The voyage of Octher made to the Northeast parts beyond Norway , reported by himself unto Alfred the famous king of England , about the year 890. 
 Cther said , that the country wherein he dwelled was called Helgoland . Octher told his lord king Alfred that he dwelled furthest North of any other Norman . He said that he dwelled towards the North part of the land towards the West coast : and affirmed that the land , notwithstanding it 
 stretcheth marvelous far towards the North , yet it is all 
 desert and not inhabited , unless it be very few places , here and there , where certain Fins dwell upon the coast , who live by hunting all the Winter , and by fishing in Wynnes live by Summer . He said that upon a certain time he fell into hunting & a fantasy and desire to prove and know how far that land stretched Northward , and whither there were any habitation of men North beyond the desert . Whereupon he took his voyage directly North along the coast , having upon his steereboord always the desert land , and upon the leereboord the main Ocean : and continued his 
 course for the space of 3. days . In which space he was come as far towards the North , as commonly the whale The place hunter's use to travel . Whence he proceeded in his course still towards the North so far as he was able to ™ raveue ' sail in other 3. days . At the end whereof he perceived that the coast turned towards the East , or else the sea opened with a main gulf into the land , he knew not how far . Well he wist and remembered , that he was feign to stay till he had a Western wind , and somewhat Northerly : and thence he sailed plain East along the coast still so far as he was able in the space of 4. days . 
 At the end of which time he was compelled again to stay till he had a full Northerly wind , forsomuch as the coast bowed thence directly towards the South , or at least wise 
 A Desert country . Fynnes . Biarmia . 
 Terfynnes . 
 The Fynnes and Biarmes speak one language . 
 Or , morsses , their teeth commended . Use of you Morsses skin for cables . 
 the sea opened into the land he could not tell how far : so that he sailed thence along the coast continually full South , so far as he could travail in 5. days ; and at the fifth days end he discovered a mighty river which opened very far into the land . At the entry of which river he stayed his course , and in conclusion turned back again , for he durst not enter thereinto for fear of the inhabitants of the land : perceiving that on the other side of the river the country was thoroughly inhabited : which was the first peopled land that he had found since his departure from his own dwelling : whereas continually throughout all his voyage , he had evermore on his steereboord , a wilderness and desert country , except that in some places , he saw a few fishers , fowlers , and hunter's , which were all Fynnes : and all the way upon his leere-boord was the main ocean . The Biarmes had inhabited and tilled their country indifferent well , notwithstanding he was afraid to go upon shore . But the country of the Terfynnes lay all waste , and not inhabited , except it were , as we have said , whereas dwelled certain hunter's , fowlers , and fishers . The Biarmes told him a number of stories both of their own country , and of the countries adjoining . Howbeit , he knew not , nor could affirm any thing for certain truth : forsomuch as he was not upon land , nor saw any himself . This only he judged , that the Fynnes and Biarmes speak but one language . The principali purpose of his travel this way , was to increase the knowledge and discovery of these coasts and countries , for the more commodity of fishing of II horsewhales , which have in their teeth bones of great price and excellency : whereof he brought some at his return unto the king . Their skins are also very good to make cables for ships , and so used . This kind of whale is much less in quantity then other kinds , having not in length above seven else . And as for the common kind of whale's , the place of most and best hunting of them is in his own country : whereof some be 48. else of length , and some 50. of which sort he affirmed that he 
 OCTHER’S VOYAGE BEYOND NORWAY a.d. 
 c . 890. himself was one of the sixe , which in the space of 3. days killed threescore . He was a man of exceeding wealth in such riches , wherein the wealth of that country does consist . At the same time that he came to the king , he had of his own breed 600. tame Dear , of that kind Sixe hundreth which they call Rane Dear : of the which number 6. were tame eere-stall Rane Dear , a beast of great valve , and marvellously esteemed among the Fynnes , for that with them they catch the wild Rane Dear . He was among the chief men of his country one : and yet he had but 20. kine , and 20. swine , and that little which he tilled , he tilled it all with horses . Their principali wealth consisteth in the tribute which the Fynnes pay them , which is all in skins The Fynnes of wild beasts , feathers of birds , whale bones , and cables , tnbute-and tacklings for ships made of Whale's or Seals skins . Every man payeth according to his ability . Note . 
 The richest pay ordinarily 15. cases of Marterns , 5. Rane Dear skins , and one Bear , ten bushels of feathers , a Qayjes coat of a Bears skin , two cables threescore else long a whale's and piece , the one made of Whale's skin , the other of Seals . Seales skins . 
 He said , that the country of Norway was very long description and small . So much of it as either bears any good °f Norway . pasture , or may be tilled , lies upon the Sea coast , which notwithstanding in some places is very rocky and stony : and all Eastward , all along against the inhabited land , lie wild and huge hills and mountains , which are in some places inhabited by the Fynnes . The inhabited land is broadest towards the South , & the further it stretcheth towards the North , it grows evermore smaller and smaller . Towards the South it is peradventure threescore miles in breadth or broader in some places : about the midst , 30. miles or above , and towards the North where it is smallest , he affirmeth that it proves not three miles from the Sea to the mountains . The mountains be in The breadth of breadth of such quantity , as a man is able to travel over in a fortnight , and in some places no more then may be J y ’ traveled in sixe days . Right over against this land , in the other side of the mountains , somewhat towards the 
 | | Or , straight . It seems to be about Elsenborg . 
 ad . 
 c . 890. 
 Swethland . South , lies Swethland , and against the same towards the Queeneland . North , lies Queeneland . The Queens sometime passing the mountains , invade and spoil the Normans : and on the contrary part , the Normans likewise sometime spoil their country . Among the mountains be many and great lake's in sundry places of fresh water , into the Boats carted which the Queens use to carry their boats upon their on men's backs , over janj } anj thereby invade and spoil the country of the Normans . These boats of theirs be very little and very light . 
 . 