The navigation of King Edgar , taken out of Florentius Wigorniensis , Hoveden , and M. Dee his discourse of the British Monarchic , page . 54 , 55 , etc. 
 Have often times ( said he ) and many ways looked into the state of earthly kingdoms , generally the whole world over ( as far as it may be yet known to Christian men commonly ) being a study of no great difficulty , but rather a purpose somewhat answerable to a perfect Cosmo - 
 grapher , to find himself Cosmopolites , a citizen and member of the whole and only one mystical city universali , and so consequently to meditate of the Cosmopolitical government thereof , under the King almighty , passing on very swiftly towards the most dreadful and most comfortable term prefixed . 
 And I find ( said he ) that if this British Monarchic would heretofore have followed the advantages which they have had onward , they might very well , year this , have surpassed by justice , and godly sort , any particular Monarchic else , that ever was on earth since men creation : and that to all such purposes as to God are most acceptable , and to all perfect common wealths , most honourable , profitable , and comfortable . 
 But yet ( said he ) there is a little lock of Lady Occasion flickering in the air , by our hands to catch hold on , whereby we may yet once more ( before all be utterly passed , and for ever ) discreetly and valiantly recover and enjoy , if not all our ancient & due appurtenances to this 16 
 Imperiali British monarchic , yet at the least some such notable portion thereof , as ( all circumstances duly and justly aPPERTAINING to peace & amity with foreign princes being offered & used ) this may become the most peaceable , most rich , most puissant , & most flourishing monarchic of all else ( this day ) in christendome . Peaceable , I say , even with the most part of the self same respects that good king Edgar had ( being but a Saxon ) and by sundry such means , as he chiefly in this Empire did put in proof and ure triumphantly , whereupon his surname was Pacificus , most aptly and justly . This peaceable king Edgar had in his mind about six hundred years past , the representation of a great part of the self same Idaea , which from above only , & by no men devise hath streamed down into my imagination , being as it becomes a subject careful for the godly prosperi tie of this British Empire under our most peaceable Queen Elizabeth . 
 For , jEdgarus pacificus , Regni sui prospiciens utilitati , Flores pariter & quieti , quatuor millia octingentas sibi ’ robustas Historiarum . congregavit naves e quibus mille ducentas , in plaga Angliae Orientali , mille ducentas in Occidentali , mille ducentas in pelago con 
 stituit , ut ad defensionem regni sui , contra exteras nationes , bellorum discrimina sustinerent . 
 O wisdom imperiali , most diligently to be imitated , videlicet , prospicere , to foresee . O charitable kingly parent , that was touched with ardent zeal , for procuring the public profit of his kingdom , yea and also the peaceable enjoying thereof . O , of and incredible mass of treasure , a kingly portion , yet , in his coffers remaining : if then he had , ( or late before ) any wars , seeing no notable tax , or contribution public is historically mentioned to have be for the charges levied : if in peace he himself flourished so wealthily : Oh marvellous political ! , & princely prudency , in time of peace to foresee , and prevent , ( and that most puissantly , and invincibly ) all possible malice , fraud , force , and mischief foreign . O most discreet liberali tie to such 
 1 17 B 
 Australi , mille ducentas in Septentrionali 
 excellent uses , powering out his treasure so abundantly . O faithful English people ( then , ) and worthy subject's , of such and Imperiali and godly Governor . O your true , and willing hearts , and blessed ready hands ( then , ) so to impart such abundance of victuals for those huge Navies maintenance : so ( I say ) as neither dearth of famine , seemed ( fondly ) to be feared of you , for any intolerable want likely to ensue thereby , nor princes of victuals complained of to be unreasonable enhanced by you , finding for their great sales so good , and rare opportunity . 
 This peaceable king Edgar , was one of the perfect Imperiali Monarchs of this British Empire , and therefore thus his fame remains ( for ever ) recorded . 
 Anglici orbis Basileus , flos , & Decus TEdgarus , non minus memorabilis Anglis , quam Cyrus Persis , Romulus Romanis , Alexander Macedonibus , Arsaces Parthis , Carolus Francis , Anno vitae 37. Regni sui cum fratre , & post 21. Idibus Julii obiit , & apud Glascon sepelitur . 
 O Glastonbury , Glastonbury , the treasury of the carcases of so famous , and so many persons ( Quae olim mater sanctorum dicta es , & ab aliis , tumulus sanctorum , quam ab ipsis discipulis Domini , aedificatam fuisse venerabilis habet Antiquorum authoritas ) how lamentable is thy case now ! how hath hypocrisy and pride wrought thy desolation 1 though I omit here the names of very many other , both excellent holy men , and mighty princes , whose carcases are committed to thy custody , yet that Apostolic Joseph , that triumphant British Arthur , and now this peaceable and provident Saxon king Edgar , do force me with a certain sorrowful reverence , here to celebrate thy memory . 
 This peaceable king Edgar ( as by ancient Records may appear ) his Summer progresses , and yearly chief pastimes were , the sailing round about this whole Isle of Albion , guarded with his grand navy of 4000. sail at the least , parted into 4. equal parts of petie Navies , 18 
 eke one being of 1000. ships , for so it is anciently recorded . 
 Idem quoque jEdgarus , 4000. naves congregavit , ex Ranulphus quibus omni anno , post festum Paschale , 1000. Cest , ens , s-naves ad quamlibet Angliae partem statuit , sic , aestate Insulam circumnavigavit : hyeme vero , judicia in Provincia exercuit : & haec omnia ad sui exercitium , & ad hostium fecit terrorem . 
 COuld , and would that peaceable & wise king Edgar , before need , as being in peace and quiet with all nations about him , and notwithstanding mistrusting his possible enemies , make his pastimes so royally , politically , and triumphantly , with so many thousand ships , and at the least with ten times so many men as ships , and that yearly ? and shall we being not assured of such neighbours friendship , as may become to us as cruel and tyrannical enemies as never king Edgar needed to dread the like , and they as many and mighty princes , as never king Edgar coped with the like , shall we ( said he ) not judge it some part of wisdom , to imitate carefully in some little proportion ( though not with so many thousands ) the prosperous pastimes of peaceable king Edgar , that Saxonicall Alexander ? yea , prosperous pastimes these may be justly counted , by which he also made evident to the whole world , that as he wisely knew the ancient bounds and limits of this British Empire , so that he could and would royally , justly , and trium - [ I . 8. J phantly enjoy the same , spite of the devil , and maugre the force of any foreign potentate . And all that , so highly and faithfully to the glory of God finally intended and brought to pass , as the wisest and godliest Prelates and counsellors of those days ( so counted of and recorded ) could best advice and direct him , or perchance , but sincerely commend and duetifiilly encourage him in , he being of himself so bent , as purposing first invincibly to fortify the chief and uttermost walls of his Islandish Monarchic , against all foreign encumbrance possible . And in that fortification furthering and assuring to trust best his own 
 oversight and judgement , in yearly viewing the same in every quarter thereof , and that as it were for his pastime Imperiali , also in Summer time , to the end that afterwards in all security , he might in Winter time ( vacare ) be at convenient leisure on land , chiefly to set forth Gods due honour , and secondly to understand , and diligently to listen to the causes and complaints of his commons . For as Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis of him to his Imperiali commendation hath left us a remembrance . 
 Habebat autem praeterea consuetudinem , per omnes Regni provincias transire , ut intelligeret quomodo legum jura , & suorum statuta decretorum , i principibus observarentur , & ne pauperes a potentibus praejudicium passi , opprimerentur , diligenter investigare solebat : in uno fortitudini , in altero Justitiae studens , & Reipub. regnique utilitati consulens in utroque . Hinc hostibus circumquaque timor , & amor omnium erga eum excreverat subditorum . 
 Thus we see how in opportunity , this peaceable Edgar procured to this Empire such prosperous security , that his true and faithful subject's , all manner of ways ( that is at home and also at sea , both outward and inward ) might peaceably , safely and securely employ their wits and travels for the marvelous enriching of this kingdom , and pleasuring very many other , carrying forth the natural commodities of this land , abounding here above our necessary uses ( and due store reserved ) and likewise again furnishing the same with all necessary and not superfluous foreign commodities , fetched from far or foreign countries' . This was in deed ( as before is recorded ) a kingly providence , Reipub. Regmque utilitati consulens , etc. beside with great utility and profit public foreseen , and by his means enjoyed , he himself used most gladly the advantage of that security , in ministering of justice , or causing the same to be executed all his kingdom over , not squemishly , frowningly or skornefully shunning the 
 ragged and tattered sleeve of any suppliant , holding up to him a simple soiled bill of complaint or petition , and that homely contrived , or afraid at , and timorously hasting from the sickly pale face or feeble limmed suitor , extremely constrained so to speak for himself , nor parcially smothering his own conscience , to favour or maintain the foul fault and trespass unlawful of any his subject's , how mighty or necessary soever , they ( else ) were , but diligently made search , least Pauperes a potentibus praejudicium passi , opprimerentur . 
 Thus did public security from foreign foe abroad , and true love of his own subject's , guarding him at home , and the heavenly spirit directing all his good purposes , cause justice and equity in all quarters of this Albion to flourish . For which his peaceable and prosperous benefits at the eternal king his hand obtained , he became not insolent or declined to tyrannical regiment ( as some princes in other countries have made their lives Comicotragical ) but with all his foresaid invincible Seaforce , abundant wealth , triumphant peace , with security and Justice over all his Monarchic prevailing , his heart was continually , and most zealously bent to set forth the glory , laud and honour of the Almighty Creator , the heavenly and everlasting king , by such principali and princely means , as ( then ) were deemed to God most acceptable , as many monuments yet to our days remaining , doe of him undoubtedly testify : As this , for one . 
 Altitonantis Dei largiflua dementia , qui est rex Regum , Ex charta Ego jEdgarus Anglorum Basileus omniumque f^^nis Regum , Insularum , Oceanique Britanniam circum - Qat^raiis jacentis , cunctarumque nationum quae infra earn wigarnia . includuntur , Imperator , & Dominus , gratias ago ipsi Deo omnipotenti , Regi meo , qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit , & exaltavit super regnum patrum meorum : qui licet Monarchiam totius Angliae adepti sunt i tempore Athelstani ( qui primus regnum Anglorum , & omnes Nationes , 
 Fundatio 
 Ecclesiae Cathedralls Eliensis . 
 quae Britanniam incolunt , sibi Armis subegit ) nullus tamen eorum ultra ejus fines imperium suum dilatare aggressus est . Mihi autem concessit propitia Divinitas , cum Anglorum Imperio , omnia regna Insularum Oceani , cum suis ferocissimis Regibus , usque Noruegiam , maximamque partem Hyberniae , cum sua nobilissima Civitate Dublinia , Anglorum regno subjugare : Quos etiam omnes , meis Imperiis colla subdere ( Dei favente gratia ) coegi . Quapropter & ego Christi gloriam , & laudem exaltare , & ejus servitium amplificare devotus disposui , & per meos fideles Fautores , Dunstanum viz. Archiepiscopum , Athelwoldum , & Oswaldum episcopos ( quos mihi patres spirituales , & Consiliatores elegi ) magna ex parte , secundum quod disposui , effeci , etc. 
 And again this in another Monument . 
 OMnipotentis Dei , etc. Ipsius nutu & gratia suffultus , Ego / Edgarus Basileus dilectae Insulae Albionis , subditis nobis sceptris Scotorum , Cumbrorum , ac Brytonum , & omnium circumcirca Regionum , quieta pace perfruens , studiosus solicit de laudibus creatoris omnium occupor addendis : Ne nunc inertia , nostrisque diebus ( plus aequo ) servitus ejus tepescere videatur , etc. 18. mei terreni Imperii anno , etc. Anno Incarnationis Dominicae , 973. 
 Ego TEdgarus totius Albionis Basileus hoc privilegium ( tanta roboratum authoritate ) crucis Thaumate confirmavi . 
 So that by all these rehearsed Records , it is most evident that the peaceable king Edgar , was one of those Monarchs , in whose hands ( if life had sufficed ) the incredible valve and privilege granted by God and nature unto this British monarchic , might have be peaceably purchased in such sort , as the very blessing and favour of the divine Trinitie hath laid means for our industry to attain to , and enjoy the same by . 
 And though sundry other valiant princes and kings of this land I could recite , which in times passed have either by intent gone about , or by wise and valiant exploit , have meetly well prospered towards this Islandish appropriate supremacy attaining , yet never any other reasonable means was used , or by humane wit , or industry can be contrived , to all purposes sufficient , but only by our sea forces prevailing , and so by our invincible enjoying all within the sea limits of our British royalty contained . 
 To which incredible political mystery attaining , no easier , readier , or perfecter plate and introduction , is ( as yet ) come to my imagination , then is the present and continual service of threescore good and tall warlike ships , with twentie smaller। barks , and those 80. ships ( great and small ) with 6660. apt men furnished , and all singularly well appointed for service both on sea and land , faithfully and diligently to be done in such circumspect and discreet order , as partly I have in other places declared , and further ( upon good occasion offered ) may declare . 
 This grand navy of peaceable king Edgar , of so many thousand ships , and they furnished with and hundred thousand men at the least , with all the final intents of those sea forces , so invincible , continually maintained , the order of the execution of their service , the godly and Imperial success thereof , are in a manner kingly lessons and prophetical encouragements to us left , even now to be as provident for public security as he was , to be as skilful of our sea right and royal limits , and wisely to find our selves as able to recover and enjoy the same as he was , who could not choose , but with the passing and yearly sailing about this British Albion , with all the lesser Isles next adjacent round about it , he could not choose I say , but by such full and peaceable possession , find himself ( according to right , and his hearts desire ) the true and sovereign Monarch of all the British Ocean , environing any way his empire of Albion and Ireland , with the lesser Islands next adjacent : with memorial whereof , as witone very precious jewel Imperial , he adorned the title and crown of his regality , as with the testimony annexed of the states and nobles of his Empire , to commit to perpetuali memory , the style of his chief worldly dignity , in this very tenor of words before also remembered . 
 Ego TEdgarus Anglorum Basileus , omniumque Regum , Insularum , Oceanique Britanniam circumjacentis , cunctardmque nationum , quae infra eam includuntur , Imperator , & Dominus . 
 Note the Queens Majesties royalty over the British Ocean sea , round about the British Empire . 
 . 