How they were welcomed at their return . 
 Basilius and Daniel Princes . 
 Ecclus. 39. ver . 4. 
 181 
 182 
 183 
 186 
 190 
 OFicium fceminarum est ducere bigas , ponere domus super eas & deponere , mungere vaccas , facere butirum 
 192 
 i 193 N 
 194 
 196 
 197 
 198 
 200 
 201 
 202 
 203 
 204 
 205 
 207 
 208 
 Oceanus . 
 Presbyter Johannes . 
 Frater Andreas in Curia Kencham . 
 Tartarorum sedes . 
 Cyngis . 
 Mangu-can . 
 210 
 211 
 Frater Andreas . 
 212 
 213 
 Astracan . 
 214 
 lagag flumen 12. dietis a Volga . 
 219 
 221 
 Casale . 
 Frater Andreas . 
 Casale . 
 Aurifodina . 
 Longissime a Perside . 
 Contomanni . 
 222 
 223 
 Jugurespopuli , Idolatrce . 
 Cailac . 
 224 
 i 225 p 
 kalendae ipsi extrahunt predict 
 Patria Presbiteri Johannis . 
 Boves pilosis caudis : his similes sunt in Quivera America septentrionalis provincia . 
 Tangut homines magni sed fusci . 
 - . .... Hispanis , & 
 227 
 228 
 The journal of friar William de Rubruquis a French man of the order of the minorite friars , unto the East parts of the world . An. Dom. 
 1253 - 
 O his most Sovereign , & most Christian Lord Lewis , by Gods grace the renowned king of France , friar William de Rubruk , the meanest of the Minorites order , wishes health & continual triumph in CHRIST . 
 It is written in the book of Ecclesi - Ecclus. 39. 
 asticus concerning the wise man : He shall travel for - +• into foreign countries , and good and evil shall he try in all things . The very same actium ( my lord and king ) have I achieved : howbeit I wish that I have done it 
 like a wise man , and not like a fool . For many there be , that perform the same actium which a wise man does , not wisely but more undiscreetly : of which number I fear my self to be one . Notwithstanding howsoever I have done it , because you commanded me , when I departed from your highness , to write all things unto you , which I should see among the Tartars , and you wished me also that I should not fear to write long letters , I have done as your majesty enjoined me : yet with fear and reverence , because I want words and eloquence sufficient to write unto so great a majesty . Be it known therefore unto your sacred Majesty , that in the year of our Lord 1253. about the Nonce of May , we entered into the sea of Pontus , which the Bulgarians call the great sea . It containeth in length ( as I learned of certain merchant's ) 1008 miles , and is in a manner , divided into two parts . About the midst thereof are two provinces , one towards the North , and another towards the South . The South province is called Synopolis , and it is the castle and port of the Soldan of Turkey : but the North province is called of the Latines , Gasaria : of the Greeks , which 
 229 
 inhabit upon the sea shore thereof , it is called Cassaria , that is to say Caesaria . And there are certain head lands stretching forth into the sea towards Synopolis . Also , there are 300. miles of distance between Synopolis and Cassaria . Insomuch that the distance from those points or places to Constantinople , in length and breadth is about 700. miles : and 700. miles also from thence to the East , namely to the country of Hiberia which is a province of Gasaria . Georgia . At the province of Gasaria or Cassaria we arrived , which province is , in a manner , three square , having a city on the West part thereof called Kersova , wherein S. Clement suffered martyrdom . And sailing before the said city , we saw and island , in which a Church is said to be built by the hands of angels . But about the midst of the said province towards the South , as it were , upon a sharp angle or point , stands a city called Sold ala . Soldaia directly over against Synopolis . And there do 
 all the Turkey merchant's , which traffic into the North countries , in their journey outward , arrive , and as they return homeward also from Russia , and the said Northern regions , into Turkey . The foresaid merchant's transport thither ermines and grey furs , with other rich and costly skins . Others carry clothes made of cotton or bombast , and silk , and diverse kinds of spices . But upon the East part of the said province stands a city The ritie of called Matriga , where the river Tanais dischargeth his Matriga . streams into the sea of Pontus , the mouth whereof is twelve miles in breadth . For this river , before it entereth into the sea of Pontus , makes a little sea , which hath in breadth and length seven hundreth miles , & it is in no place thereof above sixe paces deep , whereupon great vessels cannot sail over it . Howbeit the merchant's of \\Matriga . Constantinople , arriving at the foresayd ci tie of II Materta , send their barks unto the river of Tanais to buy dried fish , Sturgeons , Thosses , Barbils , and and infinite number of other fish . The foresaid province of Cassaria is compassed in with the sea on three sides thereof : namely on the West side , where Kersova the city of Saint 
 230 
 Clement is situate : on the South side the city of Soldaia whereat we arrived : on the East side Maricandis , and there stands the city of Matriga upon the mouth of the river Tanais . Beyond the said mouth stands Zikia , Zikia . which is not in subjection unto the Tartars : also the people called Suevi and Hiberi towards the East , who likewise are not under the Tartars dominion . Moreover towards the South , stands the city of Trapesunda , which hath a governor proper to it self , nam Guydo , being of the lineage of the emperors of Constantinople , and is subject unto the Tartars . Next unto that is Synopolis the city of the Soldan of Turkey , who likewise is in subjection unto them . Next unto these lies the country of Vastacius , whose son is called Astar , of his grandfather by the mother's side , who is not in subjection . All the land from the mouth of Tanais Westward as far as Danubius is under their jurisdiction . 
 Yea beyond Danubius also , towards Constantinople , Valakia , which is the land of Assanus , and Bulgaria minor as far as Solonia , do all pay tribute unto them . And beside the tribute imposed , they have also , of late years , exacted of every household and axe , and all such corn as they found lying on heaps . We arrived therefore at Soldaia the twelfth of the Kalends of June . And diverse merchant's of Constantinople , which were arrived there before us , reported that certain messengers were coming thither from the holy land , who were desirous to travel unto Sartach . Notwithstanding I my self had publicly given out upon Palm Sunday within the Church of Sancta Sophia , that I was not your nor any other men messenger , but that I travailed unto those infidels according to the rule of our order . And being arrived , the said merchant's admonished me to take diligent heed what I spoke : because they having reported me to be a messenger , if I should say the contrary , that I were no messenger , I could not have free passage granted unto me . 
 Then I spoke after this manner unto the governors of the city , or rather unto their Lieutenants , because the 
 231 
 governors themselves were gone to pay tribute unto Baatu , & were not as yet returned . We herd of your lord Sartach ( quoth I ) in the holy land , that he was become a Christian : and the Christians were exceeding glad thereof , & especially the most Christian king of France , who is there now in pilgrimage , & fights against the Saracens to redeem the holy places out of their hands : wherefore I am determined to go unto Sartach , & to deliver unto him you letters of my lord the king , wherein he admonisheth him concerning the good and commodity of all Christendome . And they received us with gladness , and gave us enterteinement in the cathedral Church . The bishop of which Church was with Sartach , who told me many good things concerning the said Sartach , which afterwards I found to be nothing so . Then put they us to our choice , whither we would have carts and oxen , or pack horses to transport our carriages . And the merchants of Constantinople advised me , not to take carts of the citizens of Soldaia , but to buy covered carts of mine own , ( such as the Russians carry their skins in ) and to put all our carriages , which I would daily take out , into them : because , if I should use horses , I must be constrained at every bait to take down my carriages , and to lift them up again on sundry horses backs : and beside , that I should ride a more gentle pace by the oxen drawing the carts . Wherefore , contenting my self with their evil counsel , I was traveling unto Sartach 2. months which I could have done in one , if I had gone by horse . I brought with me from Constantinople ( being by the merchants advised so to do ) pleasant fruits , muscadel wine , and delicate biscuit bred to present unto the governors of Soldaia , to the end I might obtain free passage : because they look favourably upon no man which comes with and empty hand . All which things I bestowed in one of my carts , ( not finding the governors of the city at home ) for they told me , if I could carry them to Sartach , that they would be most acceptable unto him . we took our journey therefore about the 
 232 
 kalends of June , with fower covered carts of our own and with two other which we borrowed of them , wherein we carried our bedding to rest upon in the night , and they allowed us five horses to ride upon . For there were just five persons in our company : namely , I my self and mine associate friar Bartholomew of Cremona , and Goset the bearer of these presents , the man of God Turgeman-nus , and Nicolas my servant , whom I bought at Constantinople with some part of the alms bestowed upon me . Moreover , they allowed us two men , which drave our carts and gave attendance unto our oxen and horses . There be high promontories on the sea shore from Kersova unto the mouth of Tanais . Also there are fortie castles between Kersova and Soldaia , every one of which almost have their proper languages : among whom there were many Gothes , who spoke the Dutch tongue . Beyond the said mountains towards the North , there is a most beautiful wood growing on a plain full of fountains & freshets . And beyond the wood there is a mighty plain champion , continuing five days journey unto the very extremity and borders of the said province northward , and there it is a narrow Isthmus or neck land , having sea on the East & West sides thereof , insomuch that there is a ditch made from one sea unto the other . In the same plain ( before the Tartars sprang up ) were the Comanians wont to inhabit , who compelled the foresaid cities and castles to pay tribute unto them . But when the Tartars came upon them , the multitude of the Comanians entered into the foresaid province , and fled all of them , even unto the sea shore , being in such extreme famine , that they which were alive , were constrained to eat up those which were dead : and ( as a merchant reported unto me who saw it with his own eyes ) that the living men devoured and tore with their teeth , the raw flesh of the dead , as dogs would gnaw upon carrion . Towards the borders of the said province there be many great lake's : upon the banks whereof are salt pits or fountains , the water of which so soon as it entereth into 
 233 
 The neck of Taurica Chersonesus . 
 the lake , becomes hard salt like unto ice . And out of those salt pits Baatu and Sartach have great revenues : for they repair thither out of all Russia for salt : and for each cart load they give two webs of cotton amounting to the valve of half and Yperpera . There come by sea also many ships for salt , which pay tribute every one of them according to their burden . The third day after we were departed out of the precincts of Soldaia , we 
 The Tartars , found the Tartars . among whom being entered , me thought I was come into a new world . Whose life and manners I will describe unto your Highness as well as I can . 
 Of the Tartars , and of their houses . Chap. 2. 
 THey have in no place any settled city to abide in , neither know they of the celestial city to come . 
 They have divided all Scythia among themselves , which stretcheth from the river Danubius even unto the rising of the sun . And every of their captains , according to the great or small number of his people , knoweth the bounds of his pastures , and where he ought to feed his cattle winter and summer , Spring and autumn . For in the winter they descend unto the warm regions southward . And in the summer they ascend unto the cold regions northward . In winter when snow lies upon the ground , they feed their cattle upon pastures without water , because then they use snow in stead of water . Their houses wherein they sleep , they ground upon a round foundation of wickers artificially wrought and compacted together : the roof whereof consisteth ( in like sort ) of wickers , meeting above into one little roundel , out of which roundel ascendeth upward a neck like unto a chimney , which they cover with white felt , and oftentimes they lay mortar or white earth upon the said felt , with the powder of bones , that it may shine white . And sometime also they cover it with black felt . The said felt on the neck of their house , they do garnish over with beautiful variety of pictures . Before the door likewise they hang a felt curiously painted over . For 
 234 
 1253-they spend all their coloured felt , in painting vines , trees , birds , and beasts thereupon . The said houses they make so large , that they contain thirtie foot in breadth . 
 For measuring once the breadth between the wheele-ruts of one of their carts , I found it to be 2 oh feet over : and when the house was upon the cart , it stretched over the wheels on each side five feet at the least . I told 22. oxen in one term , drawing and house upon a cart , eleven in one order according to the breadth of the cart , and eleven more before them : the axletree of the cart was of and huge bigness like unto the mast of a ship . And a fellow stood in the door of the house , upon the forestall of the cart driving forth the oxen . Moreover , they make certain foursquare baskets of small slender wickers as big as great chests : and afterwards , from one side to another , they frame and hollow lid or cover of such like wickers , and make a door in the before side thereof . And then they cover the said chest or little house with black felt rubbed over with tallow or sheeps milk to keep the rain from soaking through , which they deck likewise with painting or with feathers . And in such chests they put their whole household stuff & treasure . Also the same chests they do strongly bind upon other carts , which are drawn with camels , to you end they may wade through rivers . Neither do they at any time take down the said chests from ofF their carts . When they take down their dwelling houses , they turn the doors always to the South : & next of all they place the carts laden with their chests , here & there , within half a stones cast of you house : insomuch that the house stands between two ranks of carts , as it were , between two walls . The matrons make for themselves most beautiful carts , which I am not The benefits of able to describe unto your majesty but by pictures only : “ f^ntertn for I would right willingly have painted all things for you , C°Un~ had my skill been ought in that art . One rich Moal or Tartar hath 200. or 100. such carts with chests . Duke Baatu hath sixteene wives , every one of which hath one great house , beside other little houses , which they place 
 235 
 behind the great one , being as it were chambers for their maidens to dwell in . And unto every of the said houses do belong 200. carts . When they take their houses from off the carts , the principal wife places her court on the West frontier , and so all the rest in their order : so that the last wife dwells upon the East frontier : and one of the said ladies courts is distant from another about a stones cast . Whereupon the court of one rich Moal or Tartar will appear like unto a great village , very few men abiding in the same . One woman will guide 20. or 30. carts at once , for their countries are very plain , and they bind the carts with camels or oxen , one behind another . And there sits a wench in the foremost cart driving the oxen , and all the residue follow on a like pace . When they chance to come at any bad passage , they let them lose , and guide them over one by one : for they go a slow pace , as fast as a lamb or and ox can walk . 
 Of their beds , and of their drinking pots . 
 Chap. 3. 
 HAving taken down their houses from off their carts , and turning the doors Southward , they place the bed of the master of the house , at the North part thereof . The women's place is always on the East side , namely on the left hand of the good man of the house sitting upon his bed with his face Southwards : but the men's place is upon you West side , namely at the right hand of their master . Men when they enter into the house , will not in any case hang their quivers on the women's side . Over the master's head there is always and image , like a puppet , made of felt , which they call the master's brother : and another over the head of the good wife or mistress , which they call her brother being fastened to the wall : and above between both of them , there is a little lean one , which is , as it were the keeper of the whole house . The good wife or mistress of the house places aloft at her beds feet , on the right hand , the skin of a Kid stuffed with wool or some other matter , and near unto 
 236 
 that a little image or puppet looking towards the maidens and women . Next unto the door also on the women's side , there is another image with a cows udder , for the women that milk the kine . For it is the duty of their women to milk kine . On the other side of the door next unto the men , there is another image with the udder of a mare , for the men which milk mares . And when they come together to drink and make merry , they sprinkle part of their drink upon the image which is above the master's head : afterwards upon other images in order : then goes a servant out of the house with a cup full of drink sprinkling it thrice towards the South , and bowing his knee at every time : and this is done for the honour of the fire . Then performeth he the like superstitious idolatry towards the East , for the honour of the air : and then to the West for the honour of the water : & lastly to the North in the behalf of the dead . When the master holds a cup in his hand to drink , before he tasteth thereof , he poureth his part upon the ground . If he drinketh sitting on horse back , he poureth out part thereof upon the neck or main of his horse before he himself drinketh . After the servant aforesaid hath so discharged his cups to the fower quarters of the world , he returns into the house : and two other servants stand ready with two cups , and two basons , to carry drink unto their master and his wife , sitting together upon a bed . And if he hath more wives then one , she with whom he slept the night before , sitteth by his side the day following : and all his other wives must that day resort unto the same house to drink : and there is the court held for that day : the gifts also which are presented that day are laid up in the chests of the said wife . And upon a bench stands a vessel of milk or of other drink and drinking cups . 
 237 
 [ Of their 
 They use the like custom in Florida . 
 Of their drinks , and how they provoke one another to drinking . Chap. 4. 
 IN winter time they make excellent drink of Rise , of Mill , and of honey , being well and high coloured like wine . Also they have wine brought unto them from far countries . In summer time they care not for any drink , but Cosmos . And it stands always within the entrance of his door , and next unto it stands a minstrel with his fiddle . 1 saw there no such citerns and vials as ours commonly be , but many other musical instruments which are not used among us . And when the master of the house begins to drink , one of his servants cryeth out with a loud voice WOULD , and the minstrel plays upon his fiddle . And when they make any great solemn feast , they all of them clap their hands & dance to the noise of music , the men before their master and the women before their mistress . And when the master hath drunk , then cries out his servant as before , and the minstrel stays his music . Then drink they all around both men and women : and sometime they carouse for the victory very filthily and drunkenly . Also when they will provoke any man , they pull him by the ears to the drink , and so lug and draw him strongly to stretch out his throat clapping their hands and dancing before him . Moreover when some of them will make great feasting and rejoicing , one of the company takes a full cup , and two other stand , one on his right hand and another on his left , and so they three come singing to the man who is to have the cup reached unto him , still singing and dancing before him : and when he stretcheth forth his hand to receive the cup , they leap suddenly back , returning again as they did before , and so having deluded him thrice or fower times by drawing back the cup until he be merry , and hath got a good appetite , then they give him the cup , singing and dancing and stamping with their feet , until he hath done drinking . 
 238 
 Of their food and victuals . Chap. 5. 
 / concerning their food and victuals , be it known unto kJ your Highness that they do , without all difference or exception , eat all their dead carrions . And among so many droves it cannot be , but some cattle must needs die . Howbeit in summer , so long as their Cosmos , that is , their mares milk lasteth , they care not for any food . And if they chance to have and ox or and horse die , they dry the flesh thereof : for cutting it into thin slices and hanging it up against the Sun and the wind , it is Dryingofflesh presently dried without salt , and also without stench tn the mnd " or corruption . They make better puddings of their horses then of their hogs , which they eat being new made : the rest of the flesh they reserve until winter . They make of their ox skins great bladders or bags , which they do wonderfully dry in the smoke . Of the hinder part of their horse hides they make very fine sandals & pantoffles . They give unto 50. or and 100. men the flesh of one ram to eat . For they mince it in a bowl with salt and water ( other sauce they have none ) and then with the point of a knife , or a little fork which they make for the same purpose ( such as we use to take roasted pears or apples out of wine withal ) they reach unto every one of the company a morsel ! or twaine , according to the multitude of guests . The master of the house , before the rams flesh be distributed , first of all himself takes thereof , what he pleases . Also , if he gives unto any of the company a speciali part , the receiver thereof must eat it alone , and must not impart ought thereof unto any other . Not being able to eat it up all , he caries it with him , or delivers it unto his boy , if he be present , to keep it : if not , he puts it up into his Saptargat , that is to say , his foure square buget , which they use to carry about with them for the saving of all such provision , and wherein they lay up their bones , when they have not time to gnaw them thoroughly , that they may burnish them afterwards , 
 239 
 1253-to the end that no whit of their food may come to nought . 
 How they make their drink called Cosmos . Chap. 6. 
 THeir drink called Cosmos , which is mares milk , is prepared after this manner . They fasten a long line unto 2. posts standing firmly in the ground , & unto the same line they tie the young foies of those mares , which they mean to milk . Then come the dams to stand by their foies gently suffering themselves to be milked . And if any of them be too unruly , then one takes her foie , & puts it under her , letting it suck a while , and presently carrying it away again , there comes another man to milk the said mare . And having got a good quantity of this milk together ( being as sweet as cows milk ) while it is new they pour it into a great bladder or bag , and they beatrice the said bag with a piece of wood made for the purpose , having a club at the lower end like a men head , which is hollow within : and so soon as they beatrice upon it , it begins to boil like new wine , & to be sour and sharp of taste , and they beat it in that manner till butter come thereof . Then taste they thereof , and being indifferently sharp they drink it : for it bites a men tongue like the wine of rasps , when it is drunk . After a man hath taken a draught thereof , it leaveth behind it a taste like the taste of almond milk , and goes down very pleasantly , intoxicating weak brains : also it causeth urine to be avoided in great measure . Likewise Caracosmos , that is to say black Cosmos , for great lords to drink , they make on this manner . First they beatrice the said milk so long till the thickest part thereof descend right down to the bottom like the lees of white wine , and that which is thin and pure remains above , being like unto whay or white must . The said lees or dregs being very white , are given to servants , and will cause them to sleep exceedingly . That which is thin and clear their master's drink : and in very deed it is marvelous 
 240 
 sweet and wholesome liquour . Duke Baatu hath thirty cottages or granges within a days journey of his abiding place : every one of which serves him daily with the Caracosmos of and hundreth mares milk , and so all of them together every day with the milk of 3000. mares , beside white milk which other of his subject's bring . For even as the husbandmen of Syria bestow the third part of their fruits and carry it unto the courts of their lords , even so do they their mares milk every third day . Out of their cows milk they first churn butter , boiling the which butter unto a perfect decoction , they put it into rams skins , which they reserve for the same purpose . Neither do they salt their butter : and yet by reason of the long seething , it putrefieth not : and they keep it in store for winter . The churnmilke which remains of the butter , they let alone till it be as sour as possibly it may be , then they boil it and in boiling , it is turned all into curds , which curds they dry in the sun , making them as hard as the dross of iron : and this kind of food also they store up in satchels against winter . In the winter season when milk faileth them , they put the foresaid curds ( which they call Gry-ut ) into a bladder , and powering hight water thereinto , they beatrice it lustily till they have resolved it into the said water , which is thereby made exceedingly sour , and that they drink in stead of milk . They are very scrupulous , and take diligent heed that they drink not fair water by it self . 
 Of the beasts which they eat , of their garments , and of their manner of hunting . Chap. 7. 
 GReat lords have cottages or granges towards the South , from whence their tenants bring them Millet and meal against winter . The poorer sort provide themselves of such necessaries , for you exchange of rams , & of other beasts skins . The Tartars slaves fill their bellies with thick water , & are therewithal ! contented . They will neither eat mice with long tails , i 241 Q 
 Another strange custom , which I leave to be scanned by falconers themselves . 
 nor any kind of mice with short tails . They have also certain little beasts called by them Sogur , which lie in a cave twenty or thirty of them together , all the whole winter sleeping there for the space of sixe months : and these they take in great abundance . There are also a kind of conies having long tails like unto cats : & on the outside of their tails grow black & white hairs . They have many other small beasts good to eat , which they know and discern right well . I saw no Dear there , & but a few hares , but a great number of Roes . I saw wild asses in great abundance , which be like unto Mules . Also I saw another kind of beast called Artak , having in all resemblance the body of a ram , & crooked homes , which are of such bigness , that I could scarce lift up a pair of them with one hand : & of these homes they make great drinking cups . They have Falcons , Girfalcons , & other hawks in great plenty : all which they carry upon their right hands : 8c they put always about their Falcons necks a string of leather , which hangs down to you midst of their gorges , by the which string , when they cast them off the fist at their game , with their left hand they bow down the heads & breasts of the said hawks , lest they should be tossed up & down , & beaten with the wind , or lest they should soar too high . Wherefore they get a great part of their victuals , by hunting 8c hawking . Concerning their garments and attire be it known unto your Majesty , that out of Cataya 8c other regions of the East , out of Persia also and other countries of the South , there are brought unto them stuffs of silk , cloth of gold , 8c cotton cloth , which they wear in time of summer . But out of Russia , Moxel , Bulgaria the greater , 8c Pascatir , that is Hungaria the greater , and out of Kersis ( all which are Northern regions 8c full of woods ) 8c also out of many other countries of the North , which are subject unto them , the inhabitants bring them rich and costly skins of diverse sorts ( which I never saw in our 
 242 
 1253-countries ) wherewithal they are clad in winter . And always against winter they make themselves two gowns , one with the fur inward to their skin , & another with the fur outward , to defend them from wind & snow , which for the most part are made of wolves skins , or Fox skins , or else of Papions . And when they fit within the house , they have a finer gown to wear . The poorer sort make their upper gown of dogs or of goats skins . When they go to hunt for wild beasts , there meets a great company of them together , & environing the place round about , where they are sure to find some game , by little & little they approach on all sides , till they have got the wild beasts into the midst , as it were into a circle , & then they discharge their arrows at them . Also they make themselves breeches of skins . The rich Tartars sometimes fur their gowns with pelluce or silk shag , which is exceeding soft , light , & warm . The poorer sort do line their clothes with cotton cloth which is made of the finest wool they can pick out , & of the courser part of the said wool , they make felt to cover their houses and their chests , and for their bedding also . Of the same wool , being mixed with one third part of horse hair , they make all their cordage . They make also of the said felt coverings for their stools , and caps to defend Great expense their heads from the weather : for all which purposes efwmU-they spend a great quantity of their wool . And thus much concerning the attire of the men . 
 Of the fashion which the Tartars use in cutting their hair , and of the attire of their women . Chap. 8. 
 THe men shave a plot foure square upon the crowns of their heads , and from the two foremost corners they shave , as it were , two seams down to their temples : they shave also their temples and the hinder part of their head even unto the nape of the neck : likewise they shave the forepart of their scalp down 243 
 to their foreheads , & upon their foreheads they leave a lock of hair reaching down unto their eye brows : upon the two hindermost corners of their heads , they have two locks also , which they twine and braid into knots and so bind and knit them under each ear one . Moreover their women's garments differ not from their men's , saving that they are somewhat longer . But on the morrow after one of their women is married , she shaves her scalp from the midst of her head down to her forehead , & wears a wide garment like unto the hood of a Nun , yea larger and longer in all parts then a Nuns hood , being open before and girded unto them under the right side . For herein do the Tartars differ from the Turkes : because the Turkes fasten their garments to their bodies on the left side : but the Tartars always on the right side . They have also and ornament for their heads which they call Botta , being made of the bark of a tree , or of some such other lighter matter as they can find , which by reason of the thickness & roundness thereof cannot be held but in both hands together : & it hath a square sharp spire rising from the top thereof , being more then a cubit in length , & fashioned like unto a pinnacle . The said Botta they cover all over with a piece of rich silk : & it is hollow within : & upon the midst of the said spire or square top , they put a bunch of quils or of slender canes a cubit long and more : & the said bunch , on the top thereof , they beautify with Peacocks feathers , & round about all the length thereof , with the feathers of a Malards tail , & with precious stones also . Great ladies wear this kind of ornament upon their heads binding it strongly with a certain hat or coif , which hath and hold in the crown , fit for the spire to come through it : & under the foresaid ornament they cover the hairs of their heads , which they gather up round together from the hinder part thereof to the crown , & so lap them up in a knot or bundle within the said Botta , which afterwards they bind strongly under 
 244 
 their throats . Hereupon when a great company of such gentlewomen ride together , and are beheld a far off , they seem to be soldiers with helmets on their heads carrying their lances upright : for the said Botta appears like and helmet with a lance over it . All their women fit on horseback bestriding their horses like men : & they bind their hoods or gowns about their wastes with a sky coloured silk scarf , & with another scarf they gird it above their breasts : & they bind also a piece of white silk like a mufler or mask under their eyes , reaching down unto their breast . These gentlewomen are exceeding fat , & the lesser their noses be , the fairer are they esteemed : they daub over their sweet faces with grease too shamefully : and they never lie in bed for their travel of childbirth . 
 Of the duties enjoined unto the Tartarian women , and of their labours , and also of their marriages . Chap. 9. 
 THe duties of women are , to drive carts : to lay their houses upon carts & to take them down again : to milk kine : to make butter & Gry-ut : to dress skins & to sow them , which they usually sow with thread made of sinews , for they divide sinews into slender threads , & then twine them into one long thread . They make sandals & socks & other garments . Howbeit they never wash any apparel : for they say that God is then angry , & that dreadful thunder will ensue , if washed garments be hanged forth to dry : yea , they beatrice such as wash , & take their garments from them . They are wonderfully afraid of thunder : for in the time of thunder they thrust all strangers out of their houses , & then wrapping themselves in black felt , they lie hidden therein , till the thunder be overpast . They never wash their dishes » or bowls : yea , when their flesh is sodden , they wash the platter wherein it must be put , with scalding hight broth out of the pot , & then pour the said broth into the pot again . They make felt also , & cover their houses therewith . The 
 245 
 duties of the men are to make bows & arrows , stirrups , bridles , and saddles : to built houses & carts , to keep horses : to milk mares : to churn Cosmos and mares milk , & to make bags wherein to put it : they keep camels also & lay burdens upon them . As for sheep & goats they tend and milk them , aswell the men as the women . With sheeps milk thicked & salted they dress and tan their hides . When they will wash their hands or their heads , they fill their mouths full of water , & spouting it into their hands by little and little , they sprinkle their hair & wash their heads therewith . As touching marriages , your Highness is to understand , that no man can have a wife among them till he hath bought her : whereupon sometimes their maids are very stale before they be married , for their parents always keep them till they can sei them . They keep the first and second degrees of consanguinity inviolable , as we do : but they have no regard of the degrees of affinity : for they will marry together , or by succession , two sisters . Their widows marry not at all , for this reason : because they believe , that all who have served them in this life , shall do them service in the life to come also . Whereupon they are persuaded , that every widow after death shall return unto her own husband . And herehence arises and abominable & filthy custom among them , namely that the son marrieth sometimes all his father's wives except his own mother : For the court or house of the father or mother falls by inheritance always to the younger son . Whereupon he is to provide for all his father's wives , because they are part of his inheritance aswell as his father's possessions . And then if he will he uses them for his own wives : for he thinks it no injury or disparagement unto himself , although they return unto his father after death . Therefore when any man hath bargained with another for a maid , the father of the said damosel makes him a feast : in the mean while she fleeth unto some of her kinsfolks to hide her self . Then says her father unto the bridegroom : Lo , my daughter is yours , take 
 246 
 her wheresoever you can find her . Then he and his friends seek for her till they can find her , and having found her he must take her by force and carry her , as it were , violently unto his own house . 
 Of their execution of justice and judgement : and of their death's and burials . Chap. 10. 
 Concerning their laws or their execution of justice , your Majesty is to be advertised , that when two men fight , no third man dare intrude • himself to part them . Yea , the father dare not help his own son . But he that goes by the worst must appeal unto the court of his lord . And whosoever else ofFereth him any violence after appeal , is put to death . But he must go presently without all delay : and he that hath suffered the injury , carrieth him , as it were captive . They punish no man with sentence of death , unless he be taken in the deed doing , or confesses the same . But being accused by the multitude , they put him unto extreme torture to make him confess the truth . They punish murder with death , and carnali copulation also with any other beside his own . By his own , I mean his wife or his maid servant , for he may use his slave as he lists himself . Heinous theft also or felony they punish with death . For a light theft , as namely for stealing of a ram , the party ( not being apprehended in the deed doing , but otherwise detected ) is cruelly beaten . And if you executioner lays on and 100. strokes , he must have and 100. staves , namely for such as are beaten upon sentence given in the court . Also counterfeit messengers , because they feign themselves to be messengers , when as indeed they are none at all , they punish with death . Sacrilegious persons they use in like manner ( of which kind of malefactors your Majesty shall understand more fully hereafter ) because they esteem such to be witches . When any man dieth , they lament & howl most pitifully for him : & the said mourners are free from paying any tribute for one whole year after . Also whosoever is present at the house 
 247 
 where any one grown to men estate lies dead , he must not enter into the court of Mangu-Can till one whole year be expired . If it were a child deceased he must not enter into the said court till the next month after . Near unto the grave of the party deceased they always leave one cottage . If any of their nobles ( being of the stock of Chingis , who was their first lord & father ) deceaseth , his sepulcher is unknown . And always about those places where they inter their nobles , there is one house of men to keep the sepulchers . I could not learn that they use to hide treasures in the graves of their dead . The Comanians built a great tomb over their dead , & erect the image of the dead party thereupon , with his face towards the East , holding a drinking cup in his hand , before his navel . They erect also upon the monuments of rich men , Pyramids , that is to say , little sharp houses or pinnacles : & in some places I saw mighty towers made of brick , in other places Pyramides made of stones , albeit there are no stones to be found thereabouts . I saw one newly buried , in whose behalf they hanged up 16. horse hides , unto each quarter of the world 4 , between certain high posts : & they set beside his grave Cosmos for him to drink , & flesh to eat : & yet they said that he was baptised . I beheld other kinds of sepulchers also towards the East : namely large flowers or pavements made of stone , some round & some square , & then 4. long stones pitched upright , about the said pavement towards the 4. regions of the world . When any man is sick , he lies in his bed , & causeth a sign to be set upon his house , to signify that there lies a sick person there , to the end that no man may enter into the said house : whereupon none at all visit any sick party but his servant only . Moreover , when any one is sick in their great courts , they appoint watchmen to stand round about the said court , who will not suffer any person to enter within the precincts thereof . For they fear least evil spirits or winds should come together with the parties that enter in . They esteem of soothsayers , as of their priests . 
 248 
 Of our first entrance among the Tartars , and of their ingratitude . Chap. 11. 
 A Nd being come among those barbarous people , me thought ( as I said before ) y‘ I was entered into a new world : for they came flocking about us on horse back , after they had made us a long time to await for them sitting in the shadow , under their black carts . The first question which they demanded was whither we had ever been with them heretofore , or no ? And giving them answer that we had not , they began impudently to beg our victuals from us . And we gave them some of our biscuit & wine , which we had brought with us from the town of Soldaia . And having drunk off - one flagon of our wine they demanded another , saying , that a man goes not into the house with one foot . Howbeit we gave them no more , excusing our selves that we had but a little . Then they asked us , whence we came , & whither we were bound ? I answered them with the words above mentioned : that we had herd concerning duke Sartach , that he was become a Christian , & that unto him our determination was to travel , having your Majesties letters to deliver unto him . They were very inquisitive to know whither I came of mine own accord , or whither I were sent ? I answered that no man compelled me to come , neither had I come , unies I my self had been willing : & that therefore I was come according to mine own will , & to the will of my superior . I took diligent heed never to say that I was your Majesties ambassador . Then they asked what I had in my carts ; whither it were gold or silver , or rich garments to carry unto Sartach ? I answered that Sartach should see what we had brought , when we were once come unto him , & that they had nothing to do to ask such questions , but rather ought to conduct me unto their captain , and that he , if he thought good , should cause me to be directed unto Sartach : if not , that I would return . For there was in the same province one of Baatu his kinsmen called Scacati , unto whom my lord 249 
 the Emperor of Constantinople had written letters of request , to suffer me to pass through his territory . With this answer of ours they were satisfied , giving us horses & oxen , & two men to conduct us . Howbeit before they would allow us the foresaid necessaries for our journey , they made us to await a long while , begging our bred for their young brats , wondering at all things which they saw about our servants , as their knives , gloves , purses , & points , and desiring to have them . I excused my self that we had a long way to travel , & that we must in no wise so soon deprive our selves of things necessary , to finish so long a journey . Then they said that I was a very varlet . True it is , that they took nothing by force from me : howbeit they will beg that which they see very importunately & shamelessly . And if a man bestow ought upon them , it is but cost lost , for they are thankless wretches . They esteem themselves lords & think y* nothing should be denied them by any man . If a man gives them nought , & afterwards stands in need of their service , they will do right nought for him . They gave us of their cows milk to drink after you butter was cherned out of it , being very sour , which they call Apram . And so we departed from them . And in very deed it seemed to me y‘ we were escaped out of the hands of devils . On the morrow we were come unto the captain . From the time wherein we departed from Soldaia , till we arrived at the court of Sartach , which was the space of two months , we never lay in house or tent , but always under the starry canopy , & in the open air , or under our carts . Neither yet saw we any village , nor any mention of building where a village had been , but the graves of the Comanians in great abundance . The same evening our guide which had conducted us , gave us some Cosmos . After I had drunk thereof I sweat most extremely for the novelty and strangeness , because I never drank of it before . Notwithstanding me thought it was very savoury , as indeed it was . 
 Of the court of Scacatai : and how the Christians drink no Cosmos . Chap. 12. 
 ON the morrow after we met with the carts of Scacatai laden with houses , and me thought that a mighty city came to meet me . I wondered also at the great multitude of huge droves of oxen , & horses , and at the flocks of sheep . I could see but a few men that guided all these matters : whereupon I inquired how many men he had under him , & they told me that he had not above 500. in all , the one half of which number we were come passed , as they lay in another lodging . Then the servant which was our guide told me , that I must present somewhat unto Scacatay : & so he caused us to stay , going himself before to give notice of our coming . By this time it was passed three of the clock , and they unladed their houses never unto a certain water : And there came unto us his interpreter , who being advertised by us that we were never there before , demanded some of our victuals , & we yielded unto his request . Also he required of us some garment for a reward , because he was to interpret our sayings unto his master . Howbeit we excused our selves as well as we could . Then he asked us , what we would present unto his Lord ? And we took a flagon of wine , & filled a maund with biscuit , & a platter with apples & other fruits . But he was not contented therewith , because we brought him not some rich garment . Notwithstanding we entered so into his presence with fear and bashfulness . He sat upon his bed holding a citron in his hand , and his wife sat by him : who ( as I verily think ) had cut and pared her nose between the eyes , that she might seem to be more flat and saddle-nosed : for she had left her self no nose at all in that place , having anointed the very same place with a black ointment , and her eye brows also : which sighed seemed most ugly in our eyes . Then I rehearsed unto him the same words , which I had spoken in other places before . For it stood us in hand to use one and the same speech in all places . For 251 
 A caveat right we were well forewarned of this circumstance by some worthy the which had been among the Tartars , that we should never vary in our tale . Then I besought him , that he would vouchsafe to accept that small gift at our hands , excusing my self that I was a Monk , and that it was against our profession to possess gold , or silver , or precious garments , and therefore that I had not any such thing to give him , howbeit he should receive some part of our victuals in stead of a blessing . Hereupon he caused our present to be received , and immediately distributed the same among his men , who were met together for the same purpose , to drink and make merry . I delivered also unto Him the Emperor of Constantinople his letters ( this was eight days after the feast of Ascension ) who sent them forthwith to Soldaia to have them interpreted there : for they were written in Greek , and he had none about him that was skilful in the Greek tongue . He asked us also whither we would drink any Cosmos , that is to say mares milk ? ( For those that are Christians among them , as namely the Russians , Grecians , and Alanians , who keep their own law very strictly , will in no case drink thereof , yea , they account themselves no Christians after they have once drunk of it , & their priests reconcile them unto the Church as if they had renounced the Christian faith . ) I gave him answer , that we had as yet sufficient of our own to drink , and that when our drink failed us , we must be constrained to drink such as should be given unto us . He inquired also what was contained in our letters , which your Majesty sent unto Sartach ? I answered : that they were sealed up , and that there was nothing contained in them , but good and friendly words . And he asked what words we would deliver unto Sartach ? I answered : the words of Christian faith . He asked again what these words were ? For he was very desirous to hear them . 
 [ I . i O2 . J Then 1 expounded unto him as well as I could , by mine 
 interpreter , ( who had no wit nor any utterance of speech ) the Apostles creed . Which after he had herd , holding his peace , he shook his head . Then he assigned unto us 252 
 two men , who should give attendance upon our selves , upon our horses , and upon our Oxen. And he caused us to ride in his company , till the messenger whom he had sent for the interpretation of the Emperors letters , was returned . And so we traveled in his company till the morrow after Pentecost . 
 How the Alanians came unto us on Pentecost or Whitson even . Chap. 13. 
 UPon the even of Pentecost , there came unto us certain Alanians , who are there called * Acias , being Christians after the manner of the Grecians , using greek books and Grecian priests : howbeit they are not schismatics as the Grecians are , but without acception of persons , they honour all Christians . And they brought unto us sodden flesh , requesting us to eat of their meat , and to pray for one of their company being dead . Then I said , because it was the even of so great and so solemn a feast day , that we would not eat any flesh for that time . And I expounded unto them the solemnity of the said feast , whereat they greatly rejoiced : for they were ignorant of all things aPPERTAINING to Christian religion , except only the name of Christ . They and many other Christians , both Russians , and Hungarians demanded of us , whither they might be saved or no , because they were constrained to drink Cosmos , & to eat the dead carcases of such things , as were slain by the Saracens , and other infidels ? Which even the Greek & Russian priests themselves also esteem as things strangled or offered unto idols : because they were ignorant of the times of fasting , neither could they have observed them albeit they had known them . Then instructed I them aswell as I could and strengthened them in the faith . As for the flesh which they had brought we reserved it until the feast day . For there was nothing to be sold among the Tartars for gold & silver , but only for cloth and garments , of the which kind of merchandise we had none at all . When our servants offered them any coin called Yperpera , they 253 
 Cloth is the chief merchandise in Tartaric . 
 rubbed it with their fingers , and put it unto their noses , to try by the smell whither it were copper or no . Neither did they allow us any food but cows milk only which was very sour & filthy . There was one thing most necessary greatly wanting unto us . For the water was so foul and muddy by reason of their horses , that it was not meet to be drunk . And but for certain biscuit , which was by the goodness of God remaining unto us , we had undoubtedly perished . 
 Of a Saracen which said that he would be baptised : and of certain men which seemed to be lepers . Chap. 14. 
 UPon the day of Pentecost there came unto us a certain Saracen , unto whom , as he talked with us , we expounded the Christian faith . Who ( hearing of Gods benefits exhibited unto mankind by the incarnation of our Saviour Christ , and the resurrection of the dead , & the judgement to come , & that in baptism was a washing away of sins ) said , that he would be baptised . But when we prepared our selves to the baptizing of him , he suddenly mounted on horseback , saying that he would go home and consult with his wife what were best to be done . And on the morrow after he told us , that he durst in no case receive baptism , because then he should drink no more Cosmos . For the Christians of that place affirm that no true Christians ought to drink thereof : and that without the said liquour he could not live in that desert . From which opinion , I could not for my life remove him . Wherefore be it known of a certainty unto your highness , that they are much estranged from the Christian faith by reason of that opinion which hath been broached & confirmed among them by the Russians , of whom there is a great multitude in that place . The same day Scacatay the captain aforesaid gave us one man to conduct us to Sartach , and two other to guide us unto the next lodging , which was distant from that 
 254 
 place five days journey for oxen to travel . They gave unto us also a goat for victuals , and a great many bladders of cows milk , 8c but a little Cosmos , because it is of so great estimation among them . And so taking our journey directly towards the North , me thought that we had passed through one of hell gates . The servants which conducted us began to play the bold thieves with us , seeing us take so little heed unto our selves . At length having lost much by their thievery , harm taught us wisdom . And then we came unto the extremity of that province , which is fortified with a ditch from one sea unto another : without the bounds whereof their lodging was situate . Into the which , so soon as we had entered , all the inhabitants there seemed unto us to be infected with leprosy : for certain base fellows were placed there to receive tribute of all such as took salt out of the salt Salt pits . pits aforesaid . From that place they told us that we must travel fifteen days journey , before we should find any other people . With them we drank Cosmos , and gave unto them a basket full of fruits and of biscuit . And they gave unto us eight oxen and one goat , to sustain us in so great a journey , and I know not how many bladders of milk . And so changing our oxen , ? en we took our journey which we finished in tenne J°urneD-dayes , arriving at another lodging : neither found we any water all that way , but only in certain ditches made in the valleys , except two small rivers . And from the time wherein we departed out of the foresaid province of Gasaria , we travailed directly Eastward , having a Sea on the South side of us , and a waste desert on the North , which desert , in some places , reaches twenty days journey in breadth , and there is neither tree , mountain , nor stone therein . And it is most excellent pasture . Here the Comanians , which were called Capthac , were wont to feed their cattle . Howbeit by the Dutch men they are called Valani , and the province it self Valania . But Isidore calls all that 
 2S5 
 The length of tract of land stretching from the river of Tanais to the Comania . lake of Maeotis , and so along as far as Danubius , the country of Alania . And the same land continueth in length from Danubius unto Tanais ( which divides Asia from Europe ) for the space of two months journey , albeit a man should ride post as fast as the Tartars use to ride : and it was all over inhabited by the Comanians , called Capthac : yea and beyond Tanais , as far as the river of Edil or Volga : the space between the two which rivers is a great and long 
 Russia . journey to be travailed in ten days . To the North of the same province lies Russia , which is full of wood in all places , and stretcheth from Polonia and Hungaria , even to the river of Tanais : and it hath be wasted all over by the Tartars , and as yet is daily wasted by them . 
 Of our afflictions which we sustained : and of the Comanians manner of burial . Chap. 15. 
 Prussia . ' | ' Heigh prefer the Saracens before the Russians , A because they are Christians , and when they are able to give them no more gold nor silver , they drive them and their children like flocks of sheep into the wilderness , constraining them to keep their cattle there . Beyond Russia lies the country of Prussia , which the Dutch knights of the order of Saint Maries hospitali of Jerusalem have of late wholly conquered and subdued . And in very deed they might easily win Russia , if they would put to their helping hand . For if the Tartars should but once know , that the great Priest , that is to say , the Pope did cause the ensign of the cross to be displayed against them , they would flee all into their desert and solitary places . We therefore went on towards the East , seeing nothing but heaven and earth , and sometime the sea on our right hand , called the Sea of Tanais , and the sepulchres of the Comanians , which appeared unto us two leagues off , in which places they were wont to bury their kindred 256 
 altogether . So long as we were traveling through the desert , it went reasonably well with us . For I cannot sufficiently express in words the irksome and tedious troubles which I sustained , when I came at any of their places of abided . For our guide would have us go in unto every Captain with a present , and our expenses would not extend so far . For we were every day eight persons of us spending our wayfaring provision , for the Tartars servants would all of them eat of our victuals . We our selves were five in number , and the servants our guides were three , two to drive our carts , and one to conduct us unto Sartach . The flesh which they gave us was not sufficient for us : neither could we find any thing to be bought for our money . And as we sat Extreme heat under our carts in the code shadow , by reason of the tn Sommer-extreame and vehement heat which was there at that time , they did so importunately and shamelessly intrude themselves into our company , that they would even tread upon us , to see whatsoever things we had . Having list at any time to ease themselves , the filthy lozels had not the manners to withdraw themselves farther from us , then a bean can be cast . Yea , like vile slovens they would lay their tails in our presence , while they were yet talking with us : many other things they committed , which were most tedious and loathsome unto us . But above all things it grieved me to the very heart , that when I would utter ought unto them , which might tend to their edification , my foolish interpreter would say : you shall not make me become a Preacher now : I tell you , I cannot nor I will not rehearse any such words . And true it was which he said , For I perceived afterwards , when I began to have a little smattering in the language , that when I spoke one thing , he would say quite another , whatsoever came next unto his witless tongues end . Then seeing the danger I might incur in speaking by such and interpreter , I resolved much rather to hold my peace , and thus we traveled with great toil from lodging to lodging , till at the length , 
 I 257 R 
 The breadth of Tanais . 
 He is much deceived . 
 a few days before the feast of Saint Marry Magdalene , we arrived at the bank of the mighty river Tanais which divides Asia from Europa , even as the river Nilus of . / Egypt disjoineth Asia from Africa . At the same place where we arrived , Baatu and Sartach did cause a certain cottage to be built , upon the Eastern bank of the river , for a company of Russians to dwell in to the end they might transport Ambassadors and merchant's in ferry-boats over that part of the river . First they ferried us over , and then our carts , putting one wheel into one lyter , and the other wheel into another lyter , having bound both the lyters together , and so they rowed them over . In this place our guide played the fool most extremely . For he imagining that the said Russians , dwelling in the cottage , should have provided us horses , sent home the beasts which we brought with us , in another cart , y‘ they might return unto their own master's . And when we demanded to have some beasts of them , they answered , that they had a privilege from Baatu , whereby they were bound to none other service , but only to ferry over goers & comers : and that they received great tribute of merchants in regard thereof . We stayed therefore by the said rivers side three days . The first day they gave unto us a great fresh turbut : the second day they bestowed rye bred , and a little flesh upon us , which the purveyor of the village had taken up at every house for us : and the third day dried fish , which they have there in great abundance . The said river was even as broad in that place , as the river of Sein is at Paris . And before we came there , we passed over many goodly waters , and full of fish : howbeit the barbarous and rude Tartars know not how to take them : neither do they make any reckoning of any fish , except it be so great , that they may pray upon the flesh thereof , as upon the flesh of a ram . This river is the limit of the East part of Russia , and it springs out of the fens of Maeotis , which fens stretch unto the North Ocean . And it runneth South - 
 258 
 ward into a certain great sea 700. miles about , before it falls into the sea called Pontus Euxinus . And all the rivers , which we passed over , ran with full stream into those quarters . The foresaid river hath great store of wood also growing upon the West side thereof . Beyond this place the Tartars ascend no farther unto the North : for at that season of the year , about the first of August , they begin to return back unto the South . And therefore there is another cottage somewhat lower , where passengers are ferried over in Winter time . And in this place we were driven to great extremity , by reason that we could get neither horses , nor oxen for any money . At length , after I had declared unto them , that my coming was to labour for the common good of all Christians , they sent us oxen & men ; howbeit we our selves were feign to travel on foot . At this time they were reaping their rye . Wheat prospereth not well in that soil . They have the seed of Millium in great abundance . The Russian women attire their heads like unto our women . They imbroder their safeguards or gowns on the outside , from their feet unto their knees with particoloured or gray stuff . The Russian men wear caps like unto the Dutch men . Also they wear upon their heads certain sharp , & high-crowned hats made of felt , much like unto a sugar loaf . Then traveled we 3. dales together , not finding any people . And when our selves and our oxen were exceeding weary and faint , not knowing how far off we should find any Tartars , on the sudden , there came two horses running towards us , which we took with great joy , and our guide and interpreter mounted upon their backs , to see , how far off they could descry any people . At length upon the fourth day of our journey , having found some inhabitants , we rejoiced like seafaring men , which had escaped out of a dangerous tempest , and had newly recovered the haven . Then having taken fresh horses , and oxen , we passed on from lodging to lodging , till at the last , upon the 
 259 
 About the beginning of August , the Tartars return Southward . 
 A.D. 
 I253 ’ 
 The people of Moxel are Pagans . 
 The people called Merdui being Saracens . 
 The circuit of the Caspian sea . 
 [ I . 105. J 
 second of the Kalends of August , we arrived at the habitation of Duke Sartach himself . 
 Of the dominion of Sartach , and of his Subject's . Chap. 16. 
 THe region lying beyond Tanais , is a very goodly country , having store of rivers and woods towards the North part thereof . There be mighty huge woods which two sorts of people do inhabit . One of them is called Moxel , being mere Pagans , and without law . They have neither towns nor cities , but only cottages in you woods . Their lord & a great part of themselves were put to the sword in high Germanie . Whereupon they highly commend the brave courage of the Almans , hoping as yet to be delivered out of the bondage of the Tartars , by their means . If any merchant come unto them , he must provide things necessary for him , with whom he is first of all entertained , all the time of his abided among them . If any lies with another men wife , her husband , unless he be and eiewitnes thereof , regardeth it not : for they are not jealous over their wives . They have abundance of hogs , and great store of honey & wax , and diverse sorts of rich & costly skins , and plenty of falcons . Next unto them are other people called Merclas , which the Latines call Merdui , and they are Saracens . Beyond them is the river of Etilia or Volga , which is the mightiest river that ever I saw . And it issueth from the North part of Bulgaria the greater , & so trending along Southward , disimboqueth into a certain lake containing in circuit the space of 4. months travel , whereof I will speak hereafter . The two foresaid rivers , namely Tanais & Etilia , otherwise called Volga , towards the Northern regions through the which we traveled , are not distant asunder above x . days journey , but Southward they are divided a great space one from another . For Tanais descendeth into the sea of Pontus : Etilia makes the foresaid sea or lake , with the help of many 
 260 
 other rivers which fall thereinto out of Persia . And we had to the South of us huge high mountains , upon the sides whereof , towards the said desert , do the people called Cergis , and the Alani or Acas inhabit , who are Ker&s or as yet Christians , & wage war against the Tartars . Aas-Beyond them , next unto the sea or lake of Etilia , there are certain Saracens called Lesgi , who are in subjection unto the Tartars . Beyond these is Porta ca ferrea , or the iron gate , now called Derbent , which Alexander built to exclude the barbarous nations out of Persia . Concerning the situation whereof , your majesty shall understand more about the end of this Treatise : for I travailed in my return by the very same place . Between the two foresaid rivers , in the ’ 
 regions through the which we passed did the Comanians of old time inhabit , before they were overrun by the Tartars . 
 Of the Court of Sartach , and of the magnificence thereof . Chap. 17. 
 A Nd we found Sartach lying within three days journey of the river Etilia : whose Court seemed unto us to 
 be very great . For he himself had sixe wives , and his eldest son also had three wives : every one of which women hath a great house , & they have each one of them about 200. carts . Our guide went unto a certain Nestorian nam Coiat , who is a man of great authority Calat the in Sartachs Court . He made us to go very far unto Nestorian . the Lords gate . For so they call him , who hath the office of entertaining Ambassadors . In the evening Coiac commanded us to come unto him . Then our guide began to inquire what we would present him withal , & was exceedingly offended , when he saw that we had nothing ready to present . We stood before him , and he sat majestically , having music and dancing in his presence . Then I spoke unto him in the words before recited , telling him , for what purpose I was come unto his lord , and requesting so much 
 261 
 favour at his hands , as to bring our letters unto the sighed of his Lord . I excused my self also , that I was a Monk , not having , nor receiving , nor using any gold , or silver , or any other precious thing , save only our books , and the vestments wherein we served God : and that this was the cause why I brought no present unto him , nor unto his Lord . For I that had abandoned mine own goods , could not be a transporter of things for other men . Then he answered very courteously , that being a Monk , and so doing , I did well : for so I should observe my vow : neither did himself stand in need of ought that we had , but rather was ready to bestow upon us such things as we our selves stood in need of : and he caused us to fit down , and to drink of his milk . And presently after he requested us to say our devotions for him : and we did so . He inquired also who was the greatest Prince among the Franckes ? And I said , the Emperor , if he could enjoy his own dominions in quiet . No ( quoth he ) but the king of France . For he had herd of your Highness by lord Baldwine of Henault . I found there also one of the Knights of the Temple , who had be in Cyprus , and had made report of all things which he saw there . Then returned we unto our lodging . And on the morrow we sent him a flagon of Muscadel wine ( which had lasted very well in so long a journey ) and a box full of biscuit , which was most acceptable unto him . And he kept our servants with him for that evening . The next morning he commanded me to come unto the Court , and to bring the kings letters and my vestiments , and books with me : because his Lord was desirous to see them . Which we did accordingly , lading one cart with our books and vestments , and another with biscuit , wine , and fruits . Then he caused all our books and vestments to be laid forth . And there stood round about us many Tartars , Christians and Saracens on horseback . At the sighed whereof , he demanded whither 
 262 
 I would bestow all those things upon his Lord or no ? Which saying made me to tremble , and grieved me full soar . Howbeit , dissembling our grief as well as we could , we shaped him this answer : Sir , our humble request is , that our Lord your master would vouchsafe to accept our bred , wine , and fruits , not as a present , because it is too mean , but as a benediction , lest we should come with and empty hand before him . And he shall see the letters of my sovereign Lord the king , and by them he shall understand for what cause we are come unto him , and then both our selves , and all that we have , shall stand to his courtesy : for our vestments be holy , and it is unlawful for any but Priests to touch them . Then he commanded us to invest our selves in the said garments , that we might go before his Lord : and we did so . Then I my self putting on our most precious ornaments , took in mine arms a very fair cushion , and the Bible which your Majesty gave me , and a most beautiful Psalter , which the Queens Grace bestowed upon me , wherein there were goodly pictures . Mine associate took a missal and a cross : and the clerk having put on his surplesse , took a censer in his hand . And so we came unto the presence of his Lord : and they lifted up the felt hanging before his door , that he might behold us . Then they caused the clerk and the interpreter thrice to bow the knee : but of us they required no such submission . And they diligently admonished us to take heed , that in going in , and in coming out , we touched not the threshold of the house , and requested us to sing a benediction for him . Then we entered in , singing Salve Regina . And within the entrance of the door , stood a bench with cosmos , and drinking cups thereupon . And all his wives were there assembled . Also the Moals or rich Tartars thrusting in with us pressed us soar . Then Coiat carried unto his lord the censer with incense , which he beheld very diligently , holding it in his hand . Afterwards he carried the Psalter 263 
 unto him , which he looked earnestly upon , and his wife also that sat beside him . After that he carried the Bible : then Sartach asked if the Gospel were contained therein ? Yea ( said I ) and all the holy scriptures beside . He took the cross also in his hand , and demanded concerning the image , whither it were the image of Christ or no ? I said it was . The Nestorians & the Armenians do never make the figure of Christ upon their crosses . Wherefore either they seem not to think well of his passion , or else they are ashamed of it . Then he caused them that stood about us , to stand aside , that he might more fully behold our ornaments . Afterwards I delivered unto him your Majesties letters , with the translation thereof into the Arabic , & Syriake languages . For I caused them to be translated at Aeon into the character , & dialect of both the said tongues . And there were certain Armenian priests , which had skill in the Turkish & Arabian languages . The aforesaid knight also of the order of the Temple had knowledge in the Syriake , Turkish , & Arabian tongues . Then we departed forth , and put off our vestments , and there came unto us certain Scribes together with the foresaid Coiat , & caused our letters to be interpreted . Which letters being herd , he caused our bred , wine and fruits to be received . And he permitted us also to carry our vestments and books unto our own lodging . This was done upon the feast of S. Peter ad vincula . 
 How they were given in charge to go unto Baatu the Father of Sartach . Chap. 18. 
 THe next morning betimes came unto us a certain Priest , who was brother unto Coiat , requesting to have our box of Chrism , because Sartach ( as he said ) was desirous to see it : and so we gave it him . About eventide Coiat sent for us , saying : My lord your king wrote good words unto my lord and master Sartach . Howbeit there are certain matters of difficulty in them concerning which he dare not determine ought , without 264 
 the advice and counsel of his father . And therefore of necessity you must depart unto his father , leaving behind you the two carts , which you brought hither yesterday with vestments and books , in my custody : because my lord is desirous to take more diligent view thereof . I presently suspecting what mischief might ensue by his covetousness , said unto him : Sir , we will not only leave those with you , but the two other carts also , which we have in our possession , will we commit unto your custody . You shall not ( quoth he ) leave those behind you , but for the other two carts first nam , we will satisfy your request . I said that this could not conveniently be done : but needs we must leave all with him . Then he asked , whither we meant to tarry in the land ? I answered : If you thoroughly understand the letters of my lord the king , you know that we are even so determined . Then he replied , that we ought to be patient and lowly : and so we departed from him that evening . On the morrow after he sent a Nestorian Priest for the carts , and we caused all the foure carts to be delivered . Then came the foresaid brother of Coiat to meet us , and separated all those things , which we had brought the day before unto the Court , from the rest , namely , the books and vestments , and took them away with him . Howbeit Coiat had commanded , that we should carry those vestments with us , which we beware in the presence of Sartach , that we might put them on before Baatu , if need should require : but the said Priest took them from us by violence , saying : thou hast brought them unto Sartach , and wouldst thou carry them unto Baatu ? And when I would have rendered a reason , he answered : be not too talkative , but go your ways . Then I saw that there was no remedy but patience : for we could have no access unto Sartach himself , neither was there any other , that would do us justice . I was afraid also in regard of the interpreter , lest he had spoken other things then I said unto him : for his will was good that we should have given away all 
 265 
 They are come as far as Tolga . 
 The Tartars will be called Moal . 
 that we had . There was yet one comfort remaining unto me : for when I once perceived their covetous intent , I conveyed from among our books the Bible , and the sentences , and certain other books which I made speciali account of . Howbeit I durst not take away the Psalter of my sovereign Lady the Queen , because it was too well known , by reason of the golden pictures therein . And so we returned with the two other carts unto our lodging . Then came he that was appointed to be our guide unto the court of Baatu , willing us to take our journey in all posthaste : unto whom I said , that I would in no case have the carts to go with me . Which thing he declared unto Coiat . Then Coiat commanded , that we should leave them and our servant with him : And we did as he commanded . And so traveling directly Eastward towards Baatu , the third day we came to Etilia or Volga : the streams whereof when I beheld , I wondered from what regions of the North such huge and mighty waters should descend . Before we were departed from Sartach , the foresaid Coiat , with many other Scribes of the court said unto us : do not make 
 report that our Lord is a Christian , but a Moal . Because the name of a Christian seems unto them to be the name of some nation . So great is their pride , that albeit they believe perhaps some things concerning Christ , yet will they not be called Christians , being desirous that their own name , that is to say , Moal should be exalted above all other names . Neither will 
 This history of they be called by the name of Tartars . For the Presbyter John Tartars were another nation , as I was informed by them . in the North - 
 east , is allead - How Sartach , and Mangu-Can , and Ken-Can ged at large do reverence unto Christians . Chap. 10. by Gerardus * 1 z 
 Mercator in A TO the same time when the French-men took his general Antioch , a certain man nam Con Can had map . dominion over the Northern regions , lying thereabouts . 
 Con is a proper name : Can is a name of authority or dignity , which signifies a diviner or soothsayer . All 
 266 
 diviners are called Can among them . Whereupon their princes are called Can , because that unto them belongeth the government of the people by divination . we do read also in the historic of Antiochia , that the Turkes sent for aid against the French-men , unto the kingdom of Con Can . For out of those parts the whole nation of From whence the Turkes first came . The said Con was of the nation Turks of Kara-Catay . Kara signifies black , and Catay is the Frst sPran&-name of a country . So that Kara-Catay signifies the black Catay . This name was given to make a difference between the foresaid people , and the people of Catay , inhabiting Eastward over against you Ocean sea : con - And Ocean sea . cerning whom your majesty shall understand more hereafter . These Catayans dwelled upon certain Alpes , by the which I travailed . And in a certain plain country within those Alpes , there inhabited a Nestorian shepherd , being a mighty governor over the people called Yayman , Nayman . which were Christians , following the sect of Nestorius . 
 After the death of Con Can , the said Nestorian exalted 
 himself to the kingdom , and they called him King John , reporting ten times more of him then was true . For so the Nestorians which come out of those parts , use to do . For they blaze abroad great rumours , and reports upon just nothing . Whereupon they gave out concerning Sartach , that he was become a Christian , and the like also they reported concerning Mangu Can , and Ken Can : namely because these Tartars make more account of Christians , then they do of other people , and yet in very deed , themselves are not Christians . So likewise there went forth a great report concerning the said king John. Howbeit , when I travailed along by his territories , there was no man that knew any thing of him , but only a few Nestorians . In his pastures or territories dwells Ken Can , at whose Court Frier Andrew was . And I my self passed by it at my return . This John had a brother , being a mighty man also , and a shepherd like himself , called Vut , and he inhabited beyond the Alpes of Cara Catay , being 267 
 Presbyter John. 
 The place of Ken Kan his abode . 
 Vut Can , or Une Can . 
 distant from his brother John , the space of three weeks The village of journey . He was lord over a certain village , called Cara ( Crh^rUm Carum , having people also for his subject's , nam Crit , or 
 Merkit , who were Christians of the sect of Nestorius . But their Lord abandoning the worship of Christ , followed after idols , retaining with him Priests of the said idols , who all of them are worshippers of devils and sorcerers . Beyond his pastures some tenne or Moal in aid fifteene days journey , were the pastures of Moal , who y were a poor and beggarly nation , without governor , 
 and without Law , except their soothsayings , and their divinations , unto the which detestable studies , all in The place of those parts do apply their minds . Near unto the Tartan . MoaJ were other poor people called Tartars . The 
 foresaid king John died without issue male , and thereupon his brother Vut was greatly enriched , and caused himself to be nam Can : and his droves and flocks ranged even unto the borders of Moal . About the Cyngis . same time there was one Cyngis , a black smith among the people of Moal . This Cyngis stole as many cattle from Vut Can , as he could possibly get : insomuch that the shepherds of Vut complained unto their Lord . Then provided he and army , and marched up into the country of Moal to seek for the said Cyngis . But Cyngis fled among the Tartars , and hid himself amongst them . And Vut having taken some spoils both from Moal , and also from the Tartars , returned home . Then spoke Cyngis unto the Tartars , and unto the people of Moal , saying : Sirs , because we are destitute of a governor and Captain , you see how our neighbours do oppress us . And the Tartars and Moals appointed him to be their Chieftain . Then having secretly gathered together and army , he brake in suddenly upon Vut , and overcame him , and Vut fled into Cataya . At the same time was the daughter of Vut taken , which Cyngis married unto one of his sons , by whom she conceived , & brought forth the great Mangu-Can . Can , which now reigneth , called Mangu-Can . Then 268 
 Cyngis sent you Tartars before him in all places where he came : and thereupon was their name published and spread abroad : for in all places the people would cry out : Lo , the Tartars come , the Tartars come . Howbeit , through continual ! wars , they are now , all of them in a manner , consumed and brought to nought . Whereupon the Moals endeavour what they can , to extinguish the name of the Tartars , that they may exalt their own name . The country wherein they first inhabited , and where the Court of Cyngis Can as yet remains , is called Mancherule . But because Tartaria Mancheruk . is the region , about which they have obtained their conquests , they esteem that as their royal and chief city , and there for the most part do they elect their great Can . 
 Of the Russians , Hungarians , and Alanians : and of the Caspian Sea. Chap. 20. 
 NOw , as concerning Sartach , whither he believes in Christ , or no , I know not . This I am sure of , that he will not be called a Christian . Yea rather he seems unto me to deride and skofle at Christians . He lies in the way of the Christians , as namely of the Russians , the Valacfiians , the Bulgarians of Bulgaria the lesser , the Soldaianes , the Kerkis , and the Alanians : who all of them pass by him , as they are going to the Court of his father Baatu , to carry gifts : whereupon he is more in league with them . Howbeit , if the Saracens come , and bring greater gifts then they , they are dispatched sooner . He hath about him certain Nestorian Priests , who pray upon their beads , and sing their devotions . Also , there is another under Baatu called Berta , who feeds his cattle towards Porta Or , Berea . ferrea , or Derbent , where lies the passage of all those Saracens , which come out of Persia , and out of Turkey to go unto Baatu , and passing by , they give rewards unto him . And he professes himself to be a Saracen , and will not permit swines flesh to be eaten in his dominions . 
 269 
 Howbeit , at the time of our return , Baatu commanded him to remove himself from that place , and to inhabit upon the East side of Volga : for he was unwilling that the Saracens messengers should pass by the said Berta , because he saw it was not for his profit . For the space of foure days while we remained in the court of Sartach , we had not any victuals at all allowed us , but once only a little Cosmos . And in our journey between him and his father , we traveled in great fear . For certain Russians , Hungarians , and Alanians being servants unto the Tartars ( of whom they have great multitudes among them ) assemble themselves twentie or thirtie in a company , and so secretly in the night conveying themselves from home , they take bows and arrows with them , and whomsoever they find in the night season , they put him to death , hiding themselves in the day time . And having tired their horses , they go in the night unto a company of other horses feeding in some pasture , and change them for new , taking with them also one or two horses beside , to eat them when they stand in need . Our guide therefore was soar afraid , lest we should have met with such companions . In this journey we had died for famine , had we not carried some of our biscuit with us . At length we came unto the mighty river of Etilia , or Volga . For it is foure times greater , then the river of Sein , and of a wonderful depth : and issuing forth of Bulgaria the greater , it runneth into a certain lake or sea , which of late they call the Hircan sea , according to the name of a certain city in Persia , standing upon the shore thereof . Howbeit Isidore calls it the Caspian sea . For it hath the Caspian mountains and the land of Persia situate on the South side thereof : and the mountains of Musihet , that is to say , of the people called Assassini towards the East , which mountains are conjoined unto the Caspian mountains : but on the North side thereof lies the same desert , wherein the Tartars do now inhabit . Howbeit heretofore there dwelled certain 
 270 
 I253-people called Changlae . And on that side it receives ChangLe . the streams of Etilia ; which river increases in Summer time , like unto the river Nilus in . / Egypt . Upon the West part thereof , it hath the mountains of Alani , and Lesgi , and Porta ferrea , or Derbent , and the mountains of Georgia . This Sea therefore is compassed in on three sides with the mountains , but on the North side with plain ground . Frier Andrew , in his journey traveled Frier round about two sides thereof , namely the South and the Andrew East sides : and I my self about other two , that is to say , the North side in going from Baatu to Mangu-Can , and in returning likewise : and the West side in coming home from Baatu into Syria . A man may travel round about it in foure months . And it is not true which Isidore reporteth , namely that this Sea is a bay or gulf coming forth of the Ocean : for it doth , in no part thereof , join with the Ocean , but is environed on all sides with land . 
 Of the court of Baatu : and how we were entertained by him . Chap. 21. 
 ALL the region extending from the West shore of the foresaid sea , where Alexanders Iron gate , otherwise called the city of Derbent , is situate , and from the mountains of Alania , all along by the fens of Maeotis , whereinto the river of Tanais falls , and so forth , to the North Ocean , was wont to be called The North Albania . Of which country Isidore reporteth , that there be dogs of such and huge stature , and so fierce , that they are able in fight to match bulls , and to master lions . Which is true , as I understand by diverse , who told me , that there towards the North Ocean they make their dogs to draw in carts like oxen , by reason of their bigness and strength . Moreover , upon that part of Etilia where we arrived , there is a new cottage built , wherein they have placed Tartars and Russians both together , to ferry over , and transport messengers going and coming to and from the court of Baatu . For 
 271 
 Baatu remains upon the farther side towards the East . Neither ascendeth he in Summer time more Northward then the foresaid place where we arrived , but was even then descending to the South . From Januarie until August both he and all other Tartars ascend by the banks of rivers towards cold and Northerly regions , and in August they begin to return back again . 
 He descended We passed down the stream therefore in a bark , from dim > ne the the foresaid . cottage unto his court . From the same 
 To’barke place unto villages of Bulgaria the greater , standing 
 towards the North , it is five days journey . I wonder what devil carried the religion of Mahomet thither . For , from Derbent , which is upon the extreme borders of Persia , it is above 30. days journey to pass overthwart the desert , and so to ascend by the bank of 
 Astracan . Etilia , into the foresaid country of Bulgaria . All which way there is no city , but only certain cottages near unto that place where Etilia falls into the sea . Those Bulgarians are most wicked Saracens , more earnestly professing the damnable religion of Mahomet , then 
 The descrip - any other nation whatsoever . Moreover , when I first cion of Baatu beheld the court of Baatu , I was astonished at the sighed sscomt . thereof : for his houses or tents seemed as though they had be some huge and mighty city , stretching out a great way in length , the people ranging up and down about it for the space of some three or foure leagues . And even as the people of Israel knew every man , on which side of the tabernacle to pitch his tent : even so every one of them knoweth right well , towards what side of the court he ought to place his house when he takes it from ofF the cart . Whereupon the court 
 called in their language Horda , which signifies , the et tO e mt st . mjjst . because the governor or chieftain among them dwells always in the midst of his people : except only that directly towards the South no subject or inferior person places himself , because towards that region the court gates are set open : but unto the right hand , and the left hand they extend themselves as far as they 
 272 
 will , according to the conveniency of places , so that they place not their houses directly opposite against the court . At our arrival we were conducted unto a Saracen , who provided not for us any victuals at all . The day following , we were brought unto the court : and Baatu had caused a large tent to be erected , because his house or ordinary tent could not contain so many men and women as were assembled . Our guide admonished us not to speak , till Baatu had given us commandment so to do , and that then we should speak our minds briefly . Then Baatu demanded whither your Majesty had sent Ambassadors unto him or no ? I answered , that your Majesty had sent messengers to Ken-Can : and that you would not have sent messengers unto him , or letters unto Sartach , had not your Highness be persuaded that they were become Christians : because you sent not unto them for any fear , but only for congratulation , and courtesies sake , in regard that you herd they were converted to Christianitie . Then led he us unto his pavilion : and we were charged not to touch the cords of the tent , which they account in stead of the threshold of the house . There we stood in our habit barefooted , and bareheaded , and were a great and strange spectacle in their eyes . For indeed Friar John de Plano John de Plano Carpini had been there before my coming : Carpini . howbeit , because he was the Popes messenger , he changed his habit that he might not be contemned . Then we were brought into the very midst of the tent , neither required they of us to do any reverence by bowing our knees , as they use to do of other messengers . we stood therefore before him for the space wherein a man might have rehearsed the Psalm , Miserere mei Deus : and there was great silence kept of all men . Baatu himself sat upon a seat long and broad like unto a bed , guilt all over , with three stairs to ascend thereunto , and one of his ladies sat beside him . The men there assembled , sat down scattering , some on the right hand of the said Lady , and some on the left . Those places 
 i 273 s 
 on the one side which the women filled not up ( for there were only the wives of Baatu ) were supplied by the men . Also , at the very entrance of the tent , stood a bench furnished with cosmos , and with stately great cups of silver , and gold , being richly set with precious stones . Baatu beheld us earnestly , and we him : and he seemed to me to resemble in personage , Monsieur John de beau mont , whose soul rests in peace . And he had a fresh ruddy colour in his countenance . At length he commanded us to speak . Then our guide gave us direction , that we should bow our knees & speak . Whereupon 1 bowed one knee as unto a man : then he signified that I should kneel upon both knees : and 1 did so , being loath to contend about such circumstances . And again he commanded me to speak . Then I thinking of prayer unto God , because I kneeled on both my knees , began to pray on this wise : Sir , we beseech the Lord , from whom all good things do proceed , and who hath given you these earthly benefits , that it would please him hereafter to make you partaker of his heavenly blessings : because the former without these are but vain and improfitable . And I added further . Be it known unto you of a certainty , that you shall not obtain the joys of heaven , unless you become a Christian : for God says , Whosoever believeth & is baptised , shall saved : but he that believeth not , shall condemned . At this word he modestly smiled : but the other Moals began to clap their hands , and to deride us . And my silly interpreter , of whom especially I should have received comfort in time of need , was himself abashed & utterly dashed out of countenance . Then , after silence made , I said unto him , I came unto your son , because we herd that he was become a Christian : and I brought unto him letters on the behalf of my sovereign Lord the king of France : and your son sent me hither unto you . The cause of my coming therefore is best known unto your self . Then he caused me to rise up . And he inquired your majesties name , and my name , and the name of mine 
 274 
 associate and interpreter , and caused them all to be put down in writing . He demanded likewise ( because he had be informed , that you were departed out of your own countries' with and army ) against whom you waged war ? I answered : against the Saracens , who had defiled the house of God at Jerusalem . He asked also , whither your Highness had ever before that time sent any messengers unto him , or no ? To you sir ? ( said I ) never . Then caused he us to fit down , and gave us of his milk to drink , which they account to be a great favour , especially when any man is admitted to drink Cosmos with him in his own house . And as I sat looking down upon the ground , he commanded me to lift up my countenance , being desirous as yet to take more diligent view of us , or else perhaps for a kind of superstitious observation . For they esteem it a sign of ill luck , or a prognostication of evil unto them , when any man sits in their presence , holding down his head , as if he were sad : especially when he leans his cheek or chin upon his hand . Then we departed forth , and immediately after came our guide unto us , and conducting us unto our lodging , said unto me : Your master the King requesteth that you may remain in this land , which request Baatu cannot satisfy without the knowledge and consent of Mangu-Can . Wherefore you , and your interpreter must of necessity go unto Mangu-Can . Howbeit your associate , and the other man shall return unto the court of Sartach , staying there for you , till you come back . Then began the man of God mine interpreter to lament , esteeming himself but a dead man . Mine associate also protested , that they should sooner chop off his head , then withdraw him out of my company . Moreover I my self said , that without mine associate I could not go : and that we stood in need of two servants at the least , to attend upon us , because , if one should chance to fallen sick , we could not be without another . Then returning unto the court , he told these sayings unto Baatu . And Baatu commanded saying : let 
 275 
 the two Priests and the interpreter go together , but let the clerk return unto Sartach . And coming again unto us , he told us even so . And when I would have spoken for the clerk to have had him with us , he said : No more words : for Baatu hath resolved , that so it shall be , and therefore I dare not go unto the court any more . Goset the clerk had remaining of the alms money bestowed upon him , 26. Yperperas , and no more ; 10. whereof he kept for himself and for the lad , and 16. he gave unto the man of God for us . And thus were we parted asunder with tears : he returning unto the court of Sartach , and our selves remaining still in the same place . 
 Of our journey towards the Court of Mangu Can . Chap. 22. 
 UPon Assumption even our clerk arrived at the court of Sartach . And on the morrow after , the Nestorian Priests were adorned with our vestments in the presence of the said Sartach . Then we our selves were conducted unto another host , who was appointed to provide us housefoome , victuals , and horses . But because we had not ought to bestow upon him , he did They travel all things untowardly for us . Then we road on for-^thubanh^of^ ward whh Baatu , descending along by the bank of Etilia , Etilia . J for the space of five weeks together : Sometime mine associate was so extremely hungry , that he would tell me in a manner weeping , that it fared with him as though he had never eaten any thing in all his life before . There is a fair or market following the court of Baatu at all times : but it was so far distant from us that we could not have recourse thereunto . For we were constrained to walk on foot for want of horses . At length Hungarians , certain Hungarians ( who had sometime be after a sort 
 Clergy men ) found us out : and one of them could as yet sing many songs without book , and was accounted of other Hungarians as a Priest , and was sent for unto the funerals of his deceased country men . There was 276 
 another of them also prettily well instructed in his Grammar : for he could understand the meaning of any thing that we spoke , but could not answer us . These Hungarians were a great comfort unto us , bringing us Cosmos to drink , yea , and sometime flesh for to eat also : who , when they requested to have some books of us , and I had not any to give them ( for indeed we had none but only a Bible , and a breviary ) it grieved me exceedingly . And I said unto them : Bring me some ink and paper , and I will write for you so long as we shall remain here : and they did so . And I copied out for them Horas beatae Virginis , and Officium defunctorum . Moreover , upon a certain day , there was a Comanian A Comanian . that accompanied us , saluting us in Latin , and saying : Salvete Domini . Wondering thereat and saluting him again , I demanded of him , who had taught him that kind of salutation ? He said that he was baptised in Hungaria by our Friars , and that of them he learned it . 
 He said moreover , that Baatu had inquired many things of him concerning us , and that he told him the estate of our order . Afterward I saw Baatu riding with Kiss company , and all his subject's that were householders or master's of families riding with him , and ( in mine estimation ) they were not five hundred persons in all . At length about the end of Holy rood , there came a certain rich Moal unto us ( whose father was a Millenary , which is a great office among them ) saying : I am the man that must conduct you unto Mangu-Can , and we have thither a journey of foure months long to travel , and A journey of there is such extreme cold in those parts , that stones and +• months trees do even rive asunder in regard thereof . Therefore rome I would wish you thoroughly to advice your selves , whither you be able to endure it or no . Unto whom I answered : I hope by Gods help that we shall able to brook that which other men can endure . Then he said : if you cannot endure it , I will forsake you by the way . And I answered him : it were not just dealing for you so to do : for we go not thither upon any business of our own , 
 277 
 but by reason that we are sent by your lord . Wherefore since we are committed unto your charge , you ought in no wise to forsake us . Then he said : all shall well . Afterwards he caused us to show him all our garments : and whatsoever he deemed to be less needful for us , he willed us to leave it behind in the custody of our host . On the morrow they brought unto each of us a furred gown , made all of rams skins , with the wool still upon them , and breeches of the same , and boots also or buskin's according to their fashion , and shoes made of felt , and hoods also made of skins after their manner . 
 The 16. of The second day after Holy rood , we began to set forward September . on our journey , having three guides to direct us : and we 46. days . road continually Eastward , till the feast of All Saints . 
 Throughout all that region , and beyond also did the Or , Kangjtt& . people of Changle inhabit , who were by parentage descended from the Romans . Upon the North side of us , we had Bulgaria the greater , and on the South , the foresaid Caspian sea . 
 Or , laic . Of the river of lagac : and of diverse regions or nations . Chap. 23. 
 laic twelve TO TO Aving traveled twelve days journey from Etilia , we days journey x found a mighty river called lagac : which river jtom oga . issuing out of the North , from the land of Pascatir , 
 descendeth into the foresaid sea . The language of Pascatir . Pascatir , and of the Hungarians is all one , and they are all of them shepherds , not having any cities . And their country bordereth upon Bulgaria the greater , on the West frontier thereof . From the Northeast part of the said country , there is no city at all . For Bulgaria the greater is the farthest country that way , that hath any city therein . Out of the forenamed region of Pascatir , descendedfrom Proceeded the Hunnes of old time , who afterward were the Bascirdes . caded Hungarians . Next unto it is Bulgaria the greater . 
 Isidore reporteth concerning the people of this nation , that with swift horses they traversed the impregnable walls and bounds of Alexander , ( which , together with the rocks 278 
 of Caucasus , served to restrain those barbarous and bloodthirsty people from invading the regions of the South ) insomuch that they had tribute paid unto them , as far as TEgypt . Likewise they wasted all countries even unto France . Whereupon they were more mighty then the Tartars as yet are . And unto them the Blacians , the ValaMans . Bulgarians , and the Vandals joined themselves . For out of Bulgaria the greater , came those Bulgarians . Moreover , they which inhabit beyond Danubius , near unto Constantinople , and not far from Pascatir , are called Ilac , which ( saving the pronunciation ) is all one with Blac , ( for the Tartars cannot pronounce the letter B ) from whom also descended the people which inhabit the land of Assani . For they are both of them called Ilac ( both these , & the other ) in you languages of the Russians , the Polonians , & the Bohemians . The Sclavonians speak all one language with the Vandals , all which banded themselves with the Hunnes : and now for the most part , they unite themselves unto the Tartars : whom God hath raised up from the utmost parts of the earth , according 
 to that which the Lord says : I will provoke them to 32 - v-envy ( namely such as keep not his Law ) by a people , which is no people , and by a foolish nation will I anger ' ' ' them . This prophecy is fulfilled , according to the literal sense thereof , upon all nations which observe not the Law of God . All this which I have written concerning the land of Pascatir , was told me by certain Friars predicants , which travailed thither before ever the Tartars came abroad . And from that time they were subdued unto their neighbours the Bulgarians being Saracens , whereupon many of them proved Saracens also . Other matters concerning this people , may be known out of Chronicles . 
 For it is manifest , that those provinces beyond Constantinople , which are now called Bulgaria , Valachia , & Sclavonia , were of old time provinces belonging to the Greeks . Also Hungaria was heretofore called Pannonia . And we were riding over the land of Cangle , from the feast of Holy rood , until the feast of All Saints : travail - country . 
 279 
 ing almost every day ( according to mine estimation ) as far , as from Paris to Orleans , and sometime farther , as we were provided of post horses : for some days we had change of horses twice or thrice in a day . Sometime we travailed two or three days together , not finding any people , and then we were constrained not to ride so fast . Of 20. or 30. horses we had always the worst , because we were strangers . For every one took their choice of the best horses before us . They provided me always of a strong horse , because I was very corpulent & heavy : but whither he ambled a gentle pace or no , I durst not make any question . Neither yet durst I complain , although he trotted full soar . But every man must be contented with his lot as it fell . Whereupon we were exceedingly troubled : for oftentimes our horses were tired before we could come at any people . And then we were constrained to beat and whip on our horses , and to lay our garments upon other empty horses : yea and sometime two of us to ride upon one horse . 
 Of the hunger , and thirst , and other misery's , which we sustained in our journey . 
 Chap. 24. 
 OF hunger and thirst , cold and weariness , there was no end . For they gave us no victuals , but only in the evening . In the morning they used to give us a little drink , or some sodden Millet to sup off . In the evening they bestowed flesh upon us , as namely , a shoulder and breast of rams mutton , and every man a measured quantity of broth to drink . When we had sufficient of the flesh-broth , we were marvellously well refreshed . And it seemed to me most pleasant , and most nourishing drink . Every Saterday I remained fasting until night , without eating or drinking of ought . And when night came , I was constrained , to my great grief and sorrow , to eat flesh . Sometime we were feign to eat flesh half sodden , or almost raw , and all for want of fuel to seethe it withal : especially when we lay in the fields , or were 280 
 1253-benighted before we came at our journeis end : because we could not then conveniently gather together the dung of horses or oxen : for other fuel we found but seidome , except perhaps a few thorns in some places . Likewise Certain upon the banks of some rivers , there are woods growing nvers " here and there . Howbeit they are very rare . In the beginning our guide highly disdained us , and it was tedious unto him to conduct such base fellows . After - 
 ward , when he began to know us somewhat better , he directed us on our way by the courts of rich Moals , and we were requested to pray for them . Wherefore , had 1 carried a good interpreter with me , I should have had opportunity to have done much good . The foresaid Chingis , who was the first great Can or Emperor of the Tartars , had foure sons , of whom proceeded by natural descent many children , every one of which doth at this day enjoy great possessions : and they are daily multiplied and dispersed over that huge and waste desert , which is , in dimensions , like unto the Ocean Sea. Our guide therefore directed us , as we were going on our journey , unto many of their habitations . And they marveiled exceedingly , that we would receive neither gold , nor silver , nor precious and costly garments at their hands . They inquired also , concerning the great Pope , whither he was of so lasting and age as they had herd ? For there had gone a report among them , that he was 500. years old . They inquired likewise of our countries , whither there were abundance of sheep , oxen , & horses or no ? Concerning the Ocean sea , they could not conceive of it , because it was without limits or banks . Upon the even of you feast of All Saints , we forsook the way leading towards the East , ( because the people were now descended 
 very much South ) and we went on our journey by certain Alpes , or mountains directly Southward , for the space of Eight Jays 8. days together . In the foresaid desert I saw many j°urney asses ( which they call Colan ) being rather like unto mules : wJrd ' ■ f these did our guide & his companions chase very eagerly : f00te _ J howbeit , they did but loose their labour : for the beasts 
 281 
 1253-High mountains . Manured grounds . 
 Kenchat a village of the Saracens . 
 were two swift for them . Upon the 7. day there appeared to the South of us huge high mountains , and we entered into a place which was well watered , and fresh as a garden , and found land tilled and manured . The eight day after the feast of All Saints , we arrived at a certain town of the Saracens , nam Kenchat , the governor whereof met our guide at the towns end with ale and cups . For it is their manner at all towns and villages , subject unto them , to meet the messengers of Baatu and Mangu-Can with meat and drink . At the same time of the year , they went upon the ice in that country . And before the The 7. day of feast of S. Michael , we had frost in the desert . I November . inquired the name of that province : but being now in a strange territory , they could not tell me the name thereof , but only the name of a very small city in A gnat river , the same province . And there descended a great river down from the mountains , which watered the whole region , according as the inhabitants would give it passage , by making diverse channels and sluices : neither did this river exonerate it self into any sea , but was swallowed up by and hideous gulf into the bowels of the earth : Many lake's , and it caused many fens or lake's . Also I saw many Vines . vines , and drank of the wine thereof . 
 The mountains of Caucasus are extended unto the Eastern Sea. 
 The city of Talas , or Chincitalas . Frier Andrew . 
 How Ban was put to death : and concerning the habitation of the Dutch men . Chap. 25. 
 THe day following , we came unto another cottage near unto the mountains . And I inquired what mountains they were , which I understood to be the mountains of Caucasus , which are stretched forth , & continued on both parts to the sea , from the West unto the East : and on the West part they are conjoined unto the foresaid Caspian sea , whereinto the river of Volga dischargeth his streams . I inquired also of the city of Talas , wherein were certain Dutchmen servants unto one Buri , of whom Friar Andrew made mention . Concerning whom also I inquired very diligently in the courts of Sartach 8c Baatu . Howbeit I could have no intelligence 282 
 of them , but only that their lord & master Ban was put to death upon the occasion following : This Ban was not placed in good and fertile pastures . And upon a certain day being drunken , he spoke on this wise unto his men . Am not I of the stock and kindred of Chingis Can , as well as Baatu ? ( for in very deed he was brother or nephew unto Baatu . ) Why then do I not pass and repass upon the bank of Etilia , to feed my cattle there , as freely as Baatu himself doth ? Which speeches of his were reported unto Baatu . Whereupon Baatu wrote unto his servants to bring their Lord bound unto him . And they did so . Then Baatu demanded of him whither he had spoken any such words ? And he confessed that he had . Howbeit , ( because it is the Tartars manner to pardon drunken men ) he excused himself that he was drunken at the same time . Howe durst thou ( quoth Baatu ) once name me in thy drunkenness ? And with that he caused his head to be chopped off . Concerning the foresaid Dutchmen , I could not understand ought , till I was come unto the court of Mangu-Can . And there I was informed that Mangu-Can had removed them out of the jurisdiction of Baatu , for the space of a months journey from Talas Eastward , unto a certain village , called Bolac : where they are set to dig gold , and to make armour . Whereupon I could neither go nor come by them . I passed very near the said city in going forth , as namely , within three days journey thereof : but I was ignorant that I did so : neither could I have turned out of my way , albeit I had known so much . From the foresaid cottage we went directly Eastward , by the mountains aforesaid . And from that time we travailed among the people of Mangu-Can , who in all places sang and danced before our guide , because he was the messenger of Baatu . For this courtesy they do afford eke to other : namely , the people of Mangu-Can receiving the messengers of Baatu in manner aforesaid : and so likewise the people of Baatu entertaining the messengers of Mangu-Can . Notwithstanding the people 283 
 The village of Bolac . 
 He entereth into the territories of Mangu-Can . 
 Certain Alpes wherein the Cara Catalans inhabited . A mighty river . 
 A lake of fifteene days journey in compass . 
 Cailac a great city , and full of merchant's . 
 Contomanni . 
 of Baatu are more surly and stout , and show not so much courtesy unto the subjects of Mangu-Can , as they do unto them . A few days after , we entered upon those Alpes where the Cara Catayans were wont to inhabit . And there we found a mighty river : insomuch that we were constrained to embark our selves , and to sail over it . Afterwards we came into a certain valley , where I saw a castle destroyed , the walls whereof were only of mud : and in that place the ground was tilled also . And there we found a certain village , nam Equius , wherein were Saracens , speaking the Persian language : howbeit they dwelled and huge distance from Persia . The day following , having passed over the foresaid Alpes which descended from the great mountains Southward , we entered into a most beautiful plain , having high mountains on our right hand , and on the left hand of us a certain Sea or lake , which containeth fifteene days journey in circuit . All the foresaid plain is most commodiously watered with certain freshets distilling from the said mountains , all which do fallen into the lake . In Summer time we returned by the North shore of the said lake , and there were great mountains on that side also . Upon the forenamed plain there were wont to be great store of villages : but for the most part they were all wasted , in regard of the fertile pastures , that the Tartars might feed their cattle there . we found one great city there nam Cailac , wherein was a mars , and great store of Merchant's frequenting it . In this city we remained fifteene days , staying for a certain Scribe or Secretary of Baatu , who ought to have accompanied our guide for the dispatching of certain affairs in the court of Mangu . All this country was wont to be called Organum : and the people thereof had their proper language , and their peculiar kind of writing . But it was altogether inhabited of the people called Contomanni . The Nestorians likewise in those parts used the very same kind of language and writing . They are called Organa , because they were wont to be most 
 284 
 skilful in playing upon the Organs or cithern , as it was reported unto me . Here first did I see worshippers of idols , concerning whom , be it known unto your majesty , that there be many sects of them in the East countries . 
 How the Nestorians , Saracens , and Idolaters are joined together . Chap. 26. 
 THe first sort of these idolaters are called Jugures : The people whose land bordereth upon the foresaid land of Jusures Organum , within the said mountains Eastward : and in all their cities Nestorians do inhabit together , and they are dispersed likewise towards Persia in the cities of the Saracens . The citizens of the foresaid city of Cailac had 3. idole-Temples : and I entered into two of them , to behold their foolish superstitions . In the first of which I found a man having a cross painted with ink upon his hand , whereupon I supposed him to be a Christian : for he answered like a Christian unto all questions which I demanded of him . And I asked him , Why therefore have you not the cross with the image of Jesu Christ thereupon ? And he answered : We have no such custom . Whereupon I conjectured that they were indeed Christians : but , that for lack of instruction they omitted the foresaid ceremony . For I saw there behind a certain chest ( which was unto them in steed of and altar , whereupon they set candles and oblations ) and image having wings like unto the image of Saint Michael , and other images also , holding their fingers , as if they would bless some body . That evening I could not find any thing else . For the Saracens do only invite men thither , but they will not have them speak of their religion . And therefore , when I inquired of the Saracens concerning such ceremonies , they were offended thereat . On the morrow after were the Kalends , and the Saracens feast of Passeover . And changing mine Inn or lodging the same day , I took up mine abided near unto another idole-Temple . For 
 285 
 the citizens of the said city of Cailac do courteously invite , & lovingly entertain all messengers , every man of them according to his ability and portion . And entering into the foresaid idole-Temple , I found the Priests of the said idols there . For always at the Kalends they set open their Temples , and the priests adorn themselves , and offer up the peoples oblations of bred and fruits . First therefore I will describe 
 Frier William was at Caracarum . 
 unto you those rites and ceremonies , which are common unto all their idole-Temples : and then the superstitions of the foresaid Jugures , which be , as it were , a sect distinguished from the rest . They do all of them worship towards the North , clapping their hands together , and prostrating themselves on their knees upon you earth , holding also their foreheads in their hands . Whereupon the Nestorians of those parts will in no case join their hands together in time of prayer : but they pray , displaying their hands before their breasts . They extend their Temples in length East and West : and upon the North side they built a chamber , in manner of a Vestry for themselves to go forth into . Or sometime it is otherwise . If it be a foure square Temple , in the midst of the Temple towards the North side thereof , they take in one chamber in that place where the choir should stand . And within the said chamber they place a chest long and broad like unto a table : and behind the said chest towards the South stands their principali idol : which I saw at Caracarum , and it was as big as the idol of Saint Christopher . Also a certain Nestorian priest , which had been in Catay , said that in that country there is and idol of so huge a bigness , that it may be seen two days journey before a man come at it . And so they place other idols round about the foresaid principal idol , being all of them finely gilded over with pure gold : and upon the said chest , which is in manner of a table , they set candles and oblations . The doors of their Temples are always opened towards the South , contrary to the custom of the Saracens . They have also great 
 286 
 belles like unto us . And that is the cause ( as I think ) why the Christians of the East will in no case use great bells . Notwithstanding they are common among the Russians , and Grecians of Gasaria . 
 Of their Temples and idols : and how they behave themselves in worshipping their false gods . Chap. 27. 
 A LI their Priests had their heads and beards shaved quite over : and they are clad in saffron coloured garments : and being once shaved , they led and unmarried life from that time forward : and they live and hundreth or two hundreth of them together in one cloister or covent . Upon those days when they enter into their temples , they place two long forms therein : and so sitting upon the said forms like singing men in a quire , namely the one half of them directly over against the other , they have certain books in their hands , which sometime they lay Books . down by them upon the forms : and their heads are bore so long as they remain in the temple . And there they read softly unto themselves , not uttering any voice at all . Whereupon coming in among them , at the time of their superstitious devotions , and finding them all siting mute in manner aforesaid , I attempted diverse ways to provoke them unto speech , and yet could not by any means possible . They have with them also whithersoever they go , a certain string with and hundreth or two hundreth nutshells thereupon , much like to our beadroll which we carry about with us . And they do always utter these words : Ou mam Hactani , God thou knowest : as one of them expounded it unto me . And so often do they expect a reward at Gods hands , as they pronounce these words in remembrance of God . Round about their temple they do always make a fair court , like unto a churchyard , which they environ with a good wall : and upon the South part thereof they built a great portal , wherein they fit and confer together . And upon the top of the said portali they pitch a long pole right up , 
 287 
 exalting it , if they can , above all the whole town beside . And by the same pole all men may know , that there stands the temple of their idols , These rites and ceremonies aforesaid be common unto all idolaters in those parts . Going upon a time towards the foresaid idol-temple , I found certain priests sitting in the outward portal . And those which I saw , seemed unto me , by their shaved beards , as if they had be French men . They wore certain ornaments upon their heads made of paper . The priests of the foresaid Jugures do use such attire whithersoever they go . They are always in their saffron coloured jackets , which be very straight being laced or buttened from the bosom right down , after the French fashion . And they have a cloak upon their left shoulder descending before and behind under their right arm , like unto a deacon carrying the houssel-boxe in time Paper . of lent . Their letters or kind of writing the Tartars did So doe the receive . They begin to write at the top of their paper people of China drawjng their lines right down : and so they read and “ draw'mgfheir multiply their lines from the left hand to the right . They lines perpendi - do use certain papers and characters in their magical cularly down - practises . Whereupon their temples are full of such short ward , not scrou ] es hanged round about them . Also Mangu-Can righthand sent letters unto your Majesty written in the to the lefie . language of the Moals or Tartars , and in the foresaid hand or letter of the Jugures . They burn their dead according to the ancient custom , and lay up the ashes in the top of a Pyramid . Now , after I had fit a while by the foresaid priests , and entered into their temple and seen many of their images both great and small , I demanded of them what they believed concerning God ? And they answered : We believe that there is only one God . And I demanded farther : Whither doe you believe that he is a spirit , or some bodily substance ? They said : We believe that he is a spirit . Then said I : Do you believe that God ever took men nature upon him ? They answered : Noe. And again I said : Since you believe that he is a spirit , to what end do you make so 
 288 
 many bodily images to represent him ? Since also you believe not that he was made man : why do you resemble him rather unto the image of a man then of any other creature ? Then they answered saying : we frame not those images whereby to represent God . But when any rich man among us , or his son , or his wife , or any of his friends deceaseth , he causeth the image of the dead party to be made , and to be placed here : and we in remembrance of him doe reverence thereunto . Then I replied : you do these things only for the friendship and flattery of men . Noe ( said they ) but for their memory . Then they demanded of me , as it were in scoffing wise : Where is God ? To whom I answered : where is your soul ? They said , in our bodies . Then said I , is it not in every part of your body , ruling and guiding the whole body , and yet notwithstanding is not seen or perceived ? Even so God is every where and ruleth all things , and yet is he invisible , being understanding and wisdom it self . Then being desirous to have had some more conference with them , by reason , that mine interpreter was weary , and not able to express my meaning , I was constrained to keep silence . The Moals or Tartars are in this regard of their sect : namely they believe that there is but one God : howbeit they make images of felt , in remembrance of their deceased friends , covering them with five most rich and costly garments , and putting them into one or two carts , which carts no man dare once touch : and they are in the custody of their soothsayers , who are their priests , concerning whom I will give your Highness more at large to understand hereafter . These soothsayers or diviners do always attend upon the court of Mangu and of other great personages . As for the poorer or meaner sort , they have them not , but such only as are of the stock and kindred of Chingis . And when they are to remove or to take any journey , the said diviners go before them , even as the cloudy pillar went before the children of Israel . And they appoint ground where the tents must 
 i 289 TO 
 be pitched , and first of all they take down their own houses : & after them the whole court does the like . 
 Also upon their festival days or kalends they take forth the foresaid images , and place them in order round , or circle wise within the house . Then come the Moals or Tartars , and enter into the same house , bowing themselves before the said images and worship them . Moreover , it is not lawful for any stranger to enter into that house . For upon a certain time I my self would have gone in , but I was chidden full well for my labour . 
 Of diverse and sundry nations : and of certain people which were wont to eat their own parents . Chap. 28. 
 BUt the foresaid Jugures ( who live among the Christians , and the Saracens ) by their sundry disputations , as I suppose , have be brought unto this , to believe , that there is but one only God . And they dwelled in certain cities , which afterwards were brought in subjection unto Chingis Can : whereupon he gave his daughter in marriage unto their king . Also the city of Caracarum it self is in a manner within their territory : The country and the whole country of king or Presbyter John , & of ofPresbiter bis brother Vut lies near unto their dominions : saving , that they inhabit in certain pastures Northward , and the said Jugures between the mountains towards the South . Whereupon it came to pass , that the Moals received letters from them . And they are the Tartars principali scribes : & all the Nestorians almost can skill of their letters . Next unto them , between the foresaid Tangut . mountains Eastward , inhabiteth the nation of Tangut , who are a most valiant people , and took Chingis in battle . But after the conclusion of a league he was set at liberty by them , and afterwards subdued them . These Strange oxen , people of Tangut have oxen of great strength , with tails like unto horses , and with long shag hair upon their backs and bellies . They have legs greater then other oxen have , and they are exceedingly fierce . These oxen 
 290 
 draw the great houses of the Moals : and their horns are slender , long , straight , and most sharp pointed : insomuch that their owners are feign to cut off the ends of them . A counterfeit we will not suffer her self to be coupled unto one of them , unless they whistle or sing unto her . They have also the qualities of a Buff : for if they see a man clothed in read , they run upon him immediately to kill him . Next unto them are the people of Tebet , men which were wont to eat the carcases of their deceased parents : that for pities sake , they might make no other sepulchre for them , then their own bowels . Howbeit of late they have left off this custom , because that thereby they became abominable and odious unto all other nations . Notwithstanding unto this day they make fine cups of the skulls of their parents , to the end that when they drink out of them , they may amid all their jollities and delights call their dead parents to remembrance . This was told me by one that saw it . The said people of Tebet have great plenty of gold in their land . Whosoever therefore wants gold , diggeth till he hath found some quantity , and then taking so much thereof as will serve his turn , he layeth up the residue within the earth : because , if he should put it into his chest or storehouse , he is of opinion that God would withhold from him all other gold within the earth . I saw some of those people , being very deformed creatures . In Tangut I saw lusty tall men , but brown and swart in colour . The Jugures are of a middle stature like unto our French men . among the Jugures is the originali and root of the Turkish , and Comanian languages . Next unto Tebet are the people of Langa and Solanga , whose messengers I saw in the Tartars court . And they had brought more then ten great carts with them , every one of which was drawn with sixe oxen . They be little brown men like unto Spaniards . Also they have jackets , like unto the upper vestment of a deacon , saving that the sleeves are somewhat straighter . And they have miters upon their heads like bishops . But the before part of their 
 291 
 The people of Tebet . 
 Abundance of glide . 
 The stature of the people of Tangut , and of the Jugures . 
 The people ofSolanga resemble Spaniards . 
 miter is not so hollow within as the hinder part : neither is it sharp pointed or cornered at the top : but there hang down certain square flappes compacted of a kind of straw which is made rough and rugged with extreme heat , and is so trimmed , that it glittereth in the sun beams , like unto a glass , or and helmet well burnished . And about their temples they have long bans of the foresaid matter fastened unto their miters , which hover in the wind , as if two long homes grew out of their heads . And when the wind tosses them up and down too much , they tie them over the midst of their miter from one temple to another : and so they lie circle wise overthwart their heads . Moreover their principal messenger Atabkofele - coming unto the Tartars court had a table of elephants phants tooth , about him of a cubit in length , and a handful in 
 breadth , being very smooth . And whensoever he spoke unto the Emperor himself , or unto any other great personage , he always beheld that table , as if he had found therein those things which he spoke : neither did he cast his eyes to the right hand , nor to the left , nor upon his face , with whom he talked . Yea , going too and from before his lord , he looks no where but only upon ne people is table . Beyond them ( as I understand of a certainty ) called Muc. there are other people called Muc , having villages , but no one particular man of them appropriating any cattle unto 
 himself . Notwithstanding there are many flocks and droves of cattle in their country , & no man appointed to keep them . But when any one of them stands in need of any beast , he ascendeth up unto and hill , and there makes a shout , and all the cattle which are within hearing of the noise , come flocking about him , and suffer themselves to be handled and taken , as if they were tame . And when any messenger or stranger comes into their country , they shut him up into and house , ministering there things necessary unto him , until his business be dispatched . For if any stranger should travel through that country , the cattle would flee away at the very sent of him , and so would become wild . Beyond Muc is great 
 292 
 Cathaya , the inhabitants whereof ( as I suppose ) were of Great old time , called Seres . For from them are brought most Cat^a-excellent stuffs of silk . And this people is called Seres of a certain town in the same country . I was credibly informed , that in the said country , there is one town having walls of silver , and bulwarks or towers of gold . There be many provinces in that land , the greater part whereof are not as yet subdued unto the Tartars . And amongst* 
 Somewhat is wanting . 
 . 