Part of and Epistle written by one Yvo of Narbona unto the Archbishop of Bordeaux , containing the confession of and Englishman as touching the barbarous demeanour of the Tartars , which had lived long among them , and was drawn along perforce with them in their expedition against Hungarie : Recorded by Mathew Paris in the year of our Lord 1243. 
 THe Lord therefore being provoked to indignation , by reason of this and other sins committed among us Christians , is become , as it were , a destroying enemy , and a dreadful avenger . This I may justly affirm to be true , because and huge nation , and a barbarous and inhumane people , whose law is lawless , whose wrath is furious , even the rod of Gods anger , overrunneth , and utterly wastes infinite countries , cruelly abolishing all things where they come , with fire and sword . And this present Summer , the foresaid nation , being called Tartars , departing out of Hungarie , which they had surprised by treason , laid siege unto the | | Neust. it . very same II town , wherein I my self abided , with many thousands of soldiers : neither were there in the said 5° 
 town on our part above 50. men of war , whom , together with 20. crossbows , the captain had left in garrison . All these , out of certain high places , beholding the enemies vast army , and abhorring the beastly cruelty of Antichrist his accomplices , signified forthwith unto their governor , the hideous lamentations of his Christian subject's , who suddenly being surprised in all the province adjoining , without any difference or respect of condition , fortune , sex , or age , were by manifold cruelties , all of them destroyed : with whose carcases , the Tartarian chieftains , and their brutish and savage followers , glutting themselves , as with delicious cates , left nothing for vultures but the bore bones . And a strange thing it is to consider , that the greedy and ravenous vultures disdained to pray upon any of the relics , which remained . Oide , and deformed women they gave , as it were , for daily sustenance , unto their Canibals : the beautiful devoured they not , but smothered them lamenting and scritching , with forced and unnatural ravishments . Like barbarous miscreants , they quelled virgins unto death , and cutting ofF their tender paps to present for dainties unto their magistrates , they engorged themselves with their bodies . 
 Howbeit , their espials in the mean time descrying from the top of and high mountain the Duke of Austria , the King of Bohemia , the Patriarch of Aquileia , the Duke of Carinthia , and ( as some report ) the Earl of Baden , with a mighty power , and in battle array , approaching towards them , that accursed crew immediately vanished , and all those Tartarian vagabonds retired themselves into the distressed and vanquished land of Hungarie ; who as they came suddenly , so they departed also on the sudden : which their celerity caused all men to stand in horror and astonishment of them . But of the said fugitives , the prince of Dalmatia took eight : one of which number the Duke of Austria knew to be and English man , who was perpetually banished out of the Realm of England , in regard of certain notorious crimes by him committed . This fellow , on the behalf of the most tyrannical king of 
 A.D. 
 1243. 
 the Tartars , had be twice , as a messenger and interpreter , with the king of Hungarie , menacing and plainly foretelling those mischiefs which afterwards happened , unless he would submit himself and his kingdom unto the Tartars yoke . Well , being allured by our Princes to confess the truth , he made such oaths and protestations , as ( I think ) the devil himself would have been trusted for . First therefore he reported of himself , that presently after the time of his banishment , namely about the 30. year of his age , having lost all that he had in the city of Aeon at dice , even in the midst of Winter , being compelled by ignominious hunger , wearing nothing about him but a shirt of sack , a pair of shoes , and a hair cap only , being shaved like a fool , and uttering and uncouth noise as if he had be dumb , he took his journey , and so traveling many countries , and finding in diverse places friendly entertainment , he prolonged his life in this manner for a season , albeit every day by rashness of speech , and inconstancy of heart , he endangered himself to the devil . At length , by reason of extreme travail , and continual change of air and of meats in Caldea , he fell into a grievous sickness , insomuch that he was weary of his life . Not being able therefore to go forward or backward , and staying there a while to refresh himself , he began ( being somewhat learned ) to commend to writing those words which he herd spoken , and within a short space , so aptly to pronounce , and to utter them himself , that he was reputed for a native member of that country : and by the same dexterity he attained to many languages . This man the Tartars having intelligence of by their spies , drew him perforce into their society : and being admonished by and oracle or vision , to challenge dominion over the whole earth , they allured him by many rewards to 
 their faithful service , by reason that they wanted Interpreters . But concerning their manners and superstitions , of the disposition and stature of their bodies , of their country and manner of fighting etc. , he protested the particulars following to be true : namely , that they were 52 
 above all men , covetous , hasty , deceitful , and merciless : notwithstanding , by reason of the rigour and extremity of punishments to be inflicted upon them by their superiors , they are restrained from brawlings , and from mutual strife and contention . The ancient founders and father's of their tribes , they call by the name of gods , and at certain set times they do celebrate solemn feasts unto them , many of them being particular , & but foure only general . They think that all things are created for themselves alone . They esteem it none offence to exercise cruelty against rebels . They be hardy and strong in the breast , lean and pale-faced , rough and huf-shouldred , having flat and short noses , long and sharp chins , their upper jaws are low and declining , their teeth long and thin , their eyebrows extending from their foreheads down to their noses , their eyes inconstant and black , their countenances writhen and terrible , their extreme joints strong with bones and sinews , having thick and great thighs , and short legs , and yet being equal unto us in stature : for that length which is wanting in their legs , is supplied in the upper parts of their bodies . Their country in old time was a land utterly desert and waste , situated far beyond Chaldea , from whence they have expelled Lions , Bears , & such like untamed beasts , with their bows , and other engines . Of the hides of beasts being tanned , they use to shape for themselves light , but yet impenetrable armour . They ride fast bound unto their horses , which are not very great in stature , but exceedingly strong , and maintained with little provender . They use to fight constantly and valiantly with javelins , maces , battle-axes , and swords . But specially they are excellent archers , and cunning warriors with their bows . Their backs are slightly armed , that they may not flee . They withdraw not themselves from the combat , till they see the chief Standard of their general give back . Vanquished , they ask no favour , and vanquishing , they show no compassion . They all persist in their purpose of subduing the whole world under their own subjection , as 
 if they were but one man , and yet they are more then millions in number . They have 60000. Courriers , who being sent before upon light horses to prepare a place for the army to encamp in , will in the space of one night gallop three days journey . And suddenly diffusing themselves over and whole province , and surprising all the people thereof unarmed , unprovided , dispersed , they make such horrible slaughters , that the king or prince of the land invaded , cannot find people sufficient to wage battle against them , and to withstand them . They delude all people and princes of regions in time of peace , pretending that for a cause , which indeed is no cause . Sometime they say , that they will make a voyage to Colen , to fetch home the three wise kings into their own country ; sometime to punish the avarice and pride of the Roman , who oppressed them in times past ; sometime to conquer barbarous and Northern nations ; sometime to moderate the fury of the Germanes with their own meek mildness ; sometime to learn warlike feats and stratagems of the French ; sometime for the finding out of fertile ground to suffice their huge multitudes ; sometime again in derision they say , that they intend to go on pilgrimage to S. James of Galicia . In regard of which sleights and collusions certain undiscreet governors concluding a league with them , have granted them free passage thorough their territories , which leagues notwithstanding being violated , were and occasion of ruin and destruction unto the foresaid governors etc. 
 . 