The state of the shipping of the Cinque ports from Edward the Confessor and William the Conqueror , and so down to Edward the first , faithfully gathered by the learned Gentleman 42 
 M. Willaim Lambert in his Perambulation of Kent , out of the most ancient Records of England . 
 Find in the book of the general ! survey The antiquity of the Realm , which William the Con - °fthe Porls-querour caused to be made in the fourth IO7°-yeere of his reign , and to be called Domesday , because ( as Matthew Parise says ) it spared no man but judged all men indifferently , as the Lord in that great 
 day will do , that Dover , Sandwich , and Rumney , were in the time of K. Edward the Confessor , discharged almost of all manner of impositions and burdens ( which other towns did bear ) in consideration of such service to be done by them upon the Sea , as in their special titles shall hereafter appear . 
 Whereupon , although I might ground reasonable conjecture , that the immunity of the haven Towns ( which we now call by a certain number , the Cinque Ports ) might take their beginning from the same Edward : yet for as much as I read in the Chartre of K. Edward the first after the conquest ( which is reported in our book of Entries ) A reci tall of the grants of sundry kings to the Five Ports , the same reaching no higher then to William the Conqueror , I will leave my conjecture , and lean to his Chartre : contenting my self to yield to the Conqueror , the thanks of other men's benefits , seeing those which were benefited , were wisely contented ( as the case then stood ) to like better of his confirmation ( or second gift ) then of K. Edwards first grant , and endowment . 
 And to the end that I may proceed in some manner of array , I will first show , which Towns were at the beginning taken for the Five Ports , and what others be now reputed in the same number : secondly , what service they ought , and did in times passed : and lastly , what privileges they have therefore , and by what persons they have be governed . 
 Citizens were called Barons in old time . 
 Contention between Yarmouth , and the Five Ports . 
 1250. 
 Antiquity of Yarmouth fishing . 
 If 1 should judge by the common , and rude verse , Dover , Sandwicus , Ry , Rum , Frigmare ventus , 
 I must say , that Dover , Sandwich , Rye , Rumney , and Winchelsey , ( for that is , Frigmare ventus ) be the Five Ports : Again , if I should be ruled by the Roll which reciteth the Ports that send Barons to the Parliament , I must then add to these , Hastings and Hyde , for they also have their Barons as well as the other : and so should I not only , not show which were the first Five , but also ( by addition of two others ) increase both the number , and doubtfulness . Leaving the verse therefore , for ignorance of the author and suspicion of his authority , and forsaking the Roll ( as not assured of the antiquity ) I will flee to Henry Bracton , a man both ancient , learned , and credible , which lived under K. Henry the thirde , and wrote ( above three hundreth years since ) learnedly of the laws of this Realm . 
 He ( I say ) in the third book of his work , and treatise of the Crown , taking in hand to show the articles inquirable before the Justice in Eire , ( or Itinerent , as we called them , because they used to ride from place to place throughout the Realm , for administration of justice ) sets forth a special form of writs , to be directed severally to the Baliffs of Hastings , Hithe , Rumney , Dover , and Sandwich , commanding them , that they should cause twentie & foure of their Barons ( for so their Burgesses , or townsmen , and the citizens of London likewise , were wont to be termed ) to appear before the Kings Justices at Shipwey in Kent ( as they accustomed to do ) there to inquire of such points , as should be given in charge . Which done , he adds moreover , that forso-much as there was oftentimes contention between them of the Five Ports , & the inhabitants of Yarmouth in Norfolke and Donwich in Suffblke , there should be several ! writs directed to them also , returnable before the same Justices at the same day and place , reciting , that where the King had by his former writs summoned the Pleasant of the Five Ports to be held at Shipwey , if any of the same 
 towns had cause to complain of any ( being within the liberties of the said Ports ) he should be at Shipwey to propound against him , and there to receive according to law and Justice . 
 Thus much I recite out of Bracton , partly to show that Shipwey was before K. Edward the firsts time , the place of assembly for the Pleasant of the Five Ports : partly to notify the difference , and controversy that long time since was between these Ports , and those other towns : But purposely , and chiefly , to prove , that Hastings , and Hithe , Dover , Rumney , and Sandwich , were in Bractons time accounted the Five principali havens or Ports , which were endowed with privilege , and had the same ratified by the great Chartre of England . 
 Neither yet will I deny , but that soon after , Winchelsea and Rye might be added to the number . For I find in and old record , that king Henry the third took into his own hands ( for the better defence of the Realm ) the towns of Winchelsey , and Rye , which belonged before to the Monastery of Fescampe in Normandie , and gave therefore in exchange , the Manor of Chiltham in Gloucestershire , & diverse other lands in Lincolneshire . This he did , partly to conceal from the Priors Aliens the intelligence of the secret affairs of his Realm , and partly because of a great disobedience & excess , that was committed by the inhabitants of Wincelsey , against Prince Edward his eldest son . And therefore , although I can easily be led to think , that he submitted them for their correction to the order , and governance of the Five ports , yet I stand doubtful whither he made them partners of their privileges , or no , for that had be a preferment , and no punishment unto them : but I suspect rather , that his son king Edward the first , ( by whose encouragement and aid , old Winchelsey was afterwards abandoned , and the new town budded ) was the first that appareled them with that preeminence . 
 By this therefore let it appear , that Hastings , Dover , Hithe , Rumney , and Sandwich , were the first Ports of +5 
 1268. 
 Winchelsey first built . 
 ™ 77 - 
 privilege : which ( because they were 5. in number ) both at the first gave , and yet continue , to all the residue , the name of Cinque Ports , although not only Winchelsey and Rye , be ( since that time ) incorporated with them as principals , but diverse other places also ( for the ease of their charge ) be crept in , as parts , limbs , and members of the same . 
 Now therefore , somewhat shall said , as touching the services that these Ports of duty owe , and in deed have done , to the Princes : whereof the one ( I mean with what number of vessels , in what manner of furniture , and for how long season , they ought to wait on the king at the Sea , upon their own charges ) shall partly appear by that which we shall presently say , and partly by that which shall follow in Sandwich , and Rumney : The other shall be made manifest by examples , drawn out of good histories : and they both shall be testified by the words of king Edward the first in his own Chartre . 
 The book of Domesday before remembered , charges Dover with twentie vessels at the sea , whereof eke to be furnished with one and twentie men for fifteene days together : and says further , that Rumney and Sandwich answered the like service . But now whither this ( like ) ought to be understood of the like altogether , both in respect of the number and service , or of thee ( like ) in respect of service , according to the proportion of their ability only , I may not hereby take upon me to determine . For on the one side , if Rumney , Sandwich , and the residue , should likewise find twentie vessels a piece , then ( as you shall anon see ) the five Ports were subject to a greater charge at that time , then King Edward the first laid upon them : And on the other side , if they were only chargeable after their proportion , then know I not how far to burden them , seeing the Record of Domesday it self , binds them to no certainty . And therefore leaving this as I find it , I must elsewhere make inquisition for more lightsome proof . And first I will have recourse to king Edward the first his Chartre in which I read , that 
 At each time that the King passes over the sea , the Ports ought to rig up fiftie and seven ships , ( whereof every one to have twentie armed soldiers ) and to maintain them at their own costs , by the space of fifteene days together . 
 And thus it stood with the Ports for their generail > 278-charge , in the sixt year of his reign , for then was this Chartre sealed . But as touching the particular burden of each one , I have seen two diverse testimonies , of which the first is a note in French ( bearing the countenance of a Record ) and is entitled , to have be renewed in the two and twentie year of the Reign of the same king , by Stephan Penchester , then Constable of Dover Castle , in which the particular charge is set down in this manner . 
 The Port of Hastings ought to find three ships . 
 The lowy of Pevensey , one . 
 Bulverhithe and Petit Jahn , one . 
 Bekesborne in Kent , seven . 
 Grenche at Gillingham in Kent , two men and armour , with the ships of Hastings . 
 The town of Rye , five . 
 To it was Tenterdene annexed , in the time of King Henrie the sixt . 
 The town of Winchelsey , tenne . 
 The Port of Rumney , foure . 
 Lydde , seven . 
 The Port of Hythe , five . 
 The Port of Dover , nineteene . 
 The town of Folkestone , seven . 
 The town of Feversham , seven . 
 The Port of Sandwich , with Stonor , Fordwich , Dale , etc. five . 
 These ships they ought to find upon fortie days summons , armed and arrayed at their own charge , and in each of them twentie men , beside the Master of the Mariners : all which they shall likewise maintain five days together at their own costs , giving to the Master sixe pence by the day , to the Constable sixe pence , and to 
 each other Mariner three pence . And after those five days ended , the King shall defray the charges . 
 The other is a Latin Custumall of the town of Hyde , the which although it pretend not so great antiquity as the first , yet seems it to me to import as much or more likelihood and credit : It stands thus . 
 These be the Five Ports of our sovereign Lord the King having liberties , which other Ports have not : Hasting , Romenal , Heth , Dover , Sandwich , the chief Towns . 
 The services due by the same . 
 Hasting shall find 21. ships , in every ship 21. men , and a Garcion , or Boy , which is called a Gromet . To it pertain ( as the members of one town ) the Seashore in Seford , Pevenshey , Hodeney , Winchelsey , Rye , Ihame , Bekesbourne , Grenge , Northie , Bulwerheth . 
 Romenal 5. ships , in every ship 21. men , and a Garcion : To it pertain , as members thereof , Promhell , Lede , Eastwestone , Dengemareys , old Rumney . 
 Hethe 5. ships , as Romenal before . To it pertaineth the Westhethe . 
 Dover 21. ships , as Hasting before . To it pertain , Folkstane , Feversham , and S. Margarets , not concerning the land , but for the goods and cattles . 
 Sandwich 5. ships , as Romenal , and Hethe . To it pertain Fordwich , Reculver , Serre , and Deal , not for the soil , but for the goods . 
 Sum of ships 57. 
 Sum of the men 1187. and 57. Garcions . 
 This service , the Barons of the Five Ports do acknowledge to owe to the King , upon summons yearly ( if it happen ) by the space of 15. days together , at their own costs and charges , accounting that for the first day of the 15. in which they shall spread their sails to go towards those parts that the King intends : and to serve so long after 15. days , as the King will , at his own pay and wages . 
 Thus much out of these ancient notes , whereby your 48 
 self may easily discern the difference : but whither the one or the other , or ( by reason of some latter dispensation ) neither of these , have place at this day , I must refer it to them that be privy , and of counsel with the Ports : and so leaving this also undecided , hold on the way , wherein I am entered . 
 This duty of attendance therefore ( being devised for the honourable transportation , and safe conduct of the Kings own person or his army over the narrow Seas ) the Ports have not only most diligently ever since that time performed , but furthermore also valiantly behaved themselves against the enemy from time to time , in sundry exploits by water , as occasion hath be proffered , or the necessity of the Realm required . 
 And among other feats not unworthy perpetuali re - The good ser-membrance , after such time as Lewes ( the eldest son of vice of the five the French King ) had entered the Realm to aid Stephan ‘ Langton the Archbishop , and the Nobility , in the life of King John , and had sent into France for new supply of soldiers after his death , Hubert of Borough ( then 1217. captain of Dover ) following the opinion of Themistocles in the exposition of the oracle of the wooden walls , by the aid of the Port towns , armed fortie tall ships , and meeting with eightie sail of French men upon the high seas , gave them a most courageous encounter , in which he took some , sunk others , and discomfited the rest . 
 King Henrie the third also , after that he came to riper age , had great benefit by the service of the Cinque Ports : And king Edward the first in his Chartre , makes their continual faithful service ( and especially their good endeavour , then lately showed against the Welshmen ) the 1278. principali cause , and motive of that his liberali grant . 
 Furthermore , about the midst of the reign of the same king , and hundreth sail of the Navy of the Ports fought at the Sea with a fleet of 200. French men , all which 1293. ( notwithstanding the great odds of the number ) they took , and slew , and sunk so many of the Mariners , that 
 i 49 n 
 France was thereby ( for a long season after ) in manner destitute , both of Seamen , and shipping . 
 1406. Finally , and to conclude this part , in the days of king Henrie the fourth , the navy of the Five Ports , under the conduct of one Henrie Paye , surprised one hundreth and twentie French ships , all laden with Salt , Iron , Oil , and no worse merchandise . 
 The privl - The privileges of these Ports , being first granted by ledge s^of the £dward the Confessor , and William the Conqueror , ’ and then confirmed and increased by William Rufus , Henrie the second , Richard the first , Henrie the third , and king Edward the first , be very great , considering either the honour and ease , or the freedom and exemption , that the inhabitants have by reason of the same . 
 . 