The league between Henry the second and Fredericke Barbarossa Emperor of Germanic , wherein is mention of friendly traffic between the Merchants of the Empire and England , confirmed in the year of our Lord 1157. recorded in the first Book and seventeenth Chapter of Radevicus Canonicus Frisingensis , being and appendix to Otto Frisingensis . 
 1157. 
 The same in English . 
 THere were present also the same time , the messengers of Henry king of England presenting diverse rich and precious gifts , and that with great learning & eloquence of speech . among the which we saw a pavilion , most large in quantity , & most excellent in quality . For if you desire to know the quanti tie thereof , it could not be erected without engines and a kind of instruments , and main force : if the quality , I think there was never any furniture of the same kind , that surpassed the same either in stuff or workmanship . The said king directed his letters also , full of sugared speeches , the tenor whereof was this that folioweth . 
 To his entirely beloved friend Frederick by the grace of God Emperor of the Romans most invincible , Henry king of England , duke of Normandie and Aquitaine , Earl of Anjou wishes health and concord of sincere amity . We do render unto your highness ( most renowned and peerless Prince ) exceeding great thanks for that you have so graciously vouchsafed by your messengers to visit us , in your letters to salute 3r7 
 us , with your gifts to prevent us , and ( which we do more highly esteem of then all the rest ) to begin a league of peace and friendship between us . We rejoiced , and in a manner sensibly felt our selves to be greatly emboldened , and our courage to increase , whilst your promise , whereby you put us in good comfort , did make us more cheerful and resolute , in managing the affairs of our kingdom . We rejoiced ( I say ) & in our secret cogitations did humble obeisance unto your Majesty , giving you at this time to understand from the sincere 8c unfeigned affection of our heart , that whatsoever we shall know to tend unto your honour , we are , to our power most ready to put in practice . Our kingdom , and whatsoever is under our jurisdiction we do offer unto you , and commit the same unto your highness , that all matters may be disposed according to your direction , and that your pleasure may in all things be fulfilled . Let there be therefore between our selves and our subject's , and indivisible unity of friendship and peace , and safe trade of Merchandise : yet so , as that unto you ( who excel in dignity ) authority in commanding may be ascribed , and diligence in obeying shall not want in us . And as the liberality of your rewards doth often put us in remembrance of your Majesty , even so in like manner sending unto your Highness the most rare things in our custody , and which we thought should be most acceptable unto you , we do most heartily wish that your self also would not altogether be unmindful of us . Have respect therefore not unto the gifts , but unto the affection of the giver , and accept of them with that mind , wherewith they are offered unto you . 
 Concerning the hand of S. James , about which you wrote unto us , we have sent you word by M. Herbert , and by William the Clerk . Witness Thomas our Chancellor at Northanton . 
 . 