Charta anno regni sexto confecta . 
 350 
 351 
 In portu villae Weymouth . 
 In portu villae de magna lernemutha . 
 The same in English . 
 And Ordinance of the Staple to be held at one certain place . 
 THe King unto his Collectors of custom , for wool and woollen fels , in his port of London , greeting . 
 Whereas we upon the 20. of May , in the sixt year of our reign , considering the damages and grievances that have diversely happened unto the merchants of our realm , upon occasion that the merchants both of our own , 8c of other countries , buying up wool and woollen fels within our kingdom and dominions , have , for the better sale thereof , at their pleasure conveyed themselves , and transported the said wool 8c fels into sundry places within the provinces of Brabant , Flanders and Artoys : and being desirous also , to our power , to 352 
 provide a remedy against such damages and inconveniences , have ordained by our counsel , that all merchants , both homeborn and aliens , buying up such wools and fels , within our kingdom and dominion aforesaid , and being desirous to transport them into the foresaid provinces , there to be sold , may carry the said wools and fels , or cause them to be carried to some certain staple , within any of the said Provinces , by the Mayor and Commonalty of the said merchants of our realm , to be appointed and assigned , and when they shall think it expedient , to be changed and removed , and not unto any other place within the said Provinces whatsoever : and whereas also , among other things , we have granted unto the merchants of our foresaid realm , for us and our heirs , that the Mayor and Council of the said merchants for the time being , may impose upon all merchants , homeborn or aliens whatsoever , that shall transgress the foresaid ordination , and shall thereof lawfully be convicted , certain sums of money to be paid for their offences , and that such sums must by our ministers and officers , to our use , be levied out of the goods and wares of the merchants so offending , wheresoever they shall chance to be found within our kingdom and dominions aforesaid , as in our Charter made for the same purpose , it is more plainly expressed , ( which Charter we have caused to be published upon the Seacoasts , throughout all the countries' of our realm , and a strong prohibition to be proclaimed , that no merchants , neither homeborn , nor strangers , may in any wise transgress the tenor of the foresaid Charter , under the penalties therein contained ) and whereas afterwards it being given us to understand , that diverse merchants both homeborn , and aliens , bought up such wools and woollen fells within our said Realm and dominions , and conveyed themselves with the said wools and fells for the sale thereof , unto other places within the foresaid Provinces , beside the said Staple , which 
 i 353 z 
 1320. 
 A Charter made in the sixt year of his reign . 
 was , according to our grant aforesaid , appointed and ordained by the Mayor and commonalty of the said merchants of our Realm , in some one of those Provinces , to the contempt of our authority , and contrary to the Charter of the ordination , publication , and inhibition aforesaid , we assigned certain of our faithful subject's , in diverse parts of our Realm , to make inquisition for such wools and woollen fells , as were conveyed unto any other place of the said Provinces , then unto the Staple , so that by these means , the penalties due unto us might be levied unto our use : and having intelligence also , that in a manner all merchants both homeborn , and strangers bartering such wares in our kingdom , are culpable of the premises , and that many being indicted thereupon , and others fearing to be indicted , do cause their wools and woollen fells to be avouched under the names of persons not culpable , and to be sent over unto certain strangers being also culpable , and not minding perhaps to return any more into our realm , that they may so escape the foresaid forfeitures , and defraud us of the penalty , appertaining of right unto us , ( which abuses , if they were suffered so to go unpunished would redound unto our extreme hindrance : ) and being likewise desirous to withstand such deceitful dealing , and so far forth as we can , to prevent our own losses , we firmly command , and streightly charge you , that you do receive of every particular merchant , desirous to convey any wools , or woollen fels out of the foresaid port , into any foreign dominions , a corporal oath upon Gods holy Evangelists : that they shall avouch all those wools and woollen fels under his name unto whom they do properly belong , & under the name of none other : and then taking sufficient security from the owner of those wools and fels , or in his name , in regard whereof you will undertake to warrantise , and make good unto us those penalties and forfeitures which shall unto us appertain , for all wools , and woollen fels conveyed or sent by any of the foresaid merchant's unto any of the 
 354 
 said provinces of Flanders , Brabant , and Artoys , contrary to the Charter of the Proclamation and inhibition above mentioned ( if they shall chance to be convinced hereof ) that first , our due custom being received , you do permit the said wools and woollen fels to pass out of the foresaid port into foreign countries . Witness the king at Dover the 18. day of June . By the king himself and his Council . 
 And afterward by a Written under the Kings privy Seal there was a like commandment given unto the Collectors of the custom aforesaid in the ports underwritten . 
 That is to say : 
 A.D. 
 In the port of the Town of 
 Weymouth . 
 Southhampton . 
 Saint Botulphs town , now called Boston . 
 Kingtone upon Hull . 
 Newcastle . 
 lernemouth magna , or Yermouth . 
 Gypwick or Ipswich . 
 . 