339 
 The letters of Edward the second unto Haquinus king of Norway , concerning the English merchants arrested in Norway , and their goods to be freed from arrest . 
 O the mighty Prince , lord Haquinus , by the grace of God the famous king of Norway his most deer friend , Edward by the same grace of God , king of England , lord of Ireland , duke of Aquitaine , greeting and sincere love . We marvel not a little , and are much dis - 
 quieted in our cogitations , considering the grievances and oppressions , which ( as we have been informed by pitiful complaints ) are at this present , more then in times past , without any reasonable cause inflicted upon our subject's , which do usually resort unto your kingdom for traffics sake . For of late one William the son of Laurence of Wainfleete , and one Simon the son of Alan of the same town , and Guido the son of Mathew , and their associates our merchants , in complaining wise declared unto us : that having sent certain of their factors and servants , with three ships into your dominions , there to exercise traffic , and the said ships being laden in the haven of your town of Tonnesbergh , with Herrings and other commodities , to a great valve : and also the said mariners , men , and servants of the foresaid ships , being licenced by virtue of the safe conduct which you had granted them , freely to return from your kingdom unto the parts of England with their ships and goods aforesaid , but afterwards not being able to depart out of your haven by reason of contrary winds : certain of your bailiffs upon occasion of the slaughter of a knight being himself also of late your bailiff of Vikia , committed by malefactors and Pirates upon the sea , whilst the said ships remained in the haven aforesaid , 341 
 The town of Tonesbergh . 
 did at your commandment ( as they say ) arrest , and for a long season also detained under that arrest , the foresaid 
 ships , with all the men and goods that were in them : namely until such time , as the men and mariners aforesaid ( being driven perforce , and constrained thereunto ) should lay in sufficient security for the payment of fortie pounds sterling , upon a certain day appointed , unto your use , for every of the foresaid ships : and also until they had moreover delivered three pledges , for the bringing of the said ships and men back again into the foresaid haven , before the feast of the nativity of S. John the Baptist next ensuing , then and there to stand unto your favour and courtesy , as touching the said persons , and those ships of theirs : which dealing , the parties themselves take very grievously , yea , and all others that hear thereof think it to be a strange and unwonted course . And because it is most undoubtedly contrary to all reason , equity , justice , and law , that the faults or demerits of offenders should in any sort be punished in such persons , or in their goods , as neither have be accessory nor partakers in the crime , nor have had any society with the said offenders : we do heartily entreat and request your Highness , that weighing and pondering the matter in the balance of justice , you would of your love and friendship , command the foresaid pledges to be set at liberty , and the said security utterly to be released and acquitted . And know you this for a certainty , that if the foresaid malefactors , who ( as it is reported ) slew your Knight aforesaid , shall any where within our realm and dominions be found , we will cause justice and judgement to be executed upon them , according to the Law and custom of our say de Realm . For we cannot in these times conveniently and well endure , that the ships aforesaid , or any other ships of our kingdom ( which ought always to be in a readiness for our service ) should without speciali licence , depart out of our said kingdom , unto foreign dominions . Now , what you shall think good at this our request to perform in the premises , 
 342 
 may it please you by the bearer of these presents to return and answer unto us . Given at Windsore the 16. of April . 
 . 