A third letter of King Edward the second , to Haquinus King of Norway in the behalf of certain English Merchants . 
 345 
 346 
 The same in English . 
 TO the mighty Prince king Haquinus , by the grace of God the famous king of Norway , his most deer friend Edward by the same grace of God , king of England , lord of Ireland , Duke of Aquitaine , greeting and sincere love . We sent of late unto your royal majesty our special letters , for the behalf of our late merchants of Lenne , and of the coast adjoining ( whom your baily and officers of the city of Bergen lately apprehended , committing them to close prison , many of whom , as we understand , are , for want of due nourishment , and by reason of the extremity & loathsomeness of the prison , quite perished ) that you would cause them and their goods to be released . Howbeit , you retaining as yet our merchants in durance as before , in your letters , which we have diligently herd , and thoroughly understood , have , among other matters , returned this answer unto us : that certain merchants of your kingdom do make sundry complaints of injuries , violences and arrests , whereby they have lately ( as themselves avouch ) contrary to justice be aggrieved and oppressed in our dominions : adding moreover in your said letters , that certain sons of iniquity of the town of Lenne , coming , as they said , to fish for herrings , cruelly murdered a certain Knight , who was in times passed your bailiff of Vikia , together with ten others of your subject's , being employed about the affairs of your kingdom . In consideration whereof our mind is exceedingly and above measure grieved and troubled , especially since it was never any part of our intent , that any injuries , violences , or arrests 
 347 
 A.D. 
 I3I3 - 
 The antiquity oftraffique between England and Nor - 
 way . 
 should unjustly be inflicted upon any merchants , or any others of your realm by any of our kingdoms : neither can we as yet have any intelligence , that any such hard measure hath be offered unto any of your merchants , by any one or more of our subject's : giving you for a certainty to understand , that if upon lawful inquisition we shall advertised of any such grievances , which have be offered unto your subject's within our realm , we will cause speedy justice to be administered , and sufficient recompense , and due satisfaction to be made in regard thereof . And moreover , if the said malefactors , which , as it is aforesaid , slew the forenamed Knight , and others of his company , either be appertaining unto our kingdom and dominion , or may at any time be found within our said kingdom or dominion , we will command justice and judgement to be executed upon them , according to the laws and customs of our realm . And forasmuch as our desire is , that mutual concord and amity should be maintained and cherished between your and our subject's on both parts : so that our and your merchants may , in both our Realms and dominions , freely and without impediment exercise their traffic , as in the times of our progenitors it hath be accustomed : Whereas also we evidently gathered out of the contents of your letter , that you are in like sort ready and willing to put all things in practice , which are by you and your subject's ( for the taking away of discords , contentions , and molestations howsoever occasioned , and sprung up between your and our subject's ) lovingly to be performed : we also do promise for our selves , and our subject's , so much as in us and them lies , for his sake who is known to be the author of peace , and for the benefit & tranquillity of both our Realms ( as justice and reason shall move us ) to do the like . Desiring and earnestly requesting at your hands , that of your love and friendship , having regard of us , and consideration of justice , you would command that our foresaid 
 348 
 merchants , who as yet remain alive , and who also at the time of the said felony committed , were shut up in close prison , be delivered out of the said thraldom , causing their goods which have be taken from them , to be , according unto justice , restored to them again . And that the delivery of our foresaid merchants and goods , may be the more easily yielded unto , may it please you with diligent observation to consider , that Gefferey Drew , and certain other of our merchants of Lenne , upon occasion of the grievances offered unto your merchants within our Realm , ( as the report goes ) at the suit of Tidman Lip , paid unto the same your merchants and hundreth pound sterling : even as in a certain Indenture made between Ingelram Lend of Thorenden , and some other of your merchants on the one part , and between the foresaid Geffrey , and certain of our merchants on the other part , we saw contained . Moreover , if any of your subject's be minded to exhibit , and effectually to prosecute their complaints in our Court , concerning any of our subject's , or of any injury done unto them , we will cause the petitions of those your subject's to be admitted , and also full and speedy justice to be administered , upon any such like complaints of theirs . Insomuch , that those your subject's shall think themselves right well and sufficiently contented therewithal ! . And in the mean space we will cause diligent inquisition of the truth to be made , of all excesses and grievances howsoever offered unto your subject's within our dominions . May it please you therefore , by the bearer of these presents , to return and answer unto us , what you are determined to do in the premises . 
 Given at Westminster , the third day of April . 
 . 