The great Charter granted unto foreign merchants by king Edward the first , in the 31 year of his reign commonly called Carta mercatoria , Anno Domini 1303. 
 328 
 329 
 9 - 
 331 
 332 
 The aforesaid general Charter in English . 
 EDward by the grace of God king of England , lord of Ireland , duke of Aquitaine , to Archbishop's , Bishops , Abbots , Priors , Earls , Barons , Justices , Viscounts , governors , officers , and all bailiffs , and his faithful people sends greeting . we have speciali care for the good estate of all merchants of the kingdoms , lands , and countries following : to wit of Almain , France , Spaine , Portugal , Navarre , Lombardie , Florence , Provence , Catalonia , of our duchy of Aquitaine , Tholosa , Catur-lune , Flanders , Brabant , and of all other foreign countries and places by what name soever they be called , which come into our kingdom of England , and there remain , that the said merchants may live in quiet and full security under our dominion in time to come . Wherefore that their hearts desires may be more readily inclined to our service and the service of our kingdom , we favourably agreeing to their petitions , for the fuller asring of their estate , have thought good to grant to the said merchants for us and our heirs for ever these privileges under written , ordaining in form as follows . 
 First , that all merchants of the said kingdoms and countries' may come into our kingdom of England , and any where else into our dominion with their merchandises whatsoever safely and securely under our defence and protection without paying wharfage , pontage , or pannage . And that in Cities , Boroughs , and market towns of the said kingdom and dominion they may traffic only by the great as well with the natural subject's and inhabitants of our aforesaid kingdom and dominion , as with foreigners , strangers , or private persons . Yet so , that 333 
 And exception for trafficking with you known enemies oj the kingdom . 
 2. 
 3 - 
 merchandises which are commonly called mercery wares , and spices , may be sold by the small , as heretofore hath been accustomed . And that all the aforesaid merchants may carry or cause to be carried whither they will , aswell within our realm or dominion , as out of the same ; saving unto the countries of the manifest and known enemies of our kingdom , those merchandises which they shall bring into our foresaid realm and dominion , or buy , or otherwise purchase in our said realm and dominion , paying such customs as they ought to do : except only wines , which it shall not be any ways lawful for them to carry out of our said realm and dominion without our speciali favour and licence , after they be once brought into our realm and dominion . 
 Item that the aforesaid merchants may at their pleasure lodge & remain with their goods in the cities , boroughs , and towns aforesaid , with the good liking of those which are owners of their lodgings . 
 Item that every bargain made by the said merchants with any manner of persons , of what places soever they be , for any kind of merchandise whatsoever , shall firm & stable , so that none of both the merchants shall shrink or give back from that bargain , after that the earnest penny be once given and taken between the principali bargainers . And if peradventure any strife arise about the same bargain , the trial and inquiry thereof shall be made according to the uses and customs of the fairs and towns where it chanced that the said bargain was made and contracted . 
 Item , we promise the aforesaid merchants granting for ever for us and our heirs , that from hence forth we will not in any wise make nor cause to be made any stay or arrest , or any delay by reason of arrest of their wares , merchandises or other goods , by our selves , or by any other or others for any need or accident against the will of the said merchants , without present payment of such a price as the merchants would have sold those merchandises for to other men , or without making of them other 334 
 satisfaction , so that they shall hold themselves well contented : and that no price or valuation shall set upon their wares , merchandises , & goods by us or by any officer of ours . 
 Item , we will that all bailiffs and officers of fairs , cities , boroughs , and market towns shall do speedy justice from day to day without delay according to the law of Merchants to the aforesaid merchants when they shall complain before them , touching all and singular causes , which may be determined by the same law . And if default be found in any of the bailiffs or officers aforesaid , whereby the said merchants or any of them have sustained , or do sustain any damage through delay , though the merchant recover his losses against the party principali , yet the bailiff or other officer shall be punished to us ward , according to the quality of the default . And we do grant this punishment in favour of the aforesaid merchants in regard of the hastening of their justice . 
 Item , that in all manner of pleasant , saving in case where punishment of death is to be inflicted , where a merchant is impleaded , or sues another , of what condition soever he be which is sued , whither stranger or home born , in fairs , cities , or boroughs , where sufficient numbers of merchants of the foresaid countries are , and where the trial ! ought to be made , let the one half of the Jury be of the said merchants , and the other half of good and lawful men of the place where the suit shall fallen out to be : and if sufficient number of merchants of the said countries cannot be found , those which shall be found fit in that place shall be put upon the jury , and the rest shall be chosen of good and fit men of the places where such suit shall chance to be . 
 A.D. 
 1303. 
 5 - 
 Where it this law now become ? 
 6. 
 Item we will , we ordain , and we appoint , that in 7-every market town and fair of our realm aforesaid and elsewhere within our dominion our weight shall be set in some certain place ; and that before the weighing 
 335 
 the balance shall be seen empty in the presence of the buyer and of the seller , and that the scales be equal : and that afterwards the weigher weigh in the equal balance . And when he hath set the balances even , let him straightway remove his hands , so that the balance way remain even : And that throughout all our kingdom and dominion there be one weight and one measure , and that they be marked with the mark of our standard . And that every man may have a weight of one quarter of and hundred , and under , where the same hath not been contrary to the liberty of the lord of the place , and contrary to the liberty granted by us and our predecessors , or contrary to the custom of towns and fairs which hath hitherto been observed . 
 8 - Item we will and we grant that some certain faithful and discreet man resident in London be appointed to do Justice to the aforesaid merchants , before whom they may have their suits decided , and may speedily recover their debts , if the Sheriffs and Mayor should not from day to day give them speedy justice . And hereof let a Commission be made : which we grant unto the aforesaid merchants beside this present Charter : to wit of such things as between merchant and merchant are to be decided according to the law of merchants . 
 9. Item we ordain and appoint , and we will that this ordinance and statute shall firmly be observed for ever for us and our heirs , that the aforesaid merchants shall [ I . I37-J not lose the aforesaid liberties nor any of them , for any liberty whatsoever , which we or our heirs hereafter shall grant . And for the obtaining of the aforesaid liberties and free customs , and for remission of our arresting of their goods , the aforesaid merchants all and every of them for themselves and all other of their parties with one accord and one consent have granted unto us , that of every tun of wine , which they shall bring or cause to be brought into our realm and dominion , for which they shall be bound to pay 
 336 
 freight unto the mariners , beside the old customs which are due and were wont to be paid unto us , they will pay unto us and to our heirs in the name of a custom two shillings in money , either out of hand , or else within fortie days after the said wines shall be brought on land out of the ships . Item for every sack of wool , which the said merchants or others in their name shall buy and carry out of the realm , or cause to be brought and carried out , they will pay forty pence above the old custom of half a mark , which was paid heretofore : And for a last of hides to be carried out of our realm and dominion half a mark above that which heretofore was paid by the old custom . And likewise for three hundreth Fells with the wool on them to be transported out of our realm and dominion fortie pence , above that certain rate which before was paid by the old custom : Also two shillings upon every scarlate and every cloth died in grain . Item eighteene pence for every cloth wherein any kind of grain is mingled . Item twelve pence upon every cloth died without grain . Item twelve pence upon every quintali of copper . 
 And whereas sundry of the aforesaid merchants are wont to exercise other merchandises , as of Haver de pois , and other fine wares , as sarcenets , lawns , cindalles , and silk , and diverse other merchandises , and to fell horses and other beasts , corn , and sundry other things and merchandises , which cannot easily be reduced unto a certain custom : the said merchants have granted to give unto us , and to our heirs of every pound of silver of the estemation and valve of these kind of goods and merchandises , by what name soever they be called , three pence in the pound in the bringing in of these goods into our realm and dominion aforesaid , within twentie days after these goods and merchandises shall be brought into our realm and dominion , and shall be there unladen and sold . And likewise three pence upon every pound of silver in the carrying out of any such i 337 y 
 goods and merchandises which are bought in our realm and dominion aforesaid above the customs beforetime paid unto us or any of our progenitors . And touching the valve and estimation of these goods and merchandises , whereof three pence of every pound of silver , as is aforesaid , is to be paid , credit shall given unto them upon the letters which they are able to show from their master's or partners . And if they have no letters in this behalf , we will stand to the other of the foresaid merchants if they be present , or in their absence to the oaths of their servants . 
 Moreover , it shall be lawful for such as be of the company of the aforesaid merchants within our realm and dominion aforesaid , to fell wools to other of their company , and likewise to buy of them without paying of custom . Yet so , that the said wools come not to such hands , that we be defrauded of the custom due unto us . And furthermore it is to be understood , that after that the aforesaid merchants have once paid in one place within our realm and dominion , the custom above granted unto us in form aforesaid for their merchandises , & have their warrant thereof , whither these merchandises remain within our kingdom or be carried out ( excepting wines , which in no wise shall carried forth of our realm and dominion aforesaid , without our favour & licence as is aforesaid ) we will and we grant for us and our heirs , that no execution , attachment , or loan , or any other burden be laid upon the persons of the aforesaid merchants , upon their merchandises or goods in any case , contrary to the form before mentioned and granted . The faithful & principali witnesses of these presents are these , Robert Archbishop of Canterbury , Primate of all England , Walter bishop of Coventrey and Lichfield , Henry Lacie of Lincolne , Humfrey de Bohume , Earl of Herford and Essex , high Constable of England , Adornare of Valentia , Geofrey of Gaymal , Hugh Spenser , Walter Beauchampe Seneschal of our house , Robert of Bures , and others . Given by our 338 
 own hand at Windesore the first day of February , in the year of our reign xxxi . 
 . 