And agreement made by the Ambassadors of England and Prussia , confirmed by king Richard the second . 
 Richard by the grace of God , king of England , and France , and lord of Ireland , To all , unto whom these present letters shall come , greeting . We have seen and considered the composition , ordination , concord , and treaty , between our well-beloved clerk , master Nicholas Stocket , licentiate in both laws , Walter Sibel , and Thomas Graa , citizens of our cities of London & York , our messengers and ambassadors on the one part : and the honourable and religious personages , Conradus de Walrode , great commander , Sifridus Walpode de Bassenheim , chief hospitalary commander in Elburg , and Ulricus Hachenberg Treasurer , the messengers and ambassadors of the right reverend and religious lord , lord Conradus Zolner de Rothenstein , master general of the knightly order of the Dutch hospital of Saint Marry at Jerusalem on the other part , lately concluded and agreed upon in these words . In the name of the supreme and indivisible Trini tie , the Father , the Son , and the holy Ghost , Amen . Forasmuch as the author of peace will have peacemakers to be the sons of blessedness , and the execrable enemy of peace to be 
 expelled out of the dominions of Christians : therefore for the perpetuali memory of the thing , be it known unto all men who shall see or hear the tenor of these presents : that there being matter of dissension and discord bred between the most renowned prince and king , Richard by the grace of God king or England and France , and lord of Ireland , and his subject's on the one part : and the right reverend and religious lord , lord Conradus Zolner de Rothinstein , Master general of the knightly order of the Dutch hospitali of S. marry at Jerusalem , and his land of Prussia , and his subject's also , on the other part : the foresaid lord and general master , upon mature counsel and deliberation had , sent his honourable ambassadors towards England unto the forenamed most sovereign prince and king , to propound and make their complaint unto him of violence and injuries offered ( as it is said ) by the English unto the Prussians : in consideration whereof certain goods of the merchants of England were arrested in the land of Prussia . Whose complaint the foresaid most gracious prince did courteously and friendly admit , receive , and accept , and after many speeches uttered in this treaty , lovingly dismissed them unto their own country again , promising by his letters unto the foresaid reverend Master general , that he would dispatch his ambassadors unto the land of Prussia . Whereupon , in the year 1388. he sent the hono : and reverend person - 1388. ages Master Nicholas Stocket licentiate of both laws , Thomas Graa , and Walter Sibill , citizens of London and Yorke , with sufficient authority and full commandment , to handle , discuss , and finally to determine the foresaid business , and with letters of credence unto the right reverend lord and master generail aforesaid . Which ambassadors , together with John Bevis of London their informer , and the letters aforesaid , and their ambassage , the said right reverend lord and Master general , at his castle of Marienburgh , the 28. of July , in the year aforesaid , reverently and honourably received and enter - 
 teined : and in his mind esteemed them worthy to treat and decide the causes aforesaid : and so unto the said ambassadors he joined in commission on his behalf , three of his own counsellers , namely the honourable and religious personages Conradus de Walrode great commander , Seiffridus Walpode de Bassenheim chief hospitalary and commander in Elburg , Wolricus Hachen-berger treasurer , being all of the order aforesaid . Which ambassadors so entreating about the premises , and sundry conferences and consultations having passed between them , friendly and with one consent , concluded and agreement and concord in manner following : That is to say : 
 1. First , that all arrestments , reprisals , and impignorations of whatsoever goods and merchandises in England and Prussia , made before the date of these presents , are from henceforth quiet , free , and released , without all fraud and dissimulation : insomuch that the damages , charges and expenses occasioned on both parts by reason of the foresaid goods arrested , are in no case hereafter to be required or challenged by any man : but the demands of any man whatsoever propounded in this regard , are and ought to be altogether frustrate and void , and all actions which may or shall be commenced by occasion of the said goods arrested , are to be extinct and of none effect . 
 2. Moreover , it is secondly concluded and agreed , that all and singular Prussians pretending themselves to be injuried by the English at the Porte of Swen , or elsewhere , howsoever , and whensoever , before the date of these presents , having received the letters of the foresaid right reverend lord and Master generail , and of the cities of their abided , are to repair towards England , unto the said hon : ambassadors who are to assist them , and to propound and exhibit their complaints , unto the forenamed lord and king . The most gracious prince is bound to do his endeavour , that the parties damnified may have restitution of their goods 
 1390. made unto them , or at least complete justice and judgement without delay . Also in like manner all English men affirming themselves to have be endamaged by Prussians , wheresoever , howsoever , and whensoever , are to have recourse unto the often forenamed right reverend lord the Master general , with the letters of their king and of the cities of their abode , propounding their complaints and causes unto him . Who likewise is bound to do his endeavour that the said losses and damages may be restored , or at the least that speedy judgement may be , without all delays , executed . This caveat being premised in each clause , that it may and shall be freely granted and permitted unto every man that will civilly make his suit and complaint , to do it either by himself , or by his procurator or procurators . 
 Also thirdly it is agreed , that whosoever of Prussia is 3. determined criminally to propound his criminal complaints in England : namely that his brother or kinsman hath been slain , wounded , or maimed , by English men , the same party is to repair unto the city of London in England , and unto the said ambassadors , bringing with him the letters of the said right reverend lord the master general , and of the cities of their abided : which ambassadors are to have free and full authority , according to the complaints of the men of Prussia , and the answers of the English men , to make and ordain a friendly reconciliation or honest recompense between such parties : which reconciliation the said parties reconciled are bound [ I . 15 2. J undoubtedly & without delay to observe . But if there be any English man found , who shall rashly contradict or contemn the composition of the foresaid ambassadors : then the said ambassadors are to bring the forenamed Prussian plaintiffs before the presence of the kings Majesty : and also to make supplication on the behalf of such plaintiffs , that complete justice and judgement may without delays be administered , according as those suits are commenced . Moreover whatsoever English man , 
 against whom any one of Prussia would enter his actium , shall absent himself at the term , the said ambassadors are to summon and ascite the foresaid English man to appear at the term next ensuing , that the plaintiffs of Prussia may in no wise seem to depart or to return home , without judgement or the assistance of law . Now if the said English man being summoned shall be found stubborn or disobedient , the forenamed ambassadors are to make their appeal and supplication in manner aforesaid . And in like sort in all respects shall the English plaintiffs be dealt withal in Prussia , namely in the city of Dantzik , where the deputies of the said city and of the city of Elburg shall take unto themselves two other head boroughs , one of Dantzik , and the other of Elburg : which foure commissioners are to have in all respects , the very like authority of deciding , discussing , and determining all criminali complaints propounded criminally , by English men against any Prussian or Prussians , by friendly reconciliation , or honest recompense , if it be possible . But if it cannot friendly be determined , or if any Prussian shall not yield obedience unto any such order or composition , but shall found to contradict and to contemn the same : from thenceforth the said foure deputies and headboroughs are to make their appeal and supplication unto the Master general of the land aforesaid , that unto the said English plaintiffs speedy judgement and complete justice may be administered . But if it shall so fallen out that any of the principali offenders shall decease , or already are deceased in either of the said countries , and then it shall be free and lawful for the plaintiff to prosecute his right against the goods or heirs of the party deceased . Also , for the executing of the premises the terms under written are appointed : namely the first , from the Sunday whereupon Quasi modo geniti is to be sung next ensuing , until the seventh day following : The second upon the feast of the holy Trinitie next to come , and for seven days following : The third upon the eight day after Saint John 
 Baptist next to come , & for seven days following : The fourth , last , and peremptory term shall be upon the feast of S. Michael next to come , and upon seven days next following . And from thenceforth all causes which concern death , or the maiming of a member , with all actions proceeding from them , are to remain altogether void and extinct . And if peradventure any one of the foresaid ambassadors , shall in the mean season die , then the other two shall have authority to choose a third unto them . And if after the date of these presents any cause great or small does arise or spring forth , it must be decided in England and in Prussia , as it hath been And ancient accustomed in times past and from ancient times . custom . 
 Also , it is farther concluded and agreed upon , that all 4. lawful merchants of England whosoever shall have free The privi-licence and authority , with all kinds of ships , goods , dges and merchandises , to resort unto every port of the land i^r ' of Prussia , and also to transport all such goods and Prussia . merchandises up farther unto any other place in the said land of Prussia , and there with all kinds of persons freely to bargain and make sale , as heretofore it hath from ancient times be accustomed . Which privilege is granted in all things and by all circumstances unto the Prussians in England . And if after the date of these presents , between the said kingdom of England , and land of Prussia any dissension or discord ( which God forefend ) should arise : then the foresaid sovereign prince and king of England , and the said right reverend lord the Master generail are mutually by their letters and messengers to give certificate and intimation one unto another , concerning the matter and cause of such dissension and discord : with intimation , on the behalf of the foresaid sovereign prince & king of England , shall be delivered in the forenamed castle of Marienburg : but on the behalf of the said right reverend lord the Master generail , such intimation shall be given in the city of London aforesaid , unto the Mayor of the said city : that then such a denunciation or intimation being made , the 
 merchants of England and the subject's of the land of Prussia may , within the space of one year next following , freely and safely return home with all their goods & merchandises : if at the least , in the mean while , some composition , & friendly league between the two foresaid countries be not in some sort concluded . And that all the premises may more firmly and faithfully be put in due practice and execution on both parts , for the strong and inviolable keeping of peace and tranquillity : and also for the full confirmation and strengthening of all the said premises , the three foresaid honourable and religious personages being by the said right reverend lord the Master general appointed as commissioners to deal in the above written ordination and composition , have caused their seals unto these presents to be put : and the said ordination also , and letter in the same tenor word for word , and in all points even as it is inserted into these presents , they have mutually received from the abovenamed three ambassadors of the right sovereign king of England under their seals . Given at the castle of Marienburg in the year of our lord aforesaid , upon the twentieth day of the month of August . And we therefore do accept , approve , ratify , and by the tenor of these presents do confirm , the composition , ordination , concord , and treaty aforesaid . In testimony whereof we have caused these our letters to be made patents . Witness our selves a Westminster the 22. of October , in the thirteenth year of our reign . 
 By the king and his counsel . 
 Lincolne . 
 . 