The letters of the chancellor and treasurer of England , unto Frater Conradus de Jungingen , master generail of Prussia 1403. 
 Right reverend and mighty lord , your honourable messengers John Godeke , and Henry Moneke , the bearer hereof coming of late before the presence of our most sovereign lord the king of England and of 38 
 France , and being welcomed by our said lord with a cheerful and favourable countenance , they presented certain letters on your behalf unto the kings Majesty , with that reverence which beseemed them : expounding unto his highness , sundry piracies & molestations offered of late upon the sea , by his liege people 8c subject's unto yours , contrary to the leagues of peace and amity , which hitherto ( by Gods grace ) have be maintained and continued on both parts . In consideration of which piracies and molestations , your messengers demanded full restitution and recompense to be made , either unto the damnified parties , or unto their procurators . We therefore at that time , especially being in the presence of our sovereign ( who with his puissant army took his progress towards the remote part of Wales being subject unto his dominion , to see justice executed upon his people of those parts , who very rashly have presumed to rebel against him their sovereign , contrary to their allegiance ) right well perceived that it was his highness intention , that every one should have due justice faithfully administered unto him , especially your subject's , and that with all favour , whom he hath always in times passed right graciously entreated , as if they had be his own liege subject's and native country men , whom also he purposes hereafter friendly to protect : insomuch that between him and his subject's on the one party , and between you and yours on the other party , great abundance and perfection of mutual amity may increase . And therefore we offered unto your foresaid messengers , after they had particularly declared unto us such piracies and wrongs , to send the kings letters unto them of whom complaint was made , firmly enjoining them , under grievous penalties , that without delay they restore or cause to be restored unto the parties damnified , or unto their procurators , all ships , merchandises , wares , and goods , by them taken or violently stolen from your subject's . And that your said messengers may partly attain their desire , we have 
 \ Namely the ship of Edgard Scoff at Caleis . The ship of Tidman Dor-deviant and Tidman War-owen , atOrwel and^episwich . 
 commanded certain J ships , merchandises , wares , and goods , found in certain havens , to be delivered unto them . Howbeit , as touching other goods , which are perhaps perished or wanting by infortunate dissipation or destruction , and for the which the said messengers of yours demand satisfaction to be made unto them within a certain time by us limited : may it please your honour to understand , that in the absence of our said sovereign lord the king , being as yet far distant from us , we can in no wise limit or set down any such term of time . Notwithstanding , at the prosperous return of our sovereign , we are determined to commune with him about this matter . Of whose 
 answer so soon as we be certified , we purpose to signify his intention unto you by our letters . Since also ( right reverend and mighty lord ) your said messengers are contented , for the present , to accept of our offer aforesaid , as indeed by all reason they ought thereat to rest content , especially whereas by this means they shall the more speedily attain unto the effect of their purposes ( to the short and wished execution and performance of which offer , we will , by Gods help , endeavour , to the utmost of our ability ) may it be your will and pleasure , that as in the kingdom of England , your merchants and subject's are courteously entreated : even so the merchants and liege people of our sovereign lord the king and of his kingdoms peaceably frequenting your parts , either in regard of traffic or of any other just occasion , may there in like manner friendly be used , and with your merchants and subject's suffered to communicate , and to have intercourse of traffic , enjoying the commodities of the ancient league . By this also the fervent zeal and affection which you bear unto the royal crown of England shall undoubtedly appear : albeit between the famous houses of England and of Prussia , the bands of unfeigned love and friendship have been successively confirmed and kept inviolable in times Note well . past . And thus ( right reverend and mighty lord ) 
 •wishing unto you increase of honour and prosperity , we take our leaves . Written at London the fift of October , in the year of our lord 1403. 
 By the chancellor , the treasurer , and other lords of the hono : counsel of the king of England and France , being personally present at London . 
 A.D. 
 1404. 
 1403. 
 . 