The letters of Conradus de Jungingen , Master general of Prussia , written unto Richard the second , king of England , in the year 1398 , for the renouncing of a league and composition concluded between England and Prussia , in regard of manifold injuries offered unto the Prussians . 
 OUr humble commendations , with our earnest prayers unto God for your Majesty , premised . Most renowned prince and mighty lord , it is not ( we hope ) out of your Majesties remembrance , how our famous predecessor going immediately before us sent certain letters of his unto your highness , effectually containing sundry complaints of grievances , injuries and losses , wherewith the merchants of his land and Order being wont in times past to visit your kingdom with their goods and merchandises , have be contrary to their liberties and privileges annoyed with manifold injuries and wrongs . Especially since they have been molested in your realm , being contrary to the friendly composition made and celebrated by the hono : personages , master Nicholas Stocket , Thomas Graa and Walter Sibil , in the year 1388 , with the assistance of their coarbiters on our part , and contrary to God and all justice , oppressed with manifold damages , losses , and grievances : as in certain articles exhibited unto our predecessors aforesaid it doth more manifestly appear . In consideration whereof being vehemently moved by the damnified parties , he humbly besought your highness by his messengers and letters , for compliment and execution of justice . About the which affairs your Majesty returned your letters of answer unto our said predecessor , signifying that the said business of articles concerned all the communality of your realm , and that your highness purposed , after •consultation had in your parliament , to send a more deliberate answer concerning the premises , unto our 
 25 
 A.D. 
 I398 - 
 predecessor aforesaid . Howbeit he being by death translated out of this present world , and our selves by the providence of God succeeding in his room , and also long time expecting and effectual answer from your highness , are not yet informed as we looked for : albeit the complaints of injuries and losses offered unto our subject's do continually increase . But from henceforth to provide a remedy and a caveat for the time to come , the said complaint doth upon great reasons move and invite me . Since therefore in regard of the said composition , neither you nor your subject's may be judged in the empire : and since plain reason requires that the one be not enriched by the others loss : as undoubtedly our subject's should sustain great damage by the composition aforesaid , by virtue whereof your subject's do enjoy all commodities in our land , and contrariwise our subject's in your realm have suffered , & as yet sundry ways do suffer manifold discommodities , losses and injuries . Wherefore ( most sovereign prince and mighty lord ) being reasonably moved upon the causes aforesaid , we do , by the advice of our counsellors , revoke and repeal the said composition concluded as is above written , together with the effect thereof , purely and simply renouncing the same by these presents : refusing hereafter to have either our selves or our subject's in any respect to stand bound by the virtue of the said composition : but from henceforth , and for the times heretofore also , be it altogether void and of none effect . 
 Provided notwithstanding , that from the time of the notice of this denunciation given unto the hono : Mayor of your city of London , for the space of a year next ensuing , it shall be lawful for all merchants of your kingdom whatsoever , with their goods and merchandises to return home , according to the form in the foresaid composition expressed : conditionaly that our subject's may even so in all respects be permitted to depart , with the safety of their goods and lives out of your dominions : this present renunciation , revocation , and retractation of the 26 
 order and composition aforesaid , notwithstanding . Howbeit in any other affairs whatsoever , devoutly to submit our selves unto your highness pleasure and command , both our selves , and our whole order are right willing and desirous : and also to benefit and promote your subject's we will endeavour to the utmost of our ability . Given in our castle of Marienburg in the year of our Lord 1398 , and upon the 22. day of February . 
 Frater Conradus de Jungingen , master general of the Order of the Dutch knights of S. Maries hospital at Jerusalem . 
 . 