A brief relation of William Esturmy , and John Kington concerning their ambassages into Prussia , and the Hans-townes . 
 INprimis , that in the month of July , and in the 1403. year of our Lord 1403 , and the fift year of the reign of our sovereign Lord the king that now is , there came into England the ambassadors of the mighty lord Fr : Conradus de Jungingen , being then Master general of Prussia , with his letters directed unto our foresaid sovereign lord the king , requiring amends and recompense for certain injuries unjustly offered by English men unto the subject's of the said Master generail , written in 20. articles , which amounted unto the sum of 19120. nobles and a half etc. 
 Item , that the third day of the month of October , in the year of our Lord abovewritten , and in the fift year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king , between the reverend father in God , Henrie then bishop of Lincolne lord chancellor , and William lord de Roos high treasurer of England , on the one party and the said ambassadors on the other party , it was ( according to their petition ) among other things ordained : namely that the liege people of our sovereign lord the king should freely be permitted , until the feast of Easter then next after ensuing to 
 remain in the land of Prussia , and from thence with their goods & merchandises to return unto their own home : and also , that the subject's of the said Master general in the kingdom or England should have licence and liberty to do the like . Provided always , that after the time above limited , neither the English merchants in the land of Prussia , nor the Prussian merchants in the realm of England should use any traffic of merchandise at all , unless in the mean space it were otherwise agreed and concluded by the said king and the said Master general . 
 Item , immediately after our said sovereign lord the king sent his letters by John brown merchant of Lin unto the foresaid Master generail , for to have mutual conversation and intercourse of dealing to continue some certain space , between the merchants of England and of Prussia : promising in the same letters , that he would in the mean season send unto the foresaid Master his ambassadors to entreat about the pretended injuries aforesaid : which letters the foresaid Master , for diverse causes , refused to yield unto , as in his letters sent unto our lord the king , bearing date the 16. day of the month of July , in the year of our lord 1404. more plainly appears . 
 Item , that after the receipt of the letters of the Master aforesaid , which are next above mentioned , our said king , according to his promise , sent William Esturmy knight , M. John Kington clerk , and William Brampton citizen of London , from his court of parliament held at Coventrie , very slightly informed , as his ambassadors into Prussia . 
 Item , before the arrival of the said ambassadors in Prussia , all intercourse of traffic between the English and the Prussians , in the realm of England , and in the land of Prussia was altogether restrained and prohibited : and in the same land it was ordained and put in practice , that in whatsoever port of the land of Prussia any English merchant had arrived with his goods , he 28 
 1406. was not permitted to convey the said goods , out of that port , unto any other place of the land of Prussia , either by water , or by land , under the pain of the forfeiting of the same : but was enjoined to fell them in the very same port , unto the Prussians only and to none other , to the great prejudice of our English merchants . 
 Item , that after the arrival of the said English ambassadors in the land of Prussia , it was ordained , that from the eight day of the month of October , in the year of our lord 1405 , all English merchants what - 1405. soever should have free liberty to arrive with all kinds of their merchandise in whatsoever port of the land of Prussia , and to make sale of them in the said land , as hath heretofore from ancient times be accustomed . 
 Also sundry other commodious privileges unto the realm of England were then ordained and established : as in the indentures made for this purpose it does more manifestly appear . 
 Item , the said English ambassadors being arrived in the land of Prussia , demanded of the said Master general , a reformation and amends , for the damages and injuries offered by the Prussians unto the liege people of our sovereign lord and king , written in fifteene articles , which losses amounted unto the sum of 4535. nobles . 
 Item , the said Master general , beside the articles exhibited unto our sovereign lord the king ( as it is above mentioned ) delivered unto the said ambassadors diverse other articles of certain injuries offered ( as he say ) unjustly by English men , unto his subject's , which amounted unto the sum of 5100. nobles . 
 Item , it was afterwards concluded , that upon the first 1406. of May next then ensuing , namely in the year of our Lord 1406. or within the space of one year immediately following there should be made a convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction , for all molestations unjustly offered on both parts , as well on the behalf of our sovereign 
 lord the king , as of the foresaid Master general . Which satisfaction not being performed , the Prussians with their goods & merchandises , within three months after the end of the said year next following , were without molestation or impediment , enjoined to depart out of the realm of England with their ships and goods , and the English men likewise , out of the territories and dominions of the said Master general , & both of them , without any further admonition , to abstain & separate themselves , from both the countries aforesaid . For the performance of which premises , the ambassadors on both parts being sufficiently instructed , were appointed to meet the first day of May , at the town of Dordract in Holland . 
 Item , that the said William Esturmy and John Kington in their return homeward from Prussia towards England passed through the chief cities of the Hans , and treated in such sort with the Burgomasters of them , that there were sent messengers and agents , in the behalf of the common society of the Hans merchants , unto the town of Dordract , to confer with the ambassadors of England , about the redressing of injuries attempted on both parts : where diverse agreements were set down between the said ambassadors , and messengers , as in the indentures made for the same purpose it does more manifestly appear . 
 Item , that the meeting appointed at the town of Dordract , upon the first of May , was by the letters of the foresaid ambassadors , prorogued unto the first of August then next ensuing , and afterwards by virtue of the kings letters unto the first day of March next following : and there was another day of prorogation also . 
 Item , that after the prorogations aforesaid , the ambassadors of England , and the messengers & commissioners of Prussia met together at the town of Hage in Holland , the 28. day of August , in the year of our lord 1407. And there was a treaty between them concerning the sum 25934. nobles and and half , 
 demanded on the behalf of the said Master general for amends and recompense in consideration of wrongs offered unto himself and unto his subject's of Prussia , as is aforesaid . Also the said Master and his Prussians , beside the sum not yet declared in the articles , which is very small , are to rest contented and satisfied with the sum of 8957. nobles , in lieu of all the damages aforesaid : no times of payment being then assigned or limited , but afterwards to be reasonably limited and assigned , by our said sovereign lord the king . Insomuch , that our said sovereign lord the king is to write his full intention 8c determination concerning this matter , in his letters to be delivered the 16. day of March , unto the aidermen of the merchants of the Hans residing at Bruges . Otherwise , that from thenceforth all league of friendship shall be dissolved between the realm of England and the land of Prussia . 
 Also it is farther to be noted , that in the appointment of the sum next before written to be disbursed out of England , this condition was added in writing , namely , that if by lawful testimonies it may sufficiently and effectually be proved , concerning the chief articles abovewritten , or any part of them , that satisfaction was made unto any of those parties , to whom it was due : or that the goods , of and for the which complaint was made on the behalf of Prussia , in the said articles , did or do pertain unto others , or that any other just , true , or reasonable cause may lawfully be proved 8c alleged , why the foresaid sums or any of them ought not to be paid : that then in the sums contained in the articles abovementioned , so much only must be cut off , or stopped , as shall found , either to have be paid already , or to appertain unto others , or by any true , just , and reasonable cause alleged , not to be due . Neither is it to be doubted , but for the greater part of the sum due unto the Prussians , that not our lord the king , but others ( which will in time be nominated ) are , by all equity and justice , to be compelled to make satisfaction . 
 31 
 A.D. 
 HO ? . 
 Also , at the day and place above mentioned it was appointed and agreed upon , that our lord the king and his liege subject's , for the said 4535. nobles demanded of the English in consideration of recompense to be made for injuries offered unto the Prussians , are to discharge & pay the sum of 764. nobles , which are not as yet disbursed : but they have reserved a petition to them , unto whom the said sum is due , or if they please , there shall made satisfaction : which will be very hard and extreme dealing . 
 Item , that in the last assembly of the said ambassadors of England and messengers of Prussia , held at Hage , made as is aforesaid , for the behalf of England , there were exhibited anew certain articles of injuries against the Prussians . The valve of which losses amounted unto the sum of 1825. nobles and three shillings . 
 Item , on the contrary part for the behalf of the Prussians the sum of 1355. nobles , eight shillings and sixe pence . 
 Item , forasmuch as diverse articles propounded , as well on the behalf of England , as of Prussia , and of the cities of the Hans , both heretofore and also at the last convention held at Hage , were so obscure , that in regard of their obscurity , there could not resolute answer be made unto them : and other of the said articles exhibited , for want of sufficient proofs , could not clearly be determined upon : it was appointed and concluded , that all obscure articles given up by any of the foresaid parties whatsoever , ought before the end of Easter then next ensuing , and within one whole year after , to be declared before the Chancellor of England , for the time being : and other articles evidently exhibited , but not sufficiently proved , to be proved , under pain of perpetuali exclusion . Which being done accordingly , complete justice shall be administered on both parts . 
 Item , as concerning the eleventh article , for the behalf of the Prussians , first exhibited , which contained losses amounting unto the sum of 2445. nobles : as touching 32 
 the first article on the behalf of England exhibited in the land of Prussia , containing losses which amounted to the sum of 900. nobles : after many things alleged on both parts , relation thereof shall be made in the audience of the king and of the Master generail : so that they shall set down , ordain , and determine such and end and conclusion of those matters , as shall seem most expedient unto them . 
 . 