And agreement made between King Henrie the fourth and the common society of the Merchants of the Hans . 
 THis Indenture made between the honourable Sir William Esturmy knight , and John Kington clerk , procurators , messengers , and commissioners sufficiently deputed and authorized by the most mighty Prince , Lord Henry , by the grace of God king of England , & France , and lord of Ireland , for the performation of the things underwritten , on the one part : & the hon . personages M. Henry Uredeland , M. Riman Salum chief notaries , Thederic Knesvolt secretary , M. Simon Clovesten chief notary , and John Zotebotter citizen , being sufficiently made and ordained procurators and messengers , on the behalf of the cities of Lubec , Bremen , Hamburg , Sund , and Gripeswold , for the demanding & obtaining severally , of due reformation , and recompense at the hands of our said sovereign lord the king , and of his messengers and commissioners aforesaid , for all injuries , damages , grievances , and manslaughters , any ways unjustly done , and offered severally by the liege people and subject's of our sovereign lord the king , unto the common society of the merchants of the Hans , and unto any of the Citizens , people and inhabitants of the cities aforesaid whatsoever on the other part , Witnesseth : That between all and every of the said Procurators , messengers , and Commissioners , by virtue 55 
 A.D. 
 I405 . 
 of the authority committed unto them , it hath be and is appointed , concluded , and decreed : that the liege merchants and subject's of our said sovereign lord the king , and the merchants of the common society of the Dutch Hans aforesaid , from henceforth for one whole year and seven months immediately next ensuing and following , shall permitted and licenced friendly , freely , and securely , to exercise mutual traffic , and like merchants to buy & fell together , one of , and unto another , 1400. even as in times past , namely , in the year 1400. and before that time also , they have been accustomed to exercise mutual traffic and merchandise , and to buy and fell . 
 Also the said William and John agreed and consented , that they themselves , or some other perhaps to be appointed in this behalf by their said lord the king in their stead , shall upon the first day of the month of May next to come , with the continuation of the days following , at the town of Dordract in Holland , or upon any other term or terms , then perhaps to be limited , competently satisfy , and perform convenient recompense unto the said common society , citizens , people , and inhabitants of the cities aforesaid , and also of other cities , towns , and villages of the Hans , of and for all injuries , damages , grievances , and drownings , or manslaughters done and committed , as they allege , against them , delivered and exhibited in written articles , unto the above nam William and John , or else hereafter to be delivered and exhibited , either by the same procurators or by some others , which shall perhaps be authorized in their stead , or by the messengers procurators and commissioners of other cities , towns , and places of the Hans , in equal and like manner and form , even as at the said term limited , or then perhaps to be prorogued , there is appointed by the said William and John , reparation , reformation , and recompense unto the inhabitants of Prussia , and Livonia , for the injuries , damages , and grievances unjustly done and committed against 56 
 HANSE MERCHANTS ’ AGREEMENT them by the liege people and subject's of the said sovereign lord the king , in the presence of the mighty lord the Master general of Prussia , in his land of Prussia , as in certain letters indented , bearing date in the castle of Marienburgh in Prussia the eight day of the month of October , in the year of our lord 1405. and being made and written about the reparation , reformation , and recompense of such like injuries etc. ( the tenor whereof ought here to be understood as if it were inserted ) it is more manifestly contained . 
 It was furthermore promised by the said William and John , that they should not enforce nor compel the citizens , people , or inhabitants of the common society of the Hans , or of the above nam cities , or of any other cities of the Hans aforesaid ( having received sufficient information of their dwelling and place of abided ) to more difficult or district proofs of their Articles of complaints already exhibited , and in the foresaid terms to come , to be exhibited , then unto the inhabitants of the lands of Prussia and Livonia , according to the form of the Indentures above mentioned . 
 Moreover the said William and John do promise , that so soon as they shall come into the kingdom of England , and before the presence of their king , they shall provide , that all and singular the privileges granted unto the merchants of the said Hans by the renowned kings of England , and confirmed by the said Sovereign lord the king that now is , must , according to all their contents , be inviolably observed by the said sovereign king and his subject's : and also , that from henceforth nothing is unjustly to be attempted , upon any occasion , pretense , or colour , by the said Sovereign Prince , and the inhabitants of the realm of England , to the prejudice of the said privileges . They shall provide also , that all things heretofore . attempted and practised against the said privileges , shall , by reasonable amendment and just reformation , utterly be abolished . 
 But if after the date of these presents ( which God 
 forfend ) within the space of the said one year and seven months prescribed any damages , injuries or grievances , in ships , goods , or persons , should , either by the English and the inhabitants of England be unjustly inflicted upon the cities , and merchants of the cities , towns , and places of the Hans aforesaid , or by any merchants or others of the cities or towns of the said Hans , either unto the English , or unto any of the inhabitants of that Realm , upon any feigned pretense whatsoever , all and singular the foresaid messengers , commissioners , ambassadors , and procurators have promised , that all such damages , injuries and molestations so inflicted by them who shall ofter and commit them , must be reformed and amended , after the very same form and manner , that in the like case reformation , reparation and amends of injuries , damages , and‘molestations committed by the English against them of Prussia is to be performed , according unto a certain clause contained in the letters above mentioned , which begins : Caeterum ne per etc. In English : Howbeit lest that etc. continuing unto that clause : Et ut praescripta omnia etc. In English : And that all the covenants above written etc. 
 It was also concluded between the foresaid messengers , commissioners , and procurators , and with one general consent agreed upon , that if from the first day of the month of May next to come , within one whole year following , some convenient , just , and reasonable reformation be not performed unto the parties injuried and damnified generally above mentioned , in regard of their damages , molestations , and injuries : then , within three months after the said year be expired , the merchants of the Hans cities aforesaid are bound , without any molestation , perturbation , and impediment whatsoever ( none other intimation or admonition being necessary in this behalf ) to avoid ( and if no lawful impediment shall hinder them ) to abstain and depart from the Realms and dominions of the said Sovereign king of 
 England , with their merchandise and other goods bought or got within the space of the said three months : and also the English likewise in all respects shall avoid , abstain , and depart from the territories and dominions of the Hans cities aforesaid . 
 Also it was promised by the said William and John , that at the term appointed , namely upon the first of May next following , or at some other term or terms then limited or to be limited , there must be made a due recompense , and a proportionali satisfaction , for all those persons of the land of Prussia , Livonia , and of the cities , towns , and other places of the Hans , who have unjustly be drowned , and slain by the English : and that according to the tenor of a certain schedule written concerning a recompense to be had in regard of the said persons drowned and slain , and presented unto them by Albertus Road consul of the city of Thoren , and by the forenamed procurators and messengers of the cities aforesaid , they must faithfully and effectually , to the utmost of their ability endeavour , for the obtaining of the said recompense and amends . In witness whereof ( these letters of Indenture remaining in the possession of the said William and John the messengers , procurators , & commissioners of England aforesaid , and left in their custody , by the above nam procurators and messengers Henri Rimarus , Thedericus , Simon , and John Sotebotter , of their certain knowledge and assurance ) and for the full confirmation and testimony of all the premises , the foresaid procurators and messengers have put to their seals . Given in the town of Dordract the 15. day of December in the year of our Lord 1405. 
 William Esturmy knight , and John Kington canon of Lincolne ( being in this behalf sufficiently authorized and deputed as Ambassadors , procurators , messengers and commissioners , by our said sovereign lord the king , namely in regard of the molestations , injuries and damages unjustly done and committed against the liege people and subjects of the foresaid most excellent 59 
 Prince and lord , Lord Henry by the grace of God king of England & France , and Lord of Ireland , by the commonalties of the cities of Wismer and Rostok underwritten , their common counsel being assembled for the same purpose , & authorized also , and as well closely as expressly maintained and ratified , by the whole company of the common society of the merchants of the Dutch Hans ) doe , in this present diet at the town of Hage situate in the country of Holland , being appointed for the very same occasion , demand of you Sir John de Aa knight , and Hermannus Meyer deputies for the cities of Wismer and Rostok , and sufficiently ordained by authority requisite in this behalf , to be the procurators and messengers of the said cities , that convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction and recompense may certainly and effectually be done unto the injuried and endamaged parties , who are specified in the articles under written . 
 Newcastle . Imprimis , that about the feast of Easter , in the year of our Lord 1394. Henry van Pomeren , Godekin Michael , Clays Shield , Hans Howfoote , Peter Hawfoote , Clays Boniface , Rainbek , and many others , with them of Wismer and of Rostok , being of the society of the Hans , And English took , by main force , a ship of Newcastle upon Tine , 1tun-Ms'2'QQ ' ca^ed Godezere sailing upon the Sea towards Prussia , being of the burden of two hundred tons , and belonging unto Roger de Thorneton , Robert Gabiford , John Paulin , and Thomas de Chester : which ship , together with the furniture thereof amounteth unto the valve of foure hundred pounds : also the woollen cloth , the read wine , the gold , and the sums of money contained in the said ship amounted unto the valve of 200. marks of English money : moreover they unjustly slew John Patanson and John Russell in the surprising of the ship and goods aforesaid , and there they imprisoned the said parties taken , and , to their utter undoing , detained them in prison for the space of three whole years . 
 Hull . Item , that in the year of our Lord 13 94 - certain 60 
 persons of Wismer and Rostok , with others of the Hans their confederates robbed one Richard Horuse of Hull 
 of diverse goods and merchandizes in a ship called the Shipper Berline of Prussia , being then valued at 160. nobles . 
 Item , that in the year of our Lord 1395. Hans van Hull . Wethemonkule , Clays Scheid , Godekin Mighel , and one called Strotbeker , by force of arms , and by the assistance of the men of Wismer and Rostok , and others of the Hans , did upon the Sea near unto Norway , wickedly and unjustly take from John Tutteburie , five pieces of wax , foure hundred of work , and half a last of osmundes , and other goods , to the valve of foure hundred seventie sixe nobles . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1396. one John van Hull . Derlowe , Hans van Gelder , and other their accomplices of the Hans villainously and unjustly took a ship of William Terry of Hui called the Cog , with thirtie woollen broad clothes , and a thousand narrow clothes , to the valve of 200. pounds . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1398. one John van Hull . Derlowe , Wilmer , Hans van Gelder , Clays Scheid , Everade Pilgrimson , and diverse others of the Hans , did upon the Sea near unto Norway villainously and unjustly take a ship of John Wisdom of Hull called the Trini tie , with diverse goods and merchandizes , namely oil , wax , and work , to the valve of 300. pounds . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1399. one Clays Hull . Scheid , and others above written of Wismer and Rostok , with certain others of the Hans , their confederates , wickedly and unjustly took from one William Pound merchant of Hull , two cakes of wax , to the valve of 18. pounds , out of the ship called the Hawkin Berlin of Dantzik . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1394. one Goddekin Yorke . Mighel , Clays Scheid , Storbiker , and diverse others of Wismer and Rostok , and of the Hans , wickedly and unjustly took out of a ship of Elbing ( the master 
 whereof was called Henry Puys ) of the goods and merchandizes of Henrie Wyman , John Topcliffe , and Henry Lakenswither of Yorke , namely in work , wax , osmunds , and bowstaves , to the valve of 1060. nobles . 
 Yorke . Item , in the year of our Lord 1394. certain malefactors of Wismer and Rostok , with others of the Hans , their confederates , wickedly and unjustly took out of a ship of Holland ( the master whereof was called Hinkensman ) 140. woollen clothes ( the price of one of the which clothes was eight nobles ) from Thomas Thester of Yorke , and a chest , with armour , silver and gold of the foresaid Thomas , to the valve of 9. pounds . 
 London . Item , in the year of our Lord 1393. certain malefactors of Wismer and Rostok , and others their accomplices of the Hans , wickedly and unjustly took from one Richard Abel of London woollen cloth , green cloth , meal and fish , to the valve of 133. IL 6 . s . 
 London . Item , in the year of our Lord 1405. about the feast of S. Michael , one Nicholas Femeer of Wismer merchant of the Hans , with the assistance of other his accomplices of the Hans aforesaid , wickedly and unjustly took from one Richard Morley citizen of London five lasts of herrings , beside 32. pounds , in the sea called Northsound . 
 Colchester . Item , in the year of our Lord 1398. about the month of September , one Godekin Wisle , and Gerard Sleyre of Wismer and Rostok , with others of the Hans , their confederates wickedly and unjustly took out of a ship of Prussia ( whereof the master was nam Rorebek ) from John Seburgh merchant of Colchester two packs of woollen cloth , to the valve of and 100. marks : from Stephan Flispe , and John Plumer merchants of the same town two packs of woollen cloth , to the valve of 60. pounds : from Robert Wight merchant of the same town , two packs of woollen cloth to the valve of and 100. marks : from William Munde merchant of the same town , two farthels of woollen cloth , worth 40 . fi . 
 & from John Daw , and Thomas Cornwaile merchants of the same town , three packs of woollen cloth , worth 200. marks . Moreover they took and imprisoned certain English men , which were in the said ship , namely William Fubborne servant unto John Diere , Thomas Mersh servant unto Robert Wight , which Thomas paid for his ransom 20. nobles of English money , William Munde merchant of the town aforesaid , which William , by reason of the extremity of that imprisonment , lost the sighed of his eyes , and Thomas Cornwaile , merchant of the foresaid Town , which Thomas paid for his ransom twentie nobles . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1394. certain male - Vermouth . factors of Wismer and Rostok , upon the coasts of Denmarke and Norway , beneath Scawe , and at Anold , took Thomas Adams and John Walters merchants of Yermouth : and Robert Caumbrigge and Reginald Leman merchants of Norwich , in a certain ship of Elbing ' Norwich . in Prussia ( whereof one Clays Goldsmith was master ) with diverse woollen clothes of the said Thomas , John , Robert , and Reginald , to the valve of one thousande marks English , and carried the persons and goods afore - said , away with them : and the said Thomas , John , Robert , and Reginald they imprisoned at Courtbuttres-sow , and there detained them , until they paid and hundred marks for their redemption . 
 Item in the year of our Lord 1401. some of the Vermouth . inhabitants of Wismer and of Rostok wickedly took at Longsound in Norway , a certain ship of West-stow Longsound in in Zeland ( the Master whereof was one Gerard Dedissen ) Norway . laden with diverse goods and merchandises of John Hughson of Yermouth , namely with the hides of oxen and of sheep , with butter , masts , sparres , boards , questingstones and wild work , to the valve of and hundred marks , and do as yet detain the said things in their possession , some of the Hans being their assistants in the premises . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1402. certain of Vermouth . 
 Cley . 
 Cley . 
 the Hans , of Rostok , and of Wismer , took upon the coast of England , near unto Plimmouth a certain barge called the Michael of Yarmouth ( whereof Hugh ap Fen was the owner , and Robert Rigweys the master ) laden with bay salt , to the quanti tie of 130. ways , and with a thousand canvas clothes of Britaine , and do as yet detain the said goods in their possession , the said Hugh being endamaged , by the loss of his ship , and of his goods aforesaid 800. nobles and the foresaid Master and the mariners losing , in regard of their wages , canvas , and armour , 200. nobles . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1405. certain malefactors of Wismer wickedly and unjustly took , in a certain port of Norway called Selaw , a ship of Yarmouth ( the owner whereof was William Oxney and the master Thomas Smith ) laden with salt , cloth , and salmon , to the valve of 40. pound , and do as yet detain the said ship and goods in their possession , some of the Hans their confederates aiding and assisting them at the same time . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1395. one Godekin Mighel , Clays Scheid , Stertebeker , and other their accomplices of the Hans took upon the sea a certain ship of one John Dulwer of Cley , called the Friday ( whereof Laurence Took of Cley was master ) and conveyed the said ship unto Maustrond in Norway , and the said Master and mariners they robbed of diverse commodities , namely of artillery , furniture , and salt fish being in the same ship , to the valve of 500. nobles . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1395. Godekin Mighel , Clays Scheid , Stertebeker , and other their accomplices of the Hans , unlawfully took upon the sea a certain ship of one William Bets of Cley called the Margaret ( wherein Robert Robines was master ) and conveyed the ship it self unto Mawstrond in Norway , and there robbed the master and his partners of diverse commodities , namely of artillery , furniture , and salt fish , to the valve of 400. nobles , and one of the said master's mates they maliciously drowned . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1395. about the feast Cley . 
 of the nativi tie of S. John Baptist , the forenamed Godekin and Stertebeker , with others their accomplices of the Hans , unlawfully took upon the sea a certain ship of Nicholas Steyhard and John Letis of Cley called the Nicholas ( whereof John Breast was master ) and conveyed the said ship unto Mawstrond , and there robbed the said master and his company of diverse commodities , namely of furniture and salt fish , being in the said ship , to the valve of 320. nobles . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1395. about the feast Cley . aforesaid , the said Godekins and Stertebeker , & their companions of the Hans unjustly took upon the sea a certain ship of Thomas Peirs of Cley called the Isabel ( whereof William Noie was master ) and conveyed it unto Mawstrond , and there robbed the said master and his company of diverse commodities , as namely of furniture , and salt fish , being in the said ship , to the valve of 406. nobles . 
 Item , in the year next above mentioned , upon the Cley . Saterday , about the foresaid feast , the forenamed Godekins and Stertebeker , and other their accomplices of the Hans unlawfully took upon the sea , a certain ship of one Thomas Lyderpole of Cley , called the Helena , wherein Robert Alway was master , and also wickedly and unjustly drowned in the bottom of the sea diverse commodities , as namely salt fish , together with the ship it self . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1398. about the feast Cley . 
 of S. Michael the archangel , the foresaid Godekin & Stertebeker , with other their confederates of the Hans , took at Langsound in Norway a certain crayer of one Thomas Motte of Cley , called the Peter , ( wherein Thomas Smith was master ) & the foresaid crayer they wickedly and unjustly carried away , being worth 280. nobles . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1395 - about the feast Wiveton . of the nativi tie of S. John Baptist , the forenamed Godekins and Stertebeker , and others of the Hans unjustly took a certain ship of Simon Durham , called the 
 II 65 E 
 Dogger-ship , and the Peter of Wiveton , laden with salt fish ( whereof John Austen was master ) upon the coast of Denmarke . And they carried away the said Dogger , with the furniture thereof , and the foresaid salt fish , to the valve of 170. pound . Moreover , the master , and 25. mariners in the same ship they maliciously slew , and a certain lad of the said Dogger they carried with them into Wismer . 
 Wiveton . Item , in the foresaid year , and about the feast aforesaid , the forenamed Godekins and Stertebeker , with other their accomplices , unjustly took upon the sea a certain ship of Thomas Lyderpole , and John Coote of Wiveton : and the master and mariners which were in the said ship , they villanously slew , among whom they put to death one Simon Andrew , the godson , nephew , and servant of the foresaid Simon Durham . Which ship , with the goods and furniture that were therein was worth 410. nobles . 
 Wiveton . Item , in the very same year , about the feast aforesaid , the forenamed Godekins and Stertebeker & other their accomplices wickedly spoiled a certain ship of the foresaid Simon Durham called the Dogger , wherein Gervase Cat was master , lying at and anchor , while the company were occupied about fishing , and likewise unjustly took away with them the salt fish , and furniture of the said ship . Moreover , the master and his company that were in the said Dogger they beat and wounded , so that they utterly lost their fishing for that year , the master and his said company being endamaged thereby , to the sum of 200. nobles . 
 Wiveton . Item , in the year of our Lord 1396. the foresaid Godekins and Stertebeker , and other their accomplices unjustly took upon the sea a certain crayer , called the Buss of Zeland , which one John Ligate merchant , and servant unto the forenamed Simon Durham had laden in Prussia , on the behalf of the said Simon , to sail for England , and spoiled the said craier , and also took and carried away with them the goods and merchandises 66 
 of the said Simon , being in the foresaid ship , to the valve of 66. pounds . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1397. certain male - W’weton . factors of Wismer and Rostok , with certain others of the Hans , took a crayer of one Peter Coal of Zeland , called the Bussship , which Alan Barret the servant and factor of the foresaid Simon Durham had laden with masts , sparres , and other merchandise , for the behalf of the said Simon , and unjustly took from thence the goods of the said Simon , to the valve of 24. pounds , and carried the same away . 
 Item , in the year of our Lord 1394. certain male - Lenne . factors of Wismer and others of the Hans unjustly took upon the sea , and carried away with them a pack of woollen cloth of the foresaid Simon , worth 42. pounds , out of a certain crayer of one Thomas Fouler of Lenne being laden and bound for Dantzik in Prussia . 
 Item , pitifully complaining the merchants of Lenne Lenne . do avouch , verify , & affirm , that about the feast of S. George the martyr , in the year of our Lord 1394. sundry malefactors and robbers of Wismer & Rostok , and others of the Hans , with a great multitude of ships , arrived at the town of Norbern in Norway , and took the said town by strong assault , and also wickedly and unjustly took all the merchants of Lenne there residing with their goods and cattles , and burned their houses and mansions in the same place , and put their persons unto great ransoms : even as by the letters of safeconduct delivered unto the said merchants it may more evidently appear , to the great damage and impoverishment of the merchants of Lenne : namely , Inprimis they burned there 21. houses of 21. houses belonging unto the said merchants , to the English mar-value of 440. nobles . Item , they took from Edmund ^Norternln Belyetere , Thomas Hunt , John Brandon , and from other Norway . merchants of Lenne , to the valve of 1815. pounds . 
 67 
 . 