To the most renowned prince and mighty Lord , Henrie king of England etc. our gracious Lord . 
 OUr humble recommendations , with our most instant and continual prayers for you being graciously by your Majesty taken in good part 8cc . Most sovereign king , mighty prince , gracious lord , and unto us most unfeignedly beloved , we received of late your gracious letters by your Majesties liege subject John Brown , the contents whereof seemed to be these following : first that of long time heretofore , there have be between the merchants of your realm & of our lands , not only quiet & peaceable access one unto another , but also mutual participation , & common traffic of their wares , being right commodious & available for them both : howbeit , that now the foresaid profitable conversation , by reason of certain notorious robberies , committed upon the sea by pirates against both parts , 8c the wonted access also of your subject's unto our dominions , were altogether forbidden . Moreover , you call to remembrance the ancient amity 8c friendship between both our lands , with the invaluable commodity of sweet amiable peace , which are by all faithful Christians , to the utmost of their endeavour to be embraced . Whereupon you of your exceeding clemency , do offer your Majesties fill consent , that the foresaid prohibition being released until the feast of Easter next ensuing , the said merchants of your dominions may in our territories , and our merchants likewise may in your realms ( all molestations ceasing ) exercise their wonted traffic : especially since in the mean season your royal wisdom hath determined to direct unto us your hono : ambassadors in friendly sort to treat and parley with us as touching the pretended injuries , so far forth as they may concern your subject's . Adding moreover in particular that when your people shall repair unto the parts of Sconia to fish for herrings , having consideration & regard unto 
 your majesty , we would have them especially recommended unto our protection etc. Most sovereign lord & king , & gracious prince , we do with unfeigned and hearty affection embrace the oracles of your majesties most courteous & acceptable offer : wherein you have used most diligent & effectual persuasions , that compliment of justice should be done unto the parties injuried , & that peace & friendship should take place , making no doubt of your own royal person , nor of our selves or of any aPPERTAINING unto us , but that our inclinations and desires in this regard are all one and the same : neither would we lightly transgress the limits of your persuasions without some just , weighty , & reasonable cause , forasmuch as the matters persuaded are in very [ I . 161. J deed most happy preservatives of a common weal , yea 8c of nature it self . Moreover whereas your highness hath farther requested us , that the prohibition of your subject's access unto our dominions might , until the feast of Easter next ensuing , be released : we answer ( under correction of your majesties more deliberate counsel ) that it is far more expedient for both parts to have the said prohibition continued then released , until such time as satisfaction be performed on both sides unto the parties endamaged , not in words only , but actually 8c really in deeds , or by some course of law or friendly composition . For there is no equal nor indifferent kind of consort or trade between the impoverished party and him that is enriched , between the party which hath obtained justice and him that hath obtained none between the offender and the party offended : because they are not moved with like affections . For the remembrance of injuries easily stirs up inconsiderate motions of anger . Also , such a kind of temperature or permixtion , as it were , by way of contrariety breeds more bitterness then sweetness , more hate then love : whereupon more grievous complaints aswell unto your highness as unto our selves , might be occasioned . The lord knoweth , that even now we are too 
 much wearied and disquieted with the importunate and instant complaints of our subject's , insomuch that we cannot at this present by any convenient means release or dissolve the said prohibition , before we be sufficiently informed by your majesties ambassadors , of the satisfaction of our endamaged subject's . Furthermore , whereas your majesties request , concerning your subject's that shall come unto the parts of Sconia , is that we would defend them under our protection : be it known unto your highness , that for diverse considerations us reasonably Margaret moving , being provoked by the queen of Denmarke ^Denm an ber PeoP^e > being also urged thereunto full soar ' against our wills , for the repelling and avoiding of injuries , we have sent forth our army against them . Howbeit for a certain time a truce is concluded on both parts , so that our people are actually returned home . Far be it from us also , that our subject's being occupied in wars , should in any sort willingly molest or reproach any strangers , of what lands or nations soever , not being our professed enemies . For this should be to oppress the innocent in stead of the guilty , to condemn the just for the unjust : then which nothing can be more cruel , nor a revenge of greater impiety . In very deed ( most gracious prince and lord ) we are moved with right hearty sympathy and compassion for any inconvenience which might happen in your regiment : wishing from the bottom of our hearts , that all affairs may right prosperously and happily succeed , about the royal person and regiment of your most excellent Majestic , and that continually . The like whereof we hope from you : most humbly commending our selves , and our whole Order unto your highness . Given at our castle of Marienburgh , the 16. day the month of July , in the year of our Lord 1404. 
 . 