The letters of king Henry the 4. sent unto Fr. Ulricus master general of Prussia , wherein he does absolutely approve the foresaid conference held at Hage , and treateth about a perpetual league and amity to be concluded between England and Prussia . 
 Enry by the grace of God king of England and France and lord of Ireland , unto the noble & mighty personage of sacred religion Ulricus de Jungingen master generail of the order of the Dutch knights of S. Maries hospitali of Jerusalem , our entirely beloved friend , 
 greeting and increase of unfeigned friendship . After diverse conferences had in sundry places beyond the seas , between the ambassadors and messengers of your late predecessor and of your self also , on the one part , and between our especial ambassadors and messengers on the other part , concerning reformations , reparations , & restitutions in certain manner & form to be performed unto our subject's of both parts , in regard of manifold injuries practised against them both , and after that , in the last conference held by the ambassadors of us both at the town of Hage in Holland , there was a motion made concerning a certain form of satisfaction , by way of final conclusion in 
 that behalf : but not being as then by our ambassadors condescended unto , because they durst not proceed unto the same conclusion without our privity , relation thereof at length being by them made before us and our counsel : we returned unto your honour and answer in writing by our letters under our privy seal , of our full purpose and intention ( unto the which letters we do at this present refer our selves , as if they were here again expressly written ) what we thought good to have done in this behalf : so that we also might by your friendly letters be certainly informed of your will and express consent , being likewise conformable unto your foresaid intention . Now whereas since that time we have of late received the certainty of the matter by your letters written unto us from your castle of Marienburgh , bearing date the 27. of September last passed , containing in effect among other matters , that you being moved with a fervent zeal and speciali affection ( as you write ) unto the royal crown of our realm , and having due regard and consideration of our royal majesty , upon the advice of your honourable brothers your counsellers , do with a thankful mind accept , and by the tenor of the said letters of yours totally approve the concord of a certain satisfaction to be performed with the payment of certain sums of money howsoever due unto your subject's as well of Prussia as of Livonia , expressed in our former letters , within the terms prefixed by our consent and limited in our said letters , and also of other sums which within one whole year immediately following the feast of Easter last passed , by sufficient proofs on their part to be made before our chancellor at our city of London , shall be found due unto them : conditionally , that without inconvenience of delay and impediments , the premises be performed as they ought to be . And that your self also will without fail , upon the terms appointed for the said payments , procure satisfaction to be made accordingly unto our endamaged subject's 
 with the sums due unto them by reason of their losses , whereof they have sufficient information . Wherefore in regard of those your friendly letters , and your courteous answer returned by them unto us , as is aforesaid , we do yield unto you right unfeigned thanks . But because it will undoubtedly be most acceptable and pleasing both unto us and unto our people , and unto you and your subject's , that the zeal and fervency of love which hath from ancient times grown and increased between our progenitors for them and their subject's , and your predecessors and their subject's , and which by the insolency of certain lewd persons , without any consent of the principali lords , hath often be violated between us and you and mutually between the subject's of us both , may be put in perpetuali ure and obtain full strength in time to come , since hereupon ( by Gods assistance ) it is to be hoped , that unspeakable commodity and quiet will redound unto both parts : may it seem good unto your discretion , as it seems expedient unto us , that some messengers of yours sufficiently authorised to parley , agree , and conclude with our deputy , about the mutual contraction of a perpetuali league and confirmation of friendship , may with all convenient speed be sent unto our presence . At whose arrival , not only in this business so profitable and behooveful , but also in certain other affairs concerning the former treaties and conclusions , they may , yea and of necessity must greatly avail . Wherefore ( our entirely beloved friend ) even as upon confidence of the premises we have thought good to grant unto the merchants and subject's of our realm hill authority to resort unto your dominions , so we do in like manner grant unto your merchants and subject's free [ licence and liberty with their merchandises and goods securely to come into our realms and dominions , there to stay , and at their pleasures thence to return home . Moreover , if Arnold Dassel , who last of all presented your foresaid letters n 97 g 
 A motion for a perpetuali league . 
 unto us , shall think good in the mean season to make his abided here in our dominions ( as in very deed it is expedient ) he may both by serious consideration and deliberate consulting with our commissioners more conveniently and prosperously find out ways and means , for the more speedy expedition of all the premises . Fare you well in Christ . Given under our privy seal at our palace of Westminster , the seventh of March , in the year of our lord 1408. according to the computation of the Church of England , and in the tenth year of our reign . 
 . 