A new concord concluded between king Henry the 4. and Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of Prussia , in the year of our Lord 1409. 
 Y this indenture or letters indented be it evidently known ( for the perpetual memory of the matter ) unto all faithful Christians , that the noble & honourable personages Richard Merlowe Mayor and citizen of London , Master John Kington clerk , and William Askham citizen and 
 Aiderman of the same city , the commissioners of the most sovereign prince and lord , L. Henrie by the grace of God king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , and Tidericus de Longenthorpe knight , Lefardus de Hereford burgomaster of Elbing , and John Crolowe citizen of the city of Dantzik , the procurators , commissioners , deputies and messengers of the right noble and religious personage Fr. Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of the order of the Dutch knights of S. Maries hospital of Jerusalem , having in the names of the said king and Master by virtue of the power on both parts committed unto them , sufficient authority , have appointed and with one consent agreed upon all and singular the things underwritten . 
 Imprimis for the conservation of mutual love and 1. wonted amity , and for the tranquillity of sweet amiable peace , it is decreed and ordained , that all and singular the liege people & subject's of the Realm of England and the Merchants of the territories & dominions of the said Realm and all other persons of what state or condition soever , shall and may safely and securely , as well by land as by water enter into the parts of Prussia , and there mutually converse , and freely after the manner of Merchants exercise traffic aswell with the Prussians as with others , of what nation or quality soever , there also make their abided , and thence unto their own homes and dwelling places return , and depart unto any place whither and so often as they shall think good , as well by land as by water , with their goods , merchandise , and wares whatsoever ; faithfully paying in the mean time all rights & customs due in regard of their said wares and Merchandise . Reserved always unto the said Master and . his successors all right and remedy ordained , granted , and vouchsafed in certain obligations by our Lord the king , whereof mention shall be made in the articles following . 
 Item it is ordained , that all and singular the subject's 2. of the said Master generail and of his order , of what state and condition soever , shall and may , as well by water as by land enter into the kingdom of England and into the territories and dominions thereof , and there mutually converse , and freely after the manner of Merchants exercise traffic as well with all English people as with others of what nation or quality soever , and there also make their abided , and thence return unto their own habitations and dwelling places , and to depart whither they will and as oft as they shall think good , as well by land as by water , with their goods , merchandise and wares whatsoever : truly paying in the mean time all rights and customs due in regard of their said wares and Merchandise . Reserved always unto the said sovereign king , his heirs and successors , 
 all rights and remedies ordained and granted unto them in certain obligations , by the commissioners and procurators of the said Master general abovenamed , and in the name of the said Master general . 
 3. Item it is with one consent agreed upon , promised , and granted that for all and singular damages , grievances , and robberies howsoever done and committed before the date of these presents against the foresaid sovereign Prince and his subject's whatsoever , and all others which at the time of the grievances , damages , and robberies aforesaid , were , or at this present are the said sovereign king his subject's ; there are due to be paid unto the said king or his successors by the said Master general or his successors , in full satisfaction and recompense of the damages , grievances , and robberies abovewritten , certain sums of English money : even as in the letters obligatory made by the said Master generail his procurators , and messengers abovenamed in this behalf , and sealed with their seals , and delivered unto the forenamed procurators and commissioners of our said Lord the king it is expressed more at large . 
 4. Item it is covenanted , granted , and promised , that no subject of the said Master general or of his successors , by reason or . occasion of the damages , grievances , and robberies aforesaid , shall , by the said sovereign king or his successors , or by their authority or commandment , or by alley other person whatsoever who in regard of the foresaid losses , grievances and robberies hath be molested and damnified , or at the procurement or instant suit of any , be attached , arrested , imprisoned , or detained ; nor that the goods of the said Master general , or of his successors , or of any of them , shall laid hold on , arrested , or detained . 
 5. Item it is covenanted and ordained , that if any of the liege people and subject's of the said Master generail or of his successors shall , contrary to the form of the concord and grant next abovewritten , chance to be molested or endamaged : that then the foresaid sovereign IOO 
 Lord the King and his successors the kings of England are bound to make full satisfaction for all such losses as the subject's of the said Master general or of his successors or any of them shall for that cause have unjustly sustained , unto the parties endamaged . Which thing , if the foresaid sovereign Prince , or his successors in the Realm of England , being conveniently requested by the letters of the said Master general or of his successors , shall refuse to do , that then after the term of sixe months immediately following the said denial or refusal , it shall right lawful for the Master general that now is and for any of his successors in time to come ( having first made convenient proof that the foresaid request was by him or them exhibited ) to arrest so many goods of the foresaid king his subject's found in the land of Prussia , as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and recompense of any person or persons whatsoever unjustly molested in this behalf ; and also to detain the said goods under arrestes , until condign satisfaction and amends be made unto the party or parties molested . 
 Item by the commissioners and procurators often 6. abovenamed it is covenanted , promised , and granted , that for all and singular the damages , molestations , and robberies by the foresaid sovereign king his liege people & subject's howsoever before the date of these presents committed and offered against the said Master general or against any of his subject's whither Prussians or Livonians , and against all others who at the time of the damages , grievances & robberies aforesaid were , or at this present are the subject's of the Master generail aforesaid ( except notwithstanding certain damages & grievances hereafter to be mentioned , whereof also some provisoes shall had in the articles following , which damages were before the date of these presents by you said sovereign king his liege people and subject's inflicted upon certain subject's of the foresaid general Master , especially them of Prussia which hereafter shall nam ) 
 IOI 
 there are certain sums of money due to be paid unto the said Master general or unto his successors by the said sovereign Prince or his successors for the full satisfaction of the foresaid damages , molestations and robberies inflicted upon the Prussians and Livonians , and the others above mentioned , even as in the letters obligatory of the said sovereign Lord the king made in this behalf , being given and delivered unto the said Master generail his procurators and messengers , it is declared more at large . 
 7. Item , it is covenanted , granted and promised , that none of the liege people or subject's of the foresaid sovereign prince or of his heirs shall , by reason or occasion of the damages , grievances , and robberies aforesaid , by the said Master generail or his successors or by their authority and commandment , or by any other who in respect of the said damages , grievances and robberies above mentioned , hath been molested or damnified , or by any of their procurements or instant suits , shall attached , arrested , imprisoned or detained ; nor that any goods of the subject's of the said sovereign king or his heirs or any of them , shall be attached , arrested , or detained . Reserved always unto the forenamed Master general and his subject's all right and remedy any way requisite or competent unto them by means of the obligations aforesaid . 
 8. Item it is covenanted and agreed that if any of the liege people or subject's of the said sovereign prince or of his heirs and successors shall ( contrary to the form of concord and grant next abovewritten ) chance to be molested or endamaged ; that then the said Master general and his successors , for all losses and hindrances which the liege people and subject's the foresaid sovereign prince or of his heirs or successors , shall by that means have unjustly sustained , are bound to make full satisfaction unto the party endamaged . Which if the Master general aforesaid or his successors being conveniently requested by the letters of the said 
 102 
 sovereign prince or of his heirs , shall refuse to do ; that then , after the space of sixe months next ensuing the time of the foresaid request , it may be right lawful for the forenamed sovereign prince that now is , or that then for that time shall be ( convenient proof being first brought , that the foresaid request had conveniently been exhibited ) to arrest so many goods of the said Master generail his subject's found in the Realm of England , as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and amends of any person or persons unjustly molested in this behalf ; and also to detain the said goods under safe custody , until condign satisfaction and amends be made unto the party or parties aggrieved . 
 Item it is covenanted , that beside the sums due 9. unto the said Master general and his successors in the behalf of his subject's both of Prussia and of Livonia ( whereof mention is made in the former Articles ) there are due to be paid unto the said Master generail and his successors , for sundry other damages , grievances , and robberies against himself and diverse other of his subject's of Prussia , namely Matthewe Ludekensson , Arnold Ashen , Henri Culeman , John Unkeltop , John Halewater , Egghard Scoff of Dantzik , and Nicolas Wolmerstene of Elbing , done and committed by the said sovereign king his liege people and subject's underwritten , even before the date of these presents , for the full satisfaction of the said damages , grievances and robberies , certain sums of nobles hereafter following . Namely Inprimis by Tutburie , and Terry of Hull , 82. nobles , which are due unto the foresaid Matthew Lude-kinson . Item by Nicholas Scot of Caleis the son of Tutbury , and Hilg of Hull , 256. nobles , which are due unto the foresaid Arnold de Aschen . Item by the inhabitants of Scardeburgh , Blakeney , and Crowmer ( who had one John Jolly of Blakeney for their captain ) 156. nobles , which are due unto Henrie Culeman aforesaid . Item by the inhabitants of Bayon ( Whose Capitaine was 
 103 
 one Pideville ) 125. nobles which are due unto the said John Unkel top . Item by the inhabitants of Plymmouth and Dertmouth ( whose Captains were Henry Pay , and William Gadeling ) 600. nobles which are due unto the foresaid John Halewater , in respect of his goods by them violently taken away . Item 334. nobles to be paid by the self same parties , being due unto the said A ship of the John Halewater by reason that they detained his ship burden of from him three months and more , which ship was of the 300. onnes . hurthen of three hundreth tons of wine , and had in it all the foresaid time five and fourtie servants maintained at the expenses of the said John Halewater . item that Sir William de Ethingham knight , who was 
 Viceadmiral for the sea , must be summoned to allege a reasonable cause ( for that the said Sir William with his servants expelled the said John Halewater out of his ship for the space of fifteene days together , and took of the good and victuals of the said John to the sum of 114. nobles ) why he ought not to pay the said sum of 114. nobles unto John Halewater aforesaid : which if he shall not be willing nor able to allege before the first of April next ensuing , that then by the kings authority he must be compelled to pay unto the foresaid John the said 114 nobles . Item by the inhabitants of Caleis ( whose captains were Michael Scot , Bishop , and William Horneby ) 1900. nobles , which are due unto the foresaid Eggard Scoff , because the said sovereign king hath given them in charge by the said Michael Scot and the rest concerning the payment of the sum aforesaid . Item by John Bilis near unto Crowmer , 68. nobles , which are due unto Nicholas Wolmersten of Elbing . Which sums of nobles must by the kings authority be levied at the hands of his subject's abovementioned , between the time that now is and the feast of the Purification of the blessed virgin which shall fallen in the year of our Lord 1411. effectually to be delivered and paid unto the said Master general or his lawful procurator , or unto his successors or their lawful pro - 
 104 
 curators , at the City of London , upon the feast aforesaid . 
 Item it is covenanted that beside the sums specified in the foresaid letters obligatory made in the behalf of the said sovereign prince , there are due to be paid unto one John Marion of Wersingham lately deceased being in his lifetime the liege subject of the foresaid sovereign prince 200. nobles of English money in regard of certain injuries and robberies done and committed before the date of these presents against the foresaid John , by one Eghard Scoff7 subject unto the said Master generail , for the full satisfaction of the said damages and robberies to be made unto the said deceased John , his wife , children , heirs or executors by the said Egghard , his heirs , or by the administrators of his goods at the time and place abovementioned . 
 Item it is covenanted , confirmed , and promised , that 10. for all the injuries and robberies done and committed against one John Dordewant of Elbing , being in his life time subject unto the said Master generail , by the liege people and subject's of the said sovereign king the inhabitants of Scardeburgh before the date of these presents ; for the full recompense of all such injuries and robberies , there must be paid unto one John Gruk of Dantzik eight hundred nobles of English money , upon the feast of Easter next following in the City of London by them of Scardeburgh being guilty and culpable in this behalf ; who are by definitive sentence condemned unto the said John in the sum of 800. nobles by reason of the injuries and robberies aforesaid . Except the lawful expenses in this behalf laid out : they are also taxed in due time for the issue . And therefore the foresaid condemned parties ( whose names are in the sentence against them pronounced in this behalf , more expressly contained ) must in the mean season by the kings authority be compelled and constrained really and actually to obey the foresaid sentence , namely by delivering and paying unto John Gruk the sum of 800. 
 105 
 nobles at the time and place above mentioned , with reasonable expenses , wherein also the said parties stand condemned , their lawful taxation being reserved . 
 Item it is covenanted and granted , that the heirs of Lord Henrie de Percy the younger after they shall come unto lawful age , and shall have attained unto the possessions and goods of their inheritance , must be compelled by the kings authority ( justice going before ) to make satisfaction unto the great procurator of Marienburgh with the sum of 838. nobles in lieu of certain corn and grain which the foresaid Lord Henrie , in the year 1403 , bought and received of the said great procurator , for the use of the castle of Zutberwik . In testimony and confirmation of all the which premises , the said Tedericus , Lefardus , and John Crolow , of their certain knowledges have put their seals unto these present letters indented , in the presence of the abovenamed Richard Merlow , John Kington , and William Askam , commissioners for the behalf of England . Given at the City of London in England the fourth day of December , in the year of our Lord 1409. 
 . 