A brief Treatise of the great Duke of Moscovia his genealogy , being taken out of the Moscovites manuscript Chronicles written by a Polack . 
 TO hath almost ever be the custom of nations , in searching out the infancy and first beginnings of their estate , to ascribe the same unto such authors as lived among men in great honour and endued mankind with some one or other excellent benefit . Now , this inbred 
 desire of all nations to blaze and set forth their own pedigree hath so much prevailed with the greater part , that leaving the undoubted truth , they have betaken themselves unto mere fables and fictions . Yea and the Chronicles of many nations written in diverse and sundry ages do testify the same . Even so the Grecians boasted that they were either Autocthones , that is earthbred , or else lineally descended from the Gods. And the Roman affirm that Mars was father unto their first founder Romulus . Right well therefore and judicially say Titus Livius : Neither mean I to avouch ( quoth he ) ne to disable or confute those things which before the building and foundation of the City have been reported , being more adorned and fraught with Poetical fables then with incorrupt and sacred monuments of truth : antiquity is it to be pardoned in this behalf , namely in joining together matters historical and poetical , to make the beginnings of cities to seem the more honourable . For sith antiquity it self is accounted such a notable argument of true nobility , even private men in all ages have contended thereabouts . Wherefore citizens of Rome being desirous to make demonstration of their Gentry , use to have their ancestors arms painted along the walls of their houses : in which regard they were so puffed up , that oftentimes 182 
 1580. they would arrogantly disdain those men , which by their own virtue had attained unto honour . In like sort Poets , when the originali of their worthiness and brave champion was either utterly unknown or somewhat obscure , would oft refer it unto their Gods themselves . So in these our days ( to let pass others ) the Turkish Emperor with great presumption boasts himself to be descended of the Trojan blood . Likewise the great duke of Moscovie , to make himself and his predecessors seem the more sovereign , deriveth the beginnings of his parentage from the Roman Emperors , yea even from Augustus Caesar . Albeit therefore no man is so fond as to accept of this report for truth , yet will we briefly set down what the Moscovites have written in their Chronicles as touching this matter . 
 Augustus ( believe it who lists ) had certain brothers or kinsfolks which were appointed governors over diverse provinces . among the rest one Prussus ( of whom Prussia was nam ) had his place of government assigned unto him upon the shore of the eastern or Baltic sea , and upon the famous river of Wixel . This men grand children or nephews of the fourth generation were Rurek , Sinaus , and Truvor , who likewise inhabited in the very same places . Whereas therefore at the very same time the Russians or the Moscovites without any civil regiment possessed large and spacious territories towards the north , the foresaid three brothers , upon the persuasion of one Gostomislius the chief citizen of Novogrod , in the year since the world's creation ( according to the computation of the Greeks ) 6370 , which was in the year of our Lord 572 > were Russia became sent for , to bear rule . And so joining their kinsman mW in you Olechus unto them , and dividing these huge countries' among themselves , they laboured to reduce the barbarous 57 ' and savage people unto a civil kind of life . 
 Sinaus and Truvor deceasing without issue , Rurek succeeded and left a son behind him nam Igor ; 
 183 
 who not being of sufficient years to bear rule , was committed unto the protection of his kinsman Olechus . The said Igor begat of Olha daughter unto a citizen of Plesco ( who , after her husband was slain by his enemies , taking her journey to Constantinople , was there baptised by the name of Helena ) a son called Stoslaus , who fought many battles with the neighbour countries' . Howbeit at length Stoslaus was slain by his foe , who making a drinking cup of his skull , engraved thereupon in golden letters this sentence : Seeking after other men's , he lost his own . He left behind him three sons , namely Teropolchus , Olega , and Vulodimir . The which Vulodimir having slain his two brothers , became sole governor of Russia , or ( as the Moscovites call it ) Rosseia , his own self . This man beginning at length to loath and mislike the ethnik religion , and the multitude of false gods , applied his mind unto the religion of Christ , and having taken to wife Anna sister unto Basilius and Constantinus Emperors of Constantinople , was together with his whole nation , in the year of Christ 988. baptised , and embraced the Christian religion , with the rites and ceremonies of the Greek Church , and his name being changed , he was called Basilius . 
 Howbeit Zonaras reporteth that before the time of Vulodimir , Basilius Emperor of Constantinople sent a bishop unto the Russians , by whose means they were converted unto the Christian faith . He reporteth moreover that they would not be persuaded unless they might see a miracle : whereupon the said bishop having made his prayers unto almighty God , threw the book of the Evangelists into the fire , which remained there unconsumed . And that by this miracle they were moved to give credit unto the doctrine of Christ , and to conform themselves thereunto . 
 The sons of Vulodimir were Vuiseslaus , Isoslaus , Jaroslaus , Suatopolcus , Borissus , Glebus , Stoslaus , Vulzevolodus , Stanislaus , Sudislaus , and Podius who 184 
 died in his childhood . among the residue all Russia was divided by their father , who not being contented with their portions , but invading each other , were most of them slain by their mutual contentions . Borissus and Glebus in regard of their holy conversation were registered for Saints , whose feasts are every year celebrated with great solemnity upon the twelfth of November . 
 At length Jaroslaus only god the Sovereign authority into his own hands , and left behind him foure sons , Vulodimir , Isoslauus , Weceslauus , and Vuszevolodus . 
 The foresaid Vulodimir son of Jaroslaus kept his residence at the ancient city of Kiow standing upon Kioto . the river of Boristhenes , and after diverse conflicts with his kinsmen , having subdued all the provinces unto himself , was called Monomachos , that is , the only champoin . This man ( for I think it not amiss to report those things which their own Manuscript Chronicles make mention of ) waged war against Constantine the Emperor of Constantinople , and when he had wasted & overrun Thracia , being returned home with great and rich spoils , and making preparation for new wars , Constantine sent Neophytus the Metropolitan of Ephesus and two Bishops , with the governor of Antiochia , and Eustaphius the Abbot of Jerusalem , to present rich and magnificent gifts unto him ; as namely , part of the cross of our Saviour Christ , a crown of gold , a drinking cup curiously made of Sardonyx stone , a cloak set all over with precious stones , and a golden chain ; commanded them to salute him by the name of Czar ( which name , as it may be proved by many arguments , signifies a king , and not and Emperor ) and concluded a most inviolable league of amity and friendship with him . 
 The foresaid Vulodimir begat Vuszevolodus the second . This Vuszevolodus left eight sons behind him , Miscislaus , Isoslaus , Stoslaus , Teropolcus , Weceslaus , Romanus , Georgius , and Andrew . The sons of George were Roseslaus , Andrew , Basilius , and Demetrius . 
 185 
 Demetrius begat George , who in the year 1237. was slain by one Bathy , a Tartarian duke , which Bathy wasted Moscovia , and subdued the same unto himself . Since which time the Russians were tributary to the Tartars , and were governed by such dukes as they pleased to set over them . Howbeit the Tartars so greatly abused that authority , that when they sent their ambassadors unto the prince of Moscovie , he was constrained to go forth and meet with them , and ( as Herbortus Fulstinius in his Polonian historic reporteth ) to offer them a basin full of mares milk , and if they had spilled any whit thereof upon their horses maines , to lick it off with his tongue , and having conducted them into his princely court , to stand bareheaded before them while they sat down , and with all reverence to give ear and attendance unto them . But by what means they shook off at the length this yoke of servitude , I will forthwith declare . 
 About the same time almost all Polonia , and the dukedom of Silesia were overrun by the Tartars with fire and sword . Who having burned Presla the chief city of Silesia , & being come before the city of Legnitz , they fought there a most cruel and bloody field , wherein was slave duke Henrie himself being son unto the most holy and devout lady Hedvice , with many others , whose monuments and graves be as yet extant in sundry places , and with and infinite multitude of common soldiers , insomuch that the Tartars filled nine great sacks with the ears of them which they had slain . The Tartars to the end they might obtain the victory , presented unto the view of our soldiers the portraiture of a men head placed by art magic upon a banner , wherein the letter X. was painted , which being shaken and moved up and down breathed forth a most loathsome stench , & struck such a terror into the hearts of our men , that being as it were astonished with the snaky visage of Medusa , they were utterly daunted and dismayed . 
 186 
 From thence Bathy and his company with the same bloodthirsty intent marched into Hungarie , and had almost slain king Bela the fourth , who together with his son escaping by flight did scarcely rid themselves out of the enemies hand . And when the whole world almost was exceedingly terrified at the cruel invasions of this most barbarous nation , at length Pope Innocentius the fourth sending ambassadors unto Bathy obtained peace for five years : but to forsake his heathenish superstitions and to become a Christian , he would by no means be persuaded . For he was by the instigation of the Saracens infected with devilish opinions of Mahomet , as being more agreeable unto his barbarous rudeness , which even unto this day the Tartars do maintain , like as the profane Turkes also . 
 This Bathy had a son called Tamerlan , whom the Moscovites call Temirkutla , who likewise , as it is recorded in histories , attained unto great renown . For he carried about with him in a cage Bajazet the Turkish Emperor being fettered in golden chains , and made him a laughing stock unto all men . 
 Let us now return unto the Russians . George being slain , Jaroslaus his brother succeeded in his room , and left behind him three sons , Theodorus , Alexander and Andreas . Daniel the son of Alexander first established his royal seat in the city of Mosco , and magnificently building the castle which before time had be obscure , he took upon him the title of the great Duke of Russia . He had five sons , namely , George , Alexander , Borissus , Ophonias , and John. This John succeeded his father , and because he continually carried a scrip about with him to bestow alms , he was surnamed Kaleta , which word signifies a scrip . His sons were , Simeon , John , and Andrew . He gave unto his son Simeon the provinces of Vulodimiria and Moscovia : which Simeon deceasing without issue his brother John succeeded , who begat a son called Demetrius . This Demetrius had seven sons , namely 187 
 A.D. 
 1580. 
 These ambassadors were Johan , de Plano Carpini y Frier Benedict a Polonian . 
 The city of Mosco first made the seat of the great Duke . 
 The name of the Moscovites first advanced . 
 Daniel , Basilius , George , Andrew , Peter , John , & Constantine . Basilius reigned after his father's death . This man dishinheriting his son which was called after his own name , because he suspected his mother of adultery , at his death surrendered his Dukedom unto his brother George , who kept his nephew a long time in prison . Howbeit at his death , though himself had two sons namely Andrew and Demetrius , yet being stricken perhaps with remorse of conscience , he bestowed the Dukedom upon his nephew Basilius . Against whom his two cousin's bearing a grudge waged war , and at length having taken him by a wily stratagem they put out his eyes . Notwithstanding the Boiarens ( for so the Moscovites call their nobles ) continued their dutiful allegiance unto this their blind Duke , whom for his blindness they called Cziem-nox , that is to say , dark or darkened . He left a son behind him called Ivan Vasilowich who brought the Russian common wealth , being before his time but obscure , unto great excellende and renown . Who that he might the better get all the superiority into his own hands put to death so many sons and nephews of the former Dukes as he could lay hold on , and began to take upon him the title of the great Duke of Vulodimiria , Moscovia , and Novogardia , and to call himself the Monarch or Czar of all Russia . He brought under his subjection two principali cities , namely Plesco being the only walled city in all Moscovy , and Novogrod , both of them being in regard of traffic most rich and flourishing cities , and having been subject unto the Lithuanians for the space of 50. years before . The treasure of Novogrod was so exceeding , that the great Duke is reported to have carried home from thence 300. carts laden with gold and silver . 
 He also was the first man that waged war against the Polonians and the Livonians : against Polonia he pretended a quarrel , alleging that his daughter Helena ( whom he had married unto Alexander the great 188 
 Duke of Lithuania , which was afterwards king of Polonia ) was evil entreated , and was withdrawn from the Greekish religion unto the ceremonies of the Church of Rome . But against the Livonians for none other cause , but only for and incredible desire of enlarging his dominions . Howbeit what impulsive causes of little or no moment happened in the mean season , we will in another place more plainly declare . Notwithstanding he was very often and in diverse battles vanquished by Plettebergius the great master of the Dutch knights : but it is not to the purpose to stand any longer upon this discourse . 
 He was married first unto marry the Duke of Tyversky his daughter , and of her he begat John , unto whom in his life time he surrendered his Dukedom , and married him unto the daughter of Stephan the Palatine of Moldavia : which John , after he had begotten his son Demetrius , deceased before his father . 
 Afterwards Ivan Vasilowich aforesaid married a wife called Sophia being daughter unto Thomas Palaelogus , which is reported to have had her dowry out of the Popes treasury , because the Moscovite had promised to conform himself unto the Romish Church . This Sophia being a woman of a princely and aspiring mind , and often complaining that she was married unto the Tartars vassal , at length by her instant intreaty and continual persuasions , and by a notable stratagem she cast off that slavish yoke very much unbeseeming so mighty a prince . For whereas the Tartarian Duke had his procurators and agents in the Moscovites court , who dwelled in their own houses built within the very castle of Mosco , and were eye witnesses of all affairs which were there performed : Sophia said she was admonished from heaven to build a Temple in the self same place where the Tartars house stood , and to consecrate it unto Saint Nicholas . Being therefore delivered of a son she invited the Tartarian Duke unto the solemn baptizing of him , and being come , she requested him to give her his house , and obtained it at 
 189 
 The yoke of the Tartars shaken of . 
 Basilius . 
 Ivan Vasilowich . 
 his hands . Which house being razed and those Tartarian espials being excluded , the Tartars at length were quite bereft and utterly dispossessed of their authority which they had exercised over the Russians for many years , and could never yet recover it ; albeit they have given sundry attempts . Of his wife Sophia he begat sixe children , namely , a daughter called Helena , & five sons , that is to say , Gabriel , Demetrius , George , Simeon , and Andrew . 
 The Dukedom of right appertained unto Demetrius the son of John , which was the son of Vasilowich by his first marriage . Howbeit Sophia prevailed so with her husband , that neglecting his grandchild Demetrius , he bestowed his Dukedom upon Gabriel his son . 
 Andrew the younger had a son called Vulodimir , of whom Mary was born , which in the year of Christ 1573. was married unto Magnus the Duke of Holst . 
 Gabriel having obtained the great dukedom of Russia , changed his name calling himself Basilius , and applied his mind to the achieving of high and great enterprises . For he reduced a great part of the dukedom of Moscovy , which Vitoldus the great Duke of Lithuania held in possession , under his own jurisdiction , and won upon the river of Boristhenes ( which the Russians call Neiper ) many cities and especially Smolensco , in the year of our Lord 1514. Having divorced his first wife , he begat of Helena daughter unto Duke Glinskie , Ivan Vasilowich , which now this present 1580. reigneth as great Duke . He was born in the year of our Lord 1528. the 25. of August , sixe hours after the rising of the son . The great dukedom of Russia fell unto the said Ivan Vasilowich in the fifth year of his age , having his uncle George for his great protector : being 25. years of age , and being of a strong body and of a courageous mind he subdued the Tartars of Cazan and Astracan upon the river of Volgha , carrying their Dukes and chieftains into captivity . 
 190 
 But by what ways and means ( after the league which by the intercession of the most sacred Roman Emperor , continued from the year 1503. for the space of fifty years , was expired ) having renewed wars against Livonia , he brought that most flourishing province into extreme misery , using for the same purpose a new pretense , and alleging that it belonged unto him by right of inheritance , I tremble to recount : and it requires a large historic , which perhaps in time and place convenient some more learned then my self will take upon them to address . 
 He is exceedingly addicted unto piety and devotion , and does oftentimes observe very strict fastings and abstinence with his monks : and whereas the Russes in doing reverence & adoration unto God do beat their foreheads against the ground , this Ivan Vasilowich with performing of the same ceremony causeth his forehead to be full of boines and swellings , and sometime to be black and blue , and very often to bleed . He is much delighted with building of Churches & spares no cost for that purpose . Whither therefore by nature , or ( which he pretendeth to be the cause ) by reason of his subject's malice & treachery , he be so addicted unto all rigour and cruelty , I dare not determine , especially since he hath not and illiberal or mishapen countenance , as Attila is reported to have had . Of his first wife which was sister unto Mikita Romanowich , being now great steward of his household , he begat two sons , namely Ivan and Theodore . And albeit he was five times married , yet had Theodore . he not one child more . 
 Whereas this Ivan Vasilowich upon certain frivolous reasons calls himself the natural lord of Livonia , I thought it not amiss to add and Epistle hereunto , which was written by a certain honourable man concerning the same matter . 
 S. All we which inhabit this Province with all seemly reverence and submission of mind , do offer most humble thanks unto the Emperor's most sacred and peer - 
 191 
 less majesty our most gracious lord , in that according to his fatherly affection which he bears towards all Christendom , and for the good 8c commodity of this our distressed and afflicted country , which these many years hath been in stead of a bulwark against the invasion of barbarous nations , he hath sent his ambassadors unto the great duke of Moscovia . In regard of which his fatherly love and great benefit vouchsafed on us , we are ready when occasion shall serve , to adventure our lives and goods : praying in the mean season unto Almighty God , who is the only establisher and confounder of common wealths , to bring this excellent work , the foundation whereof is already laid unto a prosperous conclusion . But as touching the title which the Moscovite makes to this province , to say the very truth , we greatly wondered and were astonished at the declaration thereof . For it is most apparent , not only out of all ancient and credible histories , but even from the experience and state of these regions , that the said title and allegations are fabulous and feigned . For out of all ancient monuments , by what names soever they be called ( whereof there are diverse extant among us ) it cannot be proved by any mention , nor yet by any likelihood or conjecture , that those things which the Moscovite affirmeth concerning the people which were governors of these regions in times past , and concerning the right and title of his ancestors unto this province , are grounded upon truth . 
 The commodi - For it is not unknown by what means this province , ties of traffic partiy through the industry of merchants , and partly by cion . the benente or navigation , was first discovered : neither is it unknown how the inhabitants thereof being wholly addicted unto heathenish superstitions and idolatry , were by the croised knights ( who drew other knights professing the same order in Prussia to aid and accompany them in this their enterprise ) and that with great labour and difficulty , converted unto the Christian faith : when as at the same time the Livonians had no knowledge at all of the jurisdiction , religion , manners , or language of Moscovie : 
 192 
 IVAN VASILOWICH , EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 
 who had not only no conversation nor dealings with the Moscovites , but were estranged also from all other nations whatsoever : for leading a miserable , poor , barbarous , and heathenish life , in savage manner among wild beasts , and in the desert and solitary woods , they were utterly ignorant of God and destitute of civil magistrates . Howbeit this kind of government was peculiar unto them , namely that all of one family and society used a kind of reverence unto their elders more then to any other , whom also , that their authority might be the greater , they called by the name of kings , and ( albeit one of their families consisted of a 100. persons ) they obeyed them in all respects , and after their rude and barbarous manner did them loyal service . At the very same time the Moscovites had received the religion , and the Ecclesiastical ceremonies of the Greek and Eastern Church , which religion they published and dispersed throughout all provinces subject to their dominion , using their own proper letters and characters for the same purpose . Of all which things the Livonians which very barbarously inhabited a land being environed with Russia , Lithuania , Samogitia , Prussia , and the Balthic sea , never herd any report at all . It is moreover to be noted that never at any time heretofore either within the earth , or in other places of Livonia , there have be found any monuments at all of the antiquity or letters of the Russes : which verily must needs have come to pass , if the Moscovites , Russes , or any other nations which use the foresaid particulars , had born rule and authority over the Livonians : yea there had been left some remainder and token , either of their religion and divine worship , or of their laws and customs , or at the least of their manners , language , and letters . This indeed we can in no wise deny , that even in Livonia it self , there have been in times past and at this present are many and diverse languages spoken by the people . Howbeit no one language of them all hath any affinity either with the Moscovian tongue , or with the tongues of any other nations . But whereas the Mosco - 
 II 193 n 
 vite pretendeth that there hath been usually paid a pension or tribute unto himself and his predecessors out of the whole province , it is as incredible as the former .. 
 About the beginning of this tragical war , the Moscovite , to cloak his tyranny and ambition under some fair pretense , among other of his demands , made mention also of a tribute which should be due unto him out of the bishop of Dorpat his jurisdiction , whereof notwithstanding he could neither bring any just account , nor affirm any certainty : howbeit there is no man living to be found which either can tell of his own remembrance , or from the relation of others , that any such tribute was ever paid unto the Moscovite . What time therefore he referred all this negotiation unto the master of the Livonian order , and commanded him to get what knowledge he could thereof from the men of Dorpat , & urged the tribute , saying if it were worth but one hair , that he would not remit it : at length it was found recorded in the ancient Chronicles of Dorpat , that beyond the memory of man , when the territory of Plesco contained nothing but woods and forests for wild beasts , that the peasants of the liberty of Dorpat called Neuhus , by the consent of the Russian borderers , enjoyed Beehives in the said woods , and paid every year in lieu thereof unto the Russian governors , sixe shillings of Livonian coin . But so soon as the Russians had felled the woods and had built towns and villages in their place , the said pension ceased together with the trees which were cut down . Wherefore the said sixe shillings were never since that time either demanded by the Russes or paid by the Livonians . These things which I knew concerning the causes of the Livonian wars I thought good to signify unto you . Given the 22. of May , in the year of our Lord 1576. 
 . 