A declaration of the Indies and lands discovered , and subdued unto the Emperor , and the king of Portingal : And also of other parts of . the Indies and rich countries to be discovered , which the worshipful M. Robert Thorne merchant of London ( who dwelled long in the city of Sivil in Spaine ) exhorted king Henrie the eight to take in hand . 
 MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE , 
 Xperience proveth that naturally all princes be desirous to extend and enlarge their dominions and kingdoms . Wherefore it is not to be marveled , to see them every day procure the same , not regarding any cost , peril , and labour , that may thereby chance , but rather it is 
 to be marveled , if there be any prince content to live quiet with his own dominions . For surely the people would think he lacketh the noble courage and spirit of all other . 
 The world knoweth that the desires of Princes have be so fervent to obtain their purpose , that they have adventured and proved things to men conjecture impossible , the which they have made possible , and also things difficult have made facill : and thus to obtain their purpose , have in manner turned up and down the whole world so many times , that the people inhabiting in the farthest regions of the Occident have pursued with great distress , labours and perils , to penetrate and enter into the farthest regions of the Orient : and in likewise those people of the said parts of the Orient have had no less labour and desire to enter and penetrate into the farthest land of the Occident , and so following their purchase have not ceased until they could pass no farther by reason of the great seas . 
 159 
 This natural inclination is cause , that scarcely it may be said , there is any kingdom stable , nor king quiet , but that his own imagination , or other princes his neighbours do trouble him . God and nature hath provided to your Grace , and to your gracious progenitors , this Realm of England , and set it in so fruitful a place , and within such limits , that it should seem to be a place quiet and aparted from all the foresaid desire . One speciali cause is , for that it is compassed with the Sea : by reason thereof it seems , this notwithstanding , their desires and noble courages have been most commonly like unto others : and with marvelous great labours , costs and perils , they have traveled and passed the Seas , making war , not only with Kings and dominions nigh neighbours , but also with them of far countries , and so have woonne and conquered many rich and fair dominions , and amplified this your Graces Realm with great victory and glory . And also now of late your Grace having like courage and desire , and not without just cause , to enlarge this your kingdom , and demand your limits and tribute of the French king , which at that present he restrained , your Grace in person passed with a great power into France , putting your Graces person to great pain and labour , and without doubt victoriously you had conquered the said Realm of France , as you began , if your adversary had not reconciled himself , and knowledged your Graces right and title : and so promised truly to pay tribute then due , & fulfil your request in all things , and also desired your Grace for peace , the which of your clemency you could not refuse . 
 Now I considering this your noble courage and desire , and also perceiving that your Grace may at your pleasure , to your greater glory , by a godly mean , with little cost , peril , or labour to your Grace or any of your subject's , amplify and enrich this your said Realm , I know it is A secret , my bounden duty to manifest this secret unto your Grace , which hitherto , as I suppose , hath been hid : 160 
 which is , that with a small number of ships there may be discovered diverse New lands and kingdoms , in the which without doubt your Grace shall win perpetuali glory , and your subjects infinite profit . To which places there is left one way to discover , which is into the discovery North : for that of the foure parts of the world , it seems three parts are discovered by other Princes . 
 For out of Spaine they have discovered all the Indies and Seas Occidentali , and out of Portingall all the Indies and Seas Orientali : so that by this part of the Orient & Occident , they have compassed the world . For the one of them departing towards the Orient , and the other towards the Occident , met again in the course or way of the midst of the day , and so then was discovered a great part of the same Seas and coasts by the Spaniards . 
 So that now rest to be discovered the said North parts , the which it seems to me , is only your charge and duty . Because the situation of this your Realm is thereunto nearest and aptest of all other : and also for that you have II already taken it in hand . And in mine 11^ Sebastian opinion it will not seem well to leave so great and Cfbotandsir profitable and enterprise , seeing it may so easily and with in e^ht so little cost , labour , and danger , be followed and ob - year of his tayned : though heretofore your Grace hath made thereof reign . a proof , & found not the commodity thereby as you dnd this is the trusted , at this time it shall be no impediment . For there may be now provided remedies tor things , then Oveido , that lacked , and the inconveniences and lets removed , that came to S. Dothen were cause that your Graces desire took no full min8 > - effect , which is , the courses to be changed , & followed the foresaid new courses . And concerning the mariners , ships , and provision , and order may be devised and taken meet and convenient , much better then hitherto . 
 By reason whereof , and by Gods grace , no doubt your purpose shall take effect . Surely the cost herein will be nothing , in comparison to the great profit . The labour is much less , yea nothing at all , where so great honour and glory is hoped for : and considering well the courses , n 161 L 
 truly the danger & way is shorter to us , then to Spaine or Portingall , as by evident reasons appeareth . 
 Note . And now to declare something of the commodity and 
 utility of this Navigation and discovery : it is very clear and certain , that the Seas that commonly men say , without great danger , difficulty and peril , yea rather it is impossible to pass , that those same Seas be navigable and without any such danger , but that ships may pass and have in them perpetuali clearness of the day without any darkness of the night : which thing is a great commodity for the navigants , to see at all times round about them , as well the safeguards as dangers , and how great difference it is between the commodity and perils of other which lose the most part of every foure and twentie hours the said light , and go in darkness groping their way , I think there is none so ignorant but perceives this more plainly , then it can be expressed . Yea what a vantage shall your Graces subject's have also by this light to discover the strange lands , countries , and coasts ? For if they that be discovered , to sail by them in darkness is with great danger , much more then the coasts not discovered be dangerous to travel by night or in darkness . Yet these dangers or darkness hath not letted the Spanyards and Por-tingals and other , to discover many unknown Realms to their great peril . Which considered ( and that your Graces subject's may have the same light ) it will seem your Graces subject's to be without activity or courage , in leaving to do this glorious and noble enterprise . For they being passed this little way which they nam so dangerous , ( which may be two or three leagues before Navigation they come to the Pole , and as much more after they under thePok . pass the Pole ) it is clear , that from thence forth the seas and lands are as temperate as in these parts , and that then it may be at the will and pleasure of the mariners , to choose whither they will sail by the coasts , that be cold , temperate or hight . For they being passed the Pole , it is plain , they may decline to what part they list . 
 162 
 If they will go towards the Orient , they shall enjoy Tartaria . 
 the regions of all the Tartarians that extend towards the midday , and from thence they may go and proceed to the land of the Chinas , and from thence to China . the land of Cathaio Orientali , which is of all the main land most Orientali that can be reckoned from our habitation . And if from thence they do continue their navigation , following the coasts that return towards the Occident , they shall fallen in with Malaca , and so with all the Indies which we call Orientali , and following the way , may return hither by the Cape of Buona Speransa : and thus they shall compass the whole world . And if they will take their course after they be passed the Pole , towards the Occident , they shall go in the back side of the new found land , which Newfound of late was discovered by your Graces subject's , until land they come to the back side and South Seas of the Indies Occidentali . And so continuing their voyage they may return thorough the straight of Magellan to this country , and so they compass also the world by that way : and if they go this third way , and after they be passed the Pole , go right towards the Pole Antarctike , and then decline towards the lands and Islands situated between the Tropikes , and under the Equinoctial ! , without doubt they shall find there the richest lands and Islands of the world of gold , precious stones , balms , spices , and other things that we here esteem most : which come out of strange countries , and may return the same way . 
 By this it appears , your Grace hath not only a great advantage of the riches , but also your subject's shall not travel half of the way that other doe , which go round about as aforesaid . 
 . 