The names of the ships of the fleet , and of their burden , together with the names of the Captains , and Counsellors , Pilot Major , Master's of the ships , Merchants , with other officers , and Mariners , as hereafter follows . 
 The first ship . 
 The Bona Esperanza , Admiral of the fleet , of 120. tons , having with her a pinnace , and a boat . 
 Sir Hugh Willoughby , knight , Captain general of the fleet . 
 William Gefferson , Master of the ship . 
 Roger Wilson , his Mate . 
 William Gittons , Charles Barret , Gabriel Willoughby , John Andrews , Alexander Woodfoord , Ralph Chatterton , Merchants . 
 Mariners and officers , according to the custom , and use of the Seas , 
 John Brook , Master Gunner . 
 Nicholas Anthony , Boateswaine . 
 John Web , his Mate . 
 Christopher Banbrucke , Thomas Davison , Robert Rosse , Thomas Simpson , quarter Master's . 
 212 
 William White , James Smith , Thomas Painter , John 
 Smith , their Mates . 
 Richard Gwinn e , George Goiswine , Carpenters . 
 Robert Gwinne , Purser . 
 Laurence Edwards , his Mate , and Couper . 
 Richard Morgan , Cook . 
 Thomas Nashe , his Mate . 
 William Light , John Brand , Cutbert Chelsie , George 
 Blage , Thomas Walker , Thomas Allen , Edward Smith , Edward Hunt , John Fawkner , Rowland Brook . 
 Alexander Gardiner , Richard Molton , Surgeons , which two were taken in at Harwich . 
 Discharged at Harwich , by reason of sickness , George Blake , Nicholas Anthony . 
 For pickery ducked at the yards arm , and so discharged Thomas Nash . 
 The Edward Bonaventure , of 160. tons , with her a The second pinnace , and a boat . s^ ' 
 Richard Chancellor , Captain , and Pilot major of the fleet . 
 Stephen Borowgh , Master of the ship . 
 John Buckland , his Mate . 
 George Burton , Arthur Edwards , Merchants . 
 John Stafford , Minister . John Stafford 
 James Dallaber , Nicholas Newborrow , John Segswike , Minister . 
 Thomas Francis , John Hasse , Richard Johnson , William 
 Kempe . 
 Mariners and officers , according to the custom and use of the Seas . 
 Robert Stanton , Master Gunner . 
 John Walker , his Mate . 
 James Long , John Cocks , Gunners . 
 Thomas Walter , Surgeon . 
 Peter Palmer , Boateswaine . 
 Richard Strowde , his Mate . 
 John Robinson , John Carowe , Thomas Stone , Roger 
 Lishbie , quarter Master's . 
 213 
 1553 - John Austen , Steward : Patricke Stevens , his Mate . Austen Jacks , Cook . William Every , Cowper . Griffin Wagham , Carpenter . Thomas Stelston , Thomas Towns , John Robinson , John White , William Laurence , Miles Butter , John 
 M. William Burrough now comptroller of her Majesties navy . Browne , William Morren , William Watson , Thomas Handcocks , Edward Pacie , Thomas brown , Arthur Pet , George Phibarie , Edward Patterson , William Bear , John Potter , Nicholas Lawrence , William Burrough , Roger Welford , John Williams . 
 The third ship . The Bona Confidentia of 90. tons , having with her a pinnace , and a boat . Cornelius Durfoorth , Master of the ship . Richard Ingram , his Mate . Thomas Langlie , Edward Kever , Henrie Dorset , Merchants . Mariners and officers , according to the use and custom of the Sea. Henrie Tailer , Master Gunner . George Thurland , his Mate . William Hamane , Boateswaine . John Edwards , his Mate . Thomas Kirbie , Henrie Dickenson , John Haye , William Shepwash , quarter Master's . John Rein , Steward . Thomas Hante , Cook . William Lassie , his Mate . Nicholas Knight , Carpenter . Peter Lewike , Nicholas Wiggleworth , John Moore , William Chapman , Brian Chester , William Barrie , Richard Wood , Clement Gibson , John Clarocke , Erasmus Bently , John Duriforth . 
 . 