The copy of the Duke of Moscovie and Emperor of Russia his letters , sent to King Edward the sixt , by the hands of Richard Chancellor . 
 Ivan Vasi-livich , that is to say , John the son of Basilius . 
 He Almighty power of God , and the incomprehensible holy Trinitie , rightful Christian belief , etc. We great Duke Ivan Vasilivich , by the grace of God great lord and Emperor of all Russia , great Duke of Volodemer , Mosco , and Novograd , King of Kazan , King of 
 Astracan , lord of Plesko , and great duke of Smolensko , of Twerria , Joughoria , Permia , Vadska , Bulghoria , and others , lord and great duke of Novograd in the Low country , of Chernigo , Rezan , Polotskoy , Rostove , Yaruslavely , Bealozera , Liefland , Oudoria , Obdoria and Condensa , Commander of all Siberia , and of the North parts , and lord of many other countries , greeting . Before all , right great and worthy of honour Edward King of England , etc. according to our most hearty and good zeal , with good intent and friendly desire , & according to our holy Christian faith , & great governance , & being in the light of great understanding , our answer by this our honourable writing unto your kingly governance , at the request of your faithful servant Richard Chancellor , with his company , as they shall let you wisely know , is this . In the strength of the twentieth year of our governance , be it known , that at our sea coasts arrived a ship , with one Richard , and his company , and said , that he was desirous to come into our dominions , and according to his request , hath seen our Majesty , and II our eyes : and hath declared unto us your Majesties desire , as that we should grant unto your subject's , to go and come , and in our dominions , and among our subject's , to frequent free Marts , with all sorts of merchandizes , and upon 
 | | That is , come into our presence . 
 2JI 
 the same to have wares for their return . And they have also delivered us your letters , which declare the same request . And hereupon we have given order , that wheresoever your faithful servant Hugh Willoughbie land or touch in our dominions , to be well entertained , who as yet is not arrived , as your servant Richard can declare . 
 And we with Christian belief and faithfulness , and according to your honourable request , and my honourable commandment will not leave it undone : and are furthermore willing that you send unto us your ships and vessels , when and as often as they may have passage , with good assurance on our part to see them harmless . And if you send one of your majesties counsel to treat with us whereby your country merchants may with all kinds of wares , and where they will make their market in our dominions , they shall have their free Marte with all free liberties through my whole dominions with all kind of wares to come and go at their pleasure , without any let , damage or impediment , according to this our letter , our word and our seal which we have commanded to be under sealed . Written in our dominion , in our city and our palace in the castle of Mosco , in the year 7060 , the second month of February . 
 This letter was written in the Moscovian tongue , in letters much like to the Greek letters , very fair written in paper , with a broad seal hanging at the same , sealed in paper upon wax . This seal was much like the broad seal of England , having on the one side the image of a man on horseback in complete harness fighting with a dragon . Under this letter was another paper written in the Dutch tongue , which was the interpretation of the other written in the Moscovian letters . These letters were sent the next year after the date of king Edwards letters , 1554. 
 . 