The book of the great and mighty Emperor of Russia , and Duke of Moscovia , and of the dominions order and commodities thereunto belonging ; drawn by Richard Chancellor . 
 | | Duyna . 
 Note . 
 Orasmuch as it is meet and necessary for all those that mind to take in hand the travel into far or strange countries' , to endeavour themselves not only to understand the order , commodities , and fruitfulness thereof , but also to apply them to the setting forth of the same , 
 whereby it may encourage others to the like travail : therefore have I now thought good to make a brief rehearsal of the order of this my travail in Russia and Moscovia , and other countries' thereunto adjoining ; because it was my chance to fallen with the North parts of Russia before I came towards Moscovia , I will partly declare my knowledge therein . Russia is very plentiful both of land and people , and also wealthy for such commodities as they have . They be very great fishers for Salmons and small Cods : they have much oil which we call treine oil , the most whereof is made by a river called II Duina . They make it in other places , but not so much as there . They have also a great trade in seething of salt water . To the North part of that country are the places where they have their Furs , as Sables , marterns , greese Bevers , Foxes white , black , and red , Minks , Ermines , Miniver , and Hearts . There are also a fish teeth , which fish is called a Morsse . The takers thereof dwell in a place called 224 
 1553-Postesora , which bring them upon Hearts to Lampas to fell , and from Lampas carry them to a place called Colmogro , where the high market is held on Saint Nicholas day . To the West of Colmogro there is a place called Gratanove , in our language Novogorode , where much fine Flax and Hemp grows , and also much wax and honey . The Dutch merchants have a Staplehouse there . There is also great store of hides , and at a place called Plesco : and thereabouts is great store of Flax , Hemp , Wax , Honey ; and that town is from Colmogro 120 miles . 
 There is a place called Vologda ; the commodities whereof are Tallow , Wax , and Flax : but not so great plenty as is in Gratanove . From Vologda to Colmogro there runneth a river called Duyna , and from thence it falls into the sea . Colmogro serves Gratanowe , Vologda and the Mosco with all the country thereabouts with salt and saltfish . From Vologda to Jeraslave is two hundreth miles : which town is very great . The commodities thereof are hides , and tallow , and corn in great plenty , and some Wax , but not so plentiful as in other places . 
 The Mosco is from Jeraslave two hundreth miles . The country betwixt them is very well replenished with small Villages , which are so well filled with people , that it is wonder to see them : the ground is well stored with corn which they carry to the city of Mosco in such abundance that it is wonder to see it . You shall meet in a morning seven or eight hundred sleds coming or going thither , that carry corn , and some carry fish . You shall have some that carry corn to the Mosco , and some that fetch corn from thence , that at the least dwell a thousand miles ofF ; and all their carriage is on sleds . Those which come so far dwell in the North parts of the Dukes dominions , where the cold will suffer no corn to grow , it is so extreme . [ I. 2 3 8. J They bring thither fish , furs , and beasts skins . 
 In those parts they have but small store of cattle . 
 11 225 p 
 The Mosco it self is great : I take the whole town to be greater then London with the suburbs : but it is very rude , and stands without all order . Their houses are all of timber very dangerous for fire . There is a fair Castle , the walls whereof are of brick , and very high : they say they are eighteene foot thick , but I do not believe it , it does not so seem , notwithstanding I do not certainly know it : for no stranger may come to view it . The one side is ditched , and on the other side runneth a river called Moscua which runneth into Tartarie and so into the sea called Mare Caspium : and on the North side there is a base town , the which hath also a brick wall about it , and so it joineth with the Castle wall . The Emperor lies in the castle , wherein are nine fair Churches , and therein are religious men . Also there is a Metropolitan with diverse Bishops . I will not stand in description of their buildings nor of the strength thereof because we have better in all points in England . They be well furnished with ordinance of all sorts . 
 The Emperors or Dukes house neither in building nor in the outward show , nor yet within the house is so sumptuous as I have seen . It is very low built in eight square , much like the old building of England , with small windows , and so in other points . 
 Now to declare my coming before his ’ Majesty : After I had remained twelve days , the Secretary which hath the hearing of strangers did send for me , advertising me that the Dukes pleasure was to have me to come before his Ma. with the kings my master's letters : whereof I was right glad , and so I gave mine attendance . And when the Duke was in his place appointed , the interpretor came for me into the utter chamber , where sat one hundred or more gentlemen , all in cloth of gold very sumptuous , and from thence I came into the Counsel chamber , where sat the Duke himself with his nobles , which were a fair company : they sat round about the chamber on high , yet so that he 226 
 himself sat much higher then any of his nobles in a chair gilded , and in a long garment of beaten gold , with and imperial crown upon his head , and a staff of Crystal and gold in his right hand , and his other hand half leaning on his chair . The Chancellor stood up with the Secretary before the Duke . After my duty done and my letter delivered , he bade me welcome , & inquired of me the health of the King my master , and I answered that he was in good health at my departure from his court , and that my trust was that he was now in the same . Upon the which he bade me to dinner . The Chancellor presented my present unto his Grace bareheaded ( for before they were all covered ) and when his Grace had received my letter , I was required to depart : for I had charge not to speak to the Duke , but when he spoke to me . So 1 departed unto the Secretary's chamber , where I remained two hours , and then I was sent for again unto another palace which is called the golden palace , but I saw no cause why it should be so called ; for I have seen many fairer then it in all points : and so I came into the hall , which was small and not great as is the Kings Majesties of England , and the table was covered with a tablecloth ; and the Marshal sat at the end of the table with a little white rod in his hand , which board was full of vessel of gold : and on the other side of the hall did stand a fair cupborde of plate . From thence I came into the dining chamber , where the Duke himself sat at his table without cloth of estate , in a gown of silver , with a crown imperial upon his head , he sat in a chair somewhat high : There sat none near him by a great way . There were long tables set round about the chamber , which were full set with such as the Duke had at dinner : they were all in white . Also the places where the tables stood were higher by two steps then the rest of the house . In the midst of the chamber stood a table or cupboard to set plate on ; which stood full of cups of gold : and 
 227 
 among all the rest there stood foure marvellous great pots or crudences as they call them , of gold and silver : I think they were a good yard and a half high . By the cupborde stood two gentlemen with napkins on their shoulders , and in their hands each of them had a cup of gold set with pearls and precious stones , which were the Dukes own drinking cups : when he was disposed , he drunk them off at a draught . And for his service at meat it came in without order , yet it was very rich service : for all were served in gold , not only he himself , but also all the rest of us , and it was very massy : the cups also were of gold and very massy . The number that dined there that day was two hundred persons , and all were served in golden vessel . The gendemen that waited were all in cloth of gold , and they served him with their caps on their heads . Before the service came in , the Duke sent to every man a great shiver of bred , and the bearer called the party so sent to by his name aloud , and said , John Basilivich Emperor of Russia and great Duke of Moscovia does reward thee with bred : then must all men stand up , and do at all times when those words are spoken . And then last of all he gives the Marshal bred , whereof he eateth before the Dukes Grace , and 
 so does reverence and departeth . Then comes the Dukes service of the Swans all in pieces , and every one in a several dish : the which the Duke sends as he did the bred , and the bearer say the same words as he said before . And as I said before , the service of his meat is in no order , but comes in dish by dish : and then after that the Duke sends drink , with the like saying as before is told . Also before dinner he changed his crown , and in dinner time two crowns ; so that I saw three several crowns upon his head in one day . And thus when his service was all come in he gave to every one of his gentlemen waiters meat with his own hand , & so likewise drink . His intent thereby is , as I have herd , that 228 
 every man shall know perfectly his servants . Thus when dinner is done he calls his nobles before him name by name , that it is wonder to hear how he could name them , having so many as he hath . Thus when dinner was done I departed to my lodging , which was and hour within night . I will leave this , and speak no more of him nor his household : but I will somewhat declare of his land and people , with their nature and power in the wars . This Duke is Lord and Emperor of many countries , & his power is marvelous great . For he is able to bring into the field two or three hundred thousand men : he never goes into the field himself with under two hundred thousand men : And when he goes himself he furnisheth his borders all with men of war , which are no small number . He leaveth on the borders of Liefland fortie thousand men , and upon the borders of Letto 60 thousand men , and toward the Nagayan Tartars sixtie thousand , which is wonder to hear of : yet doth he never take to his wars neither husbandman nor merchant . All his men are horsemen : he uses no footmen , but such as go with the ordinance and labourers , which are thirtie thousand . The horsemen are all archers , with such bows as the Turkes have , and they ride short as do the Turkes . Their armour is a coat of plate , with a skull on their heads . Some of their coats are covered with velvet or cloth of gold : their desire is to be sumptuous in the field , and especially the nobles and gentlemen : as I have herd their trimming is very costly , and partly I have seen it , or else I would scarcely have believed it : but the Duke himself is richly attired above all measure : his pavilion is covered either with cloth of gold or silver , and so set with stones that it is wonderful to see it . I have seen the Kings Majesties of England and the French Kings pavilions , which are fair , yet not like unto his . And when they be sent into far or strange countries' , or that strangers come to them , they be very gorgeous . Else the Duke 
 229 
 himself goes but meanly in apparel : and when he goes betwixt one place and another he is but reasonably appareled over other times . In the while that I was in Mosco the Duke sent two ambassadors to the King of Poleland , which had at the lest five hundred horses ; their sumptuousness was above measure , not only in themselves , but also in their horses , as velvet , cloth of gold , and cloth of silver set with pearls and not scant . What shall I farther say ? I never herd of nor saw men so sumptuous : but it is no daily guise , for when they have not occasion , as I said before , all their doing is but mean . And now to the effect of their wars : They are men without all order in the field . For they run hurling on heaps , and for the most part they never give battle to their enemies : but that which they do , they do it all by stealth . But I believe they be such men for hard living as are not under the sun : for no cold will hurt them . Yea and though they lie in the field two months , at such time as it shall freeze more then a yard thick , the common soldier hath neither tent nor any thing else over his head : the most defence they have against the weather is a felt , which is set against the wind and weather , and when Snow comes he does cast it off , and makes him a fire , and layeth him down thereby . Thus do the most of all his men , except they be gentlemen which have other provision of their own . Their lying in the field is not so strange as is their hardness : for every man must carry & make provision for himself & his horse for a month or two , which is very wondered . For he himself shall live upon water & otemeale mingled together cold , and drink water thereto : his horse shall eat green wood , & such like baggage , & shall stand open in the cold field without covert , & yet will he labour & serve him right well . I pray you among all our boasting warriors how many should we find to endure the field with them but one month . I know no such region about us that bears that name for 
 230 
 1553-man & beast . Now what might be made of these men if they were trained & broken to order and knowledge of civil wars ? If this Prince had within his countries' such men as could make them to understand you things aforesaid , I do believe that 2 of the best or greatest princes in Christendome were not well able to match with him , considering the greatness of his power & the hardness of his people & strait living both of people and horse , and the small charges which his wars stand him in : for he gives no wages , except to strangers . They have a yearly stipend & not much . As for his own country men every one serves of his own proper costs and charges , saving that he gives to his Harcubusiers certain allowance for powder & shot : or else no man in all his country hath one penny wages . But if any man hath done very good service he gives him a ferme or a piece of land ; for the which he is bound at all times to be ready with so many men as the Duke shall appoint : who considereth in his mind what that land or ferme is well able to find : and so many shall he be bound to furnish at all and every such time as wars are held in any of the Dukes dominions . For there is no man of living , but he is bound likewise , whither the Duke call for either soldier or labourer , to furnish them with all such necessaries as to them belong . 
 Also , if any gentleman or man of living do die without issue male , immediately after his death the Duke entereth his land , notwithstanding he have never so many daughters , and peradventure gives it forthwith to another man , except a small portion that he spares to marry the daughters with all . Also if there be a rich man , a fermour , or man of living , which is stricken in age or by chance is maimed , and be not able to do the Duke service , some other gentleman that is not able to live and more able to do service , will come to the Duke and complain , saying , your Grace hath such and one , which is unmeet to do service to your Highness , who 
 231 
 hath great abundance of wealth , and likewise your Grace hath many gentlemen which are poor and lack living , and we that lack are well able to do good service , your Grace might do well to look upon him , and make him to help those that want . Immediately the Duke sends forth to inquire of his wealth : and if it be so proved , he shall be called before the Duke , and it shall be said unto him , friend , you have too much living , and are unserviceable to your prince , less will serve you , and the rest will serve other men that are more able to serve , whereupon immediately his living shall be taken away from him , saving a little to find himself and his wife on , and he may not once repine thereat : but for answer he will say , that he hath nothing , but it is Gods and the Dukes Graces , and cannot say , as we the common people in England say , if we have any thing ; that it is Gods and our own . Men may say , that these men are in wonderful great awe , and obedience , that thus one must give and grant his goods which he hath be scraping and scratching for all his life to be at his Princes pleasure and commandment . O that our sturdy rebels were had in the like subjection to know their duty toward their Princes . They may not say as some snudges in England say , I would find the Queen a man to serve in my place , or make his friends tarry at home if money have the upper hand . No , no , it is not so in this country : for he shall make humble suit to serve the Duke . And whom he sends most to the wars he thinketh he is most in his favour : and yet as I before have said , he gives no wages . If they knew their strength no man were able to make match with them : nor they that dwell near them should have any rest of them . But I think it is not Gods will : For 1 may compare them to a young horse that knoweth not his strength , whom a little child ruleth and guideth with a bridle , for all his great strength : for if he did , neither child nor man could rule him . Their wars 
 232 
 are held against the Crimme Tartarians and the Nagaians . 
 I will stand no longer in the rehearsal of their power and wars . For it were too tedious to the reader . But I will in part declare their laws , and punishments , and the execution of justice . And first I will begin with the commons of the country , which the gentlemen have rule on : And that is , that every gentleman hath rule and justice upon his own tenants . And if it so fallen out that two gentlemens servants or tenants do disagree , the two gendemen examine the matter , and have the parties before them , and so give the sentence . And yet cannot they make the end betwixt them of the controversy , but either of the gentlemen must bring his servant or tenant before the high judge or justice of that country , and there present them , and declare the matter and case . The plaintiff say , I require the law ; which is granted : then comes and officer and arresteth the party defendant , and uses him contrary to the laws of England . For when they attach any man they beat him about the legs , until such time as he finds sureties to answer the matter : And if not , his hands and neck are bound together , and he is led about the town and beaten about the legs , with other extreme punishments till he come to his answer : And the Justice demandeth if it be for debt , and say : Owest thou this man any such debt ? He will perhaps say nay . Then say the Judge : art thou able to deny it ? Let us hear how ? By other say the defendant . Then he commands to leave beating him till further trial be had . 
 Their order in one point is commendable . They have no man of Law to plead their causes in any court : but every man pleads his own cause , and gives bill and answer in writing : contrary to the order in England . The complaint is in manner of a supplication , & made to the Dukes Grace , and delivered him into his own hand , requiring to have justice as in his complaint is alleged . 
 233 
 The duke gives sentence himself upon all matters in the Law . Which is very commendable , that such a Prince will take pains to see ministration of justice . Yet notwithstanding it is wonderfully abused : and thereby the Duke is much deceived . But if it fallen out that the officers be espied in cloaking the truth , they have most condign punishment . And if the plaintiff can nothing prove , then the defendant must take his oath upon the crucifix whither he be in the right or no . Then is demanded if the plaintiff be any thing able further to make proof : if he be not ; then sometime he will say , 1 am able to prove it by my body and hands , or by my champions body , so requiring the Camp . After the other hath his other , it is granted aswell to the one as to the other . So when they go to the field , they swear upon the Crucifix , that they be both in the right , and that the one shall make the other to confess the truth before they depart forth of the field : and so they go both to the battle armed with such weapons as they use in that country : they fight all on foot , & seidome the parties themselves do fight , except they be Gentlemen , for they stand much upon their reputation , for they will not fight , but with such as are come of as good and house as themselves . So that if either party require the combat , it is granted unto them , and no champion is to serve in their room : wherein is no deceit : but otherwise by champions there is . For although they take great oaths upon them to do the battle truly , yet is the contrary often seen : because the common champions have none other living . And assoon as the one party hath got the victory , he demandeth the debt , and the other is carried to prison , and there is shamefully used till he take order . There is also another order in the law , that the plaintiff may swear in some causes of debt . And if the party defendant be poor , he shall set under the Crucifix , and the party plaintiff must swear over his head , and when he hath taken his other , the Duke takes the 
 234 
 party defendant home to his house , and uses him as his bondman , and putteth him to labour , or lets him for hire to any such as need him , until such time as his friends make provision for his redemption : or else he remains in bondage all the days of his life . Again there are many that will fell themselves to Gentlemen or Merchants to be their bondmen , to have during their life meat , drink and cloth , and at their coming to have a piece of money . yea and some will fell their wives and children to be bawds and drudges to the buyer . Also they have a Law for Felons and pickers contrary to the Laws of England . For by their law they can hang no man for his first offence ; but may keep him long in prison , and oftentimes beat him with whips and other punishment : and there he shall remain until his friends be able to bail him . If he be a picker or a cutpurse , as there be very many , the second time he is taken , he hath a piece of his Nose cut ofF , and is burned in the forehead , and kept in prison till he find sureties for his good behaviour . And if he be taken the third time , he is hanged . And at the first time he is extremely punished and not released , except he have very good friends , or that some Gentleman require to have him to the wars : And in so doing , he shall enter into great bonds for him : by which means the country is brought into good quietness . But they be naturally given to great deceit , except extreme beating did bridle them . They be naturally given to hard living aswell in fare as in lodging . I herd a Russian say , that it was a great deal merrier living in prison then forth , but for the great beating . For they have meat and drink without any labour , and get the charity of well disposed people : But being at liberty they get nothing . The poor is very innumerable , and live most miserably : for I have seen them eat the pickle of Hearing and other stinking fish : nor the fish cannot be so stinking nor rotten , but they will eat it and praise it to be more wholesome then 
 235 
 other fish or fresh meat . In mine opinion there be no such people under the sun for their hardness of living . Well , I will leave them in this point , and will in part declare their Religion . They do observe the law of the Greeks with such excess of superstition , as the like hath not be herd of . They have no graved images in their Churches , but all painted , to the intent they will not break the commandment : but to their painted images they use such idolatry , that the like was never herd of in England . They will neither worship nor honour any image that is made forth of their own country . For their own images ( say they ) have pictures to declare what they be , and how they be of God , and so be not ours : They say , Look how the Painter or Carver hath made them , so we do worship them , and they worship none before they be Christened . They say we be but half Christians : because we observe not part of the old law with the Turks . Therefore they call themselves more holy then us . They have none other learning but their mother tongue , nor will suffer no other in their country among them . All their service in Churches is in their mother tongue . They have the old and new Testament , which are daily read among them : and yet their superstition is no less . For when the Priests do read , they have such tricks in their reading , that no man can understand them , nor no man gives ear to them . For all the while the Priest readeth , the people fit down and one talk with another . But when the Priest is at service no man sitteth , but gagle and duck like so many Geese . And as for their prayers they have but little skill , but use to say As body pomele : As much to say , Lord have mercy upon me . For the tenth man within the land cannot say the Pater noster . And as for the Creed , no man may be so bold as to meddle therewith but in the Church : for they say it should not be spoken of , but in the Churches . Speake to them of the Commandments , and they will say they were given to Moses in the law , which Christ hath now 
 236 
 abrogated by his precious death and passion : therefore , ( say they ) we observe little or none thereof . And I do believe them . For if they were examined of their Law and Commandments together , they should agree but in few points . They have the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds , and more ceremonies then we have . They present them in a dish in both kinds together , and carry them round about the Church upon the Priests head , and so do minister at all such times as any shall require . They be great offerers of Candles , and sometime of money , which we call in England , Soul pense , with more ceremonies then I am able to declare . They have foure Lents in the year , whereof our Lent is the greatest . Look as we do begin on the Wednesday , so they do on the Munday before : And the week before that they call The Butter week : And in that week they eat nothing but Butter and milk . Howbeit I believe there be in no other country the like people for drunkenness . The next Lent is called Saint Peters Lent , and begins always the Munday next after Trinitie sunday , and endeth on Saint Peters even . If they should break that fast , their belief is , that they should not come in at heaven gates . And when any of them die , they have a testimoniali with them in the Coffin , that when the soul comes to heaven gates it may deliver the same to Saint Peter , which declareth that the party is a true and holy Russian . The third Lent begins fifteene days before the later Lady day , and endeth on our Lady Even . The fourth Lent begins on Saint Martins day , and endeth on Christmas Even : which Lent is fasted for Saint Philip , Saint Peter , Saint Nicholas , and Saint Clement . For they foure be the principali and greatest Saints in that country . In these Lents they eat neither Butter , Eggs , Milk , nor Cheese ; but they are very straitely kept with Fish , Cabbages , and Roots . And out of their Lents , they observe truly the Wednesdayes and Fridayes throughout the year : and on the Saturday they do eat flesh . 
 237 
 Furthermore they have a great number of Religious men : which are black Monks , and they eat no flesh throughout the year , but fish , milk and Butter . By their order they should eat no fresh-fish , and in their Lents they eat nothing but Coleworts , Cabbages , salt Cucumbers , with other roots , as Radish and such like . Their drink is like our penny Ale , and is called Quass . They have service daily in their Churches ; and use to go to service two hours before day , and that is ended by day light . At nine of the clock they go to Mass : that ended , to dinner : and after that to service again : and then to supper . You shall understand that at every dinner and supper they have declared the exposition of the Gospel that day : but how they wrest and twine the Scripture and that together by report it is wonderful . As for whoredom and drunkenness there be none such living : and for extortion , they be the most abominable under the sun . Now judge of their holiness . They have twice as much land as the Duke himself hath : but yet he is reasonable even with them , as thus : When they take bribes of any of the poor and simple , he hath it by and order . When the Abbot of any of their houses dieth , then the Duke hath all his goods movable and unmoveable : so that the successor buyeth all at the Dukes hands : and by this mean they be the best Fermers the Duke hath . Thus with their Religion I make and end , trusting hereafter to know it better . 
 To the right worshipful and my singular good Uncle , Master Christopher Frothingham , give these . 
 Sir , Read and correct ; For great is the defect . 
 . 