Instructions given to the Master's and Mariners to be observed in and about this Fleet , passing this year 1557. towards the Bay of S. Nicolas in Russia , for this present Raze to be made & return of the same by Gods grace to the port of London , the place of their right discharge , as in the Articles ensuing is deduced . 
 Irst , it is accorded and agreed between the several proprietaries and owners , master's and companies of the foure ships , surnamed the Primrose , the John Evangelist , the Anne and the Trinitie , and the Lieutenant , Consuls , assistants and company of the Merchant advent 
 turers , that the above nam foure ships shall in good order and conduct , sail , pass , and travail together in one float , ging , and conserve of society , to be kept indissolubly and not to be severed , but united within continual sighed , so far forth as ( by wind & weather ) by possibility shall or may be without any separation or departure of one from the other . 
 2 Item , it is agreed that the good ship nam the Primerose , shall Admiral of this float , and that Anthonie Jenkinson Gentleman , shall captain thereof : and that all other the 3. ships shall ensue and follow her in all courses , and that no course nor weighing ( in 
 375 
 harbour especially ) shall be made without advice , consent and agreement of the said Captain , the Master , his mate , and two other officers of the said ship , or of three of them at the least . 
 3 Item , that the said Anthonie is and shall reputed & taken for Captain general of the said float together with all such order , preeminences , privileges and preferments as by the order of seas is due and accustomed to a Captain during his abided and exercise of the same . 
 4 It is also ordained , that if any one or more of the said 3. ships shall out of sighed either before or behind the Admiral , that then the rest of the ships shall tack or take off their sails in such sort as they may meet and come together , in as good order as may be , to the intent to keep the consortment exactly in all points . 
 5 It is constituted , that if any ships shall severed by missed or dark weather , in such sort as the one cannot have sighed of the other , then and in such case the Admiral shall make found and noise by drum , trumpet , horn , gun or otherwise or means , that the ships may come as nigh together , as by safety and good order they may . 
 6 It is also to be observed , that every day once the other three ships shall send and come aboard the Admiral , and there consult and determine of such matter and things as shall be for the assurance of their Navigation , and most expedition of the same . 
 7 Item , that notes & entries be daily made of their Navigations put in writing & memory , and that the young Mariners and apprentices may be taught & caused to learn and observe the same . 
 8 It is accorded that the said Captain shall have the principali rule and government of the apprentices : And that not only they , but also all other the sailors , shall attendant and obedient to him , as of duty and reason appertaineth . 
 376 
 9 Also that no beer nor broth , or other liquour be spilled upon the ballast , or other place of the ship , whereby any annoyance , stink , or other unsavoriness shall grow in the ship to the infection or hurt of the persons in the same . 
 io Item , that the Captain by discretion shall from time to time disship any artificer or English servingman or apprentice out of the Primrose into any of the other three ships , and in lieu of him or them , take any such apprentice as he shall think convenient and most meet to serve the benefit of the company . 
 ii Item , that great respect be had to the Gunners and Cooks rooms , that all danger and peril of powder and fire may be eschewed and avoided . 
 12 Item , that singular care and respect be had to the ports of the ship , aswell in Navigation as in harbour , and especially in lading and unlading of the ships , that nothing be lacking or surcharged : and that the books may oftentimes be conferred and made to agree in eschuement of such losses , as may ensue . 
 13 Special foresight is to be had , that at the Wardhouse no treachery , invasion , or other peril of molestation be done or procured to be attempted to our ships by any kings , princes , or companies , that do mislike this new found trade by seas to Russia , or would let & hinder the same : whereof no small boast hath be made : which gives occasion of more circumspection and diligence . 
 14 If the wind and weather will serve , it is thought good rather to go by the Wardhouse then to come in and anchor there , lest any male engine , or danger may be the rather attempted against us , our goods and ships as above . 
 15 It is thought good that Richard Johnson , late servant to M. Chancellor , shall be sent home in this next return , to instruct the company of the state of the Country , and of such questions as may be demanded of him , for our better advertisements and 
 377 
 resolutions , in such doubts as shall arise here : and that he shall have the room of the Captain in such sort , as Master Jenkinson is in this present cocket assigned unto . And if Johnson can not , may not , nor will not return and occupy the said place , then any other person to be preferred thereunto , as by the discretion of our said Captain , with consent of our Agents , shall be thought meet and apt to supply the same . 
 16 Provided always , that the ships returning be not disfurnished of one such able man , as shall occupy the Captainship in like order , as is , and hath be in such case appointed , as reason and good order requires . 
 17 Item that all other former order , rules , and devises , made and provided for the good order of our ships , wares , and goods , being not repugnant , contrary or diverse , to these articles , and the contents of the same , shall be , and stand in full force and effect , to be in all respects observed and kept of all and every person and persons , whom the same does or shall touch or concern . 
 In witness of the premises faithfully to be observed and kept , the owners and Master's of the said foure ships , together with the said Captain , to these seventeene articles , contained in two sheets of paper , have subscribed their hands . Given in London , the third of May , in the year of our Lord God 1557. 
 fl Owners of the Primerose . 
 Andrewe Judde . 
 William Chester . 
 Anthony Hickman . 
 Edward Casteline . 
 fl Owners of the John Evangelist . 
 Andrew Judde . 
 William Chester . 
 fl Owner of the Anne . 
 John Dimocke . 
 fl Owner of the Trinitie . 
 R. T. 
 . 