A discourse of the honourable receiving into England of the first Ambassador from the Emperor of Russia , in the year of Christ 1556. and in the third year of the reign of Queen Marry , serving for the third voyage to Moscovie . Registered by Master John Incent Protonotary . 
 TO is here recorded by writing and authentical testimony , partly for memory of things done , and partly for the verity to be known to posterity in time to come , that whereas the most high and mighty Ivan Vasilivich Emperor of all Russia , great Duke of Volodemer , Mos - 
 covia and Novogrode , Emperor of Cassan , and of Astrachan , Lord of Pleskie , and great Duke of Smolensky , Tuerskie , Yowgoriskie , Permskie , Viatskie , Bolgarskie and Sibierskie , Emperor and great Duke of many others , as Novogrode in the neither countries , Chernigoskie , Rezanskie , Polodskie , Rezewskie , Bielskie , Rostoskie , Yeraslaveskie , Bealozarskie , Oudarskie , Ob-dorskie , Condenskie , and many other countries , and lord over all those parts , in the year of our Lord God , following the account of you Latin church , 1556. sent by the sea from the port of S. Nicholas in Russia , his right honourable ambassador surnamed Osep Napea , his high officer in the town and country of Vologda , to the most famous and excellent princes , Philip and Marry by the grace of God , king and Queen of England , Spaine , France and Ireland , defenders of the faith , Archdukes of Austria , dukes of Burgundie , Millaine , & Brabant , counties of Haspurge , Flanders and Tyroll , his ambassador & Orator with certain letters tenderly conceived , together with certain presents and gifts mentioned in the foot of this memorial , as a manifest argument and token of a mutual amity and friendship 35° 
 FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA a.d. ... J556 . 
 to be made and continued between their majesties & subject's respectively , for the commodity and benefit of both the realms and people : which Orator was the 20. day of July embarked and shipped in , and upon a good English ship nam the Edward Bonaventure , belonging to the Governor , Consuls and company of English merchants , Richard Chancellor being grand Pilot , and John Buckland master of the said ship . In which was laden at the adventure of the foresaid Ambassador , and merchants at several accounts , goods & merchandizes , viz. in wax , trane oil , tallow , furs , felts , yarn and such like , to the sum of 2oooo . li . sterling , together with 16. Russies attendant upon the person of the said Ambassador . Over and above ten Tour ships . other Russies shipped within the said Bay of S. Nicholas , in one other good ship to the said company also belonging called the Bona Speranza , with goods of the said Orators & merchants to the valve of 6000. lib . sterling , as by the invoises and letters of lading of the said several ships ( whereunto relation is to be had ) particularly appears . 
 Which good ships coming in good order into the seas , & traversing the same in their journey towards the coast of England , were by contrary winds and extreme tempests of weather severed the one from the other , that is to say , the said Bona Speranza with two other English ships also appertaining to the said company , the one surnamed the Philip and Marry , the other the Confidentia , were driven on the coast of Norway , into Drenton water , where the said Confidentia was seen to perish on a Rock , and the other , videlicet , the Bona Speranza , with her whole company , being to the number of foure and twentie persons seemed to winter there , whereof no certainty at this present day is known . The third , videlicet , the Philip and Marry arrived in the Thames nigh London the eighteenth day of April , in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred fiftie and seven . The Edward Bonaventure traversing the seas foure months , The Edward finally the tenth day of November of the aforesaid year Bonaventure 351 
 1556. arrived in Scotland , in the Bay of Pettislego , Novemb. 7. 1556. 
 Rich. Chancellor drowned . 
 of our Lord one thousand five hundred , fiftie and sixe , arrived within the Scottish coast in a Bay nam Pettislego , where by outrageous tempests , and extreme storms , the said ship being beaten from her ground tackles , was driven upon the rocks on shore , where she brake and split in pieces in such sort , as the grand Pilot using all carefulness for the safety of the body of the said Ambassador and his train , taking the boat of the said ship , trusting to attain the shore , and so to save and preserve the body , and seven of the company or attendants of the said Ambassador , the same boat by rigorous waves of the seas , was by dark night overwhelmed and drowned , wherein perished not only the body of the said grand Pilot , with seven Russes , but also diverse of the Mariners of the said ship : the noble personage of the said Ambassador with a few others ( by Gods preservation and speciali favour ) only with much difficulty saved . In which shipwreck not only the said ship was broken , but also the whole mass and body of the goods laden in her , was by the rude and ravenous people of the Country thereunto adjoining , rifled , spoiled and carried away , to the manifest loss and utter destruction of all the lading of the said ship , and together with the ship , apparel , ordinance and furniture belonging to the company , in valve of one thousand pounds , of all which was not restored towards the costs and charges to the sum of five hundred pound sterling . 
 As soon as by letters'addressed to the said company , and in London delivered the sixt of December last passed , it was to them certainly known of the loss of their Pilot , men , goods and ship , the same merchant's with all celerity and expedition , obtained not only the Queens majesties most gracious and favourable letters to the Lady Dowager , and lords of the Council of Scotland for the gentle comfortment and entertainment of the said Ambassador , his train and company , with preservation and restitution of his goods , as in such miserable cases^ to Christian pity , princely honour and mere 
 35 2 
 Justice appertaineth , but also addressed two Gentlemen of good learning , gravity and estimation , videlicet , Master Lawrence Hussie Doctor of the Civil Law , and George Gilpin with money and other requisites into the Realm of Scotland , to comfort , aid , assist , and relieve him and his there , and also to conduct the Ambassador into England , sending with them by post a Talmach or Speachman for the better furniture of the service of the said Ambassador , trusting thereby to have the more ample and speedy redress of restitution : which personages using diligence , arrived at Edenborough ( where the Queens court was ) the three and twentieth day of the said month of December , who first visiting the said Ambassador , declaring the causes of their coming and Commission , showing the letters addressed in his favour , the order given them for his solace and furniture of all such things as he would have , together with their daily and ready service to attend upon his person and affairs , repaired consequently unto the Dowager Queen , delivering the letters . 
 Whereupon they received gentle answers , with hope and comfort of speedy restitution of the goods , apparel , jewels and letters : for the more appearance whereof , the Queen sent first certain Commissioners with and Harold of arms to Pettislego , the place of the Shipwreck , commanding by Proclamation and other Edicts , all such persons ( no degree excepted ) as had any part of such goods as were spoiled and taken out or from the ship to bring them in , and to restore the same with such further order as her grace by advice of her Council thought expedient : by reason whereof not without great labours , pains and charges ( after long time ) diverse small parcels of Wax , and other small trifling things of no valve , were by the poorer sort of the Scottes brought to the Commissioners , but the Jewels , rich apparel , presents , gold , silver , costly furs , and such like , were conveyed away , concealed and utterly embezzled . Whereupon , the Queen at the request of the said Ambassador , caused n 353 z 
 A.D. 
 1556. 
 His departure from Scotland towards England . 
 > 557 - 
 Eebr . 27. 
 diverse persons to the number of 180. or more , to be called personally before her princely presence , to answer to you said spoil , & really to exhibit and bring in all such things as were spoiled and violently taken , & carried out of the same , whereof not only good testimony by writing was showed , but also the things themselves found in the hands of the Scottish subject's , who by subtle and crafty dealings , by connivance of the commissioners , so used or rather abused themselves towards the same Orator & his attendants , that no effectual restitution was made : but he fatigated with daily attendance and charges , the 14. day of February next ensuing , distrusting any real and effectual rendering of the said goods and merchandizes and other the premises , upon leave obtained of the said Queen , departed towards England , having attending upon him the said two English Gentlemen and others ( leaving nevertheless in Scotland three Englishmen to pursue the delivery of such things as were collected to have be sent by ship to him in England : which being in Aprill next , and not before embarked for London , was not at this present day here arrived ) came the 18. day of Februarie to Barwike within the dominion and realm of England , where he was by the Queens majesties letters and commandment honourably received , used and entertained by the right honourable lord Wharton , lord Warden of the East marches , with goodly conducting from place to place , as the daily journeys done ordinarily did lie , in such order , manner and form , as to a personage of such estate appertaineth . He prosecuting his voyage until the 27. of Februarie approached to the city of London within twelve English miles , where he was received with fourscore merchant's with chains of gold and goodly apparel , as well in order of men servants in one uniform livery , as also in and upon good horses and geldings , who conducting him to a merchants house foure miles from London , received there a quantity of gold , velvet and silk , with all furniture thereunto requisite , wherewith he made him a riding garment , 
 354 
 reposing himself that night . The next day being Saturday and the last day of Februarie , he was by the merchant's adventuring for Russia , to the number of one hundred and fortie persons , and so many or more servants in one livery , as abovesaid , conducted towards the city of London , where by the way he had not only the hunting of the Fox and such like sport showed him , but also by the Queens majesties commandment was received and embraced by the right honourable Viscount Montague , sent by her grace for his entertainment : he being accompanied with diverse lusty knights , esquires , His honourable gentlemen and yeomen to the number of three hundred horses led him to the North parts of the City of London , where by foure notable merchant's richly appareled was presented to him a right fair and large gelding richly trapped , together with a footcloth of Orient crimson velvet , enriched with gold laces , all furnished in most glorious fashion , of the present , and gift of the said merchant's : where upon the Ambassador at instant desire mounted , riding on the way towards Smithfield bars , the first limits of the liberties of the City of London . The Lord Maior accompanied with all the Aidermen in their scarlet did receive him , and so riding through the City of London in the middle , between the Lord Maior and Viscount Montague , a great number of merchant's and notable personages riding before , and a large troop of servants and apprentices following , was conducted through the City of London ( with great admiration and plausibility of the people running plentifully on all sides , and replenishing all streets in such sort as no man without difficulty might pass ) into his lodging situate in Fant church street , where were provided for him two chambers richly hanged and decked , over and above the gallant furniture of the whole house , together with and ample and rich cupboard of plate of all sorts , to furnish and serve him at all meals , and other services during his abided in London , which was , as is underwritten , until the third day of May : during which 
 355 
 time daily diverse Aidermen and the gravest personages of the said company did visit him , providing all kind of victuals for his table and his servants , with all sorts of Officers to attend upon him in good sort and condition , as to such and ambassador of honour doth and ought to appertain . 
 It is also to be remembered that at his first entrance into his chamber , there was presented unto him on the Queens Majesties behalf for a gift and present , and his better furniture in apparel , one rich piece of cloth of tissue , a piece of cloth of gold , another piece of cloth of gold raised with crimosin velvet , a piece of crimosin velvet in grain , a piece of purple velvet , a piece of Damask purpled , a piece of crimosin damask , which he most thankfully accepted . In this beautiful lodging refreshing and preparing himself and his train with things requisite he abided , expecting the kings majesties repair out of Flanders into England , whose highness arriving the one and twentie of March , the same Ambassador the five and twentieth of March being the Annunciation of our Lady ( the day twelvemonth he took his leave from the Emperor his master ) was most honourably brought to the King and Queens majesties court at Westminster , where accompanied first with the said Viscount and other notable personages , and the merchant's , he arriving at Westminster bridge , was there received with sixe lords , conducted into a stately chamber , where by the lords , Chancellor , Treasurer , Privy seal , Admiral ! , bishop of Elie , and other Counsellors , he was visited and saluted : and consequently was brought unto the Kings and Queens majesties presence , sitting under a stately cloth of honour , the chamber most richly decked and furnished , and most honourably presented . Where , after that he had delivered his letters , made his Oration , given two timber of Sables , and the report of the same made both in English and Spanish , in most loving manner embraced , was with much honour and high entertainment , in sighed of a great confluence of people , Lords and 356 
 Ladies eftsoons remitted by water to his former lodging , to the which , within two days after by the assignment of the King and Queens majesties , repaired and conferred with him secretly two grave Counsellers , that is , the lord Bishop of Elie , and Sir William Peter Knight , chief Secretary to their Highness , who after diverse secret talks and conferences , reported to their highness their proceedings , the gravity , wisdom , and stately behaviour of the said Ambassador , in such sort as was much to their majesties contentations . 
 Finally concluding upon such treaties and articles of amity , as the letters of the Kings and Queens majesties most graciously under the great seal of England to him by the said counsellers delivered , does appear . 
 A.D. 
 < 557 ' 
 A league and articles of amity concluded and confirmed under the 
 The three and twentieth of April , being the feast of S. great seal of George , wherein was celebrated the solemnity of the England . Noble order of the Garter at Westminster , the same lord ambassador was eftsoons required to have audience : and therefore conducted from the said lodging to the court by the right Noble the lords Talbot and Lumley to their majesties presence : where , after his Oration made , and thanks both given and received , he most honourably took his leave with commendations to the Emperor . Which being done , he was with special honour led into the chapel , where before the Kings and Queen's majesties , in the sighed of the whole Order of the Garter , was prepared for him a stately seat , wherein he accompanied with the Duke of Norfolke , the lords last above mentioned , and many other honourable personages , was present at the whole service , in ceremonies which were to him most acceptable : the divine service ended , he eftsoons was remitted and reduced to his barge , and so repaired to his lodging , in like order and gratulation of the people universally , as before . 
 The time of the year hasting the profection and Foure goodly departure of the Ambassador , the merchant's having prepared foure goodly and well trimmed ships laden for with all kinds of merchandises apt for Russia , the same Russia , 15 5 q . 
 357 
 Ambassador making provision for such things as him pleased , the same ships in good order valed down the River of Thames , from London to Gravesend , where the same Ambassador with his train and furniture was embarked to wards his voyage homeward , which God prosper in all felicity . 
 It is also to be remembered , that during the whole abided of the said Ambassador in England , the Agents of the said merchants did not only prosecute and pursue the matter of restitution in Scotland , and caused such things to be laden in and English ship hired purposely to convey the Ambassadors goods to London , there to be delivered to him , but also during his abided in London , did both invite him to the Mayor , and diverse worshipful men's houses , feasting and banqueting him right friendly , showing unto him the most notable and commendable sights of London , as the kings palace and house , the Churches of Westminster and Powles , the Tower and Guild hall of London , and such like memorable spectacles . And also the said 29. day of April , the said merchant's assembling themselves together in the house of the Drapers hall of London , exhibited and gave unto you said Ambassador , a notable supper garnished with music , Interludes and banquets : in the which a cup of wine being drunk to him in the name and lieu of the whole company , it was signified to him that the whole company with most liberal and friendly hearts , did frankly give to him and his all manner of costs and charges in victuals riding from Scotland to London during his abided there , and until setting of sail aboard the ship , requesting him to accept the same in good part as a testimony and witness of their good hearts , zeal and tenderness towards him and his country . 
 It is to be considered that of the Bona Speranza no word nor knowledge was had at this present day , nor yet of the arrival of the ships or goods from Scotland . 
 The third of May the Ambassador departed from London to Gravesend , accompanied with diverse Aidermen 358 
 1557-and merchant's , who in good guard set him aboard the noble ship , the Primrose Admiral to the Fleet , where leave was taken on both sides and parts , after many embracements and diverse farewells not without expressing of tears . 
 Memorandum , that the first day of May the Counsellers , The King and videlicet , the Bishop of Elye , and Sir William Peter on Queen's second the behalf of the Kings and Queens Majesties repairing R^nurof to the lord Ambassador did not only deliver unto him Russia . their highness letters of recommendations under the great seal of England to the Emperor , very tenderly and friendly written , but also on their majesties behalf gave and delivered certain notable presents to the Emperors person , and also gifts for the lord Ambassadors proper use and behoof , as by the particulars under written appears , with such further good words and commendations , as the more friendly have not been herd , whereby it appears how well affected their honours be to have and continue amity and traffic between their honours and their subject's : which thing as the kings and Queens majesties have showed of their princely munificences & liberalities , so have likewise the merchant's and fellowship of the Adventurers , for and to Russia , manifested to the world their good wills , minds and zeals born to this new commenced voyage , as by the discourse above mentioned , and other the notable acts over long to be recited in this present memoriali , doth and may most clearly appear , the like whereof is not in any president or historic to be showed . 
 Forasmuch as it may be doubted how the ship nam the Edward Bonaventure suffered shipwreck , what became of the goods , how much they were spoiled and detained , how little restored , what charges and expenses ensued , what personages were drowned , how the rest of the ships either arrived or perished , or how the disposition of almighty God hath wrought his pleasure in them , how the same ambassador hath be after the miserable 
 359 
 case of shipwreck in Scotland unreverently abused , and consequently into England received and conducted , there entertained , used , honoured , and finally in good safety towards his return , and repair furnished , and with much liberality and frank handling friendly dismissed , to the intent that the truth of the premises may be to the most mighty Emperor of Russia sincerely signified in eschewment of all events and misfortunes that may chance in this voyage ( which God defend ) to the Ambassadors person , train , and goods , this present memoriali is written , and autentikely made , and by the said Ambassador his servants , whose names be underwritten , and train in presence of the Notary , and witnesses undernamed , recognized , and acknowledged . Given the day , month , and year underwritten , of which instrument into every of the said Ships one testimoniali is delivered , and the first remains with the said Company in London . 
 Gifts sent to the King and Queens Majesties of England by the Emperor of Russia , by the report of the Ambassador , and spoiled by the Scots after the Shipwreck . 
 i First , sixe timber of Sables rich in colour and hair . 
 2 Item , twentie entire Sables exceeding beautiful with teeth , ears and claws . 
 3 Item , foure living Sables with chains and collars . 
 4 Item , thirtie Lusarnes large and beautiful . 
 5 Item , sixe large and great skins very rich and rare , worn only by the Emperor for worthiness . 
 6 Item , a large and fair white Jerfawcon for the wild Swan , Crane , Goose , and other great Fowls , together with a drum of silver , the hoops gilded , used for a lure to call the said Hawk . 
 360 
 Gifts sent to the Emperor of Russia by the King and Queens Majesties of England . 
 i First , two rich pieces of cloth of Tissue . 
 2 Item , one fine piece of Scarlet . 
 3 Item , one fine Violet in grain . 
 4 Item , one fine Azure cloth . 
 5 Item , a notable pair of Brigandines with a Murrian covered with crimson velvet and gilded nails . 
 6 Item , a Male and Female Lions . 
 Gifts given to the Ambassador at his departure , over and above such as were delivered unto him at his first arrival . 
 i First , a chain of gold of one hundred pound . 
 2 Item , a large Basin and Ewer , silver and gilded . 
 3 Item , a pair of pottle pots gilded . 
 4 Item , a pair of flaggons gilded . 
 The names of all such Russies as were attendant upon the Ambassador , at and before his departure out of England . 
 ' Isaak Fwesscheneke . 
 Demetre . 
 Gorbolones . 
 Symonde . 
 1 Yeroffia . 
 Stephen . 
 Lowca . 
 Andria . Foma . 
 Memorandum , the day and year of our Lord above mentioned , in the house of the worshipful John Dim-mocke Citizen and Draper of London , situate within the famous City of London in the Realm of England , 361 
 the above nam honourable Osep Gregorywich Napea Ambassador and Orator above mentioned , personally constituted and present , having declared unto him by the mouth of the right worshipful master Anthonie Hussie Esquire , the effect of the causes and contents , of , and in this book , at the interpretation of Robert Best his interpreter sworn , recognized , and knowledged in presence of me the Notary & personages underwritten , the contents of this book to be true , aswell for his own person as for his servants above nam , who did not subscribe their names as is above mentioned , but only recognized the same . In witness whereof , I John Incent Notary Public , at the request of the said master Anthonie Hussie , and other of the Merchants have to these presents underwritten set my accustomed sign , with the Subscription of my name , the day and year above written , being present the right Worshipful , 
 ' Andrew Judde . ~ ) 
 George Bairn . > Knights A 
 William Chester . J > Alder men of London . 
 Rafe Greeneaway . --------- J 
 > John Mersh Esquire . 
 John Dimmock . 
 Blaze Sanders . 
 Hubert Hussie , and 
 Robert Best above mentioned . 
 . 