A Letter of Master Thomas Hawtrey to the worshipful Master Henrie Lane Agent at Colmogro , written in Vologda the 31. of Januarie 1557. 
 Worshipful Sir , hearty commendations premised . 
 These may be to advertise you , that yesterday the thirtieth of this present came hither Robert Best , and brought with him two hundred robles , that is , one hundred for this place , and one hundred for you at Colmogro . As for hemp which is here at two robles and a half the bercovite , master Gray hath written to buy no more at that price : for John Sedgewicke hath bought for sixe or seven hundred robles worth at Novogrode for one roble and a half the bercovite , and better cheap : and white Novogrode flax is there at three robles the bercovite . I trust he will do much good by his going thither . As I do understand , Richard Johnson is gone to Novogrode with money to him , I doubt not but Master Grey hath advertised you of all their doings , both at the Mosco and at Novogrod . And touching our doings here , you shall perceive that we have sold wares of this fourth voyage for one hundred and fourtie robles , beside fiftie robles of the second and third voyage since the giving up of my last account , and for wares of the Country , you shall understand 
 392 
 that I have bought tried and untried for 77. robles foure hundred podes of tried tallow , beside foure hundred podes that I have given out money for , whereof God grant good receipt when the time comes , which is in Lent. And in brown flax and hemp I have bought seventeene bercovites , sixe podes and sixteene pound , which cost 28. robles , eleven altines two pence . And as for other kinds of wares I have bought none as yet . And for masts Masts of 30. to be provided , you shall understand that I wrote a Jarci!-letter to Totma the 28. of this present for fiftie masts , to wit , for 25. of fifteene fathoms , and 25. of fourteen fathoms , to be and arshine and a half at the small end . And more , I have written for 30. great 
 trees to be two arshines and a half at the small end , And Arshine is and for the other that were provided the last year , 3 - quarters of I trust they shall be sent down in the spring : of the a^ard , ir year . And as concerning the Ropemakers , you shall 
 understand that their abiding place shall be with you at A rope house Colmogro , as I do think Master Grey hath advertised erected at you . For , as Roger Bon tinge Master of the works c°lmogro . doth say , there is no place more meet for their purpose then with you : and there it will be made with lesser cost , considering that the pale is the one half of it : which is to set one pale more to that , and so for to cover it over , which as they say , will be but little cost . They do pray that it may be made sixteen foot broad , and one hundred and eightie fathoms long : and that in the mid way twentie foot from the pale toward the water side there may 
 be a house made to tar in , standing alone by it self A tar house . 
 for danger of fire . The Tar house that they would have made , is to be fifteene fathoms long , and ten fathoms broad , and they would that house should be made first : for I think they will not tar before they come there . And farther they desire that you will provide for as much tar as you may , for here we have small store , but when the time comes that it 
 393 
 should be made , I will provide as much as I can here , that it may be sent down when the Nasade comes . The stuff that they have ready spun is about five thousand weight , and they say that they trust to have by that time they come down yarn enough to make 20. cables . As concerning a copy of the Alphabet in Robert ciphers Master Grey hath written hither that Robert 
 Austen . Austen had one , which he willed that he should deliver 
 to you . Thus I surcease , beseeching God to preserve you in health , and to send you your hearts desire . 
 By yours to command to his power , Thomas Hawtrey . 
 . 