A Letter of Master Richard Gray one of the first Agents of the Moscovie company to Master Henrie Lane at Mosco , written in i558 - Colmogro the 19. of Februarie 1558. 
 Worshipful Sir , after hearty commendations etc. 
 You shall understand that this Lent comes Lampas a to Lampas such a number of men of diverse nations great mars fir w£th wareS } as hath not be seen these ten years . tk^North Thither come many out of Ugori : therefore I would have be there my self , and also have received such money as is owing us in wares by Kerill his brother and Osep Boscovo . For as you well know , thence they will go with their wares to the Mosco , and make us payment with delays , as they have done these other years passed . Colobone and his partner be departed towards Lampas with seven sleds laden with victuals . Others also are gone to that Mart. As touching the bringing of money with you , it will be good , for I assure you since our coming to this country have not so many persons gone to the Sea , as will do this year . Trusting that God will send good store of train oil , I will cause as much cask to be in a readiness as I can , if you shall think it meet to send some money before . All 
 394 
 our old hemp is spun and wrought in tenne cables from fifteene inches to ten the least , and thirteene Hausers from sixe inches to three inches : and all may weigh white eight and twenty thousande pound weight and upward . There is in hemp ockam five thousand pound two hundred weight in twelve sacks at the least : the flax that came down in the Nassada's with those seven podes that came last is all spun with a good part of that hemp that came last . God send more shortly , for all that is here and that is coming in the three other sleds , will be dispatched by the fourth week in Lent. Within these few days I bought thirteen podes , seven pound of hemp that cost two robles , twenty eight altines , foure pence , which together with that that was bought before , shall be laid in dipping and sounding lines , for it is very good . There are spent above fiftie barrels of tar already : you shall What quanti-understand that these eight workmen will spin ^afhempeZ . and lay above fourescore and tenne thousand pound of hemp , so it be dressed ready to their hands , year . having two to turn the wheels , and two to wind up . Therefore I have agreed with these two boys to serve the worshipful company foure years a piece . One of them windeth up and is very apt to spin : therefore I will have two other young men Russes to spin , if they can find good sureties for their truth . I have be in hand with these two young men that came out of the Trinitie , and they with me , but under seven pound a year they will not serve , nor Thomas Bunting that was Roger Bunting his servant . Therefore I would have three Russes at the least to spin , five of them will be as good as these three , and will not be so chargeable all , as one of these would be . I think it were good that our Nassada were somewhat strengthened in her floor on both sides with planks of five or sixe inches thick , from the stem to the stern , as I have written to Thomas Hawtrey at 
 395 
 White hawks y white bears prohibited without licence . 
 Master Grayes journey to Lampas . 
 1558. 
 Vologda . Also if you shall so think meet , your wax and tallow shall be laden in two Dosnickes , for they be meet to go aboard the ships : I do intend to set up and house at Boroseva over against the place whereas the ships shall ride , your advice therein I expect , it shall not cost above three robles , and yet if we will , there shall be two warm rooms in it . As for other matter at this present I have not to trouble you withal , and if it would please you I would be glad to hear some good news of Master Jenkinson . Thus Jesus be with you and be his guide . 
 Postscriptum . 
 As for these our Hawks they be not white , but white and mailed , but indeed are Jarfawkons . These days passed our Olen died . So this year our Master's of the company are like to have none , nor any white bears . Neither may any pass out of the realm without a special licence from the Emperor . 
 I intend God willing to go to Lampas , if I do I will take foure or five kerseys with me , but as for money there is small store here to carry . 
 Yours , Richard Grey . 
 . 