Certain notes gathered by Richard Johnson ( which was at Boghar with M. Anthony Jenkinson ) of the reports of Russes and other strangers , of the ways of Russia to Cathaya , and of diverse and strange people . 
 The first note given by one nam Sarnichoke a Tartarian subject to the Prince of Boghar , which are also Tartars bordering upon Kizilbash or Persia , declaring the way from Astracan , being the furthest part of Russia , to Cathaya as followeth . 
 wllrst from Astracan to Serachick by land , travailing ml Sail by leisure as Merchant's use with wares , is io . days journey . 
 * Or , urgeme . From Serachick to a town nam * Urgenshe , 15. days . 
 From Urgenshe to Boghar , 15. days . 
 From Boghar to Cascar , 30. days . 
 From Cascar to Cathaya , 30. days journey . 
 By the same party a note of another way more sure to travel , as he reporteth . 
 FRom Astracan to Turkemen by the Caspian sea , 10. days with barks . 
 From Turkemen by land specially with Camels , bearing the weight of 15. poodes for their common burdens , is 10. days to Urgenshe . 
 From Urgenshe to Boghar , 15. days . 
 Note . At this City of Boghar is the mart or meeting place between the Turkes and nations of those parts and the Cathayans . 
 Also the toll there is the 40. part to be paid of Merchandizes or goods . 
 From thence to Cascar is one months journey , and from Cascar ( being the frontier of the great Can , having many towns and forts by the way ) is also a months travel for merchant's by land to Cathay . 
 480 
 Further , as he hath herd ( not having be in those parts himself ) ships may sail from the dominions of Cathaia unto India . But of other ways , or how the seas lie by any coast he knoweth not . 
 The instruction of another Tartarian merchant dwelling in the city of Boghar , as he hath learned by other his countrymen which have be there . 
 First from Astracan by sea to Serachick is 15 days : affirming also that a man may travel the other way before written by Turkemen . 
 From Serachick to Urgence is 15 days . 
 From Urgence to Boghar also 15 days . 
 Note . These last 30 days journey is without habitation of houses : therefore travellers lodge in their own tents , carrying with them to eat , their several provisions : and for dryness there be many wells of fair water at equal baiting places not far distant daily to be had . 
 From Boghar to Taskent easy traveling with goods , is 14 days by land . 
 From Taskent to Occient 7 days . 
 From Occient to Cascar 20 days . This Cascar is the head town or city of another prince , lying between Boghar and Cathaia , called Reshit can . 
 From Cascar to Sowchick 30 days journey , which Sowchick is the first border of Cathay . 
 From Sowchick to Camchick 5 days journey , and from Camchick to Cathay is 2 months journey , all the way being inhabited , temperate , & well replenished with innumerable fruits , & the chief city in that whole land is called Cambalu , which is yet 10 days journey from Cathay . 
 Beyond this land of Cathay , which they praise to be civil & unspeakeably rich , is the country nam in the Tartarian tongue Cara-calmack inhabited with black people : but in Cathay , the most part thereof stretching to the sun rising , are people white and of fair 
 n 481 2 H 
 Angrim . Mandeville speaks hereof . 
 Or Ki faith . 
 Small people . 
 Pechora but six days journey by land or water from Ob. 
 complexion . Their religion also , as the Tartars report , is Christian , or after the manner of Christians , and their language peculiar , differing from the Tartarian tongue . 
 There are no great and furious Bears in traveling through the wales aforesaid , but wolves white and black . And because that woods are not of such quantity there , as in these parts of Russia , but in manner rather scant then plentiful , as is reported , the Bears breed not that way , but some other beasts ( as namely one in Russe called Barse ) are in those coasts . This Barse appears by a skin of one seen here to fell , to be never so great as a big lion spotted very fair and therefore we here take it to be a Leopard or Tiger . 
 Note that 20 days journey from Cathay is a country nam Angrim , where lives the beast that bears the best Musk , & the principali thereof is cut out of the knee of the male . The people are taunie , & for that the men are not bearded nor differ in complexion from women , they have certain tokens of iron , that is to say : the men wear the sun round like a boss upon their shoulders , and women on their privy parts . Their feeding is raw flesh in the same land , and in another called * Titay : the Duke there is called Can . They worship the fire , and it is 34 days journey from great Cathay , and in the way lies the beautiful people , eating with knives of gold , and are called Comorom , and the land of small people is nearer the Mosko then Cathay . 
 The instructions of one of Permia , who re-porteth he had be at Cathay the way before written , and also another way near the sea coast , as followeth , which note was sent out of Russia from Giles Holmes . 
 First from the province of Dwina is known the way to Pechora , and from Pechora traveling with Olens or hearts , is sixe days journey by land , and in the Summer as much by water to the river of Ob. 
 483 
 The Ob is a river full of flats , the mouth of it is 70. 
 Russe miles over . And from thence three days journey on the right hand is a place called Chorno-lese , to say in English , black woods , and from thence near hand is a people called Pechey-cony , wearing their hair by his description after the Irish fashion . 
 From Pechey-cony to Joult Calmachey three days journey , & from thence to Chorno Callachay three days tending to the Southeast . 
 These two people are of the Tartarian faith , and tributaries to the great Can . 
 Here follow certain countries' of the Samoeds which dwell upon the river Ob , and upon the sea coasts beyond the same , taken out of the Russe tongue word by word , and travailed by a Russe born in Colmogro , whose name was Pheodor Towtigin , who by report , was slain in his second voyage in one of the said countries' . 
 Pon the East part beyond the country of Ugori , the river Ob is the most Westermost part thereof . Upon the sea coast dwell Samoeds , and their country is called Molgomsey , whose meat is flesh of Olens , or Hearts , and Fish , and do eat one another sometime among them - 
 selves . And if any Merchants come unto them , then they kill one of their children for their sakes to feast them withal . And if a Merchant chance to die with them , they bury him not , but eat him , and so do they eat them of their own country likewise . They be evil of sighed , and have small noses , but they be swift and shoot . very well , and they travail on Hearts and on dogs , and their apparel is Sables and Hearts skins . They have no Merchandise but Sables only . 
 2 Item , on the same coast or quarter beyond those 483 
 [ I . 337-J 
 Traveling on dogs y hearts . 
 people , and by the sea side also does dwell another kind of Samoeds in like manner , having another language . One month in the year they live in the sea , and do not come or dwell on the dry land for that month . 
 3 Item beyond these people , on the sea coast , there is another kind of Samoeds , their meat is flesh and fish , and their merchandise are Sables , white and black Foxes ( which the Russes call Pselts ) and Hearts skins , and Fawns skins . 
 The relation of Chaggi Memet a Persian Merchant , to Baptista Ramusius , and other notable citizens of Venice , touching the way from Tauris the chief city of Persia , to Campion a city of Cathay over land : in which voyage he himself had passed before with the Caravans . 
 FRom Tauris to Soltania . 
 From Soltania to Casbin . 
 From Casbin to Veremi . 
 From Veremi to Eri . 
 From Eri to Boghara . 
 From Boghara to Samarchand . 
 From Samarchand to Cascar . 
 From Cascar to Acsu . 
 From Acsu to Cuchi . 
 From Cuchi to Chialis . 
 From Chialis to Turfon . 
 From Turfon to Camul . 
 From Camul to Succuir . 
 From Succuir to Gauta . 
 From Gauta to Campion . 
 20 
 5 
 25 
 20 
 20 
 10 
 13 
 15 
 5 
 6 
 ► days journey . 
 6 
 4 
 6 
 Which Campion is a city of the Empire of Cathay in the province of Tangut , from whence the greatest quantity of Rubarbe comes . 
 . 