The voyage , wherein Osep Napea the Moscovite Ambassador returned home into his country , with his entertainment at his arrival , at Colmogro : and a large description of the manners of the Country . 
 He twelfth of Maye , in the year of our Lord 1557 there departed from Gravesend , foure good ships well appointed for Merchants , which were presently bound into the Bay of S. Nicholas in Russia : with which ships was transported , or carried home , one Osep Gre - 
 goriwich Napea , who was sent Messenger from the Emperor and great Duke of Moscovia . The foure ships were these , whose names follow , viz. 
 The Primerose Admiral . 
 The John Evangelist Viceadmiral . 
 The Anne and the Trinitie Attendants . [ I. 315-1 
 The 13 of July , the foresaid foure ships came to and anchor in the Bay of S. Nicholas , before and Abbey , called 
 425 
 Presents used in Russia are all for the most part of victuals . 
 The city of Boghar . 
 the Abbey of S. Nicholas , whereas the said Messenger , Osep Gregoriwich Napea went a shore , and as many English men as came to serve the Emperor remained with him at the Abbey for the space of sixe days , until he had got all his things a shore , and laden the same in barks , to go up the river Dwina , unto Vologhda , which is by water 1000 verstes , and every verste is about three quarters of and English mile . 
 The 20 of July , we departed from S. Nicholas , and the 24 of the same , we came to Colmogro , where we remained eight days : and the said Messenger was there of all his acquaintance welcomed home , and had presents innumerable sent unto him , but it was nothing but meat and drink .. Some sent white bred , some rye bred , and some buttered bred & pancakes , beef , mutton , bacon , eggs , butter , fish , swans , geese , ducks , hens , and all manner of victuals , both fish and flesh , in the best manner , that the rude people could devise : for among them , these presents are highly esteemed . 
 The 29 of July , we departed from Colmogro , and the 14 of August we came to Ustiug , where we remained one day , and changed our barks or boats . 
 The 27 of August , we came to Vologhda , where we remained 4 days unlading the barks , and lading our chests and things in small wagons , with one horse in a piece , which in their tongue are called Telegos , and with these Telegoes they carried our stuff from Vologhda unto the Mosco , which is 500 verstes : and we were upon the same way 14 days : for we went no faster then the Telegoes . 
 There are three great towns between the Mosco and Vologhda , that is to say , Yeraslave , Rostave , and Pereslave . Upon one side of Yeraslave runneth a famous river , which is called Volga . It runneth into the Caspian sea , and it divideth it self before it come into the Mare Caspium , in 50 parts or more , and near unto the same sea there stands a great City , called Boghar , the inhabitants of the which are called by the same name . 
 426 
 The people of the said City do traffic unto the City of Mosco : their commodities are spices , musk , ambergreese , rubarbe , with other drugs . They bring also many furs which they buy in Siberia coming towards the Mosco : the said people are of the sect of Mahomet . 
 The 12 of September we came unto the ci tie of Mosco , where we were brought by Napea , and two of the Emperors gentlemen unto a large house , where every one of us had his chamber appointed . 
 The 14 of September we were commanded to come They arrived unto the Emperor , and immediately after our coming at Masco . we were brought into his presence , unto whom each of us did his duty accordingly , and kissed his right hand , his majesty sitting in his chair of estate , with his crown on his head , and a staff of goldsmiths work in his left hand well garnished with rich and costly stones : and when we had all kissed his hand and done our duties , his majesty did declare by his interpreter that we were all welcome unto him , and into his country , & thereupon willed us to dine with him : that day we gave thanks unto his majesty , and so departed until the dinner was ready . 
 When dinner time approached , we were brought again into the Emperors dining chamber , where we were set on one side of a table that stood over against the Emperors table , to the end that he might well behold us all : and when we came into the foresaid chamber , we found there ready set these tables following . 
 First at the upper end of one table were set the Emperor his majesty , his brother , & the Emperor of Cazan , which is prisoner . About two yards lower sat the Emperor of Cazan his son , being a child of five years of age , and beneath him sat the most part of the Emperor's noble men . 
 And at another table near unto the Emperors table , there was set a Monk all alone , which was in all points as well served as the Emperor . At another table sat another kind of people called Chirkasses , which the Emperor entertaineth for men of war to serve against 
 427 
 his enemies . Of which people and of their country , I will hereafter make mention .. 
 All the tables aforesaid were covered only with salt and bred , and after that we had sitten a while , the Emperor sent unto every one of us a piece of bred , which were given and delivered unto every man severally by these words : The Emperor and great Duke gives the bred this day , and in like manner three or foure times before dinner was ended , he sent unto every man drink , which was given by these words , The Emperor and great Duke gives thee to drink . All the tables aforesaid were served in vessels of pure and fine gold , as well basons and ewers , platters , dishes and saucers , as also of great pots , with and innumerable sort of small drinking pots of diverse fashions , whereof a great number were set with stone . As for costly meats I have many times seen better : but for change of wines , and diverse sorts of meads , it was wonderful : for there was not left at any time so much void room on the table , that one cup more might have been set , and as far as I could perceive , all the rest were in the like manner served . 
 In the dinner time there came in sixe singers which stood in the midst of the chamber , and their faces towards the Emperor , who sang there before dinner was ended three several times , whose songs or voices delighted our ears little or nothing . 
 The Emperor never putteth morsel of meat in his mouth , but he first blesses it himself , 8c in like manner as often as he drinketh : for after his manner he is very religious , 8c he esteems his religious men above his noble men . 
 This dinner continued about the space of five hours , which being ended , and the tables taken up , we came into the midst of the chamber , where we did reverence unto the Emperor's majesty , and then he delivered unto every one of us with his own hands a cup of mead , which when every man had received and drunk a 428 
 quantity thereof , we were licenced to depart , & so ended that dinner . And because the Emperor would have us to be merry , he sent to our lodging the same Evening three barrels of mead of sundry sorts , of the quantity in all of one hogshead . 
 The 16 day of September the Emperor sent home unto our lodging for every of us a Tartarie horse to ride from place to place as we had occasion , for that the streets of Mosco are very fowl and miry in the Summer . 
 The 18 of September there were given unto master Standish doctor in Physic , and the rest of our men of our occupations , certain furred gowns of branched velvet and gold , and some of read damask , of which master Doctors gown was furred with Sables , and the rest were furred some with white Ermine , and some with grey Squirel , and all faced and edged round about with black beaver . 
 The i of October in the morning we were commanded to come unto the Emperor's court , and when we came thither , we were brought unto the Emperor unto whom we did our duties accordingly : whereupon he willed us to dine with him that day , and so with thanks unto his majesty , we departed until dinner time , at which time we came and found the tables covered with bred and salt as at the first : & after that we were all set upon one side of the table , the Emperor's majesty according to his accustomed manner sent unto every man a piece of bred by some of the Dukes which attended on his highness . 
 And whereas the 14 of September we were served in vessels of gold , we were now served in vessels of silver , and yet not so abundantly as was the first of gold : they brought drink unto the table in silver boles which contained at the least sixe gallons a piece , and every man had a small silver cup to drink in , & another to dip or to take his drink out of the great boll withal : the dinner being ended , the Emperor 
 429 
 M. Standish doctor of Physic . 
 A yearly triumph . 
 gave unto every one of us a cup with mead , which when we had received , we gave thanks and departed . 
 Moreover , whensoever the Emperor's pleasure is that any stranger shall dine with him , he does send for them in the morning , and when they come before him , he with his own mouth bids them to dinner , and this order he always observeth . 
 The io of October the Emperor gave unto M. Standish 70 rubles in money , and to the rest of our men of occupations 30 rubles apiece . 
 The 3 of November we dined again with the Emperor , where we were served as before .. 
 The 6 of December being S. Nicholas day , we dined again at the Emperors , for that is one of the principali feasts which the Moscovites hold : we were served in silver vessels and ordered in all points as before , and it was passed 7 of the clock at night before dinner was ended . 
 The Emperor's majesty uses every year in the month of December , to have all his ordinance that is in the city of Mosco carried into the field which is without the Suburbs of the city , and there to have it planted and bent upon two houses of Wood filled within with earth : against which two houses there were two fair white marks set up , at which marks they discharge all their ordinance , to the end the Emperor may see what his Gunners can do . They have fair ordinance of brass of all sorts , bases , falcons , minions , sakers , culverings , cannons double and royal , basilisks long and large , they have sixe great pieces whose shot is a yard of height , which shot a man may easily discern as they flee : they have also a great many of mortar pieces or potguns , out of which pieces they shoot wild fire . 
 The 12 of December the Emperor's Majesty and all his nobility came into the field on horseback , in most goodly order , having very fine Jennets & Turkey horses garnished with gold & silver abundantly . The Emperor's 430 
 majesty having on him a gown of rich tissue , & a cap of scarlet on his head , set not only with pearls , but also with a great number of rich and costly stones : his noble men were all in gowns of cloth of gold , which did ride before him in good order by 3. & 3. and before them there went 5000 harquebusiers , which went by 5 and 5 in a rank in very good order , every of them carrying his gun upon his left shoulder , and his match in his right hand , and in this order they marched into the field where as the foresaid ordinance was planted . 
 And before the Emperor's majesty came into the field , there was a certain stage made of small poles which was a quarter of a mile long , and about threescore yards off from the stage of poles were certain pieces of ice of two foot thick , and sixe foot high set up , which rank of ice was as long as the stage of poles , and as soon as the Emperor's majesty came into the field , the harquebusiers went upon the stage of poles where they settled themselves in order . And when the Emperor's majesty was settled where he would be , and where he might see all the ordinance discharged and shot off , the harquebusiers began to shoot off at the bank of ice , as though it had been in any skirmish or battle , who ceased not shooting , until they had beaten all the ice flat on the ground . 
 After the handguns , they shot off their wild fire up into the air , which was a goodly sighed to behold . And after this , they began to discharge the small pieces of brass , beginning with the smallest and so orderly bigger and bigger , until the last and biggest . When they had shot them all off , they began to charge them again , and so shot them all off 3 times after the first order , beginning with the smallest , and ending with the greatest . And note that before they had ended their shooting , the 2 houses that they shot unto were beaten in pieces , & yet they were very strongly made of Wood and filled with earth , being at the least 30 foot thick . This triumph being ended , the Emperor departed and road home in the same order that he came forth into the field . The 
 431 
 ordinance is discharged every year in the month of December , according to the order before mentioned . 
 On Christmas day we were all willed to dine with the Emperor's Majesty , where for bred , meat and drink , we were served as at other times before : but for goodly and rich plate , we never saw the like or so much before . There dined that day in the Emperor's presence above 500 strangers , and two hundred Russes , and all they were served in vessels of gold , and that as much as could stand one by another upon the tables . Beside this there were foure cupboards garnished with goodly plate both of gold & silver . Among the which there were 12 barrels of silver , containing above 12 gallons a piece , and at each end of every barrel were 6 hoops of fine gold : this dinner continued about sixe hours . 
 The hallowing Every year upon the 12 day they use to bless or of nver of sanctify the river Moscua , which runneth through the ’ city of Mosco , after this manner . 
 First , they make a square hold in the ice about 3 fathoms large every way , which is trimmed about the sides & edges with white boards . Then about 9 of the clock they come out of the church with procession towards the river in this wise . 
 First and foremost there go certain young men with wax tapers burning , and one carrying a great lantern : then follow certain banners , then the cross , then the images of our Lady , of S. Nicholas , and of other Saints , which images men carry upon their shoulders : after the images follow certain priests to the number of 100 or more : after them the Metropolitan who is led between two priests , and after the Metropolitan came the Emperor with his crown upon his head , and after his majesty all his noble men orderly . Thus they followed the procession unto the water , & when they came unto the hold that was made , the priests set themselves in order round about it . And at one side of the same pool there was a scaffold of boards made , upon which stood a fair chair in which the Metro - 
 432 
 politan was set , but the Emperors majesty stood upon the ice . 
 After this the priests began to sing , to bless and to sense , and did their service , and so by that time that they had done , the water was holy , which being sanctified , the Metropolitan took a little thereof in his hands , and cast it on the Emperor , likewise upon certain of the Dukes , 8c then they returned again to the church with the priests that sat about the water : but that press that there was about the water when the Emperor was gone , was wondered to behold , for there came above 5000 pots to be filled of that water : for that Moscovite which hath no part of that water , thinks himself unhappy . 
 And very many went naked into the water , both men and women and children : after the press was a little gone , the Emperors Jennets and horses were brought to drink of the same water , and likewise many other men brought their horses thither to drink , and by that means they make their horses as holy as themselves . 
 All these ceremonies being ended , we went to the Emperor to dinner , where we were served in vessels of silver , and in all other points as we had be beforetime . 
 The Russes begin their Lent always 8 weeks before The Russes Easter : the first week they eat eggs , milk , cheese 8c Lent-butter , and make great cheer with pancakes and such other things , one friend visiting another , & from the same Sunday until our Shrofesunday there are but few Russes sober , but they are drunk day by day , and it is accounted for no reproach or shame among them . 
 The next week being our first week of Lent , or our cleansing week , beginning our Shrofesunday , they make and keep a great fast . It is reported , and the people do verily believe that the Metropolitan neither eateth nor drinketh any manner of thing for the space of seven days , and they say that there are many religious men which do the like . 
 II 433 2 E 
 The Emperor's Majesty eateth but one morsel of bred , and drinketh but one draught of drink once in the day during that week , and all men that are of any reputation come not out of their houses during that time , so that the streets are almost void of company , saving a few poor folks which wander to and from . The other sixe weeks they keep as we do ours , but not one of them will eat either butter , cheese , eggs or milk . 
 On Palm sunday they have a very solemn procession in this manner following . 
 First , they have a tree of a good bigness which is made fast upon two sleds , as though it were growing there , and it is hanged with apples , raisins , figs and dates , and with many other fruits abundantly . In the midst of you same tree stand 5 boys in white vestures , which sing in the tree before the procession : after this there followed certain young men with wax tapers in their hands burning , & a great lantern that all the light should not go out : after them followed two with long banners , & sixe with round plataeae set upon long staves : the plataeae were of copper very full of holes and thin : then followed 6 carrying painted images upon their shoulders , after the images followed certain priests to the number of 100 or more , with goodly vestures , whereof 10 or 12 are of white damask , set and embroidered round about with fair and orient pearls , as great as peas , and among them certain Sapphires and other stones . After them followed the one half of the Emperors noble men : then comes the Emperor's majesty and the Metropolitan , after this manner . 
 First , there is a horse covered with white linen cloth down to you ground , his ears being made long with the same cloth like to and asses ears . Upon this horse the Metropolitan sitteth sidelong like a woman : in his lap lies a fair book , with a crucifix of Goldsmiths work upon the cover , which he holds fast with his left hand , and in his right hand he hath a cross of gold , with 434 
 which cross he ceases not to bless the people as he rides . 
 There are to the number of 30 men which spread abroad their garments before the horse , and as soon as the horse is passed over any of them , they take them up again and run before , and spread them again , so that the horse does always go on some of them . They which spread the garments are all priests sons , and for their labours the Emperor gives unto them new garments . 
 One of the Emperor's noble men leads the horse by the head , but the Emperor himself going on foot leads the horse by the end of the reine of his bridle with one of his hands , and in the other of his hands he had a branch of a Palm tree : after this followed the rest of the Emperors Noble men and Gentlemen , with a great number of other people . In this order they went from one church to another within the castle , about the distance of two flights shot : and so returned again to the Emperors Church , where they made and end of their service . Which being done , the Emperors majesty and certain of his noble men went to the Metropolitan his house to dinner , where of delicate fish and good drinks there was no lack . 
 The rest of this week until Easter day they kept very solemnly , continuing in their houses for the most part , and upon Munday or Thursday the Emperor does always use to receive the Sacrament , and so do most of his nobles . 
 Upon good Friday they continue all the day in contemplation and prayers , and they use every year on good Friday to let lose a prisoner in the stead of Bar-rabas . The night following they go to the Church where they sleep until the next morning , & at Easter they have the resurrection , & after every of the Lents they eat flesh the next week following , Friday , Saturday and all . 
 They have and order at Easter which they always observe , and that is this : every year against Easter to die or colour read with Brazell a great number of 435 
 The Emperor leads the Metropolitans horse in procession . 
 Kissing used in the Greek church . 
 With these letters M. Jenkinson took his voyage the same April to Boghar . 
 eggs , of which every man and woman gives one unto the priest of their Parish upon Easter day in the morning . And moreover the common people use to carry in their hands one of their read eggs , not only upon Easter day , but also three or foure days after , and gentlemen and gentlewomen have eggs gilded which they carry in like manner . They use it as they say for a great love , and in token of the resurrection , whereof they rejoice . For when two friends meet during the Easter holy days , they come & take one another by the hand : the one of them say , the Lord or Christ is risen , the other answereth , it is so of a truth , and then they kiss and exchange their eggs both men and women , continuing in kissing 4 days together . 
 The 12 of Aprill being Tuesday in the Easter week , master Jenkinson and master Gray , and certain other of us English men dined with the Emperor , where we were served as we had been before time . And after dinner the Emperors majesty gave unto master Jenkinson and unto M. Grey , and so orderly unto every one of us a cup of Mead , according to his accustomed manner which when every man had received and given thanks , M. Jenkinson stepped into the midst of the chamber before the Emperors majesty , and gave thanks to his highness for his goodness unto him extended , desiring his grace to licence him to depart , and in like manner did Master Grey . His majesty did not only licence them to depart , but also granted unto master Jenkinson his letters under his great seal , unto all princes through whose dominions master Jenkinson should have occasion to pass , that he might the sooner and quietlier pass by means thereof . Which being granted , master Jenkinson and Gray lowly submitted themselves , thanking his majesty . So the Emperor gave unto either of them a cup of mead to drink , and willed them to depart at their pleasure in Gods peace . 
 The 14. of Aprill in the morning when M. Grey and I were ready to depart towards Enggland , the 436 
 Chancellors sent unto us and willed us to come to their office in the Chancery , where at our coming they showed us a great number of the Emperor's jewels , and rich robes , willing us to mark and behold them well , to the end that at our arrival into England , we might make report what we had seen there . 
 The chiefest was his majesties crown , being close under the top very fair wrought : in mine opinion , the workmanship of so much gold few men can amend . It was adorned and decked with rich and precious stones abundantly , among the which one was a ruby , which stood a handful higher then the top of the crown upon a small wier , it was as big as a good bean : the same crown was lined with a fair black Sable , worth by report 40. robles . 
 we saw all his majesties robes which were very richly set with stones , they showed us many other great stones of diverse kinds , but the most part of them were uneven , in manner as they came out of the work , for they do more esteem the greatness of stones , then the proportion of them . 
 We saw two goodly gowns which were as heavy as a man could easily carry , all set with pearls over and over : the guards or borders round about them were garnished with saphires and other good stones abundantly . One of the same gowns was very rich , for the pearls were very large , round and orient : as for the rest of his gowns and garments , they were of rich tissue and cloth of gold and all furred with very black Sables . 
 When we had sufficiently perused all these things , they willed master Grey at his arrival in England , to provide if he could , such jewels and rich clothes as he had seen there , and better if he could , declaring that the Emperor would gladly bestow his money upon such things . 
 So we took our leave the same time , and departed towards Vologda immediately . 
 437 
 The Emper-ourswardrobe . 
 The manners , usages , and ceremonies of the Russes . 
 Of the Emperor . 
 He Emperors name in their tongue is Ivan Vasilivich , that is as much to say , as John the son of “ Vasilie and by his princely state he is called Otesara , as his predecessors have be before , which to interpret , is a king , that gives not tribute to any man . And this word 
 Otesara his majesties interpreters have of late days interpreted to be Emperor , so that now he is called Emperor and great Duke of all Russia , etc. Before his father they were neither called Emperors nor kings but only Ruese Velike , that is to say , great Duke . And as this Emperor which now is Ivan Vasilivich , doth exceed his predecessors in name , that is , from a Duke to and Emperor , even so much by report he doth exceed them in stoutness of courage and valiantness , and a great deal more : for he is no more afraid of his enemies which are not few , then the Hobby of the larks . 
 His enemies with whom he hath wars for the most part are these : Litto , Poland , Sweden , Denmarke , Lifland , the Crimmes , Nagaians , and the whole nation of the Tartarians , which are a stout and a hardy people as any under the Sun . 
 This Emperor uses great familiarity , as well unto all his nobles and subject's , as also unto strangers which serve him either in his wars , or in occupations : for his pleasure is that they shall dine oftentimes in the year in his presence , and beside that he is oftentimes abroad , either at one Church or another , and walking with his noble men abroad . And by this means he is not only beloved of his nobles and commons , but also had in great dread and fear through all his dominions , 438 
 A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA a.d. 
 ..... 15581 
 so that I think no prince in Christendome is more feared of his own then he is , nor yet better beloved . For if he bid any of his Dukes go , they will run , if he give any evil or angry word to any of them , the party will not come into his majesties presence again of a long time if he be not sent for , but will feign him to be very sick , and will let the hair of his head grow very long , without either cutting or shaving , which is and evident token that he is in the Emperor's displeasure : for when they be in their prosperity , they account it a shame to wear long hair , in consideration whereof , they use to have their heads shaved . 
 His majesty hears all complaints himself , and with Note . his owqe mouth gives sentence , and judgement of all matters , and that with expedition : but religious matters he meddleth not withal , but referreth them wholly unto the Metropolitan . 
 His majesty retaineth and well rewardeth all strangers that come to serve him , and especially men of war . 
 He delights not greatly in hawking , hunting , or any other pastime , nor in hearing instruments or music , but sets all his whole delight upon two things : First , to serve God , as undoubtedly he is very devout in his religion , and the second , how to subdue and conquer his enemies . 
 He hath abundance of gold and silver in his own hands or treasury : but the most part of his know not a crown from a counter , nor gold from copper , they are so much cumbered therewithal ! , and he that is worth 2. 3. or 4. grotes , is a rich man . 
 Of their Religious men . 
 THe Metropolitan is next unto God , our Lady and 
 S. Nicholas excepted : for the Emperor's majesty judgeth & affirmeth him to be of higher dignity then himself ; for that , says he , he is Gods spiritual officer , and I the Emperor am his temporali officer , and therefore his majesty submitteth himself unto him in many 
 439 
 things concerning religious matters , as in leading the Metropolitans horse upon Palm sunday , and giving him leave to sit on a chair upon the 12. day , when the river Mosco was in blessing , his majesty standing on the ice . 
 All matters of religion are reformed by the Metropolitan , he hears the causes and gives sentence as himself lists , and is authorized so to do , whither it be to whip , hang or burn , his will must needs be fulfilled . 
 They have both monks , friars and nuns , with a great number of great & rich monasteries : they keep great hospitality , and do relieve much poor people day by day . I have be in one of the monasteries called Troietes , which is walled about with brick very strongly like a castle , and much ordinance of brass upon the walls of the same . They told me themselves that there are seven hundred brothers of them which belong unto that house . The most part of the lands , towns , and villages which are within 40. miles of it , belong unto the same . They showed me the church , wherein were as many images as could hang about , or upon the walls of the Church round about , and even the roof of the church was painted full of images . The chief image was of our Lady , which was garnished with gold , rubies , saphirs and other rich stones abun - . dandy . In the midst of the church stood 12. wax tapers of two yards long , and a fathom about in bigness , & there stands a ketde full of wax with about 100. weight , wherein there is always the wick of a candle burning , as it were a lamp which goes not out day nor night . • 
 They showed me a coffin covered with cloth of gold which stood upon one side within their church , in which they told me lay a holy man , who never eat or drank , and yet that he lives . And they told me ( supposing that I had believed them ) that he heals many diseases , and gives the blind their sighed , with many other 440 
 A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA a.d. 
 1558. 
 miracles , but I was hard of belief because I saw him work no miracle whilst I was there . 
 After this they brought me into their sellers , and made me taste of diverse kinds of drinks , both wine and beer , mead and quassie , of sundry colours and kinds . Such abundance or drink as they have in their sellers , I do suppose few princes have more , or so much at once . 
 Their barrels or vessels are of and unmeasurable bigness & size : some of them are 3. yards long and more , and 2. yards & more broad in their heads : they contain 6. or 7. tons a piece : they have none in their sellers of their own making that are less then a tun . They have 9. or 10. great vauts which are full of those barrels which are seidome removed : for they have trunks which come down through the roof of the vauts in sundry places , through which they pour drink down , having the cask right under it to receive the same , for it should be a great trouble to bring it all down the stairs . 
 They give bred , meat and drink unto all men that The hospltall-come to them , not only while they are at their abbey , but also when they depart , to serve them by the way . mmasteries - 
 There are a great number of such monasteries in the Realm , and the Emperor's majesty rides oftentimes from one to another of them , and lies at them 3. or 4. days together . 
 The same monks are as great merchant's as any in [ I . 32l-l the land of Russia , and do occupy buying and selling as much as any other men , and have boats which pass too and from in the rivers with merchandise from place to place where any of their country do traffic . 
 They eat no flesh during their lives as it is reported : but upon Sunday , Munday , Tuesday , Thursday and Saturday it is lawful for them to eat eggs , butter , cheese and milk , and at all times to eat fish , and after this sort they led their lives . 
 They wear all black garments , and so do none other in all the land , but at that abbey only . 
 441 
 Want of preachers cause of great ignorance and idolatry . 
 They have no preachers no not one in all the land to instruct the people , so that there are many , & the most part of the poor in the country , who if one ask them how many gods there be , they will say a great many , meaning that every image which they have is a god : for all the country and the Emperors majesty himself will bless and bow , and knock their heads before their images , in so much that they will cry earnestly unto their images to help them to the things which they need . All men are bound by their law to have those images in their houses , and over every gate in all their towns and cities are images set up , unto which the people bow and bend , and knock their heads against the ground before them : as often as they come by any church or cross they do in like manner . And when they come to any house , they bless themselves 3. or 4. times before they will salute any man in the house . 
 They reckon and hold it for great sin to touch or handle any of their images within the circle of the board where the painting is , but they keep them very daintily , and rich men deck them over and about with gold , silver and stones , and hang them over and about with cloth of gold . 
 The priests are married as other men are , and wear all their garments as other men do , except their nightcaps , which is cloth of some sad colour , being round , & reaches unto the ears : their crowns are shaved , but the rest of their hair they let grow , as long as nature will permit , so that it hangs beneath their ears upon their shoulders : their beards they never shave : if his wife happen to die , it is not lawful for him to marry again during his life . 
 They minister the Communion with bred and wine after our order , but he breaks the bred and putteth it into the cup unto the wine , and commonly some are partakers with them : and they take the bred out again with a spoon together with part of the wine , 442 
 A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA a.d. 
 . 1558. 
 and so take it themselves , and give it to others that receive with them after the same manner . 
 Their ceremonies are all as they say , according to the Greek Church used at this present day , and they allow no other religion but the Greeks , and their own : and will not permit any nation but the Greeks to be buried in their sacred burials , or churchyards . 
 All their churches are full of images , unto the which the people when they assemble , do bow and knock their heads , as I have before said , that some will have knobs upon their foreheads with knocking , as great as eggs . 
 All their service is in the Russe tongue , and they All their ser-and the common people have no other prayers but this , vice is in their Ghospodi Jesus Christos esine voze ponuloi nash . mother tongue . That is to say , Oh Lord Jesus Christ , son of God have mercy upon us : and this is their prayer , so that the most part of the unlearned know neither Pater noster , nor the Belief , nor Ten commandments , nor scarcely understand the one half of their service which is read in their Churches . 
 Of their Baptism . 
 WHen any child is born , it is not baptised until the next Sunday , and if it chance that it be not baptised then , it must tarry until the second Sunday after the birth , and it is lawful for them to take as many Godfathers and Godmothers as they will , the more the better . 
 When they go to the Church , the midwife goes foremost , carrying the child , & the Godfathers and Godmothers follow into the midst of the Church , where there is a small table ready set , and on it and earthen pot full of warm water , about the which the Godfathers and Godmothers , with the child , settle themselves : then the clerk gives unto every of them a small wax candle burning , then comes the priest , and begins to say certain words , which the Godfathers and Godmothers 
 443 
 must answer word for word , among which one is , that the child shall forsake the devil , and as that name is pronounced , they must all spit at the word as often as it is repeated . Then he blesses the water which is in the pot , and does breathe over it : then he takes all the candles which the gosseps have , and holding them all in one hand lets part of them drop into the water , and then gives every one his candle again , and when the water is sanctified , he takes the child and holds it in a small tub , and one of the Godfathers takes the pot with warm water , and poureth it all upon the child's head . 
 [ I . 322. J After this he hath many more ceremonies , as anointing 
 ears and eyes with spittle , and making certain crosses with oil upon the back , head , and breast of the child : then taking the child in his arms , carrieth it to the images of S. Nicholas , and our Lady , 8cc . and speaks unto the images , desiring them to take charge of the child , that he may live , and believe as a Christian man or woman ought to do , with many other words . Then coming back from the images , he takes a pair of shears and clips the young and tender hairs of the child's head , in three or foure places , and then delivereth the child , whereunto every of the Godfathers & Godmothers lay a hand : then the priest charges them , that the child be brought up in the faith & fear of God or Christ , and that it be instructed to clinege and bow to the images , and so they make and end : then one of the Godfathers must hang a cross about the neck of the child , which he must always wear , for that Russe which hath not a cross about his neck they esteem as no Christian man , and thereupon they say that we are not Christians , because we do not wear crosses as they do . 
 Of their Matrimony . 
 THeir matrimony is nothing solemnized , but rather in most points abominable , and as near as I can learn , in this wise following . 
 444 
 First , when there is love between the parties , the man sends unto the woman a small chest or box , wherein is a whip , needles , thread , silk , linen cloth , shears , and such necessaries as she shall occupy when she is a wife , and perhaps sends therewithal raisins , figs or some such things , giving her to understand , that if she do offend , she must be beaten with the whip , & by the needles , thread , cloth , etc. that she should apply her self diligently to sow , and do such things as she could best do , and by the raisins or fruits he means if she do well , no good thing shall withdrawn from her , nor be too deer for her : and she sends unto him a shirt , handkerchiefs , and some such things of her own making . And now to the effect . 
 When they are agreed , and the day of marriage appointed , when they shall go towards the Church , the bride will in no wise consent to go out of the house , but resisteth and striveth with them that would have her out , and feigneth her self to weep , yet in the end , two women get her out , and led her towards the church , her face being covered close , because of her dissimulation , that it should not be openly perceived : for she makes a great noise , as though she were sobbing and weeping , until she come at the Church , and then her face is uncovered . The man comes after among other of his friends , and they carry with them to the church a great pot with wine or mead : then the priest coupleth them together much after our order , one promising to love and serve the other during their lives together , etc. which being done , they begin to drink , and first the woman drinketh to the man , and when he hath drunk he lets the cup fallen to the ground , hasting immediately to tread upon it , and so does she , and whither of them tread first upon it must have the victory and be master at all times after , which commonly happeneth to the man , for he is readiest to set his foot on it , because he lets it fallen himself , then they go home again , the woman's face being uncovered . The boys 445 
 in the streets cry out and make a noise in the mean time , with very dishonest words . 
 When they come home , the wife is set at the upper end of the table , and the husband next unto her : they fallen then to drinking till they be all drunk , they perchance have a minstrel or two , and two naked men , which led her from the Church dance naked a long time before all the company . When they are weary of drinking , the bride and the bridegroom get them to bed , for it is in the evening always when any of them are married : and when they are going to bed , the bridegroom putteth certain money both gold and silver , if he have it , into one of his boots , and then sitteth down in the chamber , crossing his legs , and then the bride must pluck off one of his boots , which she will , and if she happen on the boot wherein the money is , she hath not only the money for her labour , but is also at such choice , as she need not ever from that day forth to pull off his boots , but if she miss the boot wherein the money is , she does not only lose the money , but is also bound from that day forward to pull off his boots continually . 
 Then they continue in drinking and making good cheer three days following , being accompanied with certain of their friends , and during the same three days he is called a Duke , & she a duchess , although they be very poor persons , and this is as much as I have learned of their matrimony : but one common rule is among them , if the woman be not beaten with the whip once a week , she will not be good , and therefore they look for it orderly , & the women say , that if their husbands did not beat them , they should not love them . 
 They use to marry there very young , their sons at 16. and 18. years old , and the daughters at 12. or 13. years or younger : they use to keep their wives very closely , I mean those that be of any reputation , so that a man shall not see one of them but at a chance , 446 
 A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA a.d. 
 1558. 
 when she goes to church at Christmas or at Easter , or else going to visit some of her friends . 
 The most part of the women use to ride a stride in saddles with styrrops , as men do , and some of them on sleds , which in summer is not commendable . 
 The husband is bound to find the wife colours to The women oj paint her withal , for they use ordinarily to paint Russia paint themselves : it is such a common practice among them , faces-that it is counted for no shame : they grease their faces with such colours , that a man may discern them hanging on their faces almost a flight shoot off : I cannot so well liken them as to a millers wife , for they look as though they were beaten about the face with a bag of meal , but their eye brows they colour as black as jeat . 
 The best property that the women have , is that they can sow well , and imbroder with silk and gold excellently . 
 Of their burial . 
 WHen any man or woman dieth , they stretch him out , and put a new pair of shoes on his feet , because he hath a great journey to go : then do they wind him in a sheet , as we do , but they forget not to put a testimony in his right hand , which the priest gives him , to testify unto S. Nicholas that he died a Christian man or woman . And they put the coarse always in a coffin of wood , although the party be very poor : and when they go towards the Church , the friends and kinsmen of the party departed carry in their hands small wax candles , and they weep and howl , and make much lamentation . 
 They that be hanged or beheaded , or such like , have no testimony with them : how they are received into heaven , it is a wonder , without their passport . 
 There are a great number of poor people among them which die daily for lack of sustenance , which is a pitiful case to behold : for there hath been buried 447 
 in a small time , within these two years , above 80. persons young and old , which have died only for lack of sustenance : for if they had had straw and water enough , they would make shift to live : for a great many are forced in the winter to dry straw and Bred made stamp it , and to make bred thereof , or at the least of straw . they eat - tO jn steaj of bred . In the summer they make good shift with grass , herbs and roots : barks The unmerd - of trees are good meat with them at all times . There finesse of the nQ people jn the world , as I suppose , that live so the poor . miserably as do the poverty in those parts : and the most part of them that have sufficient for themselves , and also to relieve others that need , are so unmerciful that they care not how many they see die of famine or hunger in the streets . 
 Stows or It is a country full of diseases , diverse , and evil , baths usual and the best remedy is for any of them , as they hold with the opinion , to go often unto the hight houses , as in a manner every man hath one or his own , which he heateth commonly twice every week , and all the household sweat , and wash themselves therein . 
 Reported by Thomas Bulky . 
 The names of certain sorts of drinks used in Russia , and commonly drunk in the Emperors Court . 
 THe first and principali mead is made of the juice or liccour taken from a berry called in Russia , Malieno , which is of a marvelous sweet taste , and of a carmosant colour , which berry I have seen in Paris . 
 The second mead is called Visnova , because it is made of a berry so called , and is like a black gooseberry : but it is like in colour and taste to the read wine of France . 
 The third mead is called Amarodina or Smorodina , short , of a small berry much like to the small rezin , and grows in great plenty in Russia . 
 The fourth mead is called Cherevnikyna , which is made of the wild black cherry . 
 448 
 The fift mead is made of honey and water , with other mixtures . 
 There is also a delicate drink drawn from the root of the birch tree , called in the Russe tongue Berozevites , which drink the noble men and others use in Aprill , May , and June , which are the three months of the spring time : for after those months , the sap of the tree drieth , and then they cannot have it . 
 . 