The Queens Majesties Letters to the great Sophy of Persia , sent by M. Anthonie Jenkinson , 1561. 
 The same in English . 
 ELizabeth , by the grace of God , Queen of England , This letter etc. To the right mighty , and right victorious 
 Prince , the great Sophy , Emperor of the Persians , Medes , Parthians , Hircans , Carmanians , Margians , of the people on this side , and beyond the river of Tygris , and of all men , and nations , between the Caspian sea , and the gulf of Persia , greeting , and most happy increase in all prosperity . By the goodness of the Almighty God it is ordained , that those people , which not only the huge distance of the lands , and the invincible wideness of the seas , but also the very quarters of the heavens do most far separate , and set asunder , may nevertheless through good commendation by writing , both ease , and also communicate between them , not only the conceived thoughts , or deliberations , and grateful offices of humanity , but also many commodities of mutual intelligence . Therefore whereas our faithful , 7 
 and right well-beloved servant Anthonie Jenkinson , bearer of these our letters , is determined with our licence , favour , and grace , to pass out of this our Realm , and by Gods sufferance to travel even into Persia , and other your jurisdictions : we mind truly with our good favour , to set forward , and advance that his right laudable purpose : and that the more willingly , for that this his enterprise is only grounded upon and honest intent , to establish trade of merchandise with your subject's , and with other strangers trafficking in your realm es . Wherefore we have thought good , both to write to your Majesty , and also to desire the same , to vouchsafe at our request , to grant to our said servant , Anthonie Jenkinson , good passports , and safe conducts , by means , and authority whereof , it may be free and lawful for him , together with his familiars , servants , carriages , merchandise , and goods whatsoever , thorough your Realms , Dominions , Jurisdictions , and Provinces , freely , and without impeachment , to journey , go , pass , repass , and tarry so long as he shall please , and from thence to return whensoever he or they shall think good . If these holy duties of entertainment , and sweet offices of natural humanity may be willingly concluded , sincerely embraced , and firmly observed between us , and our Realms , and subject's , then we do hope that the Almighty God will bring it to pass , that of these small beginnings , greater moments of things shall hereafter spring , both to our furniture and honours , and also to the great commodities , and use of our peoples : so it will be known that neither the earth , the seas , nor t^e heavens , have so much force to separate us , as the godly disposition of natural humanity , and mutual benevolence have to join us strongly together . God grant unto your Majesty long and happy felicity in earth , and perpetuali in heaven . Dated in England , in our famous city of London , the 25 day of the month of April , in the year of the creation of the world , 5523 , and of our Lord and God Jesus Christ , 1561 , and of our reign the third . 
 . 