A copy of the privileges granted by the right high and mighty Prince , the Emperor of Russia , etc. unto the right worshipful fellowship of English merchant's , for the discovery of new trades : and hither sent by Thomas Randolfe esquire , her Majesties Ambassador to the said Emperor , and by Andrew Savin his Ambassador in the year of our Lord God 1569. 
 Ne God everlasting , and without and before the beginning , the Father , the Son , and the holy Ghost , the blessed Trinitie , our only God , maker , and preserver of all things , and replenisher of all things every where , who by thy goodness dost cause all men to love the giver of wisdom 
 our only Mediator , and leader of us all unto blessed knowledge by the only Son his word , our Lord Jesus Christ , holy and everlasting Spirit , and now in these our days teachest us to keep Christianitie , and sufferest us to enjoy our kingdom to the happy commodity of our land , and wealth of our people , in despite of our enemies , and to our fame with our friends . 
 We John Vasiliwich by the grace of God , great lord , Emperor , and great duke of all Russia , Volodemer , Moscovia , Novogrod , Emperor of Cazan , Tversky , Vgorsky , Permisky , Vadsky , Bulgaria , and many others , lord and great duke of the Low countries' of Novogrod , Chernigosky , Resansky , Polotsky , Rastow , Yeraslave , Bealosera , Owdorsky , Condinsky , and all Siberland , great commander of all the North parts , lord of Leifland , and many other Northward , Southward and Westward . 
 108 
 Whereas our sister Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , hath written unto us her letters for her merchant's , who hath made suit that we should grant our goodness to the merchant's which are of one Company , and give them free leave to come to traffic in our kingdom to Colmogro , and to the country of Dwina , and to our great city of Moscovia , and to all the cities in our dominions , and thorough our country to Boghar , to Persia , Casbin , and Charday , and to all other countries' . 
 i We John Vasiliwich Emperor and great duke of all Russia ( for our sister Elizabeths sake , Queen of England ) have given and granted to the English merchant's , the Governors , Consuls , Assistants & fellowship , sir Wil. Garrard Knight , Rowland Haiward Aiderman , Joh. Thamworth Esquire , John Rivers Aiderman , Henry Beecher Aiderman , Consuls : Sir Wil. Chester Knight , Edward Jackman Aiderman , Lionel Ducket Aiderman , Edward Gilbert , Laurence Huse , Francis Walsingham , Clement Throgmorton , John Quarles , Nicholas Wheeler , Thomas Banister , John Harrison , Francis Burnham , Anthony Gamage , John Somers , Richard Wilkinson , Joh. Spark , Richard Bairn , Robert Woolman , Thomas brown , Thomas Smith , Thomas Allen , Thomas More , William Bully , Richard Young , Thomas Atkinson , Assistants : John Mersh Esquire , Geofrey Ducket , Francis Robinson , Matthew Field , & all the rest of their company and fellowship , and to their successors and deputies , to come with ships and other vessels into our Country , at Colmogorod , & Dwina , and to all the North parts now being ours , or that hereafter shall at any time be in our possession , by sea , river or land , even to our great City of Mosco , in all the towns of our Country , to Cazan and Astracan , to Novogorod the great , to Plesko & Leifland , Vriagorod , to Narve , and all other towns of Leifland . 
 2 And to pass through our land to Boghar , Persia , 
 109 
 Casbin , Charday , and other Countries : And wheresoever they come there to be and abide freely , and to barter and bargain freely all wares of sale , without custom of all people , and Merchants strangers whatsoever . 
 And if so be they bring any fine wares out of Englande , or any other Country from Boghar , Persia , Casbin , or from any other place , & those their wares that come by the way of Narve , or any other part into our Dominion , to bring the same wares into our treasure , and our Treasurers to view the same wares , and to take into our Treasury of the same such as shall needful for us . And all such wares as we shall not need , our Chancellor to redeliver you same : And after the view of our Chancellors , to barter it freely to whom they will , not selling any of their wares needful for us , before our Chancellor have seen the same . And all other gross and heavy wares that shall be needful to our use , not being brought to Mosco , to declare & tell our Chancellor of the same wares : And to give a note thereof by name , and how much they leave there , not brought to Mosco : and then if we need not the said wares , the English Merchants , their servants & Factors , to convey their wares the nearest way to Ustiug the great , and so to Colmogorod , or elsewhere at their pleasure , there to barter and fell the same . But those wares that shall needful for our Treasury , they shall not hide from us in any case . 
 And when our Chancellors shall send our adventure , with the said Merchants or their Factors , they to take our adventures with them , and to fell , & to barter for such wares as shall meet for our Treasury , and to return it into our Treasury . 
 And when we shall send any adventure into England then our Chancellor to give them a years warning , that their ships may be provided thereafter , that by taking in of our wares , they leave not their own behind them . 
 IIO 
 And to take our adventure yearly when they go into Persia . 
 Neither shall the English merchants receive or colour any of our peoples goods , nor barter nor fell it in any wise : likewise our people not to barter for the said English merchants or occupy for them . 
 3 And when they shall come into our Empire of Casan and Astracan , and other places of our Dominions , then our Captains of Casan and Astracan , and our authorised people , quietly to let them pass , not taking any toll or custom of their wares , nor once to make search thereof . 
 And when we shall send no adventure with them , yet to suffer them freely to pass , not viewing their wares , nor taking any kind of custom . And whatsoever English merchant will bargain with our Merchants or Factors beware for ware to barter the same at their pleasure . 
 And whatsoever their Merchant or Factors will fell their wares at their house at Mosco , which house I granted them at S. Maxims at the Mosco , they to sei the ware to our people , either strangers as they may best utter it , keeping within their house , arshines , measures , and weights under seals . 
 4 We have granted them the said house at S. Maxims in the half free , and without standing rend , as heretofore we did grant it the said English Merchants , sir Wil. Garrard , and the Company , maintaining in the said house one housekeeper a Russe , and two Russe servants , or some of their own country men , and none other Russes beside the aforesaid . And the said housekeepers that shall live at their house with the English merchants , neither to buy nor sei any wares for them , but that the said merchants themselves or their factors , shall buy , fell , and barter their own wares : and our Moscovie merchants not to take the said Englishmens wares to fell them in our towns , nor to buy any wares for them , neither the English merchant to colour any Russes wares at any town . 
 5 And whatsoever English merchant will fell his wares at Colmogorod , Dwyna , Vologda , Yeraslave , Castran , Novogorod the lower , Casan , Astracan , Novgorod the great , Vopsko , the Narve , Vriagorod , or at any other towns , they to sei their wares there at their pleasure : And of all wares aswell of other countries as of Russia , no officer or other to take any custom , neither in any place to stay them in any wise , neither take any kind of toll of them for their wares whatsoever . 
 6 And whatsoever merchant shall bargain or buy any wares of English merchants : The said Russe not to return those wares upon the merchants hands again , but to give ready money for the said wares , otherwise they to crave the Justice to give right , and to execute the law upon the same with all expedition . And when the English merchants or factors shall travail from Moscovie after the dispatch of their wares and business , then to show themselves unto our Chancellors , whatsoever wares of theirs shall go from Mosco , they not to show the same wares to any our officers , nor pay no custom nor toll in any place . 
 7 If it so happen the English merchants have any wrack , and the ships be brought to any port of our Dominions , we to command the said goods to be inquired and sought out , and to be given to the English merchant's , being here abiding at that time in our Country , the factors , servants , or deputies , of the Company aforesaid , to whom we have granted this our gracious letter . 
 And if there happen none of the English merchant's , factors , servants , or deputies to be in our Countries at such time , then we will all the said goods to be sought out and bestowed in some convenient place , and when any of the Company aforewritten , bringing these our letters , shall come for their goods , we to command their goods to be restored unto them . 
 8 Likewise we have granted leave to the English merchant's , their Governors , Consuls , and assistants , 
 112 
 namely , sir William Garrard knight , Rowland Hayward , and to the Company , to build houses at Vologda , Colmogro , and the seaside , at Ivangorod , at Cherell , and in all other places of our Dominions , as shall be needful for their trade . And they to keep at the said house one housekeeper , a Russe , and two or three men to keep their wares at the said houses , making sale thereof to whom they will , they , their Factors or deputies : the said housekeeper not to buy or fell for them . 
 9 Also we have given and granted to the English Merchant's , their house which they have by our goodness at S. Maxims in the Zenopski , and other their houses in the town of Zenopski , made for the better assurance of their goods , and all such as they shall set up hereafter shall be of the II Opressini , and will make them known to all them of Opressini . 
 io And whereas by our goodness we have granted them a Ropehouse at Vologda , being far from the English Merchant's house , now we have given them to built a house for that use by the said English house , and have given and granted them ( of our goodness ) ground , one hundreth and fourescore fathom long , and fiftie fathoms in breadth , according to their own request . 
 11 Also , we have of our goodness given and granted to the English Merchant's , leave to buy them a house at Wichida , and there to search out mines of iron . And where they shall happily find it , there to set up houses for the making of the same iron : and to make the same , of our goodness have granted them woods , five or sixe miles compass about the said houses , to the making of the said iron , and not to exceed these bounds and limits : And where they shall cut the said wood , not to set up any village or farm there , bringing the artificers for making of their iron , out of their own Country , and to learn our people that art , and so freely occupying the said iron in these our Dominions , transporting also of the same home into Englande , allowing for every pound one dingo , or half penny . 
 him 113 H 
 | | Or , chosen side . 
 12 And if any of the said iron shall needful for our works , then we to take of the said iron to our work , upon agreement of price , paying money out of our Treasury for the same : And when the said English Merchant's or Factors shall send their own people out of our Realm into their Country , over land through any Country whatsoever , freely to send the same with our words . 
 13 Also , we of our goodness have granted , that if any man misuse the said English , the Factors or servants , or the said English Merchant's , their Factors or servants abuse any other at Moscovie , or any other out towns whatsoever within our Dominions in trade of Merchandise or otherwise , then they to have upright justice in all such matters of our counsel the Opressini without all let or delay : But if our Justice may not agree the parties , then lots to be made , and to whose lot it shall fallen , to him the right to be given , and that only our counsel at Moscovie , and none of our Captains , or authorised people , or officers in any other our towns , give judgement upon the said English Merchant's for any thing . 
 14 Also , if any stranger shall have matter of controversy with any English Merchant , Factor or servant , abiding within these our Realms , or contrariwise any English Merchant , Factor or servant , against any other stranger , in all those causes our Counsel of the Opressini , to give them Justice , and to make and agreement & end between the parties , without all delay : And none to deal therein , save our Counsel of the Opressini . 15 And if any man have actium against any English Merchant being absent , that then in his absence it shall lawful for any other Englishman at his assignation to answer his cause . 
 16 If any Englishman happen to be wounded or beaten to death , or any Russe or stranger slain or beaten , 17 Or any stolen goods to be found in the said English houses , then our Counsellors to cause the 
 114 
 1569. guilty persons to be sought out , and to do right and Justice in the cause , and the party that is guilty , if he deserve punishment , to be corrected accordingly after his offence : That the said English Merchant's , factors and servant , sustain thereby no hindrance or damage . 
 18 And whatsoever English Merchant , Factor , servant , or deputy , shall guilty of any fault , deserving our displeasure , then our Counsellers to cause the guilty party to go under sureties , and their goods to be sealed and kept , until our pleasure be further known , and our Counsel to examine their offence , and so to report it unto us , that we may command what shall be done therein , and none other to be arrested or have their goods sealed , which are not guilty of that offence , nor to stay or apprehend them in any of our Dominions for the same . 
 19 If any English Merchant , Factor or servant shall offend , it shall lawful for their Agent to do justice upon the said party , or to send him home into England at his pleasure . 
 20 If any English Merchant , Factor or servant , have lent or hereafter shall lend money to any of our people , or credit them with wares , and so depart into any foreign Country , or die before the debt be due to be paid , then our people and Merchants to pay the said debt , to whom soever shall be appointed to the said room or charge , and the said English Merchant , factor , or servant , to bring his bill of debt to our Counsel , to show them what is due , and what money is owing them for any wares : and thus to do truly , not adding any whit to the debt , and our Counsel to command the debt to be discharged unto the English Merchant , factor , or servant , without delay . 
 21 And whatsoever English Merchant shall be arrested for debt , then our Counsel to command the party under arrest to be delivered to the Agent : and if he have no surety , to bind the Agent with him , for the better force of the bound . 
 And if any Englishman be indebted , we will the Creditor not to cast him in prison , or to deliver him to the Sergeant , lest the officer loose - him , but to take ware in pawn of the debt . 
 22 Also of our goodness , we have granted the English Merchants to send our Commission to all our Towns , Captains , and authorised men , to defend and guard the said Merchants from all thieves , robbers , and evil disposed persons . 
 23 If in coming or going to and from our dominions , the Merchants , the factors , or servants be spoiled on the sea , our Counsel shall send our letters , and will them to be sought out , and where they shall find the goods , cause it to be restored again , and the offender to be punished , according to our commandment . 
 24 Also of our goodness , we have granted the said Merchant's to take up Brokers , Packers , Wayers , and such like labourers , as shall be needful for them , paying for their hire as the labourers and they shall agree . 
 25 We likewise of our goodness , have licensed the English Merchants in our Towns of Mosco , Novogorod the great , and Plesko , that the Coiners of the said Towns shall melt Dollars , and coin money for them , without custom , allowing for coals , and other necessaries , with the workmanship . 
 26 Also of our goodness , we have granted to the said English Merchant's , to take post horse at needful times , leaving with our officers a note how many they take , and not else , in no case hindering or diminishing our treasury . 
 27 Also for our sister Queen Elizabeths sake , we of our goodness have granted to the merchant's within written , this our letter , and to their successors , that no Englishman , nor any other stranger , come without the Queens leave to Colmogorode , the river of Vob , Vasiagy , Pechora , Cola , Mezena , Pechingo , Zelevetskyes Island , the river of Shame , nor to no other haven of Dwina , nor to any part of the northside of Dwina 
 116 
 by hetherward of Wardhouse , to any haven , with ship , Buss , or any other vessel ! , nor to occupy in any kind of ways , but only the said English company , and their successors , to whom we of our goodness have granted this privilege . 
 28 Also that no English Merchant , without the Queens leave , shall come with any wares , to the Narve , or Uriogorod . 
 29 And whatsoever English Merchant , stranger , or other , of whatsoever Country he be , shall come with any ship , Buss , or any other vessel , to any of the said havens , of the north side , to any part of Dwina , by North the Narve , or Uriogorod , without the Queens leave or knowledge , not being of the company above written , we to apprehend and take the same vessel from those strangers and Merchant's , the one half to us the Emperor , and great Duke , and the other half to the company of English Merchant's . 
 30 Also of our goodness we have granted the said company of English merchant's , that no English mere chants or strangers shall pass through our dominions , to Boghar , Persia , Casbin , Charday , or other Countries' , save only the company of English merchant's , and our own messengers . 
 31 Also whatsoever Englishman , coming out of England or any other Country , into our dominions , without the Queens leave , and knowledge , not being of the said company , written within those our letters , mind , and purpose , to abide in our realm , contrary to the Queens will and pleasure , or any way abuse himself , the Agent shall freely send him home , to the Queen his Sovereign : which if the Agent of himself be unable to do , let him pray for aid of the captains and officers of our towns there being , and so send him to prison , and will the said captains not to hinder the said Agent from sending home such evil persons into England . 
 32 And if any man within our country run away to any other town or place , the English merchant's and 
 117 
 factors , to have free liberty to apprehend him , and take their goods from him again . 
 33 And as for our privilege given to Thomas Glover , Ralfe Rutter , Christopher Bennet , John Chapel , and their adherents , we have commanded the same privileges to be taken from them . 
 34 Also we of our goodness have granted the said company of English merchant's , their successors , servants and deputies , that do or shall remain at Mosco , or elsewhere within our dominions freely to keep their own law : and in any wise none of ours to force them to our law or faith against their will . 
 Moreover , beside and with the company of English merchant's , we permit all strangers , to trade to our town of Narve , Ivanogorod , & other our towns of Liefland , as they have done beforetime . Given from the beginning of the world 7077 , in the month of June 20 , Indiction 12 , the year of our lordship and reign 35 , and of our Empire of Rusland 23 , Cazan 17 , Astracan 15. 
 Other speciali grants by his Majesties private letters at the suit of M. Randolfe Ambassador . 
 REleasement out of prison of Fitzherbert , that was accused for writing of letters against the Emperor . 
 Liberty given to Thomas Greene that was accused and troubled upon suspicion of his dealing with the Ambassador , and licence given to him to traffic as he was accustomed . 
 Andrew Atherton and his sureties released at the Narve and his servant at the Mosco , that were in trouble for sending the merchant's letters into England . 
 A letter granted to Thomas Southam to the Council , for justice against them that stole the pearls . 
 His Majesties favour promised to the Artificers , and livings to be appointed them as they can best deserve . 
 A letter to the merchant's that went into Persia , to pass freely without impeachment in his dominions , as also letters of favour to the great Shaugh of Persia . 
 118 
 A grant unto the company that at what time soever they send to the discovery of Cataya , they shall licenced to repair unto this country , and have such conducts and guides , mariners , vessels , men and victuals as they shall stand in need of . 
 It is also promised by Knez Alfanas , and Peter Gregoriwich in the Emperors name , that if Benet Butler or any English man complain , deface , hinder in way of traffic or otherwise go about to discredit the worshipful company , and their doings , that therein they shall not be herd , and the doers to be punished , as in such cases they shall judged to have deserved . 
 Certain persons granted to be sent home into England that served the company , and were practisers against them in that country . 
 . 