The way and distances from Saint Nicholas , to the Caspian Sea. 
 IF you go straight from Saint Nicholas to the Caspian Sea , you must go to Vologhda by water , as by the easiest passage , and that is accomplished , passing day and night , in foureteene days and foureteene nights , in boats cut out of a tree : ( the boats are called Stroogs ) 1100. versts it is . 
 By horse and sleds in 8. days you may pass it in Winter . In Summer the way is dangerous by means of marishes and bogs , and not safely then to be passed . Then from Vologhda to Yeraslave , 180. versts over land . This Yeraslave stands upon the river of Volga , 180. versts I say distant from Vologhda . 
 To the Caspian sea are 2700. versts from Yeraslave . 
 So from S. Nicholas to the Caspian sea , are } 3 800.80 . versts . 
 The journey from S. Nicholas to Yeraslave is accom-70 
 plished in foureteene days by water , and two days by land . } i6 . days . 
 From thence to Astracan men travel by water in 30. days and 30. nights . 
 So between S. Nicholas and the Caspian sea , are [ 46. days journey . 
 There pass down Volga every Summer , 500. boats great 8c small , from all the upper parts of the river , whereof some be of 500. tun . They go for Minerali salt and for Sturgeon . 
 The salt lies in rocks ( and is whitish read , and in fine sand ) as it were 30. miles from Astracan towards the Caspian sea . They dig it themselves and pay nothing for it , but to the prince a penny a pood , viz. 40. pound weight . 
 The Sturgeon which they call Ocetera is taken fiftie Fishingfir miles on this side Astracan . Along the river the space of 20. miles , they make their booties in plain grounds , ' 8c fish for the space of three months , viz. from the end of May till the end of August , and having salt they use to salt them . 
 The river is there 5. or 6. miles broad , but with some Islands . 
 The river below Yeraslave , where it is most narrow , is a mile broad from side to side . 
 The river runneth upon read clay , all woods of birch and oak on the river sides , save about the towns of the fishing places . 
 Dwina from S. Nicholas to Ustiug runneth all on chalk and sand : the fish are sweet 8c fat . The Mean a fish with a great head a foot long breeds about Vologda , and is fat and delicate . 
 Between Vobsko and Novogrod , the space of and 180. miles , grows flax : the whole soil in length is so employed , and as much in breadth : this is upon a flat soil . 
 The hemp grows about Smolensk© upon the Polish border , 300. miles in compass : much of the soil is so employed . 
 Of this hemp they bring in Winter to Vologda and Colmogro , and we set in work in making of cables above 100. men . 
 The English - The Russians do spin and hachell it , and the English men in making tar it in thread and lay the cable . And one cable onworheaioo those is worth two of Danzick , because the Dan-men In Russia , zickers put in old cable and rotten stuff , which in fowl weather is found of no strength . 
 Sosnova tree , Sosnova , a tree that cureth the wolf with the shavings excellent for of ^g wooj ? grows in these parts , and of the barks \he ‘ wolf . they make ropes as big as a men arm for their 
 boats . 
 The Samoeds lacking linen make handkerchiefs and towels of the very wood of this tree . The wood of this tree is as heavy as holly , and the shavings tough . The descrip - Rose Island in S. Nicholas Bay is full of Roses ‘ hland^^ damask and read , of violets and wild Rosemary : This Island is near 7. or 8. miles about , and good pasture , and hath the name of the roses . 
 The snow here about the midst of May is cleared , having been two months in melting , then the ground is made dry within 14. days after , and then the grass is knee high within a month . Then after September the frost comes in , the snow is a yard deep upon plain ground . The Island hath Fir and Birch , and a fair fresh spring near the house built there by the English . 
 . 