The way discovered by water by us Thomas Southam & John Spark , from the town of Colmogro , by the Western bottom of the Bay of S. Nicholas , unto the city of Novgorod in Russia , containing many particulars of the way , and distance of miles , as hereafter followeth . Anno 1566. 
 E departed from Colmogro about 10. of the clock afore noon in a Lodia or Bark , which we hired to bring us along the coast to a place called Soroka , & in the said bark we hired 6. mariners , and a boy to conduct us to the place before rehearsed . 
 The Lodia or bark was of the burden of 25. tons or thereabouts , wherewith we valed down the river of Dwina , the wind being then calm , unto a monastery called S. Michael where we were constrained to anchor because of a contrary wind which there met us . 
 From Colmogro to this monastery are 50. versts or A versed is but miles of Russia , at which place we tarried till the 21. 3-liters of day in the morning , and then having the wind some - a^^tS what fair , we set sail and departed thence . 
 21 We departed from the monastery of S. Michael , having the wind somewhat fair , and arrived at Rose Island , over and against the monastery of S. Nicholas , the 22. day at 2. of the clock in the morning , which is 35. miles distant from the monastery of S. Michael . By reason of contrary wind and tide we were constrained to tarry there all that day . 
 23 We departed from the monastery of S. Nicholas at 7. of the clock in the evening , & came to and anchor at the Beacons , & continued there until half and hour passed 10. of the clock , and then set from thence , the wind being South : our course was West until 5. of the clock in the morning , when as we came to and anchor 
 At this town Newnox Richard Chancellor in his first voyage , with his company aship-board were relieved . 
 against Newnox town , where we continued until the 25. day . 
 The said town of Newnox is from the monastery of S. Nicholas 35. miles . 
 25 We departed from Newnox haven at one of the clock in the after noon , the wind at South and Southeast , and our course Northwest and by West . 
 The point of Tolstick which is the headland before the entrance of Newnox haven , and the headland of Sevsemski lie next Southeast and by South , Northwest and by North . We came to and anchor there this day at 4. of the clock in you afternoon , being from Newnox haven 15. miles , where we continued in harbour till the 27. day of the month , by reason of contrary winds . 
 27 We departed from Sevsemski in the morning at 5. of the clock , the wind next at East and by North , and our course Northwest and by West . 
 The said land of Sevsemski & the headland going into Owna river lies East and by South , west and by North , and between them is 25. miles . 
 This day at Sun set we came to and Island called Sogisney passing betwixt it & the main , with the wind at South and by East , our course was West and by South , being 85. miles from Owna river . 
 Being passed the said Island 10. miles , the wind came contrary , whereupon we returned to the Island of Sogisney , where we remained until the 29. day . 
 29 The 29. day we departed from Sogisney aforesaid , at 5. of the clock in the afternoon , the wind at East northeast , & our course was Southwest & by west , passing by and Island called Anger , being 30. miles from Sogisney , and keeping on our course , we came by the headland of and Island called Abdon , being from the Island of Anger 15. miles , where we found many rocks : and if the great providence of God had not preserved us , we had there perished , being fallen among them in the night time , and our pilot none of the perfectest , which was contrary to his profession as we found it . 
 But whosoever will travel that way must either keep hard aboard the shore , for that there is a channel which goes along the coast within the rocks , or else give the headland a birth of 6. miles at the least , and so go a seaboord all : for there are ledges of rocks that lie five miles from the headland . 
 We gave the headland a birth of 3. miles , notwithstanding there lay two rocks two miles to sea board of [ I . us , so that we were enclosed with them , and sat upon the highest of them : but it pleased God to make it calm , and give us the day also , or else we had miscarried . 
 30 We departed from the headland of the Island of Abdon , at 4. of the clock in the morning , directing our course West , and at 10. of the clock before noon , we arrived at a monastery nam Solofky , which is 15. miles from Abdon . 
 At this monastery we continued until the 31. day of this month . We had here delivered us by the chief monks of the monastery , their letter and house seal , and a servant of theirs to conduct us safely through the dangerous river of Owiga . 
 The people of all those parts are wild , and speak another kind of language , & are for the most part all tenants to the monastery . The effect of the letter was , that they should be ready to help and assist us in all dangerous places , and carry our boats and goods over land in places needful , as in deed they did , as hereafter shall appear . 
 Note , that at our being at the monastery , there was no Abbot for the place as then chosen : for 15. days before our arrival there , the Abbot was sent for by the Emperor , and made Metropolitan of the realm , as he now is . The number of monks belonging to the monastery are at the least 200. 
 31 we departed from the monastery of Solofky , as is aforesaid , to a fair stone house of theirs , which is 5. miles from the monastery , lying from it South and by West . 
 75 
 366. ] 
 August . i We departed from the Stone house at 3. of the clock in the morning : our course was West for 60. versts , and then passing betwixt diverse and sundry rocks , with many small Islands round about us for the space of 20 miles , keeping most commonly the same course still , we then shaped a new course , and yet sundry times shifting , but we always kept the Southwest , and nearest of all South southwest , until we came within two miles of the entrance of the river Owiga where we were to bear in , West and by North . 
 The river From the river Owiga , to the Islands and rocks before Owiga . mentioned , are 20. miles . 
 We arrived about 4. of the clock in the after noon within the river of Owiga , at a place nam Soroka , at which place we forsook our bark or Lodia , & continued there in making provision for small boats to carry us up the river until the 3. day of the same . 
 3 We departed from Soroka at two of the clock in the afternoon , with 3. boats and 12. men to row , and set the foresaid boats up the river of Owiga , which we hired . 
 We went this day 7. miles to a place called Ostrove , where we lay all night , but in the way 4. miles from The fallen of a Soroka , at a place where the water falls from the rocks , river . as if it came steep down from a mountain , we were constrained to take out our goods and wares out of the said boats , and caused them to be carried a mile over land , and afterwards also had our boats in like sort carried or drawn over land by force of men which there dwelled , being tenants to the monastery aforesaid . 
 And when our boats were come to the place where our wares were laid , we launched our boats and jaded our wares again , and went to the place before nam , where we continued and remained that night . 
 We departed from Ostrove in the morning before Sun rising , rowing and setting up the river 5. miles , where we came to a place whereas we were again constrained to take out our wares , and to carry them 76 
 1566. and our boats three miles over land , so that with rowing , drawing and setting , we went this day 7. miles more to a place called Sloboday , where we lay all night . 
 5 We departed from Sloboday in the morning at Sun rising , and at sixe of the clock in the afternoon , we came to a village called Paranda , which is from Sloboday 30. miles , where we remained all that night . 
 6 We departed from Paranda at 6. of the clock in the morning , and all that day what with setting and drawing our boats , we went but 11. miles , for we twice unladed our wares , & drew our boats overland , in one place a mile & and half , in another place as it were the eight part of a mile , and so we came to a place called Voyets , where we tarried all that night . 
 7 We departed from Voyets at 4. of the clock in the morning , & so came to and Ozera or lake , called after the name of the river , & unto a place called Quequenich , we rowed all this day , and came thither by one of the clock in the afternoon , which is 25. miles from Voyets , and there we remained all night to hire men and boats to carry us forward on our journey . 
 Here departed back from us the servant which we had at the Monastery , being sent by the monks to go thus far with us . And after that he had hired the boats and taken the men's names that should conduct us , & given them charge to deliver us with all things in safety , at a place being a little town called Povensa , then he departed from us without taking any reward for his pains , for so he was charged and commanded by the monks . 
 8 We departed from Quequenich at sun rising , & all that day rowed upon the lake among many Islands , The inhabitants do there report that there are as many v san ' Islands in their lake , as there are days in the year . In the evening we came to a village nam Tellekina , which is 60. miles from Quequenich . 
 9 We departed from Tellekina in the morning at 5. of the clock , and so entering into a river , we went that day 
 13. miles . In one place we carried our boats and goods overland 3. miles . At evening we came to a place called Oreiche na maelay , where we lay all night . 
 10 we departed thence at 5. of the clock in the morning , and so rowing , came to a place where the river ended , being 20. miles distant from the place where we lay all night , at which place we forsook our boats and unladed our wares , and sent a man to the town of Povensa , which was seven mile off , for horses to carry us and our wares to the said place . The horses came , and we jaded our goods , and at sixe of the clock in the afternoon we arrived at the town of Povensa , with all things in safety . 
 This town of Povensa stands within one mile of the famous lake or Ozera of Onega , which is 320. miles long , and in some places 70. miles over . But where it is narrowest it is 25. miles over , being fed with many goodly rivers which fallen into it . Hard aboard the shore within 6. miles , you shall have 40. and 45. fathoms of depth . 
 Here it is to be noted that from this place of Povensa unto the village of Soroka down those dangerous rivers which we came through , at no time of the year can or may any man carry or transport any goods that come from Novogrod , or the Narve , and such other places : for in the Summer it is impossible to carry down any wares by reason of the great falls of water that do descend from the rocks . Likewise in the Winter by reason of the great force and fallen of waters which make so terrible raises , that in those'places it never freezeth , but all such wares as come from Novogrod to Povensa , are transported by land to a place called Some in the Winter , which Some stands on the sea side , as does Soroka . The ready way from Povensa by land to this place of Some , with the distance of miles I will show hereafter . 
 12 We departed from Povensa at 9. of the clock in the morning , with 2. small boats which we hired to carry 
 us to a place called Toivo upon the lake of Onega , being 50 miles from Povensa , where we arrived the 13. day in the morning , where we bought a boat that carried us and all our wares from thence to the City of Novogrod . 
 14 We departed from Toivo at 3. of the clock in the afternoon , and at the evening arrived at a certain Island nam Salasalma , upon the said lake 7. miles from Toivo , and by reason of contrary winds we there tarried until the 16. day of this month . 
 16 We departed from Salasalma , at 8. of the clock in the morning , and came to and Island the 17. day in the morning , nam Vorronia , where we continued by reason of contrary winds , until the 21. day of the said month , and it is 60. miles from Salasalma . 
 21 We departed from Vorronia Island two hours S. Clement his before day , and arrived at S. Clements Monastery at Monastery . 1. of the clock in the after noon , being from Vorronia 48. miles . 
 22 We departed from S. Clements Monastery at the break of the day , having a fair wind all a long the lake : we sailed without striking of sail until two hours within night , and then entered into a river called Swire , at a Monastery called Vosnessino Christo , five miles from the entrance of the river , where we tarried all night . It is from S. Clements Monastery 160. miles : the stream of that river went with us . 
 23 we departed from Vosnessino Christo before Sun rising , and valed down the river sometime sailing , and sometime rowing , so that this day we went 90. miles and lay at night at a place called Vassian . 
 24 we departed from Vassian at the break of the day , and came to a place called II Selucax , where we lay all \\Or , Sermaxe . night , and is 10. miles from Vassian . 
 25 We departed from Selucaxe at 4 of the clock in the morning , and entered upon the Lake of Ladiskaie , the wind being calm all that day saving 3. hours , and then it was with us , so that we sailed and rowed that day 
 The Monastery of Gosnopoli . 
 The City of Novogrod . 
 10 . miles , along upon the said lake , and entered into the river of Volhuski , which river hath his beginning 20. miles above Novogrod , and runneth through the midst of the City , and so falls into this lake , which is far longer then the lake of Onega , but it is not so broad . This lake falls into the sea that comes from the Found : where any vessel or boat , having a good pilot , may go through the Found into England . 
 As soon as we were entered into the river , we came to a Monastery called S. Nicholas Medved , where we lay all that night . 
 26 we departed from S. Nicholas Medved , at five of the clock in the morning , rowing and drawing our boats all day , and came at night to another Monastery called Gosnopoli , which is 30 miles from S. Nicholas Medved , where we lay all that night . 
 27 We departed from Gosnopoli at 6. of the clock in the morning , and at evening came to a place called Moislave , where we lay all night , being 46. miles from the Monastery of Gosnopoli . 
 28 We departed from Moislave , and the said day at night came to a place called Grussina , 35. miles from Moislave where we lodged . 
 29 we departed from Grussina in the morning , and the same day at evening came to a place called Petroe Svetoe , where we lay all night , being 40 miles from Grussina . 
 30 We departed from Petroe Svetoe in the morning , and at two of the clock in the afternoon we arrived at the City of Novogrod , being twentie miles from Petroe Svetoe . Here we found William Rowlie Agent to the company , who was there stayed with all his company , and was not licenced to depart thence for the Mosco , by reason that the plague was then in the City of Novogrod . Unto him we delivered all the wares that we brought from Colmogro , for by the way we sold not a penny worth , the people of the country every where be so miserable . 
 The right way to bring and transport wares from Novogrod to Rose Island into S. Nicholas bay , where our Ships yearly lade , with the distance of miles from place to place , is as follows : 
 20 Miles from Novogrod to Petroe Svetoe . 
 40 Miles from thence to Grusina . 
 3 5 Miles from thence to Moislave . 
 46 Miles from thence to the Monastery Gosnopoli . 
 15 Miles from thence to Ladega town . 
 15 Miles from thence to Selvnaz over the lake of Ladega , albeit there be many villages all along the lake . 
 180 Miles from Ladega town up the river of Swire , unto the Monastery of Vosnessino Christo , albeit there are many villages upon the river : for within every five or sixe miles you shall have villages or small towns . 
 160 Miles from Vosnessino Christo to S. Clements Monastery , albeit there be many villages all along the lake of Onega . 
 48 Miles from thence to Voronia . 
 67 Miles from thence to Toivo town : and there are diverse villages all along the lake where the carriers may lie , and have meat for man and horse . 
 50 Miles from thence to Povensa , where Onega lake endeth . 
 The way from Povensa to Some town is this : 
 30 Miles from Povensa to Mastelina . 
 10 Miles from thence to Tellekina . 
 30 Miles from thence to Tolvich . 
 35 Miles from thence to Carraich . 
 20 Miles from thence to Varnich . 
 10 Miles from thence to Ostrovo . 
 15 Miles from thence to Lapina . 
 20 Miles from thence to Some it self . 
 Note , that from the City of Novogrod unto the town of Some is 936. miles , and from the town of Some unto the Monastery of S. Nicholas or Rose Island , over and against where our Ships do ride , is just as many miles as 
 in 81 F 
 2000. Sleds belonging to one town . 
 A good caveat for seasonable travel . 
 is Soroka village from S. Nicholas , as the Russes do account it , as also we do judge it , namely 325. miles . So that from Novogrod to S. Nicholas road , is by our account 1261. miles or versts . 
 Furthermore it is to be noted that all such wares as shall be bought at Novogrod , and sent to Some town , must be sent by sled way in the Winter : for if any ware should be sent from Novogrod by water in the spring of the year after the ice is gone , then must the said wares remain at Povensa town all that Summer , by reason that in the Summer there is no way to go from Povensa unto Some town . 
 At Povensa there are many warehouses to be hired , so that if there were as much goods as ten ships could carry away , you might have warehouses to put it in : but if there should remain much ware all the Summer , to be carried in the Winter to Some town , then horses are not easily to be got at that place to carry it thither : so that your wares once bought at Novogrod , you must have carriers there to carry it to the town of Some by Sleds , whereof you may there have 2000. if you will , by the report of the Russes . 
 For from Novogrod yearly there go many Sleds in the Winter to fetch salt from Some , with carriers and empty Sleds there to buy it , and to bring it to Novogrod to fell it in the market or otherwise . 
 From Novogrod unto Some town you may have a pood of wares carried for eight pence or nine pence : but in any wise your wares must be sent from Novogrod by the sixt of January , so that the wares may be at Some by Candlemas , or soon after : for if your wares should tarry by the way until the 15. of February when the Sun is of some power , then is it dangerous : for the heat of the Sun in the day causeth the deep lake's of Ladega , and specially of Onega to cleave : and if there should come then a sudden thaw , as oftentimes in that time of the year doth , then do . these lake's open and break , whereby many men are lost , and both men and 82 
 1566. horse drowned , although other rivers do remain frozen a long time after . 
 In the town of Some also there are many warehouses , whereof we cannot be destitute for the reposing of our wares , as also as many barks as you will to transport your wares from thence to S. Nicholas road , and that for three pence a poods carriage : so that from the Ci tie of Novogrod unto S. Nicholas road you may have wares carried for two all tines . The pood comes unto 23. all tines the tun . 
 Provided always , that you buy your wares there your Novgorod self , and send it thence : for there is no hope that the natives will bring their wares from Novogrod to Some , in hope to fell unto us , considering the great trade that they have at the Narve , which is within 180 miles off them . 
 Written by Thomas Southam a servant to the company . 
 . 