The English Bark assaulted near Astracan by the Nagaian Tartars . 
 [ I . 395-J 
 Astracan besieged by 70000. Turks and Tartars . 
 The fift voyage into Persia made by M. Thomas Banister , and master Geofrey Ducket , Agents for the Moscovie company , begun from England in the year 1568. and continuing to the year 1574. following . Written by 
 P. I from the mouth of M. Lionel 
 Plumtree . 
 Pon the 3. day of July 1568. they embarked themselves at Yeraslave , being accompanied with Lionel Plumtree , and some 12. English men more , in a Bark called the Thomas Bonaventure of the burden of 70. tons , taking also along with them of Russes to the number of 
 40. for their use and employments . It fell out in the way , before they came to Astracan by 40. miles , that the Nagaian Tartars , being a kind of thievish and cruel people , made and assault upon them with 18. boats of theirs , each of them being armed , some with swords , some with spears , and some others with bows and arrows , and the whole number of them they discovered to be about 300. men . They for their parts , although they could have wished a quiet voyage and journey without blows and violence , yet not willing to be spoiled with such Barbarians as they were , began to defend themselves against their assault , by means whereof a very terrible & fierce fight followed and continued hight & sharp for two hours , wherein our men so well played their parts with their calivers , that they forced the Tartars to flee with the loss of 120. of them , as they were afterwards informed by a Russe prisoner , which escaped from the Nagaians , and came to them to Astracan , at which town they arrived the 20. of August . 
 In this town of Astracan they were somewhat hindered of their journey , and stayed the space of sixe weeks 150 
 by reason of a great army of 70000. Turkes and Tartars which came thither upon the instigation of the great Turke , hoping either to have surprised it suddenly or by continuance of siege to win the same . But in the end by reason that the winter approached , as also , because they had received news of a great expedition , which the Emperor of Russia was in providing for the defence of the said place , they were constrained to raise their siege , 8c to leave the town as they found it . 
 Upon their departure our men had opportunity to proceed on their voyage , and using the occasion , they left Astracan , and came to Bilbil towards the end of October : from whence they went to Shavaran , where ( as they lodged in their tents ) they were greatly molested with strange troops of sholcaves or foxes , which were so busy with them that they took their meat and victuals out of their lodgings , and devoured to the bore bones in one night a mighty wild Boar that was sent unto them for a present from the governor of the country . 
 Having stayed here some three or foure days in providing of carriages and other necessaries for their journey , they departed thence and came to Shamaky , which is foure days journey from the aforesaid Shavaran . In this town of Shamaky their whole company spent out the Winter , and from thence in April following they took their journey towards Ardouil a place of great account and much esteemed , by reason of the sepulchres of the Emperors of Persia , which for the most part lie there buried , and so is grown to be a place of their superstitious devotion . In this town of Ardouil they sojourned the space of 5. or 6. months , finding some traffic and sales , but to no purpose , the town being more inhabited and frequented with gentlemen and noblemen then merchant's . 
 The difference of religion bred great broils in this town while they remained there : for the brother sought the destruction of the brother , and the nearest kinsmen 
 151 
 A.D. 
 I569 . 
 rose up one against another , insomuch that one of their company Lionel Plumtree hath seen in one day sometime 14. slain in a garboil . And he being further desirous to see their manner of fight , or rather somewhat more curious to behold , then mistrustful of their blows , was like to have born a share in their bloody tragedy , being twice wounded with their shot and arrows , although not to the death . 
 At this town the Shaw Thamas sent a messenger for our men to come to his presence at Casbin , to whom Thomas Banister failed not to go , although master Ducket lay very sick at Ardouil , and in such case that they almost despaired of his recovery . He being come to the Shaugh was received and entertained of him with great favour and speciali countenance , and had the most part of all his requests granted him , this only excepted , that whereas he entreated a privilege or sufferance to transport and carry through his dominions certain horses into India , the Shaugh seemed loath to yield thereunto , and yet did not altogether deny it , but referred it to some further time . As for the point of traffic , he could not make that motion or request that was not so soon granted as it was preferred : and the Shaugh himself bought there of him many karsies , and made him as good payment as any man could wish , and oftentimes would send his money for the wares before the wares were delivered , that he might be the surer of this honourable intended dealing . 
 One thing somewhat strange I thought good in this place to remember , that whereas he purposed to send a great sum of money to Mecca in Arabia , for and offering to Mahomet their prophet , he would not send any money or coin of his own , but sent to the English merchant's to exchange his coin for theirs , according to the valve of it , yielding this reason for the same , that the money of the merchant's was got by good means , and with good consciences , and was therefore worthy to be made for and oblation to their holy prophet , 152 
 but his own money was rather got by fraud , oppression and unhonest means , and therefore was not fit to serve for so holy a use . 
 After sixe months spent in Casbin the said Thomas Banister departed towards the great city of Tauris , where being arrived , he found M. Ducket well recovered of his sickness , whom he had left ill at Ardouil . 
 At this City the foresaid Master Ducket made sales of the English commodities , remaining there to that purpose the space of two years and a half . And beside other kinds of merchandises of that country , he bought great store of gals which grow in great abundance at a place within one days journey of the aforesaid Tauris . 
 After this Thomas Banister departed from Tauris , and went to Shamaky to give order for the transporting of those commodities which were bought for England . And having dispatched them away , he went there hence to Arrash , a town foure days journey with camels from Shamaky for the buying of raw silk . But there by reason of the unwholesomeness of the air , and corruption of the waters in the hight time of the year , he with Lawrence Chapman and some other English men unhappily died : which being known of M. Ducket , he immediately came from Tauris to Arrash , to take possession of the goods , for otherwise by the custom of the country , if there had be no merchant or other friend of his to enter upon that which he left , all had fallen into the Shaughs hands , which goods notwithstanding could not be recovered from the officers which had seized and sealed up the same , until M. Ducket had be in person with the Shaugh , and had procured his order for the delivery thereof . 
 Lionel Plumtree , in the mean time that M. Ducket was at Casbin in suit for goods , upon the persuasion of certain Bogharians , made provision for a journey to Cathaia , with carriages and commodities , and having all things ready , departed secretly with a Caravan : but being gone forward on his way sixe days journey , some fifty r53 
 A.D. 
 1572. 
 [ I - 39^-1 
 The death of Thomas Banister and Laurence Chapman . 
 1572. Humfrey Greensell burned at Ormus . 
 horsemen by the procurement of Humfry Greensell ( who afterwards being at Ormus in the East Indies , was there cruelly burned in the Inquisition by the Portingals ) were sent after him in post from Sultan Erasbec , the Shaughs lieutenant , to fetch him back again , not suffering him to pass on so perilous and dangerous a journey for fear of diverse inconveniences that might follow . 
 After this M. Ducket returned from Casbin to Shamaky again , and immediately made preparation for a journey to Cassan , being about foure days journey from Shamaky , and carried with him foure mules laden with money . 
 In the way of his travel he passed through Persepolis , sometime the royal seat of the Emperor's of Persia , but now altogether ruined and defaced , whereof remain to be seen at this day two gates only that are distant one from the other the space of 12. miles , and some few pinnacles in the mountains and conveyances for fresh water . 
 The foresaid Cassan is a town that consisteth altogether of merchandise , and the best trade of all the land is there , being greatly frequented by the merchant's of India . 
 Here our men bought great store of all manner of wrought silks , and some spices , and good store of Turkey stones . 
 The town is much to be commended for the civil and good government that is there used . And idle person is not suffired to live among them . 
 The child that is but five years old is set to some labour . No ill rule , disorder or riot by gaming or otherwise , is there permitted . Playing at Dice or Cards is by the law present death . 
 At this Cashan they remained about the space of tenne weeks , and then came down again to Shamaky , and after some time spent in diverse places of the country for buying of raw silk and other commodities , they came at last to Shavaran again , where their ship was in harbour , and then they shipped all their goods and 154 
 .. I573‘ embarked themselves also , setting sail the eight day of May , in the year 1573. intending to fetch Astracan . By reason of the variety of the winds and dangerous flats of the Caspian sea , they beatrice it up and down some 20. days . And the 28. day riding at anchor upon the flats , certain Russe Cassaks , which are outlaws or banished men , having intelligence of their being there , and of the great wealth that they had with them , came to them with diverse boats under the colour of friendship , and entered their ship , but immediately they took their hatchet's & slew diverse of the Russes that were of the ship upon the hatches : Whereupon master Ducket , Lionell Plumtree , William Smith , the master , a man of singular valour , and Amos Riall being under the Spar-deck , did so well behave themselves , that they skowred the hatches , and slew 14. of the Cassaks gunners , and hurt and wounded about 30. more , being of them all in number 150. at the least , armed with calivers and other weapons fit for so villainous a purpose . 
 M. Ducket notwithstanding and the rest aforesaid English received diverse wounds from the enemy , and were so taken by hurt , and withal so oppressed with the multitude and Cassa shall force of them , that they were at last constrained to make and agreement with the Cassaks by rendering the ship into their hands , having received first their oaths sworn by their crucifixes , not to do any further harm to their persons . 
 Thus the ship being taken , and all the English grievously hurt , the Cassaks immediately discharged the ship of them , putting them all into the ship boat with two or three Persian targets full of horse flesh and swines flesh , without further victuals or relief : they being in that case , made the best haste they could to get to Astracan : and being come to the town , master Ducket made great suit to the captain to have men and boats set out for the rescuing and recovering of the ship if it were possible : who immediately sent out his son with fortie boats and five hundred men to 
 155 
 pursue the Pirates , and by good hap came to the place where they rid at anchor with the ship , but by reason of their foolishness in striking up their drums before they were come near them , the Cassaks discovering the boats , cut their gables and put out to sea , whereupon the boats not being able to follow them , returned again to Astracan . After which , 60. boats more were sent out to pursue them again the second time : & that second army came to a place where they found many of those Cassaks and slew them , and found out the places where they had hid certain parcels of their goods in the earth in the chests of the ship : all which they recovered again for the English merchant's , to the valve of 5000. li . of 30. or 40. thousand pound , but all the rest the Cassaks in the ship had carried away . 
 In the same place they found further diverse of the Cassaks which the Englishmen had slain , buried in the earth , and wrapped some in fortie or fifty yards of Satin and Taffataes , and some in Turkey carpets cut & spoiled by those villainous Pirates , of whom afterwards as many as could be taken by the Persians who entirely loved the English merchant's , were put to most cruel torments in all places according to their deserts . 
 But our men being thus spoiled of their goods , and wounded in their bodies , remained about two months at Astracan for their better recovery : & having got some reasonable strength , they then provided boats and went up the river of Volga to Cazan , with such goods as they had recovered from the Cassaks . From Cazan they went towards Yeraslave , but in the way the ice intercepted them about the beginning of October , ' where suddenly in the night they were taken with a cruel and vehement frost , and therewithal ! the waters so congealed , that their boats were crushed and cut in sunder with the ice , whereby they sustained both a further danger of life and loss of goods : but as much as they could preserve with much ado , they conveyed over land in sleds to Vologda , and from thence sent much 
 I56 
 of it to Saint Nicholas to be laden in the ships for England . 
 But Master Ducket , Lionel Plumtree and Amos Riall went with some parcels to the Mosko , and there sold certain quantities of it to the Emperor , who pitying the mighty loss that they had sustained by his own rebellious people and subject's , bought himself as much as he liked , and paid present money for the same . So that Winter being spent out in Mosko , and such wares provided by them as served for England , they departed to Saint Nicholas , and there embarked in the month of August : and having endured a very terrible passage in nine weeks and three days , with some hardness of victuals , contrary and furious winds , and other sea accidents , they arrived at London in the month of October , one thousand five hundred seventie and foure , and so made and end of and unfortunate voyage : which if it had pleased God to prosper , that all things had come home as safely as they were carefully provided , and painfully laboured for , it had proved the richest voyage and most profitable return of commodity , that had ever be undertaken by English merchant's , who , notwithstanding all misfortunes , lost nothing of their principali adventure , but only the interest and gain that might have risen by the use of their stock in the mean time . 
 . 