Further observations concerning the state of Persia , taken in the foresaid fift voyage into those parts , and written by M. Geffrey Ducket , one of the Agents employed in the same . 
 Hamaky is the fairest town in all Media , and the chiefest commodity of that country is raw silk , & the greatest plenty thereof is at a town three days journey from Shamaky called Arash : and within 3. days journey of Arash is a country nam Grosin , whose inhabit 
 ants are Christians , & are thought to be they which are otherwise called Georgians : there is also much silk to be sold . The chief town of that country is called Zegham , from whence is carried yearly into Persia , and incredible quantity of Hasell nuts , all of one sort and goodness , and as good and thin shaled as are our Filberts . Of these are carried yearly the quantity of 4000. Camels laden . 
 Of the name of the Sophy of Persia , & why he is called the Shaugh , and of other customs . 
 THe king of Persia ( whom here we call the great Sophy ) is not there so called , but is called the Shaugh . It were there dangerous to call him by the name of Sophy , because that Sophy in the Persian tongue , is a beggar , & it were as much as to call him , The great beggar . He lies at a town called Casbin , which is situate in a goodly fertile valley of 3. or 4. days journey in length . The town is but evil built , and for the most part all of brick , not hardened with fire , but only dried at the sun , as is the most part of the building of all Persia . The king hath not come out of the compass of his own house in 33. or 34. years , whereof the cause is not known , but as they say , it is 
 upon a superstition of certain prophecies to which they are greatly addicted : he is now about 80. years of age , and very lusty . And to keep him the more lusty , he hath 4. wives always , and about 300. concubines , and once in the year he hath all the fair maidens and wives that may be found a great way about brought unto him , whom he diligently peruseth , feeling them in all parts , taking such as he liketh , and putting away some of them which he hath kept before , & with them that he putteth away , he gratifieth some such as hath done him the best service . And if he chance to take any men wife , her husband is very glad thereof , and in recompense of her , oftentimes he gives the husband one of his old store , whom he thankfully receives . 
 If any stranger being a Christian shall come before How strangers him , he must put on a new pair of shoes made in are used-that country , and from the place where he entereth , there is dug as it were a causey all the way , until he come to the place where he shall talk with the king , who stands always above in a gallery , when he talketh with any strangers : and when the stranger is departed , then is the causey cast down , and the ground made even again . 
 Of the religion of the Persians . 
 THeir religion is all one with the Turkes , saving that they differ who was the right successor of Mahumet . The Turkes say that it was one Homer and his son Usman . But the Persians say that it was one Mortus Ali , which they would prove in this manner . They say there was a counsel called to decide the matter who should be the successor : and after they had called upon Mahumet to reveal unto them his will and pleasure therein , there came among them a little A goodly and Lizard , who declared that it was Mahumets pleasure well grounded that Mortus Ali should be his successor . This Mortus re Ali was a valiant man and slew Homer the Turkes prophet . He had a sword that he fought withal , with 
 159 
 the which he conquered all his enemies , and killed as many as he stroke . When Mortus Ali died , there came a holy prophet , who gave them warning that shortly there would come a white Carnell , upon the which he charged them to lay the body and sword of Mortus Ali , and to suffer the Camel to carry it whither he would . The which being performed , the said white camel carried the sword & body of Mortus Ali unto the sea side , and the camel going a good way into the sea , was with the body & sword of Mortus Ali taken up into heaven , for whose return they have long looked in Persia . And for this cause the king always keepeth a horse ready saddled for him , and also of late kept for him one of his own daughters to be his wife , but she died in the year of our Lord , 1573. And they say furthermore , y‘ if he come not shortly , they shall of our belief : much like the Jewes , looking for their Messias to come & reign among them like a worldly king for ever , and deliver them from the captivity which they are now in among the Christians , Turkes , and Gentiles . 
 The Shaugh or king of Persia is nothing in strength & power comparable unto the Turke : for although he hath a great Dominion , yet is it nothing to be compared with the Turks : neither hath he any great Ordinance or guns , or harquebusses . Notwithstanding his eldest son Ismael about 25. years past , fought a great battle with the Turke , and slew of his army about and hundreth thousand men : who after his return , was by his father cast into prison , and there continueth until this day : for his father the Shaugh had him in suspicion that he would have put him down , and have taken the regiment unto himself . 
 Their opinion of Christ is , that he was and holy man and a great Prophet , but not like unto Mahumet : saying , that Mahumet was the last prophet by whom all things were finished , & was therefore the greatest . To prove that Christ was not Gods son , they say that God had never wife , and therefore could have no son 
 160 
 or children . They go on pilgrimage from the furthest part of Persia unto Mecha in Arabia , and by the way they visit also the sepulchre of Christ at Jerusalem , which they now call Couch Kaly . 
 The most part of spices which comes into Persia is brought from the Island of Ormus , situate in the gulf of Persia called Sinus Persicus , between the main land of Persia and Arabia , etc. The Portingals touch at Ormus both in their voyage to East India and homeward again , and from thence bring all such spices as are occupied in Persia and the regions thereabouts : for of pepper they bring very small quantity , and that at a very deer price . 
 The Turkes oftentimes bring pepper from Mecha in Arabia , which they fell as good cheap as that which is brought from Ormus . Silks are brought from no place , but are wrought all in their own country . 
 Ormus is within two miles of the main land of Persia , and the Portingals fetch their fresh water there , for the which they pay tribute to the Shaugh or king of Persia . 
 Within Persia they have neither gold nor silver mines , yet have they coined money both of gold and silver , and also other small moneys of copper . There is brought into Persia and incredible sum of Dutch dollars , which for the most part are there employed in raw silk . 
 They have few books and less learning , and are for the most part very brutish in all kind of good sciences , saving in some kind of silk works , and in such things as pertain to the furniture of horses , in the which they are passing good . 
 Their laws are as in their religion , wicked and detestable . And if any man offend the prince , he punisheth it extremely , not only in the person that offends , but also in his children , and in as many as are of his kin . Theft and murder are often punished , yet none otherwise then pleases him that is ruler in the place where the offence is committed , and as the party offending in 161 L 
 Their money . 
 Their books and learning . 
 Such was the law of the Macedonians for treason . 
 is able to make friends , or with money to redeem his offence . 
 Dissension fir There is oftentimes great mutiny among the people 
 great Towns which of Mortus Ali his sons was greatest : insomuch that sometime in the town two or three thousand people are together by the ears for the same , as I have seen in the town of Shamaky and Ardouil , and also in the great City of Teveris , where I have seen a man coming from fighting , in a bravery bringing in his hand foure or five men's heads , carrying them by the hair of the head : for although they shave their heads most commonly twice a week , yet leave they a tuft of hair upon their heads about 2. foot long . 
 I have inquired why they leave the tuft of hair upon their heads . They answer , that thereby they may easiler be carried up into heaven when they are dead . 
 For their religion they have certain priests who are appareled like unto other men . They use every morning and afternoon to go up to the tops of their churches , and tell there a great tale of Mahumet and Mortus Ali : and other preaching have they none . Their Lent is after Christmas , not in abstinence from flesh only , but from all meats and drinks , until the day be off the sky , but then they eat sometimes the whole night Their priests And although it be against their religion to drink wine , at n’^t the7 wi^ take excess thereof and en ' be drunken . Their Lent begins at the new Moon , and they do not enter into it until they have seen the same : neither yet doth their Lent end , until they have seen the next new Moon , although the same ( through close weather ) should not be seen in long time . 
 Their saints They have among them certain holy men whom they and holy men . getes , counted holy for that they or any of their ancestors have be on pilgrimage at Mecha in Arabia , Pilgrimage . for whosoever goes thither on pilgrimage to visit the sepulchre of Mahumet , both he and all his posterity are ever after called Setes , and counted for holy men , and have no less opinion of themselves . And if a man 162 
 contrary one of these , he will say that he is a Saint , and therefore ought to be believed , and that he cannot lie , although he lie never so shamefully . Thus a man may be too holy , and no pride is greater then spirituali pride of a mind puffed up with his own opinion of holiness . These Setes do use to shave their heads all over , saving on the sides a little above the temples , the which they leave unshaven , and use to braid the same as women do their hair , and to wear it as long as it will grow . 
 Every morning they use to worship God , Mahumet , Their prater and Mortus Ali , 8c in praying turn themselves towards & w°r-the South , because Mecha lies that way from them , When they be in travel on the way , many of them will Mahumet . ( as soon as the Sun riseth ) light from their horses , turning themselves to the South , and will lay their gowns before them , with their swords and beads , and so standing upright worship to the South : and many times in their prayers kneel down and kiss their beads , or somewhat else that lies before them . 
 The men or women do never go to make water , Washing and but they use to take with them a pot with a spout , outward clen-and after they have made water , they flash some water linesse-upon their privy parts , and thus do the women as well as the men : and this is a matter of great religion among them , and in making of water the men do cowre down as well as the women . 
 When they earnestly affirm a matter , they will swear Their . by God , Mahumet , or Mortus Ali , and sometime by swearin&-all at ones : as thus in their own language , saying , Olla , Mahumet , Ali. But if he will swear by the Shaughs head , in saying Shaugham bash , you may then believe him if you will . 
 The Shaugh keepeth a great magnificence in his court : The kings and although sometime in a month or six weeks none of his nobility or counsel can see him , yet go they daily to the court , and tarry there a certain time until they have known his pleasure whither he will come - 
 163 
 I57+ - maund them any thing or not . He is watched every night with a thousand of his men , which are called his 
 Pursuivants . Curshes , who are they that he uses to send into the Countries about his greatest affairs . When he sends any of them ( if it be to the greatest of any of his nobility ) he will obey them , although the messenger should beatrice any of them to death . 
 The kings company with his wives and concubines . The Shaugh occupieth himself always two days in the week in his Bathstove , and when he is disposed to go thither , he takes with him five or sixe of his concubines , more or less , and one day they consume in washing , rubbing , and bathing him , and the other day in paring his nails , and other matters . The greatest part of his life he spendeth among his wives and concubines . He hath now reigned about fiftie and foure years , and is therefore counted a very holy man , as they ever esteem their kings , if they have reigned fiftie years or more : for they measure the favour of God by a men prosperity , or his displeasure by a men misfortune or adversity . The great Turke hath this Shaugh in great reverence , because he hath reigned king so long time . 
 The succession of the kingdom . I have said before that he hath foure wives , and as many concubines as him lists : and if he chance to have any children by any of his concubines , and be minded that any of those children shall inherit after him , then when one of his wives dieth , the concubine whom he so favoureth , he makes one of his wives , and the child whom he so loves best , he ordaineth to be king after him . What I herd of the manner of their manages , for offending of honest consciences and chaste ears , I may not commit to writing : their fasting I have declared 
 Circumcision . before . They use circumcision unto children of seven years of age , as do the Turkes . Their houses ( as I have said ) are for the most part made of brick , not burned but only dried in the Sun : In their houses they have but little furniture of household 164 
 stuff , except it be their carpets and some copper work : Their houses for all their kettles & dishes wherein they eat , are of and . manner copper . They eat on the ground , sitting on carpets eatin^-crosse legged as doe Tailors . There is no man so simple but he sitteth on a carpet better or worse , and the whole house or room wherein he sitteth is wholly covered with carpets . Their houses are all with flat roofs covered with earth : and in the Summer time they lie upon them all night . 
 They have many bound servants both men and women . Bondmen and Bondmen and bondwomen , is one of the best kind of bondwomen . merchandise that any man may bring . When they buy any maids or young women , they use to feel them in all parts , as with us men do horses : when one hath bought a young woman , if he like her , he will keep her for his own use as long as him lists , and then selleth her to and other , who doth the like with her . 
 So that one woman is sometime sold in the space of foure or five years , twelve , or twentie times . If a Women bought man keep a bondwoman for his own use , and if he and find her to be false to him , and give her body to any 11110 hire ' other , he may kill her if he will . 
 When a merchant or traveller comes to any town where he entendeth to tarry any time , he hireth a woman , or sometimes 2. or 3. during his abided there . And when he comes to and other town , he doth the like in the same also : for there they use to put out their women to hire , as we do here hackney horses . 
 There is a very great river which runneth through the plain of Javat , which falls into the Caspian sea , by a town called Bachu , near unto which town is a strange thing to behold . For there issueth out of the Abundance of ground a marvelous quantity of oil , which oil they " suing fetch from the uttermost bounds of all Persia : it serves out all the country to burn in their houses . 
 This oil is black , and is called Nefte : they use to carry it throughout all the Country upon kine & asses , of which you shall oftentimes meet with foure or five i65 
 hundred in a company . There is also by the said town of Bachu another kind of oil which is white and very precious : and is supposed to be the same that here is Oleum Petro - called Petroleum . There is also not far from Shamaky , k*1 ™ - a thing like unto tar , and issueth out of the ground , whereof we have made the proof , that in our ships it serves well in the stead of tar . 
 Two sorts of In Persia are kine of two sorts : the one like unto tne - ours in these parts : the other are marvelous evil 
 favoured , with great bones and very lean , and but little hair upon them : their milk is walowish sweet : they are like unto them which are spoken of in the Scripture , which in the dream of Pharao signified the seven deer years : for a leaner or more evil favoured beast can no man see . 
 In the country of Shirvan ( sometime called Media ) if you chance to lie in the fields near unto any village , Foxes in great as the twilight begins , you shall have about you plenty - two or three hundred foxes , which make a marvelous wawling or howling : and if you look not well to your victuals , it shall escape them hardly but they will have part with you . 
 The Caspian sea doth neither ebb nor flow , except sometime by rages of wind it swells up very high : the water is very salt . Howbeit , the quantity of water that falls out of the great river of Volga makes the water fresh at the least twentie leagues into the sea . The Caspian sea is marvelous full of fish , but no kind of monstrous fish , as far as I could understand , yet hath it sundry sorts of fish which are not in these parts of the world . 
 The mutton there is good , and the sheep great , having very great rumps with much fat upon them . 
 Rice and mutton is their chief victuali . 
 . 