The copy of a letter sent to the Emperor of Moscovie , by Christopher Hodsdon and William Burrough , Anno 1570. 
 Ost mighty Emperor , etc. Whereas Sir William Garrard and his fellowship the company of English merchant's , this last Winter sent hither to the Narve three ships laden with merchandise , which was left here , and with it Christopher Hodsdon one of the said fellowship , and 
 their chief doer in this place , who when he came first hither , and until such time as he had dispatched those ships from hence , was in hope of goods to lade twelve or thirteene sails of good ships , against this shipping , wherefore he wrote unto the said Sir William Garrard and his company to send hither this spring the said number of thirteene ships . And because that in their coming hither we found the Freebooters on the sea , and supposing this year that they would be very strong , he therefore gave the said sir William and his Company advice to furnish the said number of ships so strongly , as they should be able to withstand the force of the Freebooters : whereupon they have according to his advice sent this year thirteene good ships together well furnished with men and munition , and all other necessaries for the wars , of which 13. ships William Burrough one of the said fellowship is captain general , unto whom there was given in charge , that if he met with any the Dansk Freebooters , or whatsoever robbers and thieves that are enemies to your highness , he should do his best to apprehend and take them . It so happened that the tenth day of this month the said William with his fleet , met with sixe ships of the Freebooters near unto and Island called Tuttee , which is about 50. versts from Narve , unto which Freebooters he with his fleet gave chase , and took of them the Admiral , 167 
 A.D. 
 1570 
 Five ships of Freeboters taken . 
 wherein were left but three men , the rest were fled to shore in their boats among the woods upon Tutty , on which ship he set fire and burned her . He also took foure more of those ships which are now here , and one ship escaped him : out of which foure ships some of the men fled in their boats and so escaped , others were slain in fight , and some of them when they saw they could not escape , cast themselves willingly into the Sea and were drowned . So that in these five ships were left but 83. men . 
 The said Wil. Borough when he came hither to Narve , finding here Christopher Hodsdon aforenamed , both the said Christopher and William together , in the name of sir William Garrard and the rest of their whole company and fellowship , did present unto your highness of those Freebooters taken by our ships 82. men , which we delivered here unto Knez Voivoda , the 13. of this month . One man of those Freebooters we have kept by us , whose name is Haunce Snarke a captain . And the cause why we have done it is this : When we should have delivered him with the rest of his fellows unto the Voivodaes officers , there were of our Englishmen more then 50. which fell on their knees unto us , requesting that he might be reserved in the ship , and carried back into England : and the cause why they so earnestly entreated for him , is , that some of those our Englishmen had be taken with Freebooters , and by his means had their lives saved , with great favour beside , which they found at his hands . Wherefore if it please your highness to permit it , we will carry him home with us into England , wherein we request your majesties favour : notwithstanding what you command of him shall observed . 
 we have also sent our servant to your highness with such bestellings and writings as we found in those ships : whereby your Majesty may see by whom , and in what order they were set out , and what they pretended , which writings we have commended unto Knez Yorive 168 
 your Majesties Voivoda at Plesco , by our servant . And have requested his furtherance for the safe delivery of them to your majesties hands : which writings when you have perused , we desire that they may be returned unto us by this our servant , as speedily as may be : for these ships which we now have here will be soon dispatched from hence , for that we have not goods to lade above the half of them . And the cause is , we have this winter ( by your majesties order ) be kept from trafficking , to the companies great loss . But hoping your [ I . 402. J majesty will hereafter have consideration thereof , and that we may have free liberty to traffic in all parts of your majesties Countries , according to the privilege given unto us , we pray for your majesties health , with prosperous success to the pleasure of God . From Narve the 15 of July , Anno 1570. 
 Your Majesties most humble and obedient , Christopher Hodsdon . William Borough . 
 . 