The request of and honest merchant to a friend of his , to be advised and directed in the course of killing the Whale , as follows . An. 1575. 
 I pray you pleasure me in getting me perfect information of the matter hereunder specified . 
 FOr the provision and furniture for a ship of 200 tons , to catch the Whale fish in Russia , passing from England . How many men to furnish the ship . 
 How many fishermen skilful to catch the Whale , & how many other officers and Coopers . 
 200 
 How many boats , and what fashion , and how many men in each boat . 
 What wages of such skilful men and other officers , as we shall need out of Biskay . 
 How many harping irons , spears , cords , axes , hatchet's , knives , and other implements for the fishing , and what sort and greatness of them . 
 How many kettles , the greatness and manner of them , and what mettle , and whither they be set on trivets or on furnaces for boiling of the train oil , and others . 
 What quantity of cask , and what sort of cask , and what number of hoops and twigs , and how much thereof to be staved for the train . 
 What quantity of victuals , and what kind of victuals for the men in all the ship for 4 months time . 
 For the common mariners and officers to govern the ship , we shall not need any out of Biskaie , but only men skilful in the catching of the Whale , and ordering of the oil , and one Cooper skilful to set up the staved cask . 
 Also what other matters are requisite to be known , and done for the said voyage to catch the Whale , not here noted nor remembered . 
 These requests were thus answered , which may serve as directions for all such as shall intend the same voyage , or the like for the Whale . 
 A proportion for the setting forth of a ship of 200. tun , for the killing of the Whale . 
 THere must be 55 men who departing for Wardhouse in the month of April , must be furnished with 4 kintals and a half of bred for every man . 250 hogsheads to put the bred in . 
 150 hogsheads of Cidar . 
 6 kintals of oil . 
 8 kintals of bacon . 
 201 
 10 quarters of salt . 
 150 pound of candles . 
 8 quarters of beans and peas . 
 Saltfish & herring , a quantity convenient . 
 4 tons of wines . 
 Half a quarter of mustard seed , and a quern . 
 A grindstone . 
 800 empty shaken hogsheads . 
 350 bundles of hoops , and 6 quintalines . 
 800 pair of heads for the hogsheads . 
 10 Estachas called roxes for harping irons . 
 10 pieces of Arporieras . 
 3 pieces of Baibens for the Javelins small . 
 2 tackles to turn the Whale's . 
 A halser of 27 fathom long to turn you whale's . 
 15 great Javelins . 
 18 small Javelins . 
 50 harping irons . 
 6 machicos to cut the Whale withal . 
 2 doozen of machetos to minch the Whale . 
 2 great hooks to turn the Whale . 
 3 pair of Can hooks . 
 6 hooks for staves . 
 3 dozen of staves for the harping irons . 
 6 pullies to turn the Whale with . 
 10 great baskets . 
 10 lamps of iron to carry light . 
 5 kettles of 150 li . the piece , and 6 ladles . 
 1000 of nails for the pinnaces . 
 500 of nails of Carabelie for the houses , and the wharf . 
 18 axes and hatchet's to cleave wood . 
 12 pieces of lines , and 6 dozen of hooks . 
 2 beetles of Rosemary . 
 4 dozen of oars for the pinnaces . 
 6 lanterns . 
 500 of Tesia . 
 202 
 WILLIAM BURROUGH’S DEPOSITION a.d. 
 1576. 
 Item , gunpowder & matches for harquebusses as shall needful . 
 Item , there must be carried from hence 5 pinnaces , five men to strike with harping irons , two cutters of Whale , 5 coopers , & a purser or two . 
 A note of certain other necessary things belonging to the Whalefishing , received of master W. Burrough . 
 A sufficient number of pullies for tackle for the Whale . 
 A dozen of great baskets . 
 4 furnaces to melt the Whale in . 
 6 ladles of copper . 
 A thousand of nails to mend the pinnaces . 
 500 great nails of spikes to make their house 
 3 pair of boots great and strong , for them that shall cut the Whale . 
 8 calve skins to make aprons or barbecans . 
 . 