Advertisements and reports of the 6. voyage into the parts of Persia and Media , for the company of English merchant's for the discovery of new trades , in the years 1579. 1580. and 1581. gathered out of sundry letters written by Christopher Burrough , servant to the said company , and sent to his uncle Master William Burrough . 
 First it is to be understood , that the ships for the voyage to S. Nicholas in Russia , in which the factors and merchandise for the Persian voyage were transported , departed from Gravesend the 19. of June , 1579. which arrived at S. Nicholas in Russia the 22. of July , where the factors and merchant's landed , and the merchandise were discharged & laden into doshnikes , that is , barks of the country , to be carried from thence up by river unto Vologda . And the 25. day of you said Julie , the doshnikes departed from Rose Island by S. Nicholas up the river Dwina , Peremene , that is to say , in post , by continual sailing , rowing , setting with poles , or drawing of men , which came to 
 214 
 Colmogro the 27. day , and departed thence the 29. of Julie up the said river Dwyna , and came to Ustyoug ( which is at the head of the river Dwina , and mouth of Sughano ) the 9. of August , where they stayed but a small time , providing some victuals , and shifting certain of their cassocks or barkmen , & so departed thence the same day up the river Sughano , and came to Totma ( which is counted somewhat more then half the way from Ustioug ) the 15. day , where they shifted some of their cassaks , and departed thence the same day , and came to the city Vologda the 19. of August , where they landed their goods , and stayed at that place till the 30. of the same . Having provided at Vologda , Telegas , or wagons , whereupon they jaded their goods , they departed thence with the same by land towards Yeraslave the said 30. of August at eight of the clock Yeraslave . in the morning , and came to the East side of the river Volga over against Yeraslave , with 25. Telegas laden with the said goods the seventh of September at five of the clock afternoon . Then the three stroogs or barks provided to transport the said goods to Astracan ( where they should meet the ship that should carry the same from thence into Persia ) came over from Yeraslave unto the same side of the river Volga , and there took in the said goods . And having prepared the said barks ready with all necessary furniture they departed with them from Yeraslave down the river of Volga on the 14 day of September at nine of the clock in the morning , and they arrived at Niznovogrod the 17 day at three of the clock afternoon , where they showed the Emperor's letters to pass free without paying any custom , and tarried there about three hours to provide necessaries , and then departing , arrived at Cazan ( or near the same town ) on the 22. of September at five of the clock afternoon , where ( through contrary winds , and for providing new cassaks in the places of some that there went from them ) they remained till the 26. day , at what time they departed thence about two of the clock after 
 215 
 noon , and arrived at Tetushagorod , which is on the Crim side of Volga , and in latitude 55. degrees 22. minutes , the 28. day at ten in the forenoon , where they anchored , and remained about 3. hours , and departing thence came to Oveak , which is on the Crims side ( on the Western side of Volga ) the fift of October about five of the clock in the morning . This place is accounted half the way between Cazan and Astracan : Great store of and here there grows great store of Licoris : the soil Licoris . js very fru . itfu.ll : they found there apple trees , and 
 cherry trees . The latitude of Oveak is 51. degrees 30. minutes . At this place had be a very fair stone castle called by the name Oveak , & adjoining to the same was a town called by you Russes , Sodom : this town & part of the castle ( by report of the Russes ) was swallowed into the earth by the justice of God , for the wickedness of the people that inhabited the same . There remains at this day to be seen a part of the ruins of the castle , and certain tombs , wherein as it seems have been laid noble personages : for upon a tomb stone might be perceived the form of a horse and a man sitting on it with a bow in his hand , and arrows girded to his side : there was a piece of a scutcheon also upon one of the stones , which had characters graved on it , whereof some part had been consumed with the weather , and the rest left unperfect : but by the form of them that remained , we judged them to be characters of Armenia : and other characters were graved also upon another tomb stone . Now they departed from Oveak the said fift of October at five of the clock after noon , Peravolok . and came to Peravolok the 10. day about eleven or twelve of the clock that night , making no abided at that place , but passed alongst by it . This word Peravolok in the Russe tongue doth signify a narrow straight or neck of land between two waters , and it is so called by them , because from the river Volga , at that place , to the river DONE or Tanais , is counted thirty versts , or as much as a man may well travel on foot 
 216 
 in one day . And seven versts beneath , upon and Island called Tsaritsna the Emperor of Russia hath fiftie gunners all the summer time to keep watch , called by the Tartar name Carawool . Between this place and Astracan are five other Carawools or watches . 
 i The first is nam Kameni Carawool , and is distant from Peravolok 120 , versts . 
 2 The second nam Stupino Carowool , distant from the first 50. versts . 
 3 The third called Polooy Carowool , is 120. versts distant from the second . 
 4 The fourth nam Keezeyur Carawool , is 50. versts distant from the third . 
 5 The fift nam Ichkebre , is 30. versed distant from the fourth , and Ichkebre to Astracan is 30. versts . 
 The 16. of October they arrived at Astracan , with Astracan . their three stroogs in safety about nine of the clock in the morning , where they found the ship provided for the Persia voyage in good order & readiness . The 17. day the foure principal factors of the company , Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Talbois , and Peter Pete^ Gar Garrard , were invited to dine with the chief diake or rar ' secretary of Astracan ( Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin ) who declared then unto them the troubles that were in Media and Persia : and how the Turke with help of the Crims had conquered , and did possess the greatest part of Media : also he laid before them that Winter was at hand , & if they should put out with their ship to the sea , they should be constrained to take what hazards might happen them by wintering in the parts of Media , or else where , for back again to that place there was no hope for them to return : whereupon the said factors determined to stay there all Winter to learn further of the state of those countries . 
 The 19. of November the wind being Northerly , at A stra - 
 there was a great frost , and much ice in the river : the next day being the 20. of November the ice stood in ' the river , and so continued until Easter day . 
 217 
 The 22. of December departed this life John Moore the gunner of the ship . 
 Thursday the 7. of January between 8. and 9. of the clock at night there appeared a cross proceeding from the moon , with two galls at the South and North end thereof . 
 The 6. of January being Twelfe day ( which they call Chreshenia ) the Russes of Astracan brake a hold in the ice upon the river Volga , & hallowed the water with great solemnity according to the manner of their country , at which time all the soldiers of the town shot off their small pieces upon the ice , and likewise to gratify the captain of the castle being a Duke , whose name is Pheodor Michalovich Troiocouria , who stood hard by the ship , beholding them as they were on the river , was shot off all the ordinance of our ship being 15 pieces , viz. 2. falcons , 2. falconets , 4. fowlers , 4. fowlers chambers , and 3. other small pieces made for the stroogs to shoot hailstones , and afterwards the great ordinance of the castle was shot off . 
 On the 31. of January there happened a great eclipse of the moon , which began about 12. of the clock at night , and continued before she was clear and hour and a half by estimation , which ended the first of February about half and hour passed one in the morning : she was wholly darkened by the space of half and hour . 
 The 26. of February the town of Nagay Tartars , called the Yourt , which is within 3. quarters of a mile of the castle of Astracan , by casualty was set on fire about 10. of the clock at night , & continued burning till midnight , whereby one half of it was burned , and much cattle destroyed . The Nagayes that inhabit that town , are the Emperor of Russia his vassals : It is supposed there are of them inhabiting that place of men , women , and children , the number of seven thousand . That night the Alarum was made in the castle and town of Astracan . The captain thereof had all his soldiers in very good order and readiness , being 218 
 1580. of them in number two thousand gunners and cassaks , that is to say , a thousand gunners , which are accounted mere soldiers , and are not put to any other service then the use of their pieces , watch , etc. as soldiers which always keep the castle , and the cassaks also using their pieces , do keep the town , and are commonly set to all kind of labours . 
 The 7. of March 1580. the Nagayes and Crims came before Astracan to the number of one thousand foure hundred horsemen , which encamped round about , but the nearest of them were two Russe versts and a half off from the castle and town : some of them lay on the Crims side of Volga , and some on the Nagay side , but none of them came upon the Island that Astracan Astracan situ-standeth on . It was said that two of the prince of u ? m and the Crims his sons were among them . They sent and ' a messenger on the eight day to the captain of Astracan , to signify that they would come and visit him : who answered , he was ready to receive them : and taking a great shot or bullet in his hand , willed the messenger to tell them that they should not want of that gear , so long as it would last . The ninth day news was brought that the Crims determined to assault the town or castle , and were making of faggots of reed , to bring with them for that purpose . The tenth day two Russes that were captives , and two of the Tartars bondmen ran away from the Nagayes , and came into Astracan . 
 The same day word was brought to the Duke of two Nagayes which were seen at Gostine house , supposed to be spies , but were gone again from thence before they were suspected . This Gostine house is a place a little without the town where the Tisiks ( or Persian merchant's ) do usually remain with their merchandise . 
 The 11. day the said Nagayes , and one more with them , came again to that house early in the morning , where they were taken by the Russes , and brought to the captain of the castle , and being examined , confessed that their coming was only to seek two of their 219 
 The variation of the comp as in Astracan was 13. deg . 40 , minutes . 
 May . 
 bondmen that were run from them : whereupon their bondmen were delivered to them : which favour the said captain commonly shows if they be not Russies , and they were set at liberty . The 13. day they brake up their camps , and marched to the Northwards into the country of Nagay . 
 The 17. of April the variation ot the compass observed in Astracan was 13. deg . 40. min. from North to West . This spring there came news to Astracan that the queen of Persia ( the king being blind ) had be with a great army against the Turks that were left to possess Media , and had given them a great overthrow : yet notwithstanding Derbent , & the greatest part of Media were still possessed and kept by the Turks . The factors of the company consulting upon their affairs , determined to leave at Astracan the one half of their goods with Arthur Edwards , and with the other half the other three factors would proceed in the ship on their purposed voyage to the coast of Media , to see what might be done there : where , if they could not find safe traffic , they determined to proceed to the coast of Gilan , which is a province never the Caspian sea bordering upon Persia : and thereupon appointed the said goods to be laden aboard the ship , and took into her also some merchandise of Tisiks or Persian merchant's . 
 The 29. of April Amos Riall , and Anthony Marsh , the companies servants were sent from Astracan by the said factors , up the river Volga to Yeraslave , with letters of advice to be sent for England , and had order for staying the goods in Russia that should come that year out of England for maintaining the trade purposed for Persia , until further trial were made what might be done in those parts . 
 The first day of May in the morning , having the ship in readiness to depart , the factors invited the duke Pheodor Micalovich Proiocoorow , and the principali secretary Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin , with other of 220 
 the chiefest about the duke to a banquet aboard the ship , where they were entertained to their good liking , and at their departure was shot off all the ordinance of the ship , and about nine of the clock at night the same day they weighed anchor , and departed with their ship from Astracan , and being but little wind , towed her with the boat about three versts , & then anchored , having with them a pavos or lighter to help them at the flats . The second day at foure of the clock in you morning they weighed & plied down the river Volga towards the Caspian sea . The seventh of May in the morning they passed by a tree that stands on the left hand of the river as they went down , which is called Mahomet Agatch , or Mahomets tree , & about three versts further , that is to say , to the Southwards of the said tree is a place called Uchoog , that is to say , the Russe wear : Uchwg . ( but Ochoog is the name of a wear in the Tartar tongue ) where are certain cottages , and the Emperor hath lying at that place certain gunners to guard his fishermen that keep the wear . This Uchoog is counted from Astracan 60. versts : they proceeded down the said river without staying at the Uchoog . The ninth Shoaled water . and tenth days they met with shoaled water , and were forced to lighten their ship by the pavos : the 11. day they sent back to the Uchoog for and other pavos : This day by mischance the ship was bilged on the grapnell of the pavos , whereby the company had sustained great losses , if the chiefest part of their goods had not been laid into the pavos : for notwithstanding their pumping with 3. pumps , heaving out water with buckets , and all the best shifts they could make , the ship was half full of water ere the leak could be found and stopped . 
 The 12. day the pavos came to them from the Uchoog , whereby they lighted the ship of all the goods . The 13. day in the morning there came to them a small boat , sent by the captain of Astracan , to learn whither the ship were at sea clear of the flats . The 15. Flats . day by great industry and travel they god their ship 
 221 
 45 degrees 20. minutes . The first observation in the Caspian sea . 
 Brackish water far re within the sea . 
 clear off the shoals and flats , wherewith they had been troubled from the ninth day until then : they were forced to pass their ship in three foot water or less . The 16. day they came to the Chetera Bougori , or Island of Foure Hillocks , which are counted forty versts from Uchoog , and are the furthest land towards the sea . The 17. day they bore ofF into the sea , and being about twelve versts from the Foure hillocks , riding in five foot and a half water about eleven of the clock in the forenoon , they took their goods out of the pavoses into the ship , and filled their ship with all things necessary . The 18. day in the morning about seven of the clock , the pavoses being discharged departed away towards Astracan , the wind then at Southeast , they road still with the ship , and observing the elevation of the pole at that place , found it to be 45. degrees 20. minutes . The 19. day , the wind Southeast , they road still . The 20. day the wind at Northwest they set sail about one of the clock in the morning , & steered thence South by West , & Southsouthwest about 3. leagues , and then anchored in 6. foot and a half water , about nine of you clock before noon , at which time it fell calm : the elevation of the pole at that place 45. degrees 13. minutes . The 21. having the wind at Northwest , they set sail , and steered thence South by West , and South until eleven of the clock , and had then nine foot water : and at noon they observed the latitude , and found it to be 44. degrees 47 minutes : then had they three fathoms and a half water , being clear of the flats . It is counted from the Foure hillocks to the sea about fiftie versts . From the said noontide until foure of the clock they sailed South by East five leagues and a half : then had they five fathoms and a half and brackish water : from that till twelve at night they sailed South by East half a league , East tenne leagues : then had they eleven fathom , and the water salter . From that till the 22. day three of the clock in the morning they sailed three & fifty leagues , then had they sixtene 
 222 
 fathom water : from thence they sailed until noon South and by West seven leagues and a half , the latitude then observed 43. degrees 15. minutes , the depth then 43 - degrees eight and twentie fathoms , and shallow ground : from ’5-that until eight of the clock at night , they sailed South by East five leagues and a half , then had they three and fortie fathoms shallow ground . From thence till the 23. foure a clock in the morning , they sailed Southsouthwest three leagues and a half : then could they get no ground in two and fiftie fathoms deep . From thence until noon they sailed South nine leagues , then the latitude observed was 42. degrees 20. minutes . From that till the 24. day at noon they sailed South by West seventeene leagues and a half , then the latitude observed 
 was 41. degrees 32. minutes . From noon till seven of 41 - degrees the clock at night , they sailed Southsouth west foure 32 - minuts-leagues , then had they perfect sighed of high land or hills , which were almost covered with snow , and the mids of them were West from the ship , being then about twelve leagues from the nearest land : they sounded but could find no ground in two hundred fathoms . From thence they sailed Southwest until midnight : about three leagues from thence till the 25. day foure of the clock in the morning , they sailed West three leagues , being then little wind , and near the land , they took in their sails , and lay hulling : at noon the latitude observed , was 40. degrees 54. minutes : they sounded but could get 4° degrees no ground in two hundred fathoms . At four of the 54 - minutes . clock in the afternoon , the wind Northwest , they set their sails , & from thence till the 26. day at noon they sailed East southeast foure leagues . From thence they sailed till eight of the clock at night Southwest three leagues , the wind then at North . From thence they sailed until the 27. day two of the clock in the morning , Westsouthwest eight leagues , the wind blowing at North very much . From the said two till foure of the clock they sailed South by West one league : then being day light , they saw the land plain , which was 
 223 
 not passed three leagues from them , being very high ragged land . There were certain rocks that lay far off into the sea , about five leagues from the same land , ( which are called Barmake Tash ) they sailed between those rocks and the land , and about five of the clock they passed Bilbili . by the port Bilbili , where they should have put in but could not : and bearing longest the shore about two of the clock afternoon , they came to Bildih in the country of Media or Shervan , against which place they anchored in 9. foot water . Presently after they were at anchor , there came aboard of them a boat , wherein were seven or eight persons , two Turks , the rest Persians , the Turkes vassals , which bade them welcome , and seemed to be glad of their arrival , who told the factors that the Turke had conquered all Media , or the country Shervan , and how that the Turks Basham remained in Derbent with a garrison of Turkes , and that Shamaky was wholly spoiled , and had few or no inhabitants left in it . The factors then being desirous to come to the speech of the Basham , sent one of the Tisikes ( or merchant's that went over with them from Astracan , passengers ) and one of the companies servants Robert Bachu port . Golding , with those soldiers , to the captain of Bachu , which place stands hard by the sea , to certify him of their arrival , and what commodities they had brought , and to desire friendship to have quiet and safe traffic for the same . Bachu is from Bildih , the place where they road , about a days journey , on foot easily to be traveled , which may be sixe leagues the next way over land : it is a walled town , and strongly fortified . When the said messenger came to the captain of Bachu , the said captain gave him very friendly entertainment , and after he understood what they were that were come in the ship , and what they had brought , he seemed to rejoice much thereat : who gave the said Golding licence to depart back the next day , being the eight and twentieth day : and promised that he would himself come to the ship the next day following : with which 
 224 
 answer the said Golding returned and came to the ship the said eight and twentieth day about nine of the clock at night . The nine and twentieth day in the morning the factors caused a tent to be set up at shore near the ship , against the coming of the said captain : who came thither about three of the clock after noon , and brought about thirtie soldiers , that attended on him , in shirts of male , and some of them had gauntlets of silver , others of steel , and very fair . The factors met him at their tent , and after very friendly salutations passed between them , they gave him for a present a garment of cloth of velvet , and another of scarlet , who accepted the same gratefully . After they had talked together by their interpreters , as well of the state of the voyage and cause of their coming thither , as also learned of the said captain the state of that country , the factors made request unto him , that he would help them to the speech of the Basham , who answered that their demand was reasonable , and that he would willingly show them therein what pleasure he could , and said , because the way to Derbent , where the Basham remained , was dangerous , he would send thither , and certify him of their arrival , and what commodities they had brought , and such commodities as they would desire to exchange or barter the same for he would procure the said Basham to provide for them : and therefore willed the factors to consult together , and certify him what they most desired , and what quantity they would have provided : so whilst the factors were consulting together thereupon , the captain talked with a Tisike merchant that came over in the ship with them from Astracan , which Tisike , among other matters in talk , certified the captain , that the night before , the factors & their company were determined to have returned back again to Astracan , and that they were about to weigh their anchors , which Thomas Hud-in deed was true , but the master of the bark Thomas son tfLlme-Hudson of Limehouse persuaded them that the wind English was not good for them to depart , etc. When the factors bark . 
 in 225 p 
 came again to talk with the captain , they desired to go to the Basham , and that he would safely conduct them thither : he granted their requests willingly , desiring them to go with him to a village hard by , and there to abide with him that night , and the next day they should go to Bachu , and from thence proceed on their journey to Derbent . They were unwilling to go that night with him , because their provision for the way was not in readiness , but requested that they might stay till the morning . Thereupon the captain said it was reported unto him , that they meant the night before to have gone away : and if it should so happen , he were in great danger of losing his head : for which cause he requested to have some one for a pledge : wherefore M. Garrard one of the factors offered himself to go , who , because he could not speak the Russe tongue , took with him Christopher Burrough , and a Russe interpretor : that night they road from the seaside , to a village about ten miles off , where at supper time the captain had much talk with M. Garrard of our country , demanding where about it did lie , what countries' were near unto it , and with whom we had traffic , for by the Russe name of our country he could not conjecture who we should be : but when by the situation he perceived we were Englishmen , he demanded if our prince were a maiden Queen : which when he was certified of , then ( quoth he ) your land is called Enghilterra , is it not ? answer was made , it was so : whereof he was very glad when he knew the certainty . He made very much of them , placing M. Garrard next to himself , and Christopher Burrough , with the Russie interpretor for the Turkey tongue hard by . There was a Gillan merchant with him at that present , of whom he seemed to make great account : him he placed next to himself on the other side , and his gentlemen sat round about him talking together . Their sitting is upon the heals , or cross legged . 
 Supper being brought in , he requested them to eat . 
 226 
 After their potage ( which was made of rice ) was done , and likewise their boiled meat , there came in platters of rice sodden thick , and honey mingled withal : after all which , came a sheep rested whole , which was brought in a tray , and set before the captain : he called one of his servitors , who cut it in pieces , and laying thereof upon diverse platters , set the same before the captain : then the captain gave to M. Garrard and his company one platter , and to his gentlemen another , and to them which could not well reach he cast meat from the platters which were before him . Diverse questions he had with M. Garrard and Christopher Burrough at supper time , about their diet , inquiring whither they eat fish or flesh voluntarily , or by order . Their drink in those parts is nothing but water . After supper ( walking in the garden ) the captain demanded of M. Garrard , whither the use was in England to lie in the house or in the garden , and which he had best liking of : he answered , where it pleased him , but their use was to lie in houses : whereupon the captain caused beds to be sent into the house for them , and caused his kinsman to attend on them in the night , if they chanced to want any thing : he himself with his gentlemen and soldiers lying in the garden . 
 In the morning very early he sent horse for the rest of the company which should go to Derbent , sending by them that went tenne sheep for the ship . In that village there was a Stove , into which the captain went in the morning , requesting M. Garrard to go also to the same to wash himself , which he did . Shortly after their coming out of the Stove , whilst they were at breakfast , M. Turnbull , M. Tailboyes , and Thomas Hudson the M. of the ship , came thither , and when they had all broken their fasts , they went to Bachu : but Christopher Burrough returned to the ship , for that he had hurt his leg , and could not well endure that travel . And from Bachu they proceeded towards Derbent , as it was by the captain 
 227 
 The receiving of the English into Derbent . 
 promised , being accompanied on their way for their safe conduct , with a gentleman , and certain soldiers , which had the captain of Bachu his letters to the Basham of Derbent , very friendly written in their behalf . In their journey to Derbent they forsook the ordinary ways , being very dangerous , and traveled thorough woods till they came almost to the town of Derbent : and then the gentleman road before with the captains letters to the Basham , to certify him of the English merchant's coming , who receiving the letters , and understanding the matter , was very glad of the news , and sent forth to receive them certain soldiers gunners , who met them about two miles out of the town , saluting them with great reverence , and afterwards road before them : then again met them other soldiers , somewhat nearer the castle , which likewise having done their salutations road before them , and then came forth noble men , captains , and gentlemen , to receive them into the castle and town . As they entered the castle , there was a shot of twentie pieces of great ordinance , & the Basham sent M. Turnbull a very fair horse with furniture to mount on , esteemed to be worth and hundred marks , and so they were conveyed to his presence : who after he had talked with them , sent for a coat of cloth of gold , and caused it to be put on M. Turnbulles back , and then willed them all to depart , and take their ease , for that they were weary of their journey , and on the morrow he would talk further with them . The next day when you factors came again to the presence of the Basham , according to his appointment , they requested him that he would grant them his privilege , whereby they might traffic safely in any part and place of his country , offering him , that if it pleased his Majesty to have any of the commodities that they had brought , and to write his mind thereof to the captain of Bachu , it should be delivered him accordingly . The Bashaes answer was , that he would willingly give them his privilege : yet for that he regarded their safety , having 
 228 
 come so far , & knowing the state of his country to be troublesome , he would have them to bring their commodity thither , & there to make sale of it , promising he would provide such commodities as they needed , and that he would be a defence unto them , so that they should not be injured by any : whereupon the factors sent Thomas Hudson back for you ship to bring her to Derbent , and the Basham sent a gentleman with him to the captain of Bachu , to certify him what was determined , which message being done , the captain of Bachu , and the Bashaes messenger , accompanied with a doozen soldiers , went from Bachu with Thomas Hudson , 8c came to the ship at Bildih the 11 day of June . After the captain and his men had been aboard and seen the ship , they all departed presently , but the gentleman , messenger from you Basham , with three other Turks , remained aboard , and continued in the ship till she came to Derbent : the latitude of Bildih by diverse The latitude observations is 40. degrees 2 5. minutes : the variation of^'^h 40. of the compass 10. degrees 40. minutes from North to rfe variation West . After the return of Thomas Hudson back of compass to Bildih , they were constrained to remain there 10. deg . 40. with the ship through contrary winds until the 16. mtnday of June foure of the clock in the morning , at which time they weighed anchor , set sail and departed thence towards Derbent , and arrived at anchor against Derbent East and by South from the said castle in foure fathom and a half water , the 22. day of June at ten of the clock in the morning : then they took up their ordinance , which before they had stowed in hold for easing the ship in her rolling . In the afternoon the Basham came down to the waterside against the ship , and having the said ordinance placed , and charged , it was all shot off to gratify him : and presently after his departure back , he permitted the factors to come aboard the ship . The 29. day their goods were unladen and carried to the Bashaes garden , where he made choice of such things as he liked , taking 
 229 
 for custom of every five & twenty karsies , or whatsoever , one , or after the rate of foure for the hundred . The factors after his choice made , determined to send a part of the rest of the goods to Bachu , for the speedier making sale thereof , for which cause they obtained the Bashaes letter to the captain of Bachu , written very favourably in their behoof : and thereupon was laden and sent in a small boat of that country in merchandise , to the valve ( very near ) of one thousand pound sterling : videlicet , one hundreth pieces of karsies , seven broad clothes , two barrels of cochenelio , two barrels of tin , foure barrels of shafFe . There went with the same of the companies servants William Winckle , Robert Golding , and Richard Relfe , with two Russies , whereof one was and interpretor , beside foure barkmen . They departed from Derbent with the said bark the 19. of July , and arrived at Bildih the 2 5. day : their passage and carriage of their goods to Bachu was chargeable , although their sales when they came thither were small : they had great friendship showed them of the captain of Bachu , as well for the Bashaes letter , as also for the factors sakes , who had dealt friendly with him , as before is declared . Robert Golding desirous to understand what might be done at Shamaky , which is a days journey from Bachu , went thither , from whence returning , he was set on by thieves , and was shot into the knee with and arrow , who had very hardly escaped with his life & goods , but that by good hap he killed one of the thieves horses with his caliver , and shot a Turke thorough both cheeks with a dag . On the sixt day of August the factors being advertised at Derbent that their ship was so rotten & weak , that it was doubtful she would not carry them back to Astracan , did thereupon agree and bargen at that place with and Armenian , whose name was Jacob , for a bark called a Buss , being of burden about 35. tons , which came that year from Astracan , Zere Island , and was at that instant riding at and Island called Zere , about three or foure leagues beyond or to the Eastwardes 
 230 
 of Bildih , which bark for their more safety , they meant to have with them in their return to Astracan , and thereupon wrote unto Wincoll and the rest at Bachu , that they should receive the same Buss , and lade in her their goods at Bildih to be returned to Derbent , and to discharge their first boat , which was observed by them accordingly . When all their goods were laden aboard the said Buss at Bildih , and being ready to have departed thence for Derbent , there arose a great storm with the wind out of the sea , by force whereof the cables and halsers were broken , and their vessel put a shore , and broken to pieces against the rocks : every of them that were in her saved their lives , and part of the goods . But there was a Carobia or chest , wherein were dollars , and gold , which they had received for the commodities of the company , which they sold at Bachu , which at the taking out of the Buss , fell by the barks side into the water among the rocks , and so iwa's lost . The packs of cloth which they could not well take out of the Buss were also lost , other thihgs that were more profitable they saved . 
 The 18. of August , the Factors received from the Basham 500. Batmans of raw silk , parcel of the bargain made with him , who bade them come the next day for the rest of the bargain . 
 The 19. day the Factors went to the Basham according to his appointment , but that day they could not speak with him , but it was delivered them as from him , that they should look and consider whither any thing were due unto him or not , which grieved the Factors : and thereupon M. Turnebull answered , that their heads & all that they had were at the Bashaes pleasure : But then it was answered there was no such matter in it : but that they should cast up their reckonings , to see how it stood between them . The 20. day they cast up their reckonings . The 21. they went to have spoken with the Basham , but were denied audience . 
 The 22. day they herd news by a Buss that came 231 
 The English suffer shipwreck . 
 Arthur Edwards dieth at Astracan . 
 from Astracan , that Arthur Edwards ( whom the Factors left at Astracan with the moiety of the goods ) was dead , who departed this life the of 
 The 23. day the Factors received more from the Basham 500. Batmans of silk . The 4. of September news was brought to Derbent , that Golding coming from Shamaky was set on by thieves ( Turks ) and had hurt one of them . 
 The 5. Tobias Atkins the gunners boy died of the flux , who was buried the 6. day 2. miles to the Southward of the Castle of Derbent , where the Armenian Christians do usually bury their dead . About the 20. of September news came to Derbent , that the Buss which they had bought of Jacob the Armenian as before , was cast away at Bildih , but they received no certain news in writing from any of our people . 
 The 26. of September was laden aboard the ship 40. bales of silk . From the 26. till the 2. of October , they took into the ship , bred , water , and other necessary provision for their sea store : the said 2. day of October , the Factors were commanded upon the sudden to avoid their house , and get them with their provision out of the town : Whereupon they were constrained to remove and carry their things to the sea side against the ship , and remained there all the night . The cause of this sudden avoiding them out of the town ( as afterwards they perceived ) was for that the Basham had received news of a supply with treasure that the Turke had sent , which was then near at hand coming towards him . 
 The 3. day of October all things were brought from the shore aboard the ship : and that day the Factors went to the Basham to take their leave of him , unto whom they recommended those the Companies servants , etc. which they had sent to Bachu , making account to leave them behind in the Country : who caused their names to be written , and promised they should want nothing , nor be injuried of any . After this leave taken , 232 
 the Factors went aboard purposing presently to have set sail and departed towards Astracan , the wind serving well for that purpose at South Southeast : And as they were ready to set sail , there came against the ship a man , who weved : whereupon the boat was sent a shore to him , who was and Armenian sent from William Wincoil , with his writing tables , wherein the said Wincoil had written briefly , the mishap of the loss of the Buss , and that they were coming from Bildih towards Derbent , they , and such things as they saved with a small boat , forced to put a shore in a place by the sea side called the Armenian village : Whereupon the drmen-Factors caused the ship to stay , hoping that with the tan Southerly wind that then blew , they would come from the place they were at to the ship , but if they could not come with that wind , they meant to sail with the ship , with the next wind that would serve them , against the place where they were , & take them in , if they could : which stay and loss of those Southerly winds , was a cause of great troubles , that they afterwards sustained through ice , etc. entering the Volga as shall declared . 
 The 4. day the wind South Southeast , the ship road still : This day Christopher Burrow was sent to shore to Derbent to provide some necessaries for the voyage , & with him a Tisike or two , which should go in the ship passengers to Astracan . And being on shore he saw there the coming in of the Turkes treasure , being accompanied with 200. soldiers , and one hundreth pioneers , beside Captains and Gentlemen : the Basham with his Captains and soldiers very gallantly appareled and furnished went out from Derbent about three or foure miles , to meet the said treasure , and received the same with great joy and triumph . Treasure The Turke his was the chief thing they needed , for not long before the soldiers were ready to break into the Court against ’ the Basham for their pay : there was a great mutiny among them , because he had long differed and not 
 233 
 paid them their due . The treasure came in seven wagons , and with it were brought tenne pieces of brass . 
 In the parts of Media where they were , there was no commodity to be bought of any valve , but raw silk , neither was that to be had but at the Bashaes hands : who shortly after their coming thither taxed the Country for that commodity . His dealing with our Merchants as it was not with equity in all points according to his bargain , so it was not extreme ill . Of the commodities they carried he took the chiefest part , for which he gave but a small price in respect of the valve it was there worth , and because he had provided such quantity of commodity for them , which otherwise they could not have had , the Country being so troublesome , and travail by land so dangerous , he used them at his pleasure . 
 The news that was reported unto them at Astracan touching the wars between the Turkes & Persians differed little from the truth : for the Turkes army with aid of the Crims , ( being in number by you information of two Spaniards that served in those wars , about 200000 ) invaded and conquered the Country of Media in Anno 1577. When the great Turke underOsman Basham , stood of the conquest , he appointed Osman Basham ( the said Basham , and now Captain of Derbent ) governor of the whole Country , who settled himself in Shamaky the chief City of Media , and principali place of traffic , unto whom was sent from the great Turke , in signification of the grateful acceptation of his service and the great conquest , a sword of great valve . 
 After the said Basham had brought the Country in order to his liking , and placed garrisons where he thought convenient , the army was dissolved and sent back : When the Persians understood that the Turkes army was dissolved and returned , they gathered a power together , and with the Queen of their Country as chief , they entered the Country of Media , and overran the same with fire and sword , destroying 
 234 
 whatsoever they found , as well people , cattle , as whatsoever else , that might be commodious to the Turkes . And after they had so overrun the Country , they came to Shamaky , where the said Basham Lieutenant generail of the great Turke was settled , and besieged it : whereupon the Basham seeing he could not long endure to withstand them , fled thence to Derbent where he now remains . 
 Derbent is a strong Castle which was built by Alexander the great , the situation whereof is such , that the Persians being without Ordinance , are not able to win it but by famine . When the Turkes were fled from Shamaky , the Persians entered the same and spoiled it , leaving therein neither living creature nor any commodity , and so returned back into Persia , and settled themselves about Teveris , where there grew some question among them for the kingdom . Afterwards the Persians having intelligence of and army from the Turke coming into Media , gathered themselves together in a great army and encountering the said Turkes , set upon them on the sudden , and vanquished them , putting them all to the sword . This overthrow of the Turkes grieved the Basham of Derbent , and made him to have the more care for his own safety . Moreover , news was brought unto him that the Kisel Bashaes , ( that is to say the nobles and Gentlemen of Persia ) were minded to set upon him , and that near unto Bachu there lay and army ready to besiege it . Whereupon the Basham oftentimes would ride about the Castle of Derbent viewing the same , and the springs that did come to it , and where he saw any cause of reformation , it was amended . 
 The latitude of Derbent ( by diverse observations exactly there made ) is 41. deg 52. min. The variation of the Compass at that place about 11. degrees from North to West . From Derbent to Bildih by land 46. leagues . From Derbent to Shamaky by land 45. leagues . From Shamaky to Bachu about 10. leagues , which may be 30. 
 235 
 Derbent built by Alexander the great . 
 The latitude of Derbent 41 , deg . 52. min. 
 The variation of the Compass . 
 miles . From Bachu to Bildih five or sixe leagues by land , but by water about 12. leagues . From the Castle Derbent Eastwards , there reach two stone walls to the border of the Caspian sea , which is distant one English mile . Those walls are 9. foot thick , and 28. or 30. foot high , and the space between them is 160. Geometricali paces , that is 800. foot . There are yet to be perceived of the ruin of those walls , which do now extend into the sea about half a mile : also from the cased Westward into the land , they did perceive the ruins of a stone wall to extend , which wall , as it is reported , did pass from thence to Pontus Euxinus , and was built by Alexander the great when the cased Derbent was made . 
 The 5 of October about noon the wind Northnortheast they weighed anchor , and set sail from Derbent , being alongst the coast to the Southwards to seek their men : but as they had sailed about foure leagues the wind scanted Easterly , so that they were forced to anchor in three fathom water . 
 The 6 day they weighed anchor , and bore further off into the sea , where they anchored in seven fathom water , the ship being very leak , and so rotten abaft the main mast , 
 that a man with his nails might scrape thorough her side . 
 The 7 day about 7 of the clock in the morning , they set sail , the wind Southwest . They considered the time of the year was far spent , the ship weak , leak and rotten , and therefore determining not to tarry any longer for Wincoll and his fellows , but to leave them behind , bent themselves direcdy towards Astracan : and sailing Northnortheast until midnight about 16 leagues , the wind then came to the Northnorthwest , and blew much , a very storm , which caused them to take in all their sails , saving the before corpse , with which they were forced to steer before the sea , South by West , and Southsouthwest . And on the 8 day about two of the clock in the morning their great boat sunk at the ships stern , which 236 
 they were forced to cut from the ship to their great grief and discomfort : for in her they hoped to save their lives if the ship should have miscarried . About 10 of the clock before noon they had sighed of the land about 5 leagues to the South of Derbent , and bore longest the coast to the Southeastwards unto Nezavoo , where they Nezavoo . came at anchor in three fathoms , and black oz , good anchor hold , whereof they were glad , as also that the wind was shifted to the Northwest , and but a mean gale . Wincoll and the rest of his fellows being in the Armenian village , which is about 18 versts to the Westwards of Nezavoo , the place whereagainst they road at anchor , saw the ship as she passed by that place , and sent a man in the night following alongst the coast after her , who came against the ship where she road , and with a firebrand in the top of a tree made signs , which was perceived by them in the ship , whereupon they hoist out their skiff , and sent her ashore to learn what was meant by the fire : which returned a letter from Wincoll , wherein he wrote that they were with such goods as they had at the Armenian village , and prayed that there they might with the same goods be taken into the ships . The 9 day it was little wind , they weighed and bore a little further off " into the sea towards the said village , and anchored . The 10 day they sent their skiff to the Armenian village to fetch those men and the goods they had , with order that if the wind served , that they could not return to fetch the ship , they of the ship promised to come for them , against the said village . This day it was calm . 
 The 11 day the wind Northwest they road still . The 12 day the wind Southeast they weighed anchor , & bore against & never to the Armenian village where they anchored , and then the skiff came aboard and told them that our people at shore were like to be spoiled of the Tartars , were it not that the gunners defended them : then was the skiff sent back again to charge them at any hand they should hasten aboard the ship whatsoever it cost them . Whereupon , all the company came aboard the 237 
 Two Spaniards delivered by our English men . 
 same day saving Richard Relfe and two Russes , but assoon as the skiff was returned aboard the ship , the wind blew at Southeast , and the sea was grown , so as they were forced to take in their skiff into the ship , and road still till the 13 day , and then being fair weather , early in the morning the skiff was hoist out of the ship , and sent to shore to fetch the said Relfe and the two Russes , which were ready at the shore side , and with them two Spaniards that were taken captives at the Goletta in Barbary , which served the Turke as soldiers . Those Spaniards ( of Christian charity ) they brought also aboard the ship to redeem them from their captivity , which were brought over into England , and set free and at liberty here in London , in September 1381. The wind this day at Northnortheast , fair weather . The 14 day they sent the skiff to shore , and filled fresh water . The 15 day they road still , being little wind and fog . The 16 day the wind Eastsoutheast , they weighed anchor and set sail , bearing Northwards towards Astracan , and the same night they anchored in ten fathoms water , about five miles from the shore of the Shalkaules country , which place is eight leagues Northnorthwest from Derbent . The 17 day the wind at North very stormy , they road still all that day and night . The 18 the wind all Southeast about one of the clock afternoon , they weighed anchor , and sailed thence till foure of the clock Northnortheast sixe leagues , then they might see the land Northwest about tenne leagues from the wind Southeast : from thence they sailed till midnight Northnortheast twelve leagues . From thence till the 19 day seven a clock in the morning they sailed Northnortheast eight leagues : the wind then Eastsoutheast , a fair gale , they sounded and had 17 fathoms , and sand , being ( as the Master judged ) about the head of Shetly : from thence till 12 of the clock at noon they sailed North 5 leagues , the wind then at East a fair gale , they sounded and had 5 fathoms . From thence till 8 of the clock at night , they sailed North 7 leagues , the wind then at Northeast with small 
 238 
 rain , they took in their sails , and anchored in 3 fathoms water and soft oz , where they road still all night , and the 20 day and night the wind Northeast , as before with small rain . 
 The 21 day the wind Northwest , they likewise road still . The 22 day about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , they weighed anchor , the wind Westnorthwest , and sailed from thence till sixe of the clock at night North 4 leagues , then they anchored in 2 fathoms and a half soft oz , the wind at West a small breath . 
 The 23 day about 7 of the clock in the morning , they weighed anchor , and set sail , being little wind Easterly , and sailed till 2 of the clock after noon Northwest in with the shore about sixe leagues , and then anchored in 6 foot water , having perfect sighed of the low land ( sand hills ) being about 3 miles from the nearest land . This place of the land that they were against , they perceived to be to the Westwards of the 4 Islands ( called in the Russe tongue Chetera Bougori ) and they found it afterwards by due proof , to be about 50 versts , or 30 English miles to the Southwest , or Southwest by South , from the said Chetera Bougori . 
 The 24 day the wind at East , and by South , a Sea wind called Gillavar , caused them to ride still . The 2 5 day they thought good to send in their skiff Robert Golding , and certain Russes , to row him alongst Northwards by the shore , to seek the foure Islands , and so to pass unto the Uchooge , and there to land the said Robert Golding to proceed to Astracan , to deliver Amos Riall a letter , wherein he was required to provide Pavoses to meet the ship at the said Islands , and the skiff with the Russes were appointed to return from the Uchooge with victuals to the ship , which skiff departed from the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon . The 26 , 27 , 28 , and 29 days , the winds Easterly and Northeast , they road still with their ship . The 30 day the wind Southeast , they weighed , and set sail to the Northeastwards : but the ship fell so on the side to the 
 239 
 A strange accident of provision for their relief . 
 November . 
 shorewards , that they were forced eftsoons to take in their sail , and anchor again , from whence they never removed her . That day they shared their bred : but in their want God sent them two covies of partridges , that came from the shore , and lighted in and about their ships , whereby they were comforted , and one that lay sick , of whose life was small hope , recovered his health . 
 The 4 of November the skiff returned to the ship with some victuals , and certified that the foure Islands were about 60 versts from them to the Northeastwards . When Robert Golding came to Astracan , and delivered there the Factors letters to Amos Rial , the duke , captain of that place , was done to understand of the ships arrival , & of the state they were in , and their request for Pavoses , who was very glad to hear of their safe return , and appointed to be sent with all speed two Pavoses and a Stroog , with gunners to guard and to defend them . With the which Stroog and Pavoses , Amos Riall went down to the Chetera Bougori , or 4. Islands aforesaid , where he stayed with those barks , according to the Factors appointment . The 5 day they purposed to send from the ship their skiff with the carpenter , and 4 Russes to row him to the 4 Bougories , to request Amos Riall to come from thence with the Pavoses to the ship with all possible speed . The skiff with those men departed from the ship in the morning , and within one hour they met with a small boat with Russes , rowing towards the ship , which came from the Ouchooge with a wild swine and other victuals to fell : with the same boat the skiff returned back to the ship after the Russes had received and were satisfied for the victuals they brought : the same day they returned with their boat back towards the Ouchooge , and with them in the same boat was sent the Carpenter of the ship to the Chetera Bougori , which were in their way , to declare unto Amos Riall the message before appointed him . From the 5 until the 9 day the ship road still with contrary winds Easterly . The same 9 day came to the ship certain Russes in a small boat , which brought 240 
 with them some victuals sent by Amos Riall , and declared that he with the Pavoses and Stroog had remained at the Chetera Bougori five days , expecting the coming thither of the ship . The 10 day being doubtful of the Pavoses coming , they sent Thomas Hudson Master of the ship in the skiff ( and with her went the foresaid skiff boat ) towards the Chetera Bougori to the Pavoses to bring word whither they would come to the ship or not , the wind then at Northeast with fog . The 11 day the wind Northerly with fog , the ship road still . The 12 day Amos Riall , Christopher Faucet , and a new gunner came to the ship , and with them the M. Thomas Hudson returned ; but the Stroog with the gunners remained at the Chetera Bougori ; and from thence ( when it began to freeze ) returned to Astracan . Amos Riall declared that he sent the carpenter back from the Chetera Boogori in a small boat on the 10 day , and marveiled that he was not come to the ship ( but in the fog the day before as afterwards they learned ) missed the ship , and overshot her , and afterwards returning back , he found the ship at anchor , and nothing in her but the Russes that were left to keep her , and then he departed thence , and went to the Uchooge , and there stayed . Presently upon the coming of the Pavoses to the ship they used as much speed as might be , to get the goods out of the ship into them , and after the goods were laden in , they took in also of the ships ordinance , furniture and provision , as much as they could . 
 The 13 day in the morning Amos Riall was sent away Ice the 13 of in a small boat towards Astracan , to provide victuals and carriages to relieve and help them , who could pass no further then the foure Islands , but was there over - Volga . taken with ice , and forced to leave his boat , and from thence passed post to Astracan , finding at the Uchooge the Carpenter returned from his ill journey , very ill handled with the extremity of the cold . The same day they departed also in those lighters with the goods 
 in 241 Q 
 towards the Chetera Bougori , leaving the ship at anchor , and in her two Russes , which with three more that went in the Pavoses , to provide victuals for themselves and the rest , & therewith promised to return back to the ship with all speed , had offered to undertake for twenty rubbles in money to carry the ship into some harbour , where she might safely winter , or else to keep her where she road all winter , which was promised to be given them if they did it : and the same day when with those lighters they had got sighed of the foure Islands being about eight versts Southwest from them , the wind then at Northeast , did freeze the sea so as they could not row , guide , stir or remove the said lighters , but as the wind and ice did force them . And so they continued driving with the ice , Southeast into the sea by The 16 day . the space of forty hours , and then being the sixteenth day the ice stood . While they drove with the ice , the dangers which they incurred were great : for oftentimes when the ice with the force of wind and sea did break , pieces of it were tossed and driven one upon another with great force , terrible to behold , and the same happened at sometime so near unto the lighters , that they expected it would have overwhelmed them to their utter destruction : but God who had preserved them from many perils before , did also save and deliver them then . 
 Within three or foure days after the first standing of the ice , when it was firm and strong , they took out all their goods , being fourty and eight bales or packs of raw silk , etc. laid it on the ice , and covered the same with such provisions as they had . Then for want of victuals , etc. they agreed to leave all the goods there upon the ice , and to go to the shore : and thereupon brake up their Chests and Corobias , wherewith , and with Travail upon such other things as they could get , they made sleds the ice . for every of them to draw upon the ice , whereon 
 they laid their clothes to keep them warm , and such victuals as they had , and such other things as they might conveniently carry , and so they departed from the said 
 242 
 1580. goods and Pavoses very early about one of the clock in the morning , and travailing on the ice , directed their way North , as near as they could judge , and the same day about two of the clock in the afternoon , they had sighed of the Chetera Babbas ( fourp hillocks of Islands Chetera Bab-so called ) unto the same they directed themselves , and as ' there remained that night . 
 The goods and Pavoses which they left on the ice they judged to be from those Chetera Babbas about 20 versts . 
 And the next morning departed thence Eastwards , and came to the Chetera Bougories ( or foure Islands before spoken of ) before noon ( the distance between those places is about 15 versts ) where they remained all that night , departing thence towards Astracan : the next morning very early they lost their way through the persuasion of the Russes which were with them , taking too much towards the left hand ( contrary to the opinion of M. Hudson ) whereby wandering upon the ice foure or five days , not knowing whither they were entered into the Crimme Tartars land or not , at length it fortuned they met with a way that had be travailed , which crossed backwards towards the sea : that way they took , and following the same , within two days travail it brought them to a place called the Crasnoyare ( that is to say in the English tongue ) Read clifFe , which diverse of the company knew . 
 There they remained that night , having nothing to eat but one loaf of bred , which they happened to find with the two Russes that were left in the ship to keep her all the Winter ( as is aforesaid ) whom they chanced to meet going towards Astracan , about five miles before they came to the said Crasnoyare , who certified them that the ship was cut in pieces with the English ice , and that they had hard escaping with their lives . ship cut in 
 In the morning they departed early from Crasnoyare sm ce‘ towards the Ouchooge , and about 9 of the clock before noon , being within 10 versts of the Uchooge , they met 
 243 
 Amos Riall , with the carpenter , which he found at Ouchooge , and a gunner newly come out of England , and also 65 horses with so many Cassocks to guide them , and 50 gunners for guard , which brought provision of victuals , etc. and were sent by the Duke to fetch the goods to Astracan . The meeting of that company was much joy unto them . 
 The factors sent back with Amos Riall and the said company to fetch the goods , Thomas Hudson the Master , Tobias Paris his Mate , and so they the said Factors and their company marched on to the Uchooge , where they refreshed themselves that day , and the night following . And from thence proceeded on towards Astracan , where they arrived the last day of November . These that went for the goods after their departure from the Factors travailed the same day until they came within 10 versts of the Chetera Babbas , where they rested that night . The next morning by the break of the day they departed thence , and before noon were at the Chetera Babas , where they stayed all night ; but presently departed thence Thomas Hudson with the Carpenter and gunner to seek where the goods lay : who found the same , and the next day they returned back to their company at the Chetera Babbas , and declared unto them in what sort they had found the said goods . 
 The 3 day early in the morning they departed all from the 4 Babbas towards the said goods , and the same day did lade all the goods they could find upon the said sleds , and with all convenient speed returned back towards Astracan . And when they came to the Chetera Bougori , where they rested the night , in the morning very early before the break of day , they were assaulted by a great company of the Nagays Tartars horsemen , which came shouting and hallowing with a great noise , but our people were so environed with the sleds , that they durst not enter upon them , but ran by , and shot their arrows among them , and hurt but one man in the head , who was a Russe , and so departed presently . Yet 244 
 1581. when it was day , they showed themselves a good distance off from our men , being a very great troop of them , but 
 did not assault them any more . The same day our Their return men with those carriages , departed from thence towards t0 Astracan-Astracan , where they arrived in safety the 4 of December , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , where our people greatly rejoiced of their great good happen to have escaped so many hard events , troubles and misery's , as they did in that voyage , and had great cause therefore to praise the Almighty , who had so mercifully preserved and delivered them . They remained the Winter at Astracan , where they found great favour and friendship of the duke , captain , and other chief officers of that place : but that Winter there happened no great matter worth the noting . 
 In the spring of the year 1581 , about the mids of The breaking March , the ice was broken up , and clear gone before Astracan , and the ninth of Aprill , having all the goods that were returned from the parts of Media , laden into a Stroog , the Factors , William Turnebull , Matthew Taile-boyes , Giles Crow , Christopher Burrough , Michael Lane , Laurence Prouse gunner , Randolfe Fox , Tho. Hudson , Tobias Parris , Morgan Hubblethorne the dier , Rich. Morgan Hub-the Surgean , Rob. Golding , Joh. Smith , Edw. Reding carpenter , and William Perrin gunner , having also 40 persia . Russes , whereof 36 were Cassocks to row , the rest merchant's passengers , departed from Astracan with the said Stroog and goods up the Volga towards Yeraslave . They left behind them at Astracan , with the English goods & merchandise there remaining , Amos Riall , W. Wincoll , and Richard Relfe , and appointed them to fell & barter the same , or so much thereof as they could to the Tisiks , if there came any thither that spring , and to others as they might , & the rest with such as they should take in exchange to return up to Yeraslave that Summer , when the Emperor's carriage should pass up the Volga . 
 The 21 day they came with their Stroog to the Peravolok , but made no stay at that place : for they had been much 245 
 troubled with ice in their coming from Astracan . The 3 of May about noon they came to Oveak , and from thence proceeding up the river , on the 17 day William Turnebull departed from the Stroog in a small boat , and went before towards Tetusha to provide victuals , and send down to the Stroog , from which place they were then about 230 versts . The 23 day they met a boat with victuals , which William Turnebull sent from Tetusha , and the same day they arrived with their Stroog at Tetusha , where they stayed all night , and the next morning betimes departed thence , but W. Turnebull was gone in the small boat before to Cazan , to provide necessaries from thence , and to make way for their dispatch . The 26 day they arrived with their Stroog at Cazan , where they remained till the fourth of June : the Factors sent Giles Crow from Cazan to the Mosco , with their letters the 30 of May . The 4 day of June they departed from Cazan with their Stroog , and arrived at Yeraslave the 22 day about 5 of the clock in the morning . 
 The 23 day they provided Telegos , to carry the goods to Vologda . The 24 day having the goods laden upon Telegos , they departed with the same towards Vologda , and remained there five versts from Yeraslave . 
 The 29 day they came to Vologda , with all their goods in safety , and good order . The same 29 , William Turnbull and Peter Garrard departed from Vologda post by water towards Colmogro , the third of July , having their goods laden in a small doshnik , they departed with the same from Vologda towards Rose Island by S. Nicholas , where they arrived in safety the 16 of July , and found there the Agents of Russia , and in the road the ships sent out of England , almost laden ready to depart . 
 The 25 day departed for England ( out of the road of S. Nicholas ) the ship Elizabeth . 
 The 26 day departed thence the Thomas Allen and Mary Susan , and in the Thomas Allen went William Turnbul , Matthew Tailboys , Thomas Hudson , and 246 
 others . The goods returned of the Persia voyage were laden into the ship , William and John , whereof was Master , William Bigat , and in her with the same goods came Peter Garrard and Tobias Parris . 
 The ii of August , the same ship being laden and dispatched departed from the road of S. Nicholas , and with her in company another of the companies freighted ships , called the Tomasin , whereof was M. Christopher Hall . In their return homeward they had some foul weather , and were separated at the sea , the William and John put into Newcastle the 24 of September : from whence the said Peter Garrard and Tobias Parris came to London by land , and brought news of the arrival of the ship . 
 The 25 of September both the said ships arrived at the port of London in safety , and anchored before Limehouse and Wapping , where they were discharged , 1581. 
 . 