Commission given by sir Rowland Hayward [ I - 433J knight , and George Bairn , Aidermen and governors of the company of English Merchant's , for discovery of new trades , unto Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman , for a voyage by them to be made , for discovery of Cathay , 1580. in form following . 
 N the Name of God Almighty , and everlasting , Amen . This writing for commission Tripartite , made the twentieth day of May Anno Dom. 1580. and in the 22. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God , Queen of England , 
 France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc. Between sir Rowland Hayward knight , and George Bairn , Aidermen of the City of London , and Governors of the company of English Merchant's , for discovery of new 251 
 trades , for the behoof , and in the name of the said company , on the first party , and Arthur Pet of Ratcliffe , in the County Middlesex , Captain , Master , and chief ruler of the good bark , called the George of London , of the burden of 40. tons , or thereabouts , on the second party , and Charles Jackman of Popler , in the said County of Middlesex , Captain , Master and ruler of the good bark , called the William of London , of the burden of 20. tons , or thereabouts , ( which barks are now riding at anchor in the river of Thames against Limehouse ) on the third party : witnesseth , that the said Governors , and company have hired the said Arthur Pet , to serve in the said bark , called the George , with nine men and a boy : And likewise the said Charles Jackman , to serve in the said bark , called the William , with five men and a boy , for a voyage by them to be made by Gods grace , for search and discoveries of a passage by sea from hence by Boroughs straights , and the Island Vaigats , Eastwards , to the countries or dominions of the mighty Prince , the Emperor of Cathay , and in the same unto the Cities of Cambalu and Quinsay , or to either of them . 
 The which passage ( upon authority of writers , and great reason ) is conceived to be from the Vaigats Eastwards , according to the description in plate of spirali lines , made by master William Burrough , whereof either of the said Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman , have one delivered unto them , and also one other sailing card , and a blank plate for either of them . But if it should not be in all points , according to that description , yet we hope that the continent or firm land of Asia does not stretch it self so far Northwards , but that there may be found a sea passable by it , between the latitude of 70. and 80. degrees . And therefore we have appointed you with these two barks to make trial of the same : wishing you both to join in friendship together , as most deer friends and brother's , to all purposes and effects , to the furtherance and orderly 252 
 performing of the same voyage . And likewise order your companies , that they of the one bark may have such love and care , to help and succour them of the other , as most deer friends and brother's would do : so as it may appear , that though they be two barks , and two companies , ( which is so appointed for your greater comfort and assurance ) yet that you are wholly of one mind , and bend your selves to the uttermost of your powers , to perform the thing that you are both employed for . 
 Do you observe good order in your daily service , and pray unto God , so shall you prosper the better . 
 We would have you to meet often together , to talk , confer , consult , and agree how , and by what means you may best perform this purposed voyage , according to our intents . And at such meeting we think it requisite , that you call unto you your mates , and also Nicholas Chancellor , ( whom we do appoint as merchant , to keep account of the merchandise you shall buy or fell , barter or change ) to the end that whatsoever God should dispose of either of you , yet they may have some instructions and knowledge how to deal in your place , or places . And of all your assemblies and consultations together , and the substance of matter you shall at every time agree upon , we would have you to note them in the paper books that we give you for that purpose , unto each bark one . We do appoint Arthur Pet in the George , as Admiral , to wear the flag in the main top , and Charles Jackman in the William , as Viceadmiral . For good order to be taken for your good and orderly keeping of company together , which we wish may be such , as you should never loose sighed the one of the other , except by both your consents , to discover about and Island , or in some river , when and where you may certainly appoint to meet together again , we refer the same to your discretions . 
 And now for your good direction in this voyage , we would have you with the next good wind and weather , 253 
 that God shall send thereunto meet and convenient , after the 22. day of this present month of May , sail from this river of Thames , to the coast of Finmarke , to the North Cape there , or to the Wardhouse , and from thence direct your course to have sighed of Willoughbies land , and from it pass alongst to the Nova Zemla , keeping the same lands always in your sighed on your larboordsides ( if conveniently you may ) to the end you may discover , whither the same Willoughbies land be continent and firm land with Nova Zembla , or not : notwithstanding we would not have you to entangle your selves in any Bay , or otherwise , so that it might hinder your speedy proceeding to the Island Vaigats . 
 And when you come to Vaigats , we would have you to get sighed of the main land of Samoeda , which is over against the South part of the same Island , and from thence with Gods permission , to pass Eastwards alongst the same coast , keeping it always in your sighed ( if conveniently you may ) until you come to the mouth of the river Ob , and when you come unto it , pass over the said rivers mouth unto the border of land , on the Eastside of the same ( without any stay to be made for searching inwardly in the same river ) and being in sighed of the same Easterly land , do you in Gods name proceed alongst by it , from thence Eastwards , keeping the same always on your starboordside in sighed , if you may , and follow the tract of it , whither it incline Southerly or Northerly ( as at times it may do both ) until you come to the Country of Cathay , or the dominion of that mighty Emperor . 
 And if God prosper your voyage with such good success , that you may attain to the same , do you seek by all means you can to arrive to the Cities Cambalu , and Quinsay , or to the one of them . But if it happen that you cannot conveniently come to either of those places , or shall driven to remain & winter in some other port or place of his dominion , do you seek by all means possible to win favour 
 254 
 COMMISSION TO PET AND JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. 
 and liking of the people , by gifts and friendly demeans towards them , and not to offer violence , or do wrong to any people or nation whatsoever , but therein to be innocent as doves , yet wily as serpents , to avoid mischief , and defend you from hurt . And when you shall have got friendship through your discreet ordering of your selves , towards the people , do you learn of them what you can of their Prince , and show them one of the Queens Majesties letters , which she sends The Queens with you ( by either of you one , made of one substance lettersand effect , for each of you particularly ) written in Latin , whereunto her Majesty hath subscribed , and caused her signet seal to be set , the effect of the same letters you have also written in English , for your own understanding thereof . 
 The same her Majesties letters you shall procure to deliver unto the same mighty Prince , or Governor , with some present to be given , such as you shall think meet and convenient , using your selves in all points according to the effect of the same letters , and procure again from the same Prince , his letters accordingly . 
 And if God so prosper your voyage , that you may this Summer pass the Straights , and compass about the Northermost land of Asia , unto the country of Cathay , or dominion of that mighty Prince , and wintering in it , may obtain from him his letters of privilege against the next years spring , you may then after your first setting forth , search and discover somewhat further then you had discovered before your wintering , so far as you shall think convenient , with regard had , and always provided , that you may return home hither , to give us advice of your proceedings the same Summer , or before the sharpness or extremity of winter overtake you . 
 And if it happen you cannot this summer attain to the border of Cathay , and yet find the land beyond the Ob , to stretch it self Easterly , with the sea adjoining unto it navigable , do you then proceed on your dis - 
 255 
 covery ( as before said ) alongst the same continent , so far as you can this summer , having care in the travel to find out some convenient harbour and place , where you may winter : and when you think it convenient , put your self to wintering , where if you happen to find people , you shall deal with them , as we have before advised you to do with the people of Cathay , etc. And if you can learn that they have a prince or chief governor , do you procure to deliver unto the same Prince or governor one of the Queens Majesties letters , as before said , and seek to obtain again his letters accordingly . If you so happen to winter & obtain letters of privilege , finding the country and people , with the commodities to be such , that by using trade thither with the people , and for the commodities , it may be beneficial unto us ( as we hope you may ) the same will be some good liking unto us : notwithstanding we would have you the next summer ( by the grace of God ) at your first setting out of your wintering harbour , proceed alongst that tract of land to Cathay , if you see likelihood to pass it ( for that is the Country that we chiefly desire to discover ) and seeing you are fully victualed for two years and upward , which you may very well make to serve you for two years and a half , though you find no other help , you may therefore be the bolder to adventure in proceeding upon your discovery : which if you do , we doubt not , but you shall achieve the Country of Cathay , & deliver to the prince there , one of her Majesties letters , bringing from thence the same princes letters answerable : and so in the year of our Lord 1582. return home with good news , and glad tidings , not only unto us the adventurers in this voyage , but also to our whole Country and nation , which God grant you may do , Amen . 
 But if it happen that the land of Asia , from beyond the river Ob , extend it self Northwards to 80. degrees , or nearer the pool , whereby you find it to lead you 256 
 into that extremity , that small or no hope may be looked for , to sail that way to Cathay , do you notwithstanding follow the tract of the same land , as far as you can discover this Summer , having care to find out by the way a convenient place for you to Winter in , the which ( if you may discover the same land of Asia this Summer to extend it self to 80. degrees of latitude , and upward or to 85. degrees ) we wish then that the same your wintering place may be in the river of Ob , or as near the same river as you can , and finding in such wintering place , people , be they Samoeds , Yowgorians , or Molgomzes , etc. do you gently entreat with them as aforesaid , and if you can learn that they have a prince or chief governor among them , do you deliver him one of her Majesties letters , and pro - 2% Queens cure thereof and answer accordingly : do you procure Otters . to barter & exchange with the people , of the merchandise and commodities that you shall carry with you , for such commodities as you shall find them to have , etc. 
 If you so happen to winter , we would have you the next Summer to discover into the river Ob , so far as conveniently you may : And if you shall find the same river ( which is reported to be wide or broad ) to be also navigable and pleasant for you , to travel far into , happily you may come to the city Siberia , or to some The City of other town or place habited upon or near the border iberia-of it , and thereby have liking to winter out the second winter : use you therein your discretions . 
 But if you find the said river Ob to be should , or not such as you may conveniently travel in with your barks , do you then the next summer return back through Boroughs straights : And from that part of Nova Zembla , adjoining to the same straights , do you come alongst the tract of that coast Westwards , keeping it on the starboard side , and the same always in sighed , if conveniently you may , until you come to Willoughbies land , if outward bound you shall not tVilloughbies happen to discover and try whither the said Willough - land . 
 in 257 r 
 bies land join continent with the same Nova Zembla , or not . But if you shall then prove them to be one firm and continent , you may from Nova Zembla direct your course unto the said Willoughbies land , as you shall think good , and as you may most conveniently : and from Willoughbies land you shall proceed Westwards alongst the tract of it , ( though it incline Northerly ) even so far as you may or can travel , having regard that in convenient time you may return home hither to London for wintering . 
 And for your orderly passing in this voyage , and making observations in the same , we refer you to the instructions given by M. William Burrough , whereof one copy is annexed unto the first part of this Indenture under our seal , for you Arthur Pet , another copy of it is annexed to the second part of this Indenture , under our seal also , for you Charles Jackman , and a third copy thereof is annexed unto the third part of this Indenture , remaining with us the said company , sealed and subscribed by you the said Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman . 
 And to the observing of all things contained in this Commission ( so near as God will permit me grace thereunto ) I the said Arthur Pet do covenant by these presents to perform them , and every part and parcel thereof . And I the said Charles Jackman do for my part likewise covenant by these presents to perform the same , and every part thereof , so near as God will give me grace thereunto . 
 And in witness thereof these Indentures were sealed and delivered accordingly , the day and year first above written . Thus the Lord God Almighty send you a prosperous voyage , with happy success and safe return , Amen . 
 . 