The discovery made by M. Arthur Pet , and M. Charles Jackman , of the Northeast parts , beyond the Island of Vaigatz , with two Barks : the one called the George , the other the William , in the year 1580. Written by Hugh Smith . 
 Pon Munday the 30. of May , we departed from Harwich in the afternoon , the wind being at South , and to the Eastward . The ebb being spent we could not double the pole , and therefore were constrained to put in again until the next day in the morning , being the last 
 of May : which day we weighed our anchors about 3. a clock in the morning , the wind being West southwest . The same day we passed Orfordnesse at and East Sun , and Stamford at a West Sun , and Yarmouth at a West northwest sun , and so to Winterton , where we did anchor all night : it was then calm , and the flood was come . 
 The next day being the first of June , we set sail at 3. a clock in the morning , and set our course North , the wind at the Southwest , and at Southsouthwest . 
 The 10. day about one of the clock in the afternoon , we put into Norway to a place where one of the headlands of the found is called Bottle : the other headland is called Moil . There is also and Island called Keen . Here I did find the pole to be elevated 62. deg . it doth flow there South , and it hieth 7. or 8. foot , not above . 
 The 11. day in the morning the wind came to the South and to the Southeast : the same day at sixe in 282 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. the afternoon we set sail , and bore along the coast : it was very foul weather with rain and fog . 
 The 22. day the wind being at West , we did hall the The North coast East northeast , and East . The same day at 6. in doubled . the morning we did double the north cape . About 3. in the afternoon we passed Skites bear ness , and hold along the coast East , and East southeast , and all the same night we hailed Southeast , and Southeast by East . 
 The 23. day about 3. in the morning we came to Wardhouse . Wardhouse , the wind at the Northwest . The cause of our coming in was to seek the William , whose company we lost the 6. day of this month , and to send letters into England . About one of the clock in the after noon the William also came into Wardhouse to us in good safety , and all her company in good health . 
 The 24. the wind came to the East Northeast . This day the William was hold a ground , because she was somewhat leak , and to mend her steerage . This night about 12. of the clock she did hale a float again . 
 The 25. day the wind was at East northeast . 
 The 26. day the Toby of Harwich departed from Wardhouse for London , Thomas Greene being master , to whom we delivered our letters . 
 The 27. day the wind was at South southeast , and the 28. also . 
 The 29. day about 6. in the afternoon , the wind came to the West northwest for the space of one hour , and presently to the East again , and so was variable all the same night . 
 The 30. about sixe in the morning , the wind came to East southeast , and continued so all the same day . 
 The first of July about 5. in the afternoon , the wind July . was at Northnorthwest : and about 7. of the clock we set sail from Wardhouse East and by South . 
 The second day about 5. in the morning , the wind was East , and East southeast , and we did lie to the shorewards . And about 10. in morning the wind came to South southeast , and we laid it to the Eastward : some-283 
 time we lay East by South , sometime East southeast , and sometime East by North . About 5. in the afternoon we bore with the William , who was willing to go with Kegor , because we thought her to be out of try , and sailed very ill , where we might mend her steerage : whereupon master Pet not willing to go into harbour said to master Jackman , that if he thought himself not able to keep the sea , he should do as he thought best , and that he in the mean time would bear with Willoughbies Willoughbies land , for that it was a parcel of our land . direction , and would meet him at Verove Ostrove , or Vaigats , and so we set our course East northeast , the wind being at Southeast . 
 The 3. day the wind at Southeast we found the pole to be elevated 70. degrees , 46. minutes . The same night at 12. of the clock we sounded , but had no ground , 50. leagues in I2o . fathoms , being fifty leagues from the one side from Kegor . our reckoning East northeast from Kegor . 
 The 4. day all the morning was calm . This day we found the pole to be elevated 71. degrees 38. minutes . This day at 9. in the afternoon the wind at Northeast with a gentle gale , we hold along Southeast by East . 
 The 5. day the wind at Northwest , we hold East and East by South : this day we saw land , but we could not make it , the wind being Northerly , so that we could not come near to it . 
 The 6. day about 2. in the afternoon , the wind at North northwest , we halde East southeast with a fair and gentle gale : this day we met with ice . About 6. in the afternoon it became calm : we with sail and oars laid it to the Northeast part , hoping that way to clear us of it : for that way we did see the head part of it , as we thought . Which done , about 12. of the clock at night we gate clear of it . We did think it to be ice of the bay of Saint Nicholas , but it was not J sighed of as we f°und afterwards . 
 perfect land . The seventh day we met with more ice , at the East 284 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. part of the other ice : we halde along a weather the ice to find some end thereof by East northeast . This day there appeared more land North from us being perfect land : the ice was between us and it , so that we could not come nearer to it . 
 The same morning at sixe of the clock we put into the ice to find some way through it , we continued in it all the same day and all the night following , the wind by the North Northwest . we were constrained to go many points of our compass , but we went most and Easterly course . 
 The eight day the wind at North northwest , we continued our course , and at five in the morning we sounded , and had 90. fathoms read oz . This day at foure in the afternoon we sounded again , and had .84 . fathoms oz , as before . At sixe in the after noon we cleared our selves of the ice , and hold along Southeast by South : we sounded again at 10. a clock at night , and had 43. fathom sandy oz . 
 The 9. day at 2. in the morning , we sounded again , and had 45. fathoms , then there appeared a shadow of land to us East Northeast , and so we ran with it the space of 2. hours , and then perceiving that it was but fog , we hold along Southeast . 
 This day at 2. in the afternoon we sounded and 7^ - 3 - 
 had fiftie fathoms black oz . Our latitude was 70. mtn ' degrees three minutes . At tenne a clock at night we sounded again , and had fiftie fathoms black oz . 
 The tenth day the wind being at North northwest , we haled East and by North , which course we set , because at ten of the clock afore noon we did see land , and then we sounded having 35. fathoms black oz . All this day there was a great fog , so that we durst not bear with the land to make it , and so we kept and outwardly course . This day at 6. in the afternoon we espied land , wherewith we hailed , and then it grew calm : we sounded and had 120. fathoms black oz : and then we sent our boat a land to found and prove the land . 
 285 
 The same night we came with our ship within and And Island . Island , where we road all the same night . The same night we went into a bay to ride near the land for wood and water . 
 The malne The 11. day the wind came to the East southeast : land - this day about a league from us to the Eastwards , we saw a very fair found or river that passed very far into the country with 2. or 3. branches with and Island in the midst . 
 The 12. of July the wind was East Southeast . This day about 11. a clock in the morning , there came a great white bear down to the water side , and took the water of his own accord , we chased him with our boat , but for all that we could do , he goat to land Bearebay . and escaped from us , where we nam the bay Bearebay . This day at 7. in the after noon we set sail , for we had good hope that the wind would come Westerly , and with sail and oars we gate the sea . All the night it was calm with fog . 
 The 13. day in the morning the wind was very variable with fog , and as it cleared up we met with great store of ice , which at the first showed like land . This ice did us much trouble , and the more because of the fog , which continued until the 14. day , 12. of the clock . 
 The 14. day in the morning we were so imbayed with ice , y* we were constrained to come out as we went in , which was by great good fortune , or rather by the goodness of God , otherwise it had be impossible , and at 12. of the clock we were clear of it , the wind being at South and South by West . The same day 70. deg . 26. we found the pole to be elevated 70. degrees , 26. mtn - minutes : we lay along the coast Northwest , thinking 
 it to be and Island , but finding no end in rowing so long , The supposed we supposed it to be the main of Nova Zembla . About embia^0 ™ 2‘ * n afternoon we laid it to the Southward to ' double the ice , which we could not do upon that board , so that we cast about again and lay West along under the ice . About seven in the afternoon 
 286 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. we goat about the greatest part thereof . About 11. a clock at night we brought the ice Southeast of us , and thus we were rid of this trouble at this time . 
 The 15. day about 3. in the morning , the wind was at South southwest : we cast about and lay to the Eastwards : the wind did Wester , so that we lay South southwest with a flawne sheet , and so we ran all the same day . About 8. in the after noon we sounded , and had 23. fathoms small gray sand . This night at twelve of the clock we sounded again , and had 29. fathoms sand , as afore . 
 The 16. day unto 3. in the morning we hold along East Southeast , where we found 18. fathoms read sand , then we hold along Northeast . In these soundings we had many overfals . This day at 10. of the clock we Many overmet with more ice , which was very great , so that we fab . could not tell which way to get clear of it . Then the wind came to the South Southeast , so that we lay to the Northwards . We thought that way to clear our selves of it , but that way we had more ice . About 6. in the afternoon , the wind came to the East . Then we lay to the Southwards that we had 30. fathoms black oz . This day we found the pole to be elevated 69. deg . 40. minutes , and this night at 12. a clock we had 41. fathoms read sand . 
 The 17. day at 3. in the morning , we had 12. fathoms . At 9. we had 8. and 7. all this day we ran South and South by West , at the depth aforesaid , read sand , being but shallow water . At eight in the afternoon , the wind with a shower and thunder came to the Southwest , and then we ran East Northeast . At 12. at night it came to the South and by East , and all this was in the bay of Pechora . The bay of 
 The 18. day at 7. in the morning we bore with the w*0 ™ - headland of the bay , where we found two Islands . There are also overfals of water or tides . We went between the main and the Island , next to the head , where we had about 2. fathoms and a half . We found 
 287 
 They had sighed the pole elevated 69. deg . 13 minutes . This day we of Vaygatz . sighed of Vaigatz : the land of the main of Pechora 
 did trend Southeast , we hold East southeast , and had 10. fathoms oz all the same day until 4. in the after noon , then being calm , we anchored in 10. fathoms all the same night . 
 The 19. day at two in the morning we set sail , and ran South and South southwest all the same day at 8. 7. and 6. fathoms , this was ofF the South part of Vaigatz , this part of the land lies North and South . This day at 4. in the afternoon we found shallow water sometime 4. fathoms , sometime 3. and 2. and a half , and one fathom and a half : there we anchored and sent our boat away to found , and all to leeward we had 4. foot and 3. foot , and 2. foot , there was not water for the boat between Vaigatz & the other side : finding no more water , there was no other way but to go back as we came in , having the wind Northwest , so at twelve at night we set sail . 
 The 20. day we plied to the Northwards , and god deep water again 6. and 7. fathoms . 
 The 21. day the wind by the Northwest , we hold along the coast North and North northwest , we had 8. and 9. and 10. fathoms . 
 The 22. day the wind came to the Southwest , we bore along the coast of Vaygatz , as we found it to lie North and by West , and North northwest , and North . The wind blew very much with great fog , we lacking And Island water and wood bore within and Island where we found having store of great store of wood and water , there were three or wood tS water . 9 j tt 1 • 1 
 roure goodly sounds . Under two points there was a cross set up , and a man buried at the foot of it . Upon the said cross Master Pet did grave his name with the date of our Lord , and likewise upon a stone at the foot of the cross , and so did I also , to the end that if the William did chance to come thither , they might have knowledge that we had been there . At eight in the afternoon the wind came to the North north - 
 288 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. 
 west , we set sail and turned out of the Bay. The same night the wind came to the West , so that we lay North along the land . 
 The 23. day at five in the morning , the wind came to the Southwest , a Sea board we saw a great number of fair Islands , to the number of sixe : a sea board fair of these Islands , there are many great overfals , as great islands-streames or tides : we halde Northeast and East northeast as the land did trend . At eight aforenoon the wind came to the Southeast with very much wind , rain and fog , and very great store of ice a sea board : so we lay to the Southwest to attain to one of the Islands to harbour us if the weather did so extremely continue , and to take in our boat , thinking it meet so to do , and not to tow her in such weather . About twelve of the clock it became very calm upon the sudden , and came up to the West Northwest , and Northwest by West , and then we took in our boat , and this done , there came down so much wind , as we were not able to steer afore it , with corpse and bonnets of each , we hold South with the land , for so the land did trend . This day all the afternoon we sailed under a great land of ice , we sailed between the land and it , being not able to cross it . About twelve at night we found the ice to stretch into the land , that we could not get clear to the Eastward , so we laid it to the shore , and there we found it clear hard aboard the shore , and we found also a very fair Island which makes a very good harbour , and within are 12. fathoms . 
 This Island is to you Eastwards of Vaigatz , 4 or 5. - And Island to leagues . This land of the main does trend Southeast , gr 
 and Southeast by East . It is a very fair coast , and °r 
 even and plain , and not full of mountains nor rocks : you have but shallow water of 6. or 7. fathoms , about a league from the shore , all this morning we hailed East southeast . This day we found the pole to be elevated 69. degrees 14. minutes . About 12. a clock we were constrained to put into the ice to seek some 
 in 289 TO 
 The William and the George meet again . 
 way to get to the Northwards of it , hoping to have some clear passage that way , but there was nothing but whole ice . About nine in the afternoon we had sighed of the William , and when we saw her , there was a great land of ice between her and us , so that we could not come one to the other , but as we came near to her , we sounded our trumpet and shot ofF two muskets , and she put out her flag upon her foretopmaste in token that she did see us : all this time we did shorten our sails , and went with our foresail & mainetopsaile , seeking the best way through the broken ice , she making away the best that she could to follow us , we put out our flag to answer her again with the like : thus we continued all the afternoon till about 12. a clock at night , and then we moared our ship to a piece of ice to tarry for the William . 
 The 25. day about five in the morning , the William came to us , being both glad of our meeting . The William had her stern post broken , that the rudder did hang clean beside the stern , so that she could in no wise port her helm , with all hands she did lighten her stern , and trim her head , and when we had brought her forward all that we could , we brought a cable under her stern , and with our capstaine did wind up her stern , and so we made it as well as the place would give us leave , and in the end we brought her to steer again . we acknowledge this our meeting to be a great benefit of God for our mutual comfort , and so gave his majesty thanks for it . All the night after we took our rest being made fast upon a piece of ice : the wind was at West Northwest , but we were so enclosed with ice that we could not tell which way to pass . Winds we have had at will , but ice and fog too much against our wills , if it had pleased the Lord God otherwise . 
 The 26. day the wind was at West Northwest : we set sail to the Northwards , to seek if we could find any way clear to pass to the Eastward , but the further 290 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. we went that way , the more and thicker was the ice , so that we could go no further . So about foure in the afternoon we were constrained to moare upon another piece of ice . I think we sailed in all a league this day , here we had 15. fathoms oz , and this oz is all the channel over . All the same day after foure of the clock , and all the night we tarried there , being without all good hope , but rather in despair . This day Master Jugman did see land East Northeast from us , as he did think , whither it were land or no , I cannot tell well , but it was very like land , but the fogs have many times deceived us . 
 The 27. day the wind was at Northwest . This day at nine in the morning we set sail to seek the shore . Further into the ice we could not go , and at seven in the afternoon we moared to a piece of ice , and the William with us , here we had 14. fathoms oz . At three in the afternoon we warped from one ice to another . At nine in the afternoon we moared again to a piece of ice until the next day . All this night it did snow with much wind , being at West Northwest , and at Northwest , and by West . 
 The 28. day the wind came to the Southwest , and Southsouthwest : this day was a very fair day . At one in the afternoon master Pet and master Jackman did confer together what was best to be done considering that the winds were good for us , and we not able to pass for ice , they did agree to seek to the land again , and so to Vaygatz , and there to confer further . At Their return . 3. in the afternoon we did warp from one piece of ice to another to get from them if it were possible : here were pieces of ice so great , that we could not see beyond them out of the top . Thus we warped until 9. in the afternoon , and then we moared both our ships to a great and high piece of ice , until the next morning . 
 The nine and twentie day the wind came to the Southwest , we set sail at five in the morning to ply 
 291 
 The currant runneth with the wind . 
 into the shore if it were possible , we made many turns among the ice to small purpose , for with the wind doth the currant run . This day by misfortune a piece of ice stroke of our greepe afore at two afternoon , yet for all this we turned to do our best . The William being encumbered with ice , and perceiving that she did little good , took in all her sails , and made her self fast to a piece of ice , and about foure in the afternoon she set sail to follow us . We were afraid that she had taken some hurt , but she was well . At seven afore noon we took in all our sails to tarry for the William , and made our ship fast to a piece of ice : the William before she came to us took in all her sails , and moared to another piece of ice , and thus we continued until the next morning . 
 The 30. day the wind at Southeast , and by South , and at 9. in the morning we set sail , and sooner would have done if you William had be by us , but we did tarry for her to know whither all was well with her : But as soon as we made sail , she did the like . All this day we did our best to seek our way as the ice would give us leave , sometime we lay South , sometime West , and sometime East , and thus we continued until eight at night , and then being calm , we made our ship fast to a piece of ice , and went to supper . In the mean time the wind with a fair gentle gale came up to the East , and East and by South , but there came down a shower of rain with it , which continued the space of one hour : Which being done , it became calm again , so that we could do no good all that night , but took our rest until the next day . 
 The 31. the wind being at Southwest , we set sail to turn to windward at three a clock in the morning . In this turning we did little good , for the currant would not give us leave . For as the wind is , so is the currant . We did our best until ten of the clock , and then perceiving that we did no good , and being enclosed with ice , we made our ships fast to a piece of ice : 
 292 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. 
 All this day the William lay still , and did as much good as we that did labour all the fbrenoone . Thus we took our rest all the same day . 
 In the afternoon we set sail , the wind being at South & by East , we lay to the Westwards , as Southwest and Southwest and by South , and sometime to the Westward as we might . Thus we continued until 9. at night , and then we could go no further for ice : so we with the William were constrained to make our ship fast to a piece of ice all the same night . This day we found the pole elevated 69. degrees 20. minutes , and here we had 17. fathoms oz . 
 The first day of August was very calm in the August . morning , the wind being at West Northwest . About twelve the wind came to the West , and continued so all the same night with great fog . 
 The second day the wind was at Southwest all day with rain and fog . All this day we were enclosed with ice , so that we were forced to lie still . Here we had one and twentie fathoms oz . At sixe in the afternoon the wind was at West with very much foul weather , and so continued all the same night . 
 The third day the wind was at West , and West by North , and West Northwest , this day we lay still enclosed with ice , the weather being dark with fog : thus abiding the Lords leisure , we continued with patience . And sounding we found 21. fathoms . 
 The fourth day we lay still enclosed with ice , the wind being at West Northwest , this ice did every day increase upon us , yet putting our trust in God , we hoped to be delivered out of it in good time . 
 The fift day all the morning it reigned with very much wind , being at South Southeast : about 3. in the after noon we set sail , and presently it became calm for the space of one hour , then the wind came to the North Northeast , and here we had 33. fathoms : thus we made way among the ice Southwest , and Southsouthwest , & West , as we might find our way for 293 
 A whole land the space of 3. hours : then we met with a whole °fyce - land of ice , so that we could go no further : here we moared our ship to tarry for a further opening . Here we found 45. fathoms oz , and all the night was very dark with fog . 
 The sixt day having no opening of the ice we lay still , the wind being at West , and West by South : here we had sixty three fathoms oz : all the same night the wind was at the West Northwest . 
 The 7. day the wind was at West , and West and by North all day . And all this day we lay still being enclosed with ice , that we could not stir , labouring only to defend the ice as it came upon us . Here we had 68. fathoms oz . 
 The 8. day was very fair & calm but foggy . This day towards night there was little wind by the South Southwest : then the ice began a little to open , and here we had 70. fathoms oz : all the night was foggy . 
 The 9. day the wind was at Northwest , and by West , all the afternoon we lay still because of the ice , which did still enclose us . This day we found 70. degr . 4. the pole elevated seventy degrees , 4. minutes , we had mtn - 63. fathoms oz : this night was a very fair night , 
 Frost . but it freezed : in the morning we had much ado to 
 go through the same : and we were in doubt that if it should have freezed so much the night following , The appearing we should hardly have passed out of it . This night j was one star that appeared to us . 
 The tenth day the wind was at East Northeast with a very small gale . we with sail and oars made way through the ice : about five in the morning we set sail : sometime we say Southwest , and sometime South , and sometime West , as we might best find the way . About three in the afternoon the gale began to fresh : about sixe in the afternoon the wind was at Northeast with fog . Here we had eighty eight Much snow , fathoms : we bore sail all the same night , and it snowed very much . 
 294 
 The eleventh day we were much troubled with ice , and by great force we made our way through it , which we thought a thing impossible : but extremity does cause men to do much , and in the weakness of man Gods strength most appears . This day we had 95. fathoms . At three in the afternoon the wind came to the Southwest , we were forced to make our ship fast to a piece of ice , for we were enclosed with it , and tarried the Lords leisure . This night we had 97. fathoms . 
 The 12. day the wind was at the Southeast not very much but in a manner calm : at a 11. of the clock the wind came to the West Southwest : all the day was very dark with snow and fog . At 6. in the afternoon we set sail the wind being at the North Northeast : all this night we bore away Southwest , and Southsouthwest , as well and as near as the ice would give us leave : all this night we found the ice somewhat favourable to us , more then it was before , whereupon we stood in good hope to get out of it . 
 The 13. day at 7. in the morning , the wind was at the Northeast , and Northeast and by East : all this day we were much troubled with the ice , for with a blow against a piece of ice we brake the stock of our anchor , and many other great blows we had against the ice , that it was marvelous that the ship was able to abide them : the side of our boat was broken with our ship which did recoil back , the boat being betwixt a great piece of ice , and the ship , and it perished the head of our rudder . This day was a very hard day with us : at night we found much broken ice , and all this night it blew very much wind , so that we lay in drift with the ice , & our drift was South , for the wind was at North all this night , and we had great store of snow . 
 The 14. day in the morning we made our ship fist to a piece of ice , and let her drive with it . In the mean time we mended our boat and our steerage : all this day the wind continued Northerly , and here 295 
 Great store of snow . 
 They are thwart against Vaigats . 
 Sands . 
 we had threescore and two fathoms . Thus we lay a drift all the same night . 
 The 15. day we set sail at 6. in the morning , the wind being at Northeast . At 9. aforenoon we entered into a clear Sea without ice , whereof we were most glad , and not without great cause , and gave God the praise . We had 19. fathoms water , and ran in Southwest all the morning until we came to 14. fathoms , and thence we hailed West , till we came to 10. fathoms , and then we went Northwest , for so the land doth trend . At 12. of the clock we had sighed of the land , which we might have had sooner , but it was dark and foggy all the same day : for when we had sighed of the land , we were not passing three leagues from it . This day we had the pole elevated 69 degrees 49 minutes . All day we ran along the coast in ten and nine fathoms , pepered sand . It is a very goodly coast and a bold , and fair soundings off it , without sands or rocks . 
 The 16 day the wind was at East : this day we were troubled again with ice , but we made great shift with it : for we got between the shore and it . This day at twelve of the clock we were thwart of the Southeast part of Vaigats , all along which part there was great store of ice , so that we stood in doubt of passage , yet by much ado we god betwixt the shore and it : about 6 in the afternoon was found a great white bear upon a piece of ice : all this day in the afternoon it was dark with fog . And all the night we haled North and North by West , and sometime North and by East , for so does the land trend . 
 The 17 day in the morning we haled West , for so does the land lie . The wind was at Southeast , and it was very dark with fog , and in running along the shore we fell a ground , but God be praised without hurt , for we came presendy ofF again . The William came to and anchor to stay for us , and sent some of their men to help us , but before they came we were 296 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. under sail , and as we came to the William we did stowe our boats , and made sail , we went within some of the Islands , and haled Westsouthwest . The Islands . 
 About two of the clock in the afternoon , we set our course Southwest and by South : so we ran Southwest until twelve at night , the wind came to the Northnortheast , and then we haled West . 
 The 18 day at 6 in the morning we had 16 fathoms read sand : at 6 in the morning 13 fathoms . At 10 , 14 fathoms , and we haled Westnorthwest . At 12 a clock the wind came to the East , and East by South , we haled West and by North all the same day and night . At 6 in the afternoon we had 17 fathoms read sand . 
 The 19 day the wind was at Eastnortheast : at 6 in the morning we had 19 fathoms read sand : at 12 of the clock the wind blue North and North by East , we had 17 fathoms of water , at 3 in the afternoon 15. 
 The 20 day the wind was at Northeast , and Northnortheast : at 7 in the morning we had 30 fathoms black oz : at twelve of the clock we were upon the sudden in shoal water , among great sands , and could find no way out . By sounding and seeking about , we came aground , and so did the William , but we had no hurt , for the wind was off the shore , and the same night it was calm : all night we did our best , but we could not have her aflote . These shoals do lie off Shoals off Colgoyeve : it is very flat a great way off , and it does not high above 2 or 3 foot water : it flows Northeast , and Southwest . 
 The 21 day the wind was at Southwest , and being very fair weather we did lighten our ships as much as was possible for us to do , by reason of the place . The same high water , by the help of God , we god both a float , and the wind being at the Southwest did help us , for it caused it to flow the more water . 
 This day we found the pole to be elevated 68 degrees 40 min. In the afternoon we both set sail to seek way to get out of these sands , our boat a 
 297 
 The bay of Morzovets . 
 head sounding , having 6 , 7 , and 8 fathoms all within the sand which was without us . We bore to the Southward , and the William bore more to the Eastwards , and night being at hand the wind came to the Southeast , whereupon we laid it to the Southwards , lying Southwest , and South and by West , and ran to 19 , and 12 and 14 fathoms , and presently we had but sixe fathoms , which was off the sands head , which we were a ground upon the day before . Then we cast about to the Eastwards for deep water , which we presently had , as 10 , 15 , and 20 and so to 23 fathoms . 
 The 22 day at 8 in the morning , we cast about to the Southward , and this day in the morning we saw the William under our lee as far as we could see her , and with a great fog we lost the sighed of her , and since we have not seen her . Thus we ran till we came to thirtie fathoms black oz , which we had at twelve of the clock , and at three in the afternoon we had twenty and three fathoms , and then we ran Westnorthwest , and West by North , all the same night following . 
 The 23 day we had at 6 in the morning 27 fathoms , at 8 a clock 28 fathoms : at 9 the wind being at Eastsoutheast , we haled Westnorthwest : this day we had sighed of the land of Hugri side . At twelve of the clock we had thirty two fathoms sand . This day we ran West and by North , and came to five fathoms off the bay of Morzovets . Then we laid it to the Northwards , so that we lay Northnortheast off . The wind after came to the North , and North by East , and we lay East and East by North , then we laid it to the Westward again : and thus we lay till we came to fortie fathoms , and then we went Northwest till we came to fourteene fathoms , and so to tenne fathoms . Then we cast about to the Eastwards and lay East , and East by North all the same night . 
 The 24 day at 8 in the morning we had 32 fathoms . We ran Northwest till we came to 11 fathoms , then we lay to the Northwards till 12 at night , and then we 298 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d. 
 1580. came to forty fathoms , then the wind at Northeast we lay to the Westwards , and haled Northwest along . 
 The 25 at 4 in the morning we had 37 fathoms , we ran Northwest , the wind at Northnortheast very much . 
 The 26 day we ran with the same wind , and found the pole to be elevated 70 deg . 40 min. 
 The 27 at 7 in the morning we saw land , which we made to be Kegor , then we haled Northwest , and North by West to double the North Cape . 
 The 28 day at 3 in the morning we ran Northwest , and so all day . At night the wind came to the Southwest , and we ran Northwest all that night . 
 The 29 day we put into a found called Taken , and the The town of town is called Hungon : we came to and anchor at 5 in Hungon . the afternoon , at 25 fathoms very fair sand . This found is very large and good , and the same night we god water aboard . 
 The 30 day in the morning the wind at Northeast , and but little , we set sail , and with our boat on head we god the sea about 12 of the clock : the wind with a fair gale came to the East Southeast , and all this day and night we ran Westnorthwest . 
 The 31 day at 12 of the clock we doubled the North They double Cape , the wind being at Eastsoutheast , we haled West North all the same day , and at night we ran Westsouthwest . m 
 The 1 day of September the wind was at Northeast with very much fog : all this day we ran Westsouthwest : at 2 in the afternoon the wind came North . 
 The second day at 3 in the morning we doubled Fowlnesse , & the wind was this day variable at all parts of the Compass . In the afternoon we made but little way : at 6 a clock the wind came to the Southwest , and we went Northwest . At 9 in the night there came down so much wind by the Westsouth west , that we were feign to lay it a hull , we haled it to Northwards for the space of 2 hours , and then we laid her head to the Southwards , and at the break of day we saw land , which is very high , and is called by the men of the 
 299 
 The found of Romesal . 
 country Foulness . It is within full of small Islands , and without full of rocks very far out , and within the rocks you have fair sand at 20 fathoms . 
 The 3 day in the morning we bore with the found aforesaid : Within it is but shoal water , 4 5 and 3 fathoms , sandy ground , the land is very high , and the Church that is seen is called Helike Kirke . It doth high here not above 8 or 9 foot . 
 The 12 day at 3 in the afternoon , we put into a found by Lowfoote , where it doth flow Southwest , and by South , and does high 7 or 8 foot water . 
 The 13 day much wind at West : we had a ledge of rocks in the wind of us , but the road was reasonable good for all Southerly and Westerly winds . We had the main land in the wind of us : this day was stormy with rain . 
 The 23 day at foure of the clock in the afternoon we put into Norway , into a found called Romesal , where it flows Southsoutheast , and does high 8 foot water : this place is full of low Islands , and many good sounds without the high mountain land . Here is great store of wood growing , as fir , birch , oak , and hasell : all this night the wind was at the South , very much wind , with rain and fog . 
 The 28 day in the morning the wind being at Eastnortheast we set sail at 8 of the clock , and haled out of the bay Westsouthwest , and Southwest , having a goodly gale until one of the clock , and then the wind came to Southeast , and to the South with rain and fog , and very much wind : at sixe of the clock we came into a very good road , where we did ride all the same night in good safety . 
 The 29 day we put into a good found , the wind by the Southwest : at three in the afternoon there came down very much wind by the South , and all night with vehement Wastes , and rain . 
 The 30 day all day the wind was at Westsouth west . And in this found the pole is elevated 63 deg . 10 min. 
 300 
 ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN AD . 
 1580. 
 The first day of October the wind was at South with October . very much wind , and vehement blasts . 
 The 7 day we set sail : for from the first of this month until this 7 day , we had very foul weather , but specially the fourth day when the wind was so great , that our cables brake with the very storm , and I do not think that it is possible that any more wind then that was should blow : for after the breaking of our cable , we did drive a league , before our anchors would take any hold : but God be thanked the storm began to slack , otherwise we had be in ill case . 
 The 7. day at night we came to and anchor until the next day , which was the 8 day of the month , when as the wind grew great again , with rain , whereupon we set sail and returned into the found again : and at our first coming to and anchor , presently there blew so much wind , that although our best anchor was out , yet the extremity of the storm drove us upon a ledge of rocks , and did bruise our ship in such sort , that we were constrained to lighten her to save her , and by this means ( by the help of God ) we god ofF our ship and stopped our leaks , and moared her in good safety abiding for a wind . We rid from this day by reason of contrary winds , with fog and rain until the 24 day , which day in the morning the wind came to the Northeast , and at 8 of the clock we set sail . This found is called More Moore found . found , where it higheth about 5 foot water , & flows Southsoutheast . The next day being the 2 5 day we put into a found which is called Ultar found , where was a ship of the king of Denmark put into another found there by , being 2 leagues to the southwards of us , that came out of Island : you wind was contrary for us at Southsouthwest . 
 The 12 day of November we set sail the wind being at the East Southeast , and passed through the found where the kings ship did lie : which found is called Sloure found . But as we did open the found , we found the wind at the Southwest , so that we could do no good , so 301 
 that we moared our ship between 2. Islands until the 18 day , and then the weather being fair and calm , we set sail , 8c went to sea hoping to find a fair wind , but in the sea we found the wind at the Southwest , and Southsouthwest , so that we were constrained to return into the same found . 
 The next day being the 19 the kings ship came out also , because she saw us put to sea , 8c came as far out as we , and moared where we did moare afore : And at our return back again , we moared our ship in and utter found called Scorpe found , because the kings ship was without victuals , and we did not greatly desire her company , although they desired ours . In this found the pole is elevated 62 deg . 47 min. Thus we lay still for a wind until the 1 of December , which day we set sail at 6 a clock in the morning , 8c at 4 in the afternoon we laid it to the inward . 
 The 9 day we had sighed of the coast of Scotland which was Buquhamnesse . 
 The 10 day we were open off the Frith . 
 The 11 day at 4 in the morning we were thwart of Barwike : at 6 we were thwart of Bamburch : the same day at 10 at night we were shot as far as Hollyfoote . Then the wind came to the South and Southeast , so that we lay still until the next day in the morning , and then we were constrained to put with Tinmouth . The same day at night we haled aground to stop a leak , which we found to be in the scarf afore . The wind continued by the Southeast 8c Southsoutheast until the 20 day , and then we set sail about 12 at night , bearing along the coast . 
 The 22 day by reason of a Southeast wind , we thought we should have be put into Humber , but the wind came to the West , so that we haled Southeast : and at 3 in the afternoon we haled a sea board the sands , and had shoal water off Lymery and Owry , and were in 4 fathoms off them . The next day we haled as we might to seize Orfordnesse . 
 302 
 INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUSSIAN FLEET a.d. 
 1582. 
 The 24 day we came thwart of the Nase , about 8 in the morning . 
 The 25 day being the Nativity of Christ , we came to and anchor between Oldhaven , and Tilberie hope . The same day we turned as high as Porshet . 
 The 26 day we turned as high as Ratcliffe , and praised God for our safe return . And thus I end , 1580. 
 The William with Charles Jackman arrived at a port in Norway between Tronden and Rostock in October 1580. and there did winter : And from thence departed again in Februarie following , and went in company of a ship of the King of Denmarke towards Island : and since that time he was never herd of . 
 . 