The most solemn , and magnificent coronation | | Or Theodor . of | | Pheodor Ivanowich , Emperor of Russia etc. the tenth of June , in the year 1584. seen and observed by Master Jerom Horsey gentleman , and servant to her Majesty , a man of great travel , and long experience in those parts : wherewith is also joined the course of his journey over land from Mosco to Emden . 
 The death of Ivan Vasiliwich 1584. 
 Apr. 18. 
 Hen the old Emperor Ivan Vasiliwich died , ( being about the eighteenth of Aprill , 1584. after our computation ) in the ci tie of Mosco , having reigned 54. years , there was some tumult and uproar among some of the nobility , and commonalty , which notwithstanding was quickly 
 pacified . Immediately the same night , the Prince Boris 
 Pheodorowich Godonova , Knez Ivan Pheodorowich , 
 L. Boris adopted as the Emperor's third son . 
 Mesthis Slafsky , Knez Ivan Petrowich Susky , Mekita Romanowich & Bodan Jacovlewich Belskoy , being all noble men , and chiefest in the Emperor's Will , especially the Lord Boris , whom he adopted as his third son , & was brother to the Empress , who was a man very well liked of all estates , as no less worthy for his valour & wisdom : all these were appointed to dispose , & settle 336 
 his son Pheodor Ivanowich , having one sworn another , and all the nobili tie , and officers whosoever . In the morning you dead Emperor was laid into the Church of Michael the Archangel , into a hewn sepulchre , very richly decked with vestures fit for such a purpose : and present Proclamation was made , ( Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia etc. ) Throughout all the city of Mosco was great watch and ward , with soldiers , and gunners , good order established , and officers placed to subdue the tumulters , and maintain quietness : to see what speed and policy was in this case used was a thing worth the beholding . This being done in Mosco , great men of birth and account were also presently sent to the bordering Towns , as Smolensko Vobsko , Kasan , Novo-gorod etc. with fresh garrison , and the old sent up . As upon the 4. of May a parliament was held , wherein were assembled , the Metropolitan , Archbishop's , Bishops , Priors , and chief clergy men , and all the nobility whatsoever : where many matters were determined not pertinent to my purpose , yet all tended to a new reformation in the government : but especially the term , and time was agreed upon for the solemnizing of the new 
 young son sent to Ouglets . 
 Emperor's coronation . In the mean time you Empress , Em~ wife to the old Emperor , was with her child the 
 Emperor's son , Charlewich Demetrie Ivanowich , of Jatier , and er one years age or there about , sent with her father Pheodor Pheodorowich Nagay , & that kindred , being 5. 
 Brother's , to a town called Ouglets , which was given unto her , and the young Prince her son , with all the lands belonging to it in the shire , with officers of all sorts appointed , having allowance of apparel , jewels , diet , horse etc. in ample manner belonging to the estate of a princess . The time of mourning after their use being expired , called Sorachyn , or fortie orderly days , the day of the solemnizing of this coronation , with great preparations , was come , being upon the 10. day of June , 1584. and that day then Sunday , he being of the age of 25. years : at which time , Master Jerom Horsey was 
 The day of Pheodor his coronation . 
 in 
 337 
 orderly sent for , and placed in a fit room to see all the solemnity . The Emperor coming out of his Palace , there went before him , the Metropolitan , Archbishop's , Bishops , and chiefest Monks , and Clergy men , with very rich Copes , and Priests garments upon them , carrying pictures of our Lady etc. with the Emperors Angel , banners , censers , and many other such ceremonious things , singing all the way . The Emperor with his nobility in order entered the Church nam Blaveshina , or Blessedness , where prayers , and service were used , according to the manner of their Church : that done , they went thence to the Church , called Michael the Archangell , and there also used the like prayers , and service : and from thence to our Lady Church , Prechista , being their Cathedral Church . In the midst thereof was a chair of majesty placed , wherein his Ancestors used to fit at such extraordinary times : his robes were then changed , and most rich and unvaluable garments put on him : being placed in this Princely seat , his nobility standing round about him in their degrees , his imperiali Crown was set upon his head by the Metropolitan , his Sceptre globe in his right hand , his sword of Justice in his left of great riches : his 6. Crowns also , by which he holds his kingdoms were set before him , and the Lord Boris Pheodorowich was placed at his right hand : then the Metropolitan read openly a book of a small volume , with exhortations to the Emperor to minister true Justice , to enjoy with tranquillity the Crown of his ancestors , which God had given him , and used these words following . 
 Through the will of the almighty & without beginning God , which was before this world , whom we glorify in the Trinitie , one only God , the Father , the Son , and the holy Ghost , maker of all things , worker of all in all every where , fulfiller of all things , by which will , and working , he both lives , and gives life to man : that our only God which enspireth every one of us his only children with his word to discern God through our Lord 338 
 Jesus Christ , and the holy quickening spirit of life , now in these perilous times establish us to keep the right Sceptre , and suffer us to reign of our selves to the good profit of the land , to the subduing of the people , together with the enemies , & the maintenance of virtue . And so the Metropolitan blessed and laid his cross upon him . After this , he was taken out of his chair of Majesty , having upon him and upper robe adorned with precious stones of all sorts , orient pearls of great quantity , but always augmented in riches : it was in weight two hundred pounds , the train , and parts thereof born up by 6. Dukes , his chief imperiali Crown upon his head very precious : his staff imperiali in his right hand of and unicorns horn of three foot and a half in length beset with rich stones , bought of Merchant's of Ausburge by the old Emperor in An. 1581 , and cost him 7000. Marks sterling . This Jewel M. Horsey kept sometime , before the Emperor had it . His sceptre globe was carried before him by the prince Boris Pheodorowich , his rich cap beset with rich stones and pearls was carried before him by a Duke : his 6. Crowns also were carried by Demetrius Ivanowich Godonova , the Emperor's uncle , Mekita Romanowich the Emperor's uncle , Stephan Vasiliwich , Gregory Vasiliwich , Ivan Vasiliwich brother's of the blood royal . Thus at last the Emperor came to the great Church door , and the people cried , God save our Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia . His horse was there ready most richly adorned , with a covering of embroidered pearl and precious stones , saddle , and all furniture agreeable to it , reported to be worth 300000. marks sterling . 
 There was a bridge made of 150. fathom in length , three manner of ways , three foot above ground and two fathom broad , for him to go from one Church to the other with his Princes and nobles from the press of the people , which were in number infinite , and some at that time pressed to death with the throng . As the Emperor returned out of the Churches , they were spread under foot 339 
 with cloth of gold , the porches of the Churches with read velvet , the bridges with scarlet , and stammell cloth from one church to another : and as soon as the Emperor was passed by , the cloth of gold , velvet and scarlet was cut , and taken of those that could come by it , every man desirous to have a piece , to reserve it for a monument : silver and gold coin , then mynted of purpose was cast among the people in great quantity . The lord Boris Pheodorowich was sumptuously , and richly attired , with his garments decked with great orient pearl , beset with all sorts of precious stones . In like rich manner were appareled all the family of the Godonovaes in their degrees , with the rest of the princes , and nobili tie , whereof one nam Knez Ivan Michalowich Glynsky , whose robe , horse , and furniture , was in register found worth one hundred thousand marks sterling , being of great antiquity . The Empress being in her palace , was placed in her chair of Majesty also before a great open window : most precious , and rich were her robes , and shining to behold , with rich stones , and orient pearl beset , her crown was placed upon her head , accompanied with her Princesses , and Ladies of estate : then cried out the people , God preserve our noble Empress Irenia . After all this the Emperor came into the Parliament house which was richly decked : there he was placed in his royal seat adorned as before : his 6. crowns were set before him upon a table : the basin , and ewer royal of gold held by his knight of guard with his men standing two on each side in white apparel of cloth of silver , called Kindry , with sceptres , and battle axes of gold in their hands : the Princes , and nobility were all placed according to their degrees all in their rich robes . 
 The Emperor after a short oration , permitted every man in order to kiss his hand : which being done , he removed to a princely seat prepared for him at the table : where he was served by his nobles in very princely order . The three out rooms being very great , and large were beset with plate of gold , and silver round , from the 340 
 ground up to the vauts one upon the other : among which plate were many barrels of silver and gold : this solemnity , and triumph lasted a whole week , wherein many royal pastimes were showed and used : after which the chiefest men of the nobility were elected to their places of office , & dignity , as the Prince Boris Pheodorowich was made chief Counsellor to the Emperor , Master of the horse , had the charge of his person , Lieutenant of the Empire , and Warlike engines , Governor or Lieutenant of the Empire of Cazan , and Astracan and others : to this dignity were by Parliament , and gift of the Emperor given him many revenues , and rich lands , as there was given him , and his for ever to inherit a province called Vaga , of 300. English miles in length , and 250. in breadth , with many towns and great villages populous and wealthy , his yearly revenue out of that province , is 35. thousand marks sterling , being not the 5. part of his yearly revenue . Further , he and his house be of such authority , and power , that in 40. days warning they are able to bring into the field 100. thousand Soldiers well furnished . 
 The conclusion of the Emperor's Coronation was a peal of ordinance , called a peal royal two miles without the city , being 170. great pieces of brass of all sorts , as fair as any can be made , these pieces were all discharged with shot against bulwarks made of purpose : 20. thousand hargubusers standing in 8. ranks two miles in length , appareled all in velvet , coloured silk & stammels , discharged their shot also twice over in good order : and so the Emperor accompanied with all his princes and nobles , at the least 50. thousand horse departed through the City to his palace . This royal coronation would ask much time , and many leaves of paper to be described particularly as it was performed : it shall suffice , to understand that the like magnificence was never seen in Russia . 
 The coronation , and other triumphs ended , all the nobility , officers , and merchant's according to and accustomed order every one in his place , and degree brought 
 341 
 A.D. 
 I584 - 
 rich presents unto the Emperor , wishing him long life , and joy in his kingdom . 
 The same time also Master Jerom Horsey aforesaid , remaining as servant in Russia for the Queens most excellent Majesty , was called for to the Emperor , as he sat in his imperiali seat , and then also a famous Merchant of Netherland being newly come to Mosco , ( who gave him self out to be the king of Spaines subject ) called John de Wale , was in like sort called for . Some of the nobility would have preferred this subject of the Spaniard before Master Horsey servant to the Queen of England , whereunto Master Horsey would in no case agree , saying , he would have his legs cut off by the knees , before he would yield to such and indignity offered to his Sovereign the Queens Majesty of England , to bring the Emperor a present , in course after the King of Spaines subject , or any other whatsoever . The Emperor , and the Prince Boris Pheodorowich perceiving the controversy , sent the Lord Treasurer Peter Ivanowich Galavyn , and Vasili Shalkan , both of the Counsel , to them , who delivered the Emperor back , Master Horseys speech : whereupon he was first in order ( as good reason ) admitted and presented the Emperor in the behalf of the English Merchant's trading thither , a present wishing him joy , and long to reign in tranquillity , and so kissed the Emperor's hand , he accepting the present with good liking , and avouching , that for his sisters sake Queen Elizabeth of England , he would be a gracious Lord to her Merchant's , in as ample manner as ever his father had been : and being dismissed , he had the same day sent him 70. dishes of sundry kinds of meats , with 3. carts laden with all sorts of drinks very bountifully . After him was the foresaid subject of the Spanish king admitted with his present , whom the Emperor willed to be no less faithful and serviceable unto him , then the Queen of Englands subject's were & had be , and then the king of Spaines subject's should receive favour accordingly . 
 342 
 All these things thus in order performed , praises were sung in all the churches . The Emperor and Empress very devoutly resorted on foot to many principal Churches in the City , and upon Trinitie Sunday betook themselves to a progress in order of procession , to a famous monastery called Sergius and the Trinitie , 60. miles distant from the City of Mosco , accompanied with a huge army of Noblemen , Gentlemen and others , mounted upon goodly horses with furniture accordingly . 
 The Empress of devotion took this journey on foot all the way , accompanied with her princesses and ladies , no small number : her guard and gunners were in number 20000 , her chief counsellor or attendant , was a noble man of the blood Royal her uncle of great authority called Demetri Ivanowich Godonova . All this progress ended , both the Emperor and Empress returned to Mosco : shortly after the Emperor by the direction of the prince Boris Pheodorowich , sent a power into the land of Siberia , where all the rich Sables & Furs are got . This power conquered in one year and a half , 1000. miles . In the performance of this war , there was taken prisoner the Emperor of the country called Chare Siber - ChareSiberski sky , and with him many other dukes and noble men , ^ce . , / / , i , a i . a r u - alberta taken 
 which were brought to Mosko with a guard or soldiers prismer and ( i and gunners , who were received into the city in very brought to honourable manner , and do there remain to this day . Mosco . 
 Hereupon the corrupt officers , Judges , Justices , captains and lieutenants through the whole kingdom were removed , and more honest men substituted in their places , with express commandment , under severe punishment to surcease their old bribing & extortion which they had used in the old Emperor's time , and now to execute true justice without respect of persons : and to the end that this might be the better done , their lands and yearly stipends were augmented : the great tasks , customs , and duties , which were before laid upon the people in the old Emperor's time , were now abated , and some wholly remitted , and no punishments com-343 
 Sophet Keri Alli king of the Crimmes arrival at Mosco . 
 manded to be used , without sufficient and due proof , although the crime were capitali , deserving death : many Dukes and noble men of great houses , that were under displeasure , and imprisoned 20. years by the old Emperor , were now set at liberty and restored to their lands : all prisoners were set at liberty , and their trespasses forgiven . In sum , a great alteration universally in the government followed , and yet all was done quietly , civilly , peaceably , without trouble to the Prince , or offence to the Subject : and this bred great assurance and honour to the kingdom , and all was accomplished by the wisdom especially of Irenia the Empress . 
 These things being reported and carried to the ears of the kings and princes that were borderers upon Russia , they grew so fearful and terrible to them , that the Monarch of all the Scythians called the Crimme Tartar or great Can himself , nam Sophet Keri Alli , came out of his own country to the Emperor of Russia , accompanied with a great number of his nobility well horsed , although to them that were Christians they seemed rude , yet they were personable men , and valiant : their coming was grateful to the Emperor , and their entertainment was honourable , the Tartar prince having brought with him his wives also , received of the Russe Emperor entertainment , and princely welcome according to their estates . 
 Not long after , 1200. Polish gentlemen , valiant Soldiers , and proper men came to Mosko offiing their service to the Emperor , who were all entertained : and in like sort many Chirkasses , and people of other nations came and offied service . And assoon as the report of this new created Emperor was spread over other kingdoms of Europe , there were sent to him sundry Ambassadors to wish him joy and prosperi tie in his kingdom : thither came Ambassadors from the Turke , from the Persian , the Bogharian , the Crimme , the Georgian , and many other Tartar princes . There came also Ambassadors from the Emperor of Almain , the 
 344 
 Pole , the Swethen , the Dane , etc. And since his coronation no enemy of his hath prevailed in his attempts . 
 It fell out not long after , that the Emperor was 2% Em-desirous to send a message to the most excellent Queen perorPheodore of England , for which service he thought no man fitter kttmand “ then M. Jerome Horsey , supposing that one of the requests to the Queens own men and subject's would be the more Queen . acceptable to her . The sum of which message was , that the Emperor desired a continuance of that league , friendship , amity and intercourse of traffic which was between his father and the Queen's majesty and her subject's , with other private affairs beside , which are not to be made common . 
 . 