The Ambassage of M. Giles Fletcher , Doctor of the Civil Law , sent from her Majestic to Theodor the Emperor of Russia , Anno 1588. 
 N the year 1588. was sent Ambassador from her highness into the country of Russia , Giles Fletcher Doctor of the Civil Law , as well to treat with the new Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , about league and amity , in like manner as was before with his father Ivan Vasilowich , 
 as also for the reestablishing and reducing into order in 353 z 
 the decayed trade of our Englishmen there . Who notwithstanding at his first arrival at the Mosco , found some parts of hard entertainment , by means of certain rumours concerning the late naval victory which was there reported to have fallen on the Spanish side , as also for some dislike conceived against the privileged trade of our English merchant's . Yet in the end he obtained of the Emperor many good & equal conditions , and was courteously and honourably dismissed by him . The principali points which he entreated of , and were granted unto him by the said Emperor , were these : 
 1 A continuation of league and amity between her Highness and the said Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , in like manner as was before with his father Ivan Vasilowich . 
 2 A confirmation and reestablishment of the former privileges of the Company of our English merchant's , which were infringed and annulled in the principal points , with diverse necessary additions to the same , for the better ordering of their trade in those countries' hereafter , viz. That the state of the privilege granted before in the names of some private and particular men , be altered in that point , and the same granted by the name and style of their incorporation , viz. To the fellowship of English merchant's for the discovery of new trades . 
 3 That upon every surmise and light quarrel , the said privilege be not revoked and annulled , as before time it hath be . 
 4 That justice shall be administered to the said Company and their Agent without delay , upon such as shall offer them any despite or injury , or shall exact or impose upon them any payment , taxation or imposition whatsoever , contrary to the freedom of the said grant . 
 5 That the goods & commodities of the said Company , be not forcibly taken as before time they had be by the Emperor's officers or people of authority , 
 354 
 DR . GILES FLETCHERS AMBASSAGE a.d. 
 1588. 
 either for the use of the said Emperor or of his officers . But in case they have need of the said commodities , the same to be taken at reasonable princes , and for ready money . 
 6 That the said Company be not charged hereafter with the answering of such debts as are made by any Englishman not being of the society . 
 7 That the Emperor's authorized people shall not hereafter repute any Englishman resiant in that country , to be any factor , servant , or dealer in the said Companies affairs , but such as the Agent shall inregister by name , within the offices where custom is entered in all such places of the land where the said Company have residences to traffic . 
 8 That the names of such as shall so be inregistred be no longer continued in record , nor themselves reputed as factors or dealers for the said Company , then the Agent shall think good . But in case the said Agent in his discretion shall think meet to strike out of the Register any name of such as have be employed in the Companies service , the said person to be held as private , & whose act in bargaining or otherwise , shall not charge the said Company . 
 9 That if any English man within the country of Russia be suspected for any notorious crime , as felony , treason , etc. the same be not straightways set upon the * Pudkey , nor otherwise tormented , till such time * It is resting as he shall be convicted by plain and evident proofs : t0 which being done , the whole proceeding to be sent over to the Queen of England . 
 10 That the said privilege with the additions , shall be published in all towns and parts of the Emperor's dominions , where the said Company have traffic . 
 11 That the said Company shall be permitted to use a sole trade through the Emperors countries , by the river Volga into Media , Persia , Bogharia , and the other the East countries . 
 12 Whereas there was claimed of the said Company 
 355 
 the sum of 23553. marks of debt , made by certain of their factors for the said company , for payment whereof , their whole stock was in danger of arrest , by public authority : Further also 2140. rubbles for custom and houserent , he obtained a rebatement of eighteene thousand , one hundred fiftie and three marks of the said debt . 
 The said Ambassador M. Giles Fletcher , as I understand , hath drawn a book entitled , Of the Russe Common wealth , containing : 
 First , a Cosmographical description of the country , which hath these chapters . 
 1 Of the length and breadth of the country of Russia , with the names of the shires . 
 2 Of the soil and climate . 
 3 Of the native commodities of the country . 
 Secondly , a description of their policy contained in these Chapters , viz. 
 1 Of the constitution or state of the Russe Common wealth . 
 2 Of their Parliaments , and manner of holding them . 
 3 Of the Russe Nobili tie and means whereby it is kept in and under , proportion agreeable to that state . 
 4 Of the manner of governing their provinces or shires . 
 5 Of the Emperors privy counsel . 
 6 Of the Emperor's customs & their revenues , with the practises for the increase of them . 
 7 Of the Russe commonalty and their condition . 
 8 Of their public justice and manner of proceeding therein . 
 9 Of the Emperor's forces for his wars , with the chief officers , and their salary or pay . 
 10 Of their manner of mustering , armour , and provision for victuali . 
 11 Of their ordering , marching , charging , and their martial discipline . 
 356 
 12 Of their colonies and policy in maintaining their purchases by conquest . 
 13 Of their borderers with whom they have most to do in war and peace . 
 14 Of their church offices and degrees . 
 15 Of their liturgy or form of Church service . 
 16 Of their manner of administering the Sacraments . 
 17 Of the doctrine of the Russe church . 
 18 Of the manner of solemnizing their marriages . 
 19 Of the other ceremonies of the Russe church . 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 Thirdly , the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe containing these chapters . 
 1 Of the Emperor's household officers , and order of his house . 
 2 Of the private behaviour and manner of the Russe people . 
 . 