A letter of M. Henrie Lane to the worshipful M. William Sanderson , containing a brief discourse of that which passed in the Northeast discovery for the space of three and thirtie years . 
 Aster Sanderson , as you lately requested me , so have I sought , and though I cannot find things that heretofore I kept in writing , and lent out to others , yet perusing at London copies of mine old letters to content one that means to pleasure many , I have briefly and as 
 truly as I may , drawn out as follows : The rough hewing may be planed at your leisure , or as pleases him that shall take the pains . 
 First the honourable attempt to discover by sea Northeast and Northwest nam for Cathay , being chiefly 
 33° 
 procured by privilege from king Edward the sixt , and other his nobility , by and at the cost and suit of M. Sebastian Cabota , then governor for discoveries with sir Andrew Judde , sir George Barnes , sir William Garrard , M. Anthony Hussie , and a company of merchant's , was in the last year of his Majesties reign 1553. The generail charge whereof was committed to one sir Hugh Willoughbie knight , a goodly Gentleman , accompanied with sufficient number of Pilots , Masters , Merchant's and Mariners , having three ships well furnished , to wit , The Bona Speranda , the Edward Bonadventure , and the Confidentia . The Edward Bonadventure , Richard 
 A.D. 
 < 554 - 
 Anno 1553. M. William Burrough was then young , and with his brother in this first voyage . 
 Chanceller being Pilot , and Steven Burrough Master , having discovered Wardhouse upon the coast of Fin-mark , by storm or fog departed from the rest , found Newnox is , the bay of S. Nicholas now the chief port for Russia , - m tO e rM-there wintered in safety , and had aid of the people at 
 a village called Newnox . 
 The other two ships attempting further Northwards ( as appeared by pamphlets found after written by sir Hugh Willoughbie ) were in September encountered with such extreme cold , that they put back to seek a wintering place : and missing the said bay fell upon a desert coast in Lappia , entering into a River immediately frozen up , since discovered , nam Arzina Reca , distant East from a Russian Monastery of Monks called Pechingho , from whence they never returned , but all to the number of 70. persons perished , which was for want of experience to have made caves and stoves . These were found with the ships the next Summer Anno 1554. by Russe fishermen : and in Anno 1555. the place sent unto by English Merchant's as hereafter appears . 
 Anno 1554. the said ship Edward Bonadventure ( although robbed homewards by Flemings ) returned with her company to London , showing and setting forth their entertainments and discovery of the countries' even to the city of Mosco , from whence they brought a privilege written in Russe with the Kings or great Dukes 
 of S. Nicholas Westward 35 miles . 
 Note . 
 Anno 1554. 
 331 
 seal , the other two ships looked for and unknown to them where they were . 
 Anno 1555. An. 1555. the said company of Merchant's for discovery upon a new supply , sent thither again with two ships , to wit , the Edward Bonadventure , & another bearing the name of the King and Queen , Philip and The King and Marie , whose Majesties by their letters to the said betters5 Moscovite , recommended sundry their subject's then 
 ' passing , whereof certain , to wit , Richard Chanceller , 
 George Killingworth , Henry Lane , and Arthur Edwards , after their arrival at the Bay , and passing up Dwina to Vologda , went first up to Mosco , where , upon knowledge of the said letters , they with their train had speciali entertainment , with houses and diet appointed , and shortly permitted to the princes presence , they were with gentlemen brought through the city of Mosco , to the castle and palace , replenished with numbers of people , and some gunners . They entered sundry rooms , ftir-nished in show with ancient grave personages , all in long garments of sundry colours , gold , tissue , baldekin , and violet , as our vestments and copes have be in England , suitable with caps , jewels , and chains . These were found to be no courtiers , but ancient Moscovites , inhabitants , and other their merchant's of credit , as the manner is , furnished thus from the Wardrobe and Treasury , waiting and wearing this apparel for the time , and so to restore it . 
 Then entering into the presence , being a large room floored with carpets , were men of more estate , and richer show , in number above and hundred set square : who after the said English men came in , doing reverence , they all stood up , the prince only sitting , and yet rising at any occasion , when our King and Queens names were read or spoken . Then after speeches by interpretation , our men kissing his hand , and bidden to dinner , were stayed in another room , and at dinner brought through , where might be seen massy silver and gilded plate , some like and as big as kilderkins , and washbowles , and entering 33 2 
 the dining place , being the greater room , the prince was set bore headed , his crown and rich cap standing upon a pinnacle by . Not far distant sat his Metropolitan , with diverse other of his kindred , and chief Tartarian Captains : none sat over against him , or any , at other tables , their backs towards him : which tables all furnished with guests set , there was for the Englishmen , nam by the Russes , Ghosti Carabelski , to wit , strangers or merchant's by ship , a table in the midst of the room , where they were set direct against the prince : and then began the service , brought in by a number of his young Lords and Gentlemen , in such rich attire , as is above specified : and still from the Princes table ( notwithstanding their own furniture ) they had his whole messes set over all in massy fine gold , delivered every time from him by name to them , by their several Christian names , as they sat , viz. Richard , George , Henry , Arthur . Likewise bred and sundry drinks of purified mead , made of fine white and clarified honey . At their rising , the prince called them to his table , to receive each one a cup from his hand to drink , and took into his hand Master George Killingworths beard , which reached over M. KilRng-the table , & pleasantly delivered it the Metropolitan , w^rths beard who seeming to bless it , said in Russe , this is Gods gift . As in deed at that time it was not only thick , broad , and yellow coloured , but in length five foot and two inches of assize . Then taking leave , being night , they were accompanied and followed with a number , carrying pots of drink , and dishes of meat dressed , to our lodging . 
 This year the two ships , with the dead bodies of Sir Hugh Willoughbie , and his people , were sent unto by Master Killingworth , ( which remained there in Mosco Agent almost two years ) and much of the goods and victuals were recovered and saved . 
 Anno 1556. The company sent two ships for Russia , Anno 1556. with extraordinary master's and sailors to bring home the two ships , which were frozen in Lappia , in the river of 
 333 
 Arzina aforesaid . The two ships sent this year from England sailing from Lapland to the Bay of S. Nicholas , took in lading with passengers , to wit , a Russe ambassador , nam Joseph Napea , and some of his men shipped with Richard Chanceller in the Edward . But so it fell out that the two which came from Lappia , with all their new Master's and Mariners , never were herd of , but in foul weather , and wrought seas , after their two years wintering in Lapland , became , as is supposed , unstanch , and sunk , wherein were drowned also diverse Russes merchant's , and servants of the ambassador . A third ship the Edward aforesaid , falling on the North part of Scotland , upon a rock was also lost , and Master Chanceller , with diverse other , drowned . The said Russe ambassador hardly escaping , with other his men , mariners , & some goods saved , were sent for into Scotland , from the King , Queen , and Merchant's ( the messenger being M. Doctor Laurence Hussie , and others : ) And then , as in the chronicles appears , honorably entertained and received at London . 
 This year also the company furnished and sent out a pinnace , nam the Serchthrift , to discover the harborowes in the North coast from Norway to Wardhouse , and so to the Bay of S. Nicholas . There was in her Master and Pilot , Stephen Burrough , with his brother William , and eight other . Their discovery was beyond the Bay , toward the Samoeds , people dwelling near the river of Ob , and found a found or sea with and Island called Vaigats , first by them put into the Card or Map . In that place they threw snow out of their said pinnace , with shovels in August , by which extremity , and lack of time , they came back to Russia , and wintered at Colmogro . 
 Anno 1557. The company with foure good ships , sent back the said Russe ambassador , and in company with him , sent as and Agent , for further discovery , Master Anthony Jenkinson , who afterwards anno 1558 , with great favour of the prince of Moscovia , and his letters 334 
 passed the river Volga to Cazan , and meaning to seek Cathay by land , was by many troops and companies of Boghar uncivil Tartarians encountered , and in danger : but keeping company with merchant's of Bactria , or Boghar , and Urgeme , traveling with camels , he with his company , went to Boghar , and no further : whose entertainment of the king is to be had of master Jenkinson , which returned anno 1559. to Moscovie . And in anno 1560. he , with 1560. Henry Lane , came home into England : which year was the first safe return , without loss or shipwreck , or dead 
 ffaight , & burnings . And at this time was the first The first trade traffic to the Narve in Livonia , which confines with t0 Blarve . Lituania , & all the dominions of Russia : and the ’ ' markets , fairs , commodities , great towns & rivers , were sent unto by diverse servants : the reports were taken by Henry Lane , Agent , and delivered to the company , 1561. The trade to Rye , and Revel , of old time hath be long since frequented by our English nation , but this trade to the Narve was hitherto concealed from us 
 by the Danskers and Lubeckers . 
 Anno 1561. the said Master Anthony Jenkinson went Agent into Russia , who the next year after , passing all the river of Volga to Astracan , and over the Caspian sea , arrived in Persia , and opened the trade thither . 
 Also between the years of 1568. and 1573. sundry voyages after Master Jenkinsons , were made by Thomas Alcock , Arthur Edwards , Master Thomas Bannister , and Master Geffrey Ducket , whose return ( if spoil near Volga had not prevented by roving thieves ) had altogether salved and recovered the companies ( called the old companies ) great loss , charges , and damages : but the saying is true , By unity small things grow great , & by contention great things become small . This may be understood best by the company . The frowardness of some few , and evil doing of some unjust factors , was cause of much of the evil success . 
 Arthur Edwards was sent again 1579. and died in the voyage at Astracan . About which matters , are to be 335 
 Alcock slain in Persia . Bannister died in Media . 
 Edwards died at Astracan . 
 remembered the voyages of Master Thomas Randolph Esquire , Ambassador , anno 1567. And late of Sir Jerome Bows , anno 1583. both tending and treating for further discoveries , freedoms , and privileges , wherewith I meddle not . But in conclusion , for their pains and 
 adventures this way ( as diverse do now adays other ways ) as worthy Gentlemen sent from princes , to do their country good , I put them in your memory , with my hearty farewell . From S. Magarets near Dartforth in Kent . TO 
 Yours Henry . Lane . 
 . 