A speciali note gathered by the excellent Venetian Cosmographer M. John Baptista Ramusius out of the Arabian Geographic of Abilfada Ismael , concerning the trending of the Ocean sea from China Northward , along the coast of Tartaric and other unknown lands , and then running Westwards upon the Northern coasts of Russia , and so farther to the Northwest . 
 DEscrivendo poi il predetto Abilfada Ismael i luoghi della terra habitabile , che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca , dice cosi . 
 Rivoltasi 1’Oceano da levante verso la region delle Cine , & v& alia volta di Tramontana , et passata final-mente la detta region , see ne giunge a Gogi & Magogi , cio & alii confini de gli Ultimi Tartari , & di quivi ad 412 
 Akune Terre che sono Incognite : Et correndo sempre per Ponente , passa sopra li confini Settentrionali della Rossia , et va alia volta di Maestro . 
 The same in English . 
 THe aforesaid Abilfada Ismael describing afterwards the habitable places of the earth , which the Ocean sea in his circuit touches , say in this manner following . 
 The Ocean sea turns from the East towards the Country of the Chinaes , and stretcheth towards the North , and at length having passed the said Country , it reaches unto the Gogi and Magogi , that is , to the confines of The uttermost Tartars , and from thence , unto certain unknown Countries' : and running still Westward it passes upon the Northern coasts of Russia , and from thence it runneth towards the Northwest , ( which it does indeed upon the coast of Lappia . ) By this most notable testimony it appears , that the Ocean sea compasseth and environeth all the East , Northeast , and North parts of Asia and Europe . 
 The Emperor's private or household Officers . 
 THe chief Officers of the Emperor's household are these which follow . The first is the office of the Boiaren Conesheva , or master of the Horse . Which containeth no more then is expressed by the name , that is , to be overseer of the Horse , and not Magister equitum , or Master of the Horsemen . For he appoints other for that service , as occasion does require , as before was said . He that bears that office at this time , is Boris Pheodorowich Godonoe , brother to the Empress . Of Horse for service in his wars ( beside other for his ordinary uses ) he hath to the number of ten thousand which are kept about Mosco . 
 The next is the Lord Steward of his household at this time , one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe . The third is his Treasurer , that keepeth all his moneis , jewels , plate , etc. now called Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe . The 413 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 Alcune Terre Incognite . 
 Confini Settentrionali della Rossia . 
 The Country of China . 
 The coasts of the uttermost Tartars . Certain unknown Countries' . 
 The Northern coasts of Russia . 
 The Northwest . 
 Master of the Horse . 
 The L. Steward . 
 The L. Treasurer . 
 Controller . fourth his Controller , now Andreas Petrowich Clesinine . Chamberlame The fift his Chamberlain . He that attends that office at this time , is called Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay . 
 Tasters . The sixt his Tasters , now Theodor Alexandrowich , and Harbingers . Ivan Vasilowich Godonoe . The seventh his Harbingers , which are three Noble men , and diverse other Gentlemen that do the office under them . These are his ordinary officers , and offices of the chiefest account . 
 Gentlemen of Of Gentlemen , beside them that wait about his the chamber . chamber , and person ( called Shilsey Strapsey ) there are The Gard. two hundred , all Noblemen's sons . His ordinary Guard is two thousand Hagbutters ready with their pieces charged , and their match lighted , with other necessary furniture continually day and night : which come not within the house , but wait without in the court or yard , where the Emperor is abiding . In the night time there lodgeth next to his bedchamber the chief Chamberlain , with one or two more of best trust about him . A second chamber off , there lodge sixe other of like account for their trust and faithfulness . In the thirde chamber lie certain young Gentlemen , of these two hundred , called Shilsey Strapsey , that take their Gnomes . turns by forties every night . There are grooms beside that watch in their course , and lie at every gate and door of the Court , called Estopnick . 
 The Hagbutters or Gunners , whereof there are two thousand ( as was said before ) watch about the Emperors lodging , or bedchamber by course 250. every night , and 250. more in the Court yard , and about the Treasure house . His Court or bouse at the Mosco is made cased wise , walled about , with great store of fair ordinance planted upon the wall , and containeth a great breadth of ground within it , with many dwelling houses : Which are appointed for such as are known to be sure , and trusty to the Emperor . 
 414 
 Of the private behaviour , or quality of the Russe people . 
 THE private behaviour and quality of the Russe people , may partly be understood by that which hath been said concerning the public state and usage of the Country . As touching the natural habit of Constitution of their bodies , they are for the most part of a large size , thetr bo^es-and of very fleshly bodies : accounting it a grace to be somewhat gross and burley , and therefore they nourish and spread their beards , to have them long and broad . 
 But for the most part they are very unwieldy and unactive withal . Which may be thought to come partly of the climate , and the numbness which they get by the cold in winter , and partly of their diet that stands most of roots , onions , garlic , cabbage , and such like things that breed gross humours , which they use to eat alone , and with their other meats . 
 Their diet is rather much then curious . At their Their diet . 
 meals they begin commonly with a Charke or small cup of Aqua vitae , ( which they call Russe wine ) and then drink not till towards the end of their meals , taking it in largely , and all together , with kissing one another at every pledge . And therefore after dinner there is no talking with them , but every man goes to his bench to take his afternoons sleep , which is as ordinary with them as their nights rest . When they exceed , and have variety of dishes , the first are their baked meats ( for roast meats they use little ) and then their broathes or pottage . Their common drink is Mead , the poorer sort use water , and a third drink called Quasse , which is nothing else ( as we say ) but water turned out of his wits , with a little bran meashed with it . 
 This diet would breed in them many diseases , but that they use bathstoves , or hight houses in stead of all Physic , commonly twice or thrice every week . All the winter time , and almost the whole Summer , they 415 
 And admirable enduring of extreme heat , and cold at one and the same time . 
 The Noble men attire . 
 heat their Peaches , which are made like the Germane bathstoves , and their Poclads like ovens , that so warm the house that a stranger at the first shall hardly like of it . These two extremities , specially in the winter of heat within their houses , and of extreme cold without , together with their diet , make them of a dark , and sallow complexion , their skins being tanned and parched both with cold and with heat : specially the women , that for the greater part are of far worse complexions , then the men . Whereof the cause I take to be their keeping within the hight houses , and busying themselves about the heating , and using of their bathstoves , and peaches . 
 The Russe because that he is used to both these extremities of heat and of cold , can bear them both a great deal more patiently , then strangers can do . You shall see them sometime ( to season their bodies ) come out of their bathstoves all on a froth , and fuming as hot almost as a pig at a spit , and presently to leap into the river stark naked , or to pour cold water all over their bodies , and that in the coldest of all the winter time . The women to mend the bad hue of their skins , use to paint their faces with white and read colours , so visibly , that every man may perceive it . Which is made no matter , because it is common and liked well by their husbands : who make their wives and daughters and ordinary allowance to buy them colours to paint their faces withal , and delight themselves much to see them of fowl women to become such fair images . This parcheth the skin , and helpeth to deform them when their painting is of . 
 They apparel themselves after the Greek manner . The Nobleman's attire is on this fashion . First a Taffia , or little night cap on his head , that covereth little more then his crown , commonly very rich wrought of silk and gold thread , and set with pearl and precious stone . His head he keepeth shaved close to the very skin , except he be in some displeasure with the 
 416 
 Emperor . Then he suffers his hair to grow and hang down upon his shoulders , covering his face as ugly and deformedly as he can . Over the Taffia he weareth a wide cap of black Fox ( which they account for the best fur ) with a Tiara or long bonnet put within it , standing up like a Persian or Babylonian hat . About his neck ( which is seen all bore ) is a collar set with pearl and precious stone , about three or foure fingers broad . Next over his shirt , ( which is curiously wrought , because he strippeth himself into it in the Summer time , while he is within the house ) is a Shepon , or light garment of silk , made down to the knees , buttoned before : and then a Caftan or a close coat buttoned , and girded to him with a Persian girdle , whereat he hangs his knives and spoon . This commonly is of cloth of gold , and hangs down as low as his ankles . Over that he weareth a loose garment of some rich silk , furred and faced about with some gold lace , called a Ferris . Another over that of chamlet , or like stuff called and Alkaben , sleeved and hanging low , and the cape commonly brooched , and set all with pearl . When he goes abroad , he casts over all these ( which are but sleight , though they seem to be many ) and other garment called and Honoratkey , like to the Alkaben , save that it is made without a collar for the neck . And this is commonly of fine cloth , or Camels hair . His buskin's ( which he weareth in stead of hose , with linen folles under them in stead of boot hose ) are made of a Persian leather called Saphian , embroidered with pearl . His upper stocks commonly are of cloth of gold . When he goes abroad , he mounts on horseback , though it be but to the next door : which is the manner also of the Boiarskey , or Gentlemen . 
 The Boiarskey or Gentleman's attire is of the same fashion , but differeth in stufFe : and yet he will have his Caftan or undercoat sometime of cloth of gold , the rest of cloth , or silk . 
 Ill 417 2 WORSER 
 The Gentleman's apparel . 
 The Noble woman ( called Chyna Boiarshena ) weareth on her head , first a caull of some soft silk ( which is commonly red ) and over it a fruntlet called Obrosa , of white colour . Over that her cap ( made after the coif fashion of cloth of gold ) called Shapka Zempska , edged with some rich fur , and set with pearl and stone . Though they have of late begun to disdain embroidering with pearl above their caps , because the Diacks , and some Merchants wives have taken up the fashion . In their ears they wear earrings ( which they call Sargee ) of two inches or more compass , the matter of gold set with Rubies , or Saphires , or some like precious stone . In Summer they go often with ker-chieffes of fine white lawn , or cambricke , fastened under the chin , with two long tassels pendent . The kerchief spotted and set thick with rich pearl . When they ride or go abroad in rainy weather , they wear white hats with coloured bands , called Stapa Zemskoy . About their necks they wear collers of three or foure fingers broad , set with rich pearl and precious stone . Their upper garment is a lose gown called Oposhen commonly of scarlet , with wide lose sleeves , hanging down to the ground buttened before with great gold buttons , or at least silver and guilt nigh as big as a walnut . Which hath hanging over it fastened under the cap , a large broad cape of some rich fur , that hangs down almost to the mids of their backs . Next under the Oposken or upper garment , they wear another called a Leitnick that is made close before with great wide sleeves , the cufFe or half sleeve up to the elbows , commonly of cloth of gold : and under that a Ferris Zemskoy , which hangs lose buttoned throughout to the very foot . On the hand wrists they wear very fair braselets , about two fingers broad of pearl and precious stone . They go all in buskin's of white , yellow , blue , or some other coloured leather , embroidered with pearl . This is the attire of the Noblewoman of Russia , when she makes the best show of her self . 
 418 
 The Gentlewoman's apparel may differ in the stufFe , but is all one for the making or fashion . 
 As for the poor Mousick and his wife they go poorly clad . The man with his Honoratkey , or lose gown to the small of the leg , tied together with a lace before , of course white or blue cloth , with some Shube or long waistcoat of fur , or of sheepskin under it , and his furred cap , and buskin's . The poorer sort of them have their Honoratkey , or upper garment , made of Kowes hair . This is their winter habit . In the summer time , commonly they wear nothing but their shirts on their backs , and buskin's on their legs . The woman goes in a read or blew gown , when she makes the best show , and with some warm Shube of fur under it in the winter time . But in the summer , nothing but her two shirts ( for so they call them ) one over the other , whither they be within doors , or without . On their heads , they wear caps of some coloured stuff , many of velvet , or of cloth of gold : but for the most part kerchiefs . Without earings of silver or some other mettle , and her cross about her neck , you shall see no Russe woman , be she wife , or maid . 
 A.D. 
 1590. 
 The Mousicks or common men attire . 
 . 