A brief discourse of the voyage of Sir Jerome Bowes knight , her Majesties ambassador to Ivan Vasilivich the Emperor of Muscovia , in the year 1583. 
 He Emperor of Russia that then lived , by name Ivan Vasiliwich , having deliberately considered how necessary it were for the strengthening of his estate , that a sure commerce and intercourse of merchant's should be again renewed between him and her sacred Majesty 
 of England , with such further immunities and privileges for the honour and utility of both their dominions , and subject's of the same , as upon mutual treaty of persons interposed on both sides , might be assented unto : sent over into this realm , in the year of our Lord 1582 , as his ambassador for that purpose , and ancient discreet gentleman of his household called Pheodor Andrevich Phisemsky , accompanied with one of his Secretary's , for his better assistance in that expedition : and beside his many other directions , whereof part were to be delivered by word of mouth , and the rest set down in a letter under the Emperors signature , addressed to her Majesty : he had in speciali charge to solicit her Majesty to send over with him to his master and ambassador from her , to treat and contract of such affairs of importance as concerned both the realms , which was the principali end of his employments hither . Whereupon her Majesty very graciously inclining to the Emperor's motion , and at the humble suit of the English merchant's trading those countries' being carried with the same princely respects , to satisfy his demands in that behalf , made choice of sir Jerome Bows , a gentleman of her Court , ordinarily attending upon her Majesties person , towards whom was apparently expressed her princely opinion and favour by the credit of this negotiation . 
 3*5 
 Pheodor Andrevich Phisemsky the Emperor's ambassador . 
 The Hollanders intrude into our trade . 
 After he had received his commission , with other speciali letters to the Emperor , with all other instructions aPPERTAINING to his charge , and that the said Russe ambassador was licenced to return home to his master , being honorably entertained and rewarded , the English ambassador being attended upon with forty persons at the least , very honourably furnished , whereof many were gentlemen , and one M. Humfrey Cole a learned preacher , took his leave of her Majesty at the Court at Greenwich the eighteenth of June , and with the other ambassador , with their several ! companies , embarked themselves at Harwich the two and twentieth of the same , and after a stormy voyage at the Sea , they arrived both in safety in the road of S. Nicholas the three and twentieth of July next following . 
 The Russe ambassador lodged himself at the abbey of S. Nicholas : and the English ambassador was lodged and well entertained by the English merchant's , at their house at S. Nicholas , standing in and Island called Rose Island . 
 The Russe ambassador having reposed himself one whole day , took his leave of the English ambassador , and departed towards Mosco . 
 The English ambassador abided yet at S. Nicholas foure or five days , when having made provision of boats , and means to that purpose , he went forward upon his journey towards Mosco , to a town called Colmogro , about foure score miles distant from S. Nicholas . 
 You must here understand that before the English ambassadors going into Russia , there were diverse strangers , but especially certain Dutch merchant's , who had intruded themselves to trade into those countries' . Notwithstanding a privilege of the sole trade thither was long before granted to the English merchant's . These Dutch men had already so handled the matter , as they had by chargeable means woonne three of the chiefest counsellors to the Emperor to be their 316 
 assured friends , namely , Mekita Romanovich , Bodan Belskoy , and Andrew Shalkan the chancellor : for beside daily gifts that they bestowed upon them all , they took so much money of theirs at interest at five and twenty upon the hundred , as they paid to some one of them five thousand marks yearly for the use of his money , and the English merchant's at that time had not one friend in Court . 
 The ambassador having now spent five weeks at S. Nicholas and at Colmogro , there came to him then a gentleman sent from the Emperor to entertain him , and had in charge to conduct him up the rivers towards Mosco , and to deliver him provision of all kind of victuals necessary . 
 This gentleman being a follower of Shalkan the chancellor , was by him ( as it seemed ) foisted into that service of purpose , as afterwards appeared by the course he took , to offer discourtesies , and occasions of mislike to the ambassador : for you must understand that the chancellor and the other two great counsellors ( spoken of as friends to the Dutchmen ) had a purpose to oppose themselves directly against her Majesties ambassage , especially in that point , for the barring of all strangers from trading into the Emperor's country . 
 This gentleman conducted the English ambassador a thousand miles up the rivers of Dwina and Soughana , to a city called Vologda , where received him another gentleman sent from the Emperor , a man of better countenance then the other , who presented the ambassador from the Emperor with two fair geldings well furnished after their manner . 
 At a city called Yeraslave upon the river Volga there met the ambassador a duke well accompanied , sent from the Emperor , who presented him from the Emperor a coach and ten geldings for the more easy conveying of him to Mosco , from whence this city was distant five hundred miles . 
 Two miles on this side Mosco there met the am - 
 317 
 bassador foure gentlemen of good account , accompanied with two hundred horse : who after a little salutation , not familiar , without embracing , told him that they had to say to him from the Emperor , and would have had him light on foot to have herd it , notwithstanding themselves would still have fit on horseback : which the ambassador soon refused to do , and so they stood long upon terms , whither both parties should light or not : which afterwards agreed upon , there was yet great niceness whose foot should not be first on ground . 
 Their message being delivered , and after having embraced each other , they conducted the said ambassador to his lodging at Mosco , a house built of purpose for him , themselves being placed in the next house to it , as appointed to furnish him of all provisions , and to be used by him upon all other occasions . 
 The ambassador having been some days in Mosco , and having in all that time be very honorably used from the Emperor ( for such was his will ) though some of his chiefest counsellors ( as is said ) had another purpose , and did often times cunningly put it in use : He was sent for to Court , and was accompanied thither with about forty gentlemen honorably mounted , and sumptuously arrayed , & in his passage from his lodging to the court , were set in a ward five or sixe thousand shot , that were of the Emperor's guard . At the entry into the court there met him foure noble men appareled in cloth of gold , and rich furs , their caps embroidered with pearl and stone , who conducted him towards the Emperor , till he was met with foure others of greater degree then they , who guided him yet further towards the Emperor , in which passage there stood along the walls , and sat upon benches and forms in row , seven or eight hundred persons , said to be noblemen and gentlemen , all appareled in garments of coloured satins and cloth of gold . 
 These foure noblemen accompanied him to the Emperor's chamber door , where met him the Emperor's 318 
 AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME BOWES a.d. 
 . 1583 - 
 herald , whose office is there held great : and with him all the great officers of the Emperor's chamber , who all conducted him to the place where the Emperor sat in his state , having three crowns standing by him , viz. of Moscovia , Cazan , and Astrakan , and also by him 4 young noblemen of about twenty years of age , of each side twaine , costly appareled in white , holding upon their shoulders each of them a broad axe , much like to a Gallogals axe of Ireland , thin and very sharp , the steal or handle not passed half a yard long , and there sat about the chamber upon benches and other low seats , above and hundred noblemen richly appareled in cloth of gold . 
 The ambassador being thus brought to the Emperor to kiss his hand , after some compliments and inquiry of her Majesties health , he willed him to go fit down in a place provided for that purpose , nigh ten pases distant from him , from whence he would have had him to have sent him her Majesties letters and present , which the ambassador thinking not reasonable stepped forward towards the Emperor : in which passage the chancellor came to meet him , and would have taken his letters : to whom the ambassador said , that her Majesty had directed no letters to him ; and so went on , and delivered them himself to the Emperor's own hands . 
 And after , having thus delivered her Majesties letters and what he had else to say at that time , he was conducted to the Council chamber , where having had conference with the council of matters of his ambassage , he was soon after sent for again to the Emperor , where he dined in his presence at a side table , never unto him , and all his company at another board by , where also dined at other tables in the same place , all the chief noble men that were about the Court , to the number of and hundred . And in the time of this dinner , the Emperor used many favors to the ambassador and about the midst of dinner ( standing up ) drank a great carouse to the health of the Queen his 319 
 good sister , and sent him a great bowl full of Rhenish wine and sugar to pledge him . 
 The ambassador after this , was often called to Court , where he had conference both with the Emperor and his council of the matters in question , touching both ambassages , which diverse times raised many jars : and in the end , after sundry meetings , the Emperor finding himself not satisfied to his liking , for that the ambassador had not power by his commission to yield to every thing that he thought fit , as a man whose will was seidome wonted to be gainsaid , let lose his passion , and with a stern and angry countenance told him that he did not reckon the Queen of England to be his fellow : for there are ( quoth he ) that are her betters . 
 The ambassador greatly misliking these speeches , & being very unwilling ( how dangerous soever it might prove to his own person ) to give way to the Emperor , to derogate ought from the honour and greatness of her Majesty : and finding also that to subject himself to the angry humour and disposition of the Emperor was not the means to win ought at his hands , with like courage and countenance to answer his , told him that the Queen his Mistress was as great a prince as any was in Christendome , equal to him that thought himself the greatest , well able to defend herself against his malice whosoever , and wanted no means to offend any that either she had , or should have cause to be enemy unto . Yea ( quoth he ) How sayest thou to the French king , and the king of Spaine ? Mary ( quoth the ambassador ) I hold the Queen my Mistress as great as any of them both . Then what sayest thou ( quoth he ) to the Emperor of Germany ? Such is the greatness of the Queen my Mistress ( quoth the ambassador ) as the King her father had ( not long since ) the Emperor in his pay , in his wars against France . 
 This answer misliked the Emperor yet so much more , 320 
 as that he told the ambassador , that were he not and ambassador , he would throw him out of the doors . Whereunto he answered that he might do his will , for he was now fast within his country : but he had a Mistress who ( he doubted not ) would be revenged of any injury that should be done unto him . Whereupon the Emperor in great sudden bade him get him home . And he with no more reverence then such usage required , saluted the Emperor , and went his way . 
 All this notwithstanding , the ambassador was not much sooner out of the chamber , and the Emperors choler somewhat settled , but he delivered to his council that stood about him many commendations in the favour of the ambassador , for that he would not endure one ill word to be spoken against his Mistress , and therewithal ! wished himself to have such a servant . 
 The ambassador had not been much more then one hour in his lodging , but the Emperor imagining ( as it seemed ) by the extraordinary behaviour of the ambassador ( for he wanted not wit to judge ) that he had found what was the Emperor's case , sent his principali secretary unto him , to tell him , that notwithstanding what had passed , yet for the great love that he bore to the Queen his sister , he should very shortly be called again to Court , and have a resolution of all the matters in question : and this Secretary was now further content to impart , and said to the ambassador that the Emperor was fully resolved to send a greater noble man home with him in ambassage to the Queen his sister , then ever he yet at any time sent out of his country : and that he determined also to send to the Queen a present worth three thousand pounds , and to gratify himself at his departure with a gift that should be worth a thousand pounds : and told him also that the next day the Emperor would send a great noble man unto him , to confer with him of certain abuses done him by Shalkan the chancellor , and his ministers . 
 And so the day following he sent Bodan Belskoy the in 321 x 
 chiefest counsellor that he had , a man most in credit with him : this man examined all matters wherewith the ambassador had found himself grieved , and supplied him with what he wanted , and righted him in all things wherein he had been wronged . 
 Not long after the return of this noble man , the Emperor caused to be set down in his own presence , a new and much larger allowance of diet for the ambassador then he had had before , and shortly after sent the same to the ambassador by his principali Secretary Savio Frollo . This diet was so great , as the ambassador often times sought to have it lessened , but the Emperor would not by any means . 
 The scroule of the new diet was this : 
 One bushel of fine meal for three days . 
 One bushel of wheat meal for a day and a half . Two live geese for one day . 
 Twenty hens for the day . 
 Seven sheep for a day . 
 One ox for three days . 
 One side of pork for a day . 
 Seventie eggs for a day . 
 Ten pound of butter . 
 Seventy penny white loaves of bred . 
 Twelve penny loaves of bred . 
 One veather or gallon of vinegar . 
 Two veathers of salt cabiges . 
 One peck of onions . 
 Ten pound of salt . 
 On altine , or sixe penny worth of wax candles . Two all tines of tallow candles . 
 One fourth part of a veather of cherry mead . 
 As much of Mallynovomead . 
 Half a veather of burned wine . 
 One veather of sodden mead called Obarni . 
 Three veathers of sweet mead . 
 Ten veathers of white mead . 
 Fifteene veathers of ordinary mead . 
 322 
 1583-Foure veathers of sweet beer . 
 Fifteene veathers of beer . 
 Half a pound of pepper . 
 Three sollitincks or ounces of saffron . 
 One sollitincke of maze . 
 One sollitincke of nutmegs . 
 Two sollitincks of cloves . 
 Three sollitincks of cinnamon . 
 fOne bushel of oats . 
 Provender , < One load of hay . 
 one load of straw . 
 Now he began so much to discover his purpose and affections towards her Majesty & her country , as he sent to the ambassador , entreating him that his II preacher , and M. Coal . doctor Jacob his English physician , might set down the points of the religion in use in England , which the ambassador caused to be done accordingly , and sent them unto him , who seemed so well to like them , as he caused them ( with much good allowance ) to be publicly read before diverse of his council , and many others of his nobility . 
 Now he drew hotly again in question to marry some kinswoman of her Majesties , & that he would send again into England , to have some one of them to wife , and if her Majesty would not upon his next ambassage send him such a one as he required , himself would then go into England , and carry his treasure with him , and marry one of them there . 
 Here you must understand that the year before this ambassage , he had sent to her Majesty by his ambassador to have had the lady Marry Hastings in marriage , which entreaty by means of her inability of body , by occasion of much sickness , or perhaps , of no great liking either of herself or friends , or both , took no place . 
 The ambassador was now so far grown into the Emperor's favour , & his affection so great to England , as those great counsellors that were the ambassadors great enemies before , were now desirous of some public 
 323 
 courtesies at his hands for their advantage to the Emperor : neither durst they now any more interpose themselves betwixt the Emperor and him : for not long before this , the Emperor for abusing the ambassador , had ( to show his favour towards him ) beaten Shalkan the chancellor very grievously , and had sent him word , that he would not leave one of his raze alive . 
 Now whilst the ambassador was thus strongly possessed of the Emperors favour , he employed himself in all he might , not only for the speedy dispatch of the negotiation he had in hand , but laboured also by all the good means he might , further to benefit his country and countrymen , and so not long after won at the Emperors hands not only all those things he had in commission to treat for by his instructions , but also some other of good and great importance , for the benefit of the merchant's . 
 Private suits obtained of the Emperor by the ambassador . 
 LEave for Richard Fransham and English man and apothecary to the Emperor , his wife , and children , to come home into England , and to bring with him all such goods as he had got there . 
 He obtained like leave for Richard Elmes and English man one of the Emperors surgeons . 
 He also god leave for Jane Ricards the widow of Doctor Bomelius a Dutchman , and physician to the Emperor , who for treason practised with the king of Pole against the said Emperor , was roasted to death at the city of Mosco , in the year 1579. 
 These following he obtained for the behoof of the merchant's . 
 HE procured for the merchant's promise of recompense for certain goods taken from their factors . 
 by robbery upon the Volga . 
 324 
 He obtained likewise the payment of five hundred marks , which was paid for ten years before his going into Russia ( into the Emperors receipt ) for a rend of a house that they had at Vologda . 
 He also god granted for them the repayment of fifteene hundred marks , which had be exacted of them the two last years before his coming thither . 
 He god also for them order for the repayment of and old and desperate debt of three thousand marks , a debt so desperate , as foure years left out of their accounts , and by the opinion of them all , not thought fit to be dealt with , for too much offending the Emperor , or impeaching his other business , which was thought at least otherwise sufficient , and was therefore left out of his instructions from her Majesty . 
 He obtained that all strangers were forbidden to trade any more into Russia , and that the passage and trade to all the Emperor's Northern coasts and countries , from the Wardhouse to the river of Ob should be only free to the English nation . 
 Lastly , of a great desire he had to do the merchant's good , without motion either of themselves here , or their Agents there , or any other of them , he obtained of the Emperor the abatement of all their custom which they had long before paid , and agreed still to continue , which custom the Dutchmen and strangers being removed , as now it was agreed , amounted to two thousand pounds yearly . 
 All these were granted , some already paid before his coming from Mosco , the old privilege ratified , newly written , signed and sealed , and was to be delivered to the ambassador at his next coming to Court , before when the Emperor fell sick of a surfeit , and so died . 
 After whose death the case was wondrously altered with the ambassador : for whereas both in his own conceit , and in all men's opinion else , he was in great forwardness to have grown a great man with the Emperor , what for the love he bore to her Majesty , and the 325 
 particular liking he had of himself , he now fell into the hands of his great enemies , Mekita Romanovich and Andre Shalkan the chancellor , who , after the death of the Emperor , took the speciali government upon themselves , and so presently caused the ambassador to be shut up a close prisoner in his own house , for the space of nine weeks , and was so straightly guarded and badly used by those that attended him , as he daily suspected some further mischief to have followed : for in this time there grew a great uproar in Mosco of nigh twenty thousand persons , which remembering that his enemies reigned , somewhat amazed the ambassador , but yet afterwards the matter fell out against that great counsellor Bodan Belskoy , whom I noted before to be a special man in the old Emperor's favour : who was now notwithstanding so outrageously assaulted , as that he was forced to seek the Emperor's chamber for his safety , and was afterwards sent away to Cazan , a place he had in government , five hundred miles from Mosco , where he hath remained ever since , and never as yet called again to court , at which time the ambassador expected some such like measure , and prepared himself aswell as he could , for his defence : yet happily after this , was sent for to court , to have his dispatch , and to take his leave of the Emperor : whither being conducted ( not after the wonted manner ) and brought to the council chamber , came to him only Shalkan the chancellor and a brother of his , who without more ado , told him for the sum of his dispatch , that this Emperor would not treat of further amity with the Queen his mistress , then such as was between his late father and her , before his coming thither : and would not hear any reply to be made by the ambassador , but presently caused both himself and all his company to be disarmed of their weapons , and go towards the Emperor . In which passage there were such outrages offered him , as had he not used more patience then his disposition afforded him , or the occasion required , he had not in likelihood escaped with life , but 326 
 yet at length was brought to the presence of the Emperor , who said nothing to him , but what the chancellor had already done , but offered him a letter to carry to her Majesty , which the ambassador ( for that he knew it contained nothing that did concern his ambassage ) refused till he saw his danger grow too great : neither would the Emperor suffer the ambassador to reply ought , nor well he could , for they had now of purpose taken away his interpretor , being yet unwilling ( as it seemed , and suspecting the ambassadors purpose ) that the Emperor and other should know how dishonourably he had been handled : for there was at that time , in that presence a noble brave gentleman , one Boris The great Pheodorovich Godenoe , brother to the Emperor that now en^s0^ is , who yet after the death of the Emperor did always pheQ^rovich use the ambassador most honorably , and would very willingly have done him much more kindness , but his authority was not yet , till the coronation of the Emperor : but notwithstanding he sent often unto him , not long before his departure , and accompanied his many honourable favours with a present of two fair pieces of cloth of gold , and a timber of very good sables : and desired that as there was kindness and brotherhood betwixt the Emperor and her Majesty , so there might be love and brotherhood betwixt him and the ambassador . 
 Saving from this man , there was now no more favour nor friendship left for the ambassador in Moscovia : for the chancellor Shalkan had now sent him word that the English Emperor was dead : he had now nothing offered him but dangers and disgraces too many , and a hasty dispatch from the Mosco , that he might not tarry the coronation of the new Emperor : offences many in his preparation for his long journey , only one mean gentleman appointed to accompany him to the sea side , expecting daily in his passage some sudden revenge to be done upon him , for so he understood it was threatened before his coming from the Mosco , & therefore with resolution provided by all the means 
 327 
 he might , by himself and his servants for his defence ( for now was his danger known such , as the English merchant's did altogether leave him , although he commanded them in her Majesties name to accompany him ) that if any such thing should happen to be offered him , as many of them as he could that should offer to execute it , should die with him for company : which being perceived was thought to make his passage the safer . So afterwards being driven to digest many injuries by the way , at length he recovered S. Nicholas , where remembering his unfortunate loss of the old Emperor , and his ill usage since then at the Mosco , he being forced to take a bore letter for the sum of his dispatch , containing nothing of that he came for , and the poor and disgraceful present sent him ( in the name of the Emperor ) in respect of that that was meant him by the old Emperor , knowing all these to be done in disgrace of her Majesty and himself , determined now to be discharged of some part of them in such sort as he could , and so providing as he might to prevent his danger , in getting to his ship , furnishing and placing his men to answer any assault that should be offered him , after he had bidden farewell to the uncourteous gentleman that brought him thither , by three or foure of the valiantest and discreetest men he had , he sent to be delivered him or left at his lodging , his masters weak letter , and worse present , and so afterwards happily ( though hardly ) recovered his ship in safety , although presently afterwards , there was great hurly burly after him , to force him to receive the same again , but failed of their purpose . So came the ambassador from S. Nicholas the twelft day of August , and arrived at Gravesend the twelft of September following , and attended her Majesty at the court at Otelands , where , after having kissed her Majesties hands , and delivered some part of the success of his ambassage , he presented her and Elk or Loshe , the Read deer of the country , and also a brace of Rain deer , Buck and Doe , both bearing very huge homes : they in 
 328 
 OF PREFERRING SUITS IN RUSSIA a.d. 
 .. J583 - 
 her Majesties presence drew a sled and a man upon it , after the manner of the Samoeds , a people that inhabit in the Northeast from Russia , and were that year come over the sea in the winter season upon the ice , in their sleds , drawn with these deer into Russia , where the ambassador bought of them seventeene , whereof he brought nine alive into Kent . 
 . 