The Queens Majesties letters to the Lord Boris Pheodorowich . 
 Lizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France , and Ireland , defendor of the faith , etc. to the right honourable and noble Prince Lord Boris Pheodorowich Godonova , Master of the horses to the great and mighty Emperor of Russia , his Highness lieutenant of 
 Cazan and Astracan , our most deer and loving cousin , 
 greeting . Right honourable , it hath appeared unto us upon the reading and perusing of the Letters lately sent unto our Highness from our deer and loving brother the Emperor , in what part his Majesty took the late employment of our messenger Jerome Horsey in our affairs into Russia : wherein we do also find the 
 honourable endeavour used by your Lordship to appease his Highness mislike and exception taken aswell to the person of our Messenger , as to our princely letters sent by him : both of which points we have answered in our letters sent by this bearer directed to our said loving brother the Emperor : upon perusing whereof we doubt not but his Majesty will be well satisfied touching our said Messenger and former letters . And for the honourable course held by your Lordship in the interposing of your opinion and favourable construction in a thing which might grow to the offence of the league and amity standing between your Sovereign Lord and us ( wherein your Lordship performed the office of and honourable and grave Counselor ) we take our self beholding to your Lordship for your readiness in that behalf , and do assure our self that the same did proceed of the especial love and kind affection that your Lordship hath ever born and continued towards us , whereof our princely nature will never be unmindful . We have be also from time 
 428 
 to time made acquainted by our chief and principali Counselor William Lord Burghley , Lord high Treasurer of our Highness Realm of England , of your letters which have passed between your Lordship and him , concerning the intercourse of our Merchant's traffic in your Countries' , and of the honourable offices done by your Lordship with the Emperor in favour of our said Merchants . And lastly ( which we take a most assured argument of your undoubted love and affection towards us ) that your Lordship hath vouchsafed , and of purpose taken into your hands the protection of our said Merchant's , and the hearing and determining of all their causes and occasions whatsoever , which shall concern them or their trade . All which we conceive to be done for our sake , and therefore do acknowledge our selves t'o be , and still will continue beholding unto you for the same . 
 And whereas we have made mention in our said letters written to our loving brother the Emperor of certain debts due aswell to our merchant's , as to other of our subject's by one William Turnebull a subject of ours late deceased in Russia , we pray you to be referred to the said letter . And forasmuch as the said cause will fallen under your Lordship's jurisdiction by reason of your acceptation of all their causes into your patronage and protection : we are so well assured of your honourable inclination to justice , and your good affection towards our merchant's for our sake , that we shall not need to entreat your honourable furtherance either of justice or expedition in the said cause . And lastly considering that your noble lineage together with your great wisdom and desert hath made you a principali Counselor and director of the state of so great a Monarchic , whereby your advice and direction is followed in all things that do concern the same , we have given order to our said principali Counselor William Lord Burghley , treasurer of our Realm of England , that as any occasion shall arise to the hindrance of the intercourse between 
 429 
 A.D. 
 I59I - 
 these Countries , or of the privileges granted by his Majesty to our merchant's , that he may by advertisement treat with your Lordship thereupon : which we by reason of our great princely affairs can not so conveniently at all times do with such expedition as 
 the cause may require . And thus with our princely commendations we bid you farewell . From our royal Palace of Whitehall the foureteenth day of Januariee , Anno Domini 1591. 
 . 