A letter from the Lord Boris Pheodorowich to the right honourable Lord William Burghley , Lord high Treasurer of England . 
 Y the grace of God great Lord , King , and great Duke Theodor Ivanovich , governor of Russia , Volodimer , Mosco , and Novgorod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Vobsco , and great Duke of Smolensco , Otver , Ughory , Perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other regions , Lord and great Duke 
 of all Novgorod in the low countries' , of Chernigo , of Liffeland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the North parts , and Lord over the country of Iversky , and King of Grusinsky , and of the countries' of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and Duke of Igorsky , Lord and ruler of many Countries' more etc. His princely Majesties servant , Lord and Master of his horses , and high Steward of his house , President of the territories of Cazan and Astracan , Boris Pheodorowich Godonova , to the most honourable Counsellor of the most resplendent mighty great Lady Elizabeth Queen of England , France , and Ireland , William Burghley , Lord , and Knight of the Garter , high Treasurer of England , sends greeting . 
 I perceive by your letter that your merchant's last 436 
 LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d. 
 ships came home in safety , and that you have received the letters sent by them , by the hands of Francis Cherie , M - Francis one from our Lord and great King of all Russia his Majesty , unto your Queens most excellent Majesty , and one from me to her Highness , and one from my self to you : and the contents thereof you have caused to be read and well understood at large . 
 And whatsoever is therein written concerning Jerome Horsey , you have sought out the ground thereof , and that he is in great displeasure . And her Highness hath written in her letter concerning her Majesties merchant's , that whereas I have taken them into protection , she takes it very lovingly and kindly , that for her sake they have received so great kindness . 
 And touching the damages and hindrances which your merchants have sustained by means of the Emperors authorised people and officers , and that they were not permitted to traffic at liberty at the Sea port in the year 1589 , for the space of three weeks , it hath been against the Emperors Majesties will and pleasure , as also against mine . Where you desire and wish that [ I . 5°5-l between our Emperors Majesty , and your Queens Majesty , their love and amity may not be separated at any time , but to continue : and you request me that I should be good unto the English merchant's , and to defend them from all such domages hereafter : your honours loving letter I have therein thoroughly considered : and as I have be heretofore , so I will still continue to be a mean betwixt our Lord and kings Majesty , and your great Lady the Queen her highness , for the maintaining of brotherly love and amity , most joyfully and willingly , as God knoweth , aswell hereafter as I have be heretofore : praying you to do the like also . Mine only desire is for your most excellent Princess sake , to do all that lies in me for the aiding , helping and protecting of her Majesties merchant's , by the order and commandment of our Lord and king his Majesty . 
 437 
 And to that end , I have given order to all our authorised people to be careful over them , and to defend them in all causes , and to give them free liberty to traffic at their own wills and pleasures . It may be that your merchant's do not certify you the truth of all things , nor make known unto your honour my readiness to protect them : And how my Letters and Commissions are sent to all authorised people for them , that they should aid and assist them according to the tenor or my Letters , to all others that be in authority under the said Officers or otherwise . 
 Also your honour writeth of the debarring of your merchant's at the Sea port from their accustomed liberty of interchangeable traffic and bartar . Touching which complaint search and inquisition hath be made , and commandment given , that your Queens Majesties merchant's at the Seaside , and in all places where the trade is , do not sustain any damage or hindrance hereafter , but that they shall at liberty without any hindering or letting , either in the Mosco , the Treasurehouse , or else where by any of our authorised people , but absolutely to be at free liberty at their own will and pleasure . And also I will continue to be their protector and defendor in all causes , by our Lord and kings Majesties order and commandment : as it shall known and certified you by your people resident here in the Mosco . 
 Written in our Kings Majesties royal city of Mosco from the beginning of the world 7101. year , in the month of January . 
 . 