I592 - A letter from the Emperor of Russia , Theodore Ivanovich to the Queens Majesty . 
 [ I - 5°3-l 
 The Emperor's style lately enlarged . 
 Hrough the tender mercy of our God , whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us , thereby to guide our feet into the way of peace . Even this our God by mercy we glorify in Trini tie . 
 We the great Lord , King and great Duke Theodore Ivanowich , governor of 
 all Russia , of Volodimer , Mosco , and Novogrod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Vobsco , and great Duke of Smolensco , Otver , Ughori , Perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other regions , Lord and great Duke also of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , of Rezan , Polotsko , Rostove , Yeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Siberia , and commander of all the North parts , and Lord over the country of Iversky , and King of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and Duke of Igorsky , Lord and ruler of many countries' more etc. To our loving sister Elizabeth Queen of England , France , and Ireland , etc. Loving sister , your letters sent by your servant Thomas Lind , we have received , and read what you have written in the same touching our title , and touching your order held in your letters heretofore sent us by your servant Jerome Horsey : 
 432 
 wherein you have answered us sufficiently and most graciously . 
 And whereas your Majesty hath written in your letter concerning the goods of William Turnebull late deceased in our kingdom , that your subject's , for whom he was factor , should have debts growing unto them from him by account : we at your Majesties request have caused not only order to be taken , but for your Highness sake , loving sister , we have caused the goods to be sought out and delivered to your merchant's Agent and his company , together with his stuff , books , bills and writings , as also money to the valve of sixe hundred rubbles , which Christopher Holmes and Francis Cherry are to pay for | | ycarie : and we have set at liberty the said Turnebulles kinsman Raynold Kitchen and his fellows and delivered them to your merchant's Agent . 
 And further , where you write unto us for such your subject's as have departed out of your majesties Realm secretly without licence , that we should give order to send them home : concerning such your subject's for which you have written unto our Majesty by letters , we will cause search to be made , and such as are willing to go home into your kingdom , we will command forthwith to be delivered unto your merchant's Agent , and so to pass . And such of your Majesties people as have given themselves under our government as subject's , we think it not requisite to grant to let them pass . 
 And further , where you have written unto us concerning the goods of John Chappell , we have written heretofore the whole discourse thereof , not once , but sundry times , and therefore it is not needful to write any more thereof . And such goods as were found out of the goods of the said Chapel , the money thereof was restored to your Majesties people William Turnbull and his fellows . Your Majesties servant Thomas Lind M. Thomas we have sent with our letters the same way whereby he Lind. came into our kingdom . The long abiding here of 
 ni 433 2 E 
 This is a dainty meat made of the roas of Sturgeons . 
 your Majesties servant in our kingdom , was for the coming of your people from the Sea port . Written in our princely court and royal seat in the city of Mosco in the year from the beginning of the world 1592. 7101 , in the month of January . 
 . 