A most gracious Letter given to the English Merchant's Sir John Heart and his company , by Theodore Ivanowich , the King , Lord , and great duke of all Russia , the only upholder thereof . 
 He only God omnipotent before all eternity , his will be done without end : the Father , Son , and holy Ghost we glorify in Trinitie . Our only God the maker of all things and worker of all in all every where with plentiful increase : for which cause he hath given life to 
 man to love him , and to trust in him : Our only God which inspireth every one of us his holy children with his word to discern good through our Lord Jesus Christ , and the holy quickening spirit of life now in these perilous times establish us to keep the right sceptre , and suffer us to reign of our selves to the good profit of the land , and to the subduing of the people together with the enemies , and to the maintenance of virtue . 
 We the great Lord , king , and great duke Theodore Ivanovich , of all Russia the only upholder , of Volodimer , Mosco , and Novogrod , King of Casan , and king of Astracan , Lord of Vobsco , and great duke of Smolensko , of Otver , Ughorie , Permia , Viatski , Bulgari , and other regions , great duke also of Novogrod in the low Country , of Chernigo , of Rezan , Polotski , Rostove , Yaruslave , Bealozero , and of Liefland , of Udorski , Obdorski , Condenski , and commander of all the Country of Siberi and of the North parts , and Lord over the Country of Iverski , Grusinski , and King over the Country of Igorski , and ruler over many other kingdoms and Lordship's more . 
 Our princely Majesty at the request of our brother in law Boris Feodorowich Godenova our servant , and Master of our horses , generail Comptroller of our house , 
 439 
 and governor of the Lordship's and kingdoms of Casan and Astracan : unto the English merchant's Sir John Heart knight , sir William Webbe knight , Richard Salken-stow Aiderman , Nicholas Moseley aiderman , Robert Dove , Wil. Garrowe , John Harbey , Robert Chamberlaine , Henry Anderson , John Woodworth , Francis Cherry , John Merrick , & Cristopher Holmes ; hath graciously given leave to come & go with their ships into our kingdom & territories of Duina with all kind of commodities at their pleasures to traffic from the seaside to our royal city of Mosco , & in all other cities , towns , countries and territories of our whole kingdom of Mosco : upon the humble petition and suit of the said English merchant's sir John Heart and his company , we have given them leave to pass and traffic into all parts of our dominions and territories of Mosco , and to our inheritance of Novogrod and Plesco with their wares and commodities without paying any custom or duties . 
 We the great Lord , king , and great duke Theodore Ivanovich of all Russia , have firmly given and granted unto the aforesaid English merchant's Sir John Heart and his company , for the love we bear to our deer sister Queen Elizabeth , we I say of our gracious goodness have given leave to travel and pass to our royal seat of Mosco , and to all the parts of our kingdom with all kind of commodities , and to traffic with all kind of wares at their own pleasure , without paying any custom of their said wares . 
 To you our Customers we will and command not to take any manner of custom of the said merchant's and their company , neither for entering , weighin nor passing by or through any place of our territories , nor for custom , of judgement by Law , or for their person or persons ; nor any duties over bridges , or for certificates or processes , or for conducting over any streams or waters , or for any other customs or duties that may be nam ; we will and straitly command you not to take any of them in any wise . 
 440 
 Provided always , that the said merchant's shall not colour any strangers wares , nor bring them into our country , nor favour them colorably , nor sei for any stranger . To you our subject's also we command , not to meddle or deal with any wares of strangers colorably , nor to have them by you in keeping , nor to offer to sei their commodities ; but themselves to sei their own commodities in change or otherwise as they may or can . And in all towns , cities , countries' , or any part of our dominions and territories it shall lawful for the foresaid merchant's and their company to fell or barter away their own commodities in change or otherwise , for or at their pleasure as they will . And whensoever the said merchant's or any of them come into our territories of great Novgorod or Plesco , or to any other parts of our kingdom with their wares , by virtue of these our Majesties letters we straitly charge and command you our Captains , generals , and all other that be authorised or in office , to suffer the aforesaid merchant's to pass and repass , and to take no kind of custom or duty of them , or any of their goods , howsoever it may have name : nor in no place else where they shall come in all our kingdom . Likewise if they fell not nor buy no wares , you shall take no custom , but suffer them quietly to pass where they will with their goods . Of our gracious goodness and mere goodwill we have given the said merchant's leave to traffic throughout all our kingdoms , and in all towns and cities with all manner of wares and commodities without paying any custom or duty . Wheresoever they shall happen to sei or barter away any of their commodities to our subject's , they are to barter or fell by whole sale , and not by retail , as by the yard or by the ounce in their houses or elsewhere : but by the pack or whole clothes , velvets , damasks , tafiaties by the piece , and not by the yard : and all other wares that are to be sold by weight , they are to be sold not by the ounce , but by great sale . Your wines shall sold by hogs heads , pipes or buttes , but not by quarts nor pints . 
 441 
 The said English merchant's are to sei or barter away their own commodities themselves , and not to suffer any Russes to buy or fell for them : nor to carry or transport any wares of strangers in stead of their own in no wise . And if the said English merchant's shall be desirous to fell any of their commodities at Colmogro , or upon the River of Duina , or at Vologhda or at Yeraslave ; when as the said merchant's have sold in any of the said Towns , Cities or territories , then you our officers and authorised people by virtue of this our gracious letter we will and straitly command not to take any custom of the aforesaid merchant's , howsoever it may be nam . 
 Also whensoever the said English merchant's or any of their factors shall desirous to hire carriers to carry their wares to any place of our dominions or Cities , it shall at their choice and pleasure to hire them the best they can , and where they will , either water men to row , or vessels . 
 Also when any of the said merchant's themselves , or any of theirs are desirous to travel into any part of our dominions , or into any other kingdoms , or into their own kingdom , if any of our treasure be delivered to them , they to take it with them , and to sei it in bartar or otherwise for such wares as are most requisite and necessary to be brought into our kingdom and to be delivered into our treasury . You , our nobili tie , generals & all others in authority suffer them to pass through all our cities , towns & countries without taking any custom of them . And when the said merchant's have done their traffic in any place & come to the Mosco , they shall make it known at their arrival at the house of Chancery and secretariship to Vasili Shalkan . And further when there come any English merchant's with their ships or vessels by sea , that by mishap shall cast away upon any of our shores or costs , we will and command you to aid & help them , and to seek for their goods so perished by any casualty , and to be 
 442 
 restored again to the said English merchant's or their assigns without any prolonging or detaining . As also if any of the aforesaid merchant's goods be found in any part of our coasts or streams and they not present themselves , let the said goods be taken and laid up in safety in some place or other , and be delivered to the aforesaid merchant's or their factors under penalty of our displeasure . 
 Furthermore we King , Lord , and great duke of all Russia , of our gracious goodness give unto the English merchant's and their company , their house in the City of Mosco lying hard by the Church of S. Mark behind the market place : which they shall keep and remain therein after their old accustomed use . Provided always that they shall keep one Russe porter or one of their own people , & may keep any other Russe servant at their discretion . Also their houses in sundry places , as at Jeraslave , Vologhda , Colmogro , and at S. Michael Archangel , all these houses they shall keep and use at their own pleasure , according to our former letters patents without paying any duty , rend , or custom . Nor you the commonalty of the said towns shall take any thing of them or theirs for any duty that should belong to you , especially of the houses aforesaid : but the said English merchant's shall enjoy them peaceably for themselves and their families , but shall not suffer any other strangers Russes or others to use the aforesaid houses : Also you shall suffer them to lay their wares and commodities in their warehouses , and to fell their commodities to whom they please without let or hindrance , by virtue of this our gracious letter . 
 Their housekeeper being a Russe shall not undertake to meddle , or fell any of their wares without they themselves be present , nor to buy any thing for them . 
 Also it shall lawful for the said merchant's when they shall arrive at their port , to lade and unladen their merchandises as in times passed they have done at their pleasure . And when they lade their ships with Russe 443 
 commodities or unladen them , it shall lawful for them to hire any of our subject's to help them for the present time , and for them to carry their goods to and from with their own vessels to S. Michael Archangel , or elsewhere . 
 Also we command you our authorised people at the sea side as well Customers as others to take of the foresaid merchant's a note , or remembrance , what goods they bring in and ship out : whereby it may be known what goods come in and go out . But in no wise shall you open or unpack any of their wares or merchandises . 
 In like manner when as they ship or send away any of their country commodities from S. Michael Archangel to any other place , or to our royal City of Mosco ye shall not hinder nor let them any manner of wise for the shipping of their merchandises in or out , by virtue of these our gracious letters of privilege given them . 
 And whensoever any of the said English merchant's have any occasion to send over land out of our dominions into their own country any of their servants or factors , by virtue of this our gracious letter we command you to give them their passport out of the office of our Secretariship . 
 And whensoever any of our subject's hath any thing to do with any of the foresaid merchant's by way of contentions : or that they be damnified or hindered by any of our subject's : then we appoint and ordain our Chanceller and Secretary Vasili Shalcan to hear their causes , and finally to determine on both sides according to equity and justice : and that he shall search the truth between both parties . 
 And when the truth cannot be proved or found out , then to cast lots by order of the foresaid Judge , and he to whom the lot shall fallen to take his other . 
 Furthermore whensoever any of the English merchant's or their factors shall come into any parts of our dominions or Cities , and shall wronged any kind of ways in trading , or otherwise by any abused , or have 
 444 
 any occasion of contention with any by way of trade in merchandise or otherways : we straightly charge and command you our governors , and authorised subject's within all our Realm and territories of the same , to minister justice unto the aforesaid merchant's , or to their deputies , and to search the truth of the contention : And for want of sufficient proof cast lots who shall take his oath for the more ready trial of the cause : And in no wise to take any fee or duty of the aforesaid English merchant's for the said judgement in Law . 
 We will and command all this to be observed and kept in all parts of our dominions by all our subject's and authorised people , by virtue of these our royal letters patents : And the said letters not to be diminished in any part or parsell thereof , by any persons howsoever they be nam . And whosoever shall withstand & not regard these our gracious letters shall in our high displeasure , and shall incur the loss of his life . This our gracious letter was given in our kingdom and royal City of Mosco , in the year from the beginning of the world 7104. in the month of May . 
 Subscribed by the Emperors Chancellor and Secretary Vasili Shalcan . 
 . 