A testimony of the Northeastern Discovery made by the English , and of the profit that may arise by pursuing the same : taken out of the second volume of Navigations and Voyages , fol. 17. of the notable Cosmographer , M. John Baptista Ramusius , Secretary to the State of Venice : Written in Italian in the year , 1557. 
 458 
 MOreover ( having before spoken of diverse particularities , in and excellent Map of Paulus Venetus ) on that part subject to our North pole , where every writer and Cosmographer of these and of former times hitherto , have , and do place the frozen Sea , and that the land stretcheth continually to 90. degrees , towards the pole : contrariwise , in this map is to be seen , that the land extendeth only a little above Norway and Swethland , and then turning it self trendeth afterwards towards the Southeast and by East , unto the country of Moscovie and Russia , and stretcheth directly unto Cathay . And that this is true , the navigations which the English men have of late made , intending to discover Cathay , in the time of Edward the sixt , king of England , are very sufficient witnesses . For in the mids of their voyage , lighting by chance upon the coast of Moscovie ( where they found then reigning John Vasiliwich Emperor of Russia , and great duke of Moscovia , who after he had , to his great delight and admiration , seen the English men , entertained them with exceeding great courtesies ) found this sea to be navigable , and not frozen . 
 Which navigation to Cathay , although it be not as The great yet thoroughly known , yet if with often frequenting rthelterne the same , and by long use and knowledge of those discovery . seas it be continued , it is like to make a wonderful change and revolution in the state of this our part of the world . 
 [ The testimony 
 459 
 The testimony of Gerardus Mercator in his last large Map of Europe , touching the notable discoveries of the English , made of Moscovie by the Northeast . 
 The same in English . 
 THe most famous navigation of the English men by the Northeast sea hath offered unto me a great occasion , and certain direction for the reformation of the map of Europe : which discovery hath the Northern parts of Finmarke , Lapland , and Moscovie , laid out according to the just elevation and the quarters of the world . And further , the true observation of the latitude of the city of Mosco , made by the foresaid Englishmen , hath yielded me and infallible rule , for the correcting of the situation of the inland countries : which notable helps being ministered unto me , I thought it my duty to exhibit to the world this Map , more exact and perfect then hitherto it hath be published . 
 460 
 Another testimony of Joannes Metellus Sequanus concerning the same Navigation and Discoveries in his Preface prefixed before Osorius de rebus gestis Emanuelis Regis Portugalli^ , written about the year , 1574. 
 The same in English . 
 BUt least all and the whole glory of discovering the Ocean sea should be ascribed to the Spaniards , the Englishmen about twentie years past , by a new navigation into Moscovie , discovered the Northeast parts . For they by reason of the wars of Swethland being hindered from the traffic of the Moscovites and of the Narve in Liefland , opened a passage for themselves by the Ocean sea , beyond the Northern latitude of 70. degrees : having in their course on the one side the coasts of Norway , Finmark , Lapland , Scrickfin and Biarmia : On the other side the coast of Gronland . 
 461 
 A.D. J574 - Which voyage the Hollanders afterward entered into , but not without some conflict with the English . They carry thither old plate and course linen cloth , and all kind of small Mercery wares , serving for the appareling of men and women , as linen , and silk girdles , garters , purses , knives , and many such like things . And they bring away from the Moscovites , all kind of precious Furs , and Salmons salted and dried in the smoke . 
 . 