The life and travels of Constantine the great , Emperor and King of Britaine . 
 iv 273 s 
 FLavius Constantine , surnamed the great , king of the Britaines after his father , and Emperor of the Romans , born in Britanie of Helena his mother , and there created Emperor , made his native country partaker of his singular glory and renown . 
 Having conquered and put to flight the Almains , Spaniards , Frenchmen , and their Kings for a spectacle through wen out to wild beasts , he held France it self as subject unto him : and having happily delivered the Italians from the tyrannic of Maxentius , he preferred three of his mother's uncles , all Britaines , namely , Leoline , Trahere , and Marius , whom in all his actions he had found more faithful unto him then any others , to be of the order of the Roman Senators . 
 Eutropius reporteth , that he infinitely excelled in the virtues both of the mind and body also , and that having a pleasure in the practice of war , and in the just commendation of Martial ! prowess , he never pitched his field but his success in the battle was always victorious . His mother Helena having instructed him in the faith of Christ , although he made much of all men that were learned in the Greek and Latin tongues , yet he yielded speciali honour to those that spent their time in the study of Divinity , which he called Christian Philosophic : so that beginning at the furthest part of the Ocean sea , which then was taken to be his own native soil of Britaine , and trusting in the assistance of God , when the darkness of superstition was most thick , then he undertook a care of Religion , stirring up innumerable nations from the West as far as India it self , to the hope of eternal ! life . 
 He passed many nights without sleep , having his mind occupied in divine studies : and whensoever his laisure from greater affairs did permit him , his vacant times should be spent in the use of writing and other good exercises , assuring himself that his kingdoms and 274 
 Empire were to be continued and strengthened to him by prayer and holy works : and oftentimes taking upon him as it were the person of a notable preacher of Christian discipline , he would teach his children and nobility , that godliness was to be preferred before riches , yea , before the Monarchic of all the world . 
 He overthrew the false gods of the heathens , and by many laws often revived , he abrogated the worshipping of Images in all the countries of Greece , Egypt , Persia , Asia , and the whole Roman Empire , commanding Christ only by his Edicts to be worshipped , the sacred Gospel to be preached , the Ministers thereof to be honoured and relieved , and the temples of Idols every where to be destroyed . 
 Whithersoever he went he caused the book of the Gospel of Christ to be still carried before him , that thereby it might appear to be a form of faith to all men , and to appertain generally to all nations . 
 He was the first that appointed and Imperiali Diadem , or Crown to the Kings of Britaine . 
 He was most beneficial to all Churches , bestowing upon them lands and fields , and upon the poor , sick persons , widows and orphans , corn and wood , being as careful of them as if he had be their natural father . 
 He used learned men most familiarly , as Eusebius , Lactantius and others , and they are witnesses that this was his usual prayer to God . O Lord we know thee to be the only God , we are sure that thou art the only King , and we call upon thee as our helper : through thee we have got the victory , and thrown the enemy . 
 Sextus Aurelius reporteth , that it was his greatest delight to embrace the study of learning , to favour good Arts , to read , write and meditate , and that he composed many books and Epistles both in the Greek and Latin tongues . 
 He died at Nicomedia , being then 66. years of age , in the 32. year of his reign , and in the 339. year after 275 
 by thee we have over - 
 the Incarnation of Christ , and was buried at Constantinople , Octavius being then King of Britaine : whose life Eusebius bishop of Caesarea hath written in Greek in 4. books , which afterwards were translated into the Latin tongue by John Portes a Frenchman . 
 . 