A letter written by the grave and learned Gudbrandus Thorlacius Bishop of Holen in Island , concerning the ancient state of Island and Gronland , etc. 
 194 
 A.D. 
 1595 - 
 The same in English . 
 To the reverend , learned , and virtuous , Master Hugh Branham minister of the Church of Harewich in England , his brother and fellow-pastor . etc. 
 I Much marveled ( even as your self , reverend sir , conjectured that I would ) at the first sighed of your letters , that being a stranger I should be saluted in writing by one altogether unknown unto me . Howbeit , reading a little further , I found my self , if not otherwise , yet by name at least ( which proceedeth of 
 195 
 This is the brief Commentary of Jonas Arngrimus immediacy going before . 
 Gronland in old time had Christian Bishops . 
 your courtesy ) known unto you : And also , for that I saw you desirous of the credit and honest report of us Islanders , I greatly rejoiced . Wherefore I my self will be a mean , that your virtue and good name ( because you congratulate with us for the Gospel of Christ here published , and do think and write so lovingly and honourably of our nation ) may cease hereafter to be unknown among us . 
 As touching the monuments of antiquity which are here thought to be extant , there is , in very deed , nothing ( except those particulars , whereof mention is made in the Commentary of Island , which you write unto me that you have seen ) worthy to be read or written , which I may communicate with you . And as concerning our neighbour Countries' we have little to show , beside the history of the Kings of Norway , ( or rather some fragments of the same history ) which others have otherwise described : howbeit they are all in a manner such things as Krantzius never mentioned : unless it be some few relations . Moreover , as touching Gronland , we hold this from the opinion of our ancestors ; that , from the extreme part of Norway , which is called II Biarmlandia , and from whence the said Gronland is not far distant , it fetches about the Northern coast of Island with and huge circuit in manner of and half Moon . Our Chronicles likewise do testify that our own countrymen in times past resorted thither for traffic , and also that the very same country of Gronland had certain Bishops in the days of Popery . More then this we cannot avouch . But now it is reported that your Englishmen ( whom I may almost call the lords of the Ocean sea ) make yearly voyages unto Gronland : concerning which matter if you please to give me further advertisement , you shall do me and especial favour . Moreover , whatsoever news you hear concerning the affairs of England or of other Countries' thereabouts , I pray you make us acquainted therewith . Thus ( reverend sir ) wishing you long life , for the service of God , for 
 196 
 the increase of learning , and the benefit of the people committed to your charge , I bid you farewell . From Island upon the feast of the visitation of the blessed Virgin Marry , Anno Dom. 1595. 
 Yours Gudbrandus Thorlacius Bishop of Hola in Island . 
 . 