A voyage of three Ambassadors , who in the time of K. Edward the Confessor , and about the year of our Lord 1056 , were sent unto Constantinople , and from thence unto Ephesus , together with the occasion of their sending , etc. recorded by William of Malmesburie , lib . 2. de gestis regum Anglorum , capite 13. 
 The same in English . 
 UPon Easter day king Edward the Confessor being crowned with his kingly diadem , and accompanied with diverse of his nobles , sat at dinner in his palace at Westminster . And when others , after their long abstinence in the Lent , refreshed themselves with dainty meats , and fed thereupon very earnestly , he lifting up his mind from earthly matters and meditating on heavenly visions ( to the great admiration of those which were present ) brake forth into and exceeding laughter : and no man presuming to inquire the cause of his mirth , they all kept silence till dinner was ended . But after dinner as he was in his bedchamber putting 285 
 A.D. 
 c . 1056. 
 off his solemn robes , three of his Nobles , to wit earl Harold , and Abbot , and a Bishop , being more familiar with him then the residue followed him in , and boldly asked him what was the occasion of his laughter : for it seemed very strange unto them all , what should move him at so solemn a time and assembly , while others kept silence , to laugh so excessively . I saw ( quoth he ) admirable things , and therefore laughed I not without occasion . Then they ( as it is the common guise of all men ) demanded and inquired the cause more earnestly , humbly beseeching him that he would vouchsafe to impart that secret 
 unto them . Whereupon musing a long while unto himself , at length he told them wonderful things : namely that seven Sleepers had rested in mount Caelius two hundred years , lying upon their right sides ; but in the very hour of his laughter , that they turned themselves on their left sides ; and that they should continue so lying for the space of 74. years after ; being a dismal sign of future calamity unto mankind . For all things should come to pass within those 74. years , which , as our Saviour Christ foretold unto his disciples , were to be fulfilled about the end of the world ; namely that nation should rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom , and that there should be in many places earthquakes , pestilence , and famine , terrible apparitions in the heavens , and great signs , together with alterations of kingdoms , wars of infidels against the Christians , and victories of the Christians against the infidels . And as they wondered at these relations , he declared unto them the passion of the seven Sleepers , with the proportion and shape of each of their bodies ( which things no man living had as then committed unto writing ) and that so plainly and distinctly , as if he had conversed a long time in their company . Hereupon the earl sent a knight , the bishop a clerk , and the abbot a monk unto Maniches the Emperor of Constantinople , with the letters and gifts of their King . Who giving them 286 
 friendly entertainment , sent them over unto the bishop of Ephesus ; and wrote his letters unto him giving him charge , that the English Ambassadors might be admitted to see the true , and material habiliments of the seven Sleepers . And it came to pass that King Edwards vision was approved by all the Greeks , who protested they were advertised by their father's , that the foresaid seven Sleepers had always before that time rested upon their right sides ; but after the Englishmen were entered into the cave , those Sleepers confirmed the truth of the outlandish prophesy , unto their countrymen . Neither were the calamities foretold , any long time delayed : for the Agarens , Arabians , Turkes and other unbelieving nations invading the Christians , harried and spoiled Syria , Lycia , the lesser Asia , and many cities of Asia the greater , and among the rest Ephesus , yea , and Jerusalem also . 
 . 