The worthy voyage of Richard the first , K. of England into Asia , for the recovery of Jerusalem out of the hands of the Saracens , drawn out of the book of Acts and Monuments of the Church of England , written by M. John Fox . 
 King Richard the first of that name , for his great valour surnamed Ceur de Lion , the son of Henry the second , after the death of his father 
 remembering the rebellions that he had undutifully raised against him , sought for absolution of his trespass , and in part of satisfaction for the same , agreed with Philip the [ II i . 21. ] French king to take his voyage with him for the recovery of Christes patrimony , which they called the Holy land , whereupon the said king Richard immediately after his Coronation , to prepare himself the better towards his journey , used diverse means to take up sums of money , and exacted a tenth of the whole Realm , the Christians to make threescore and ten thousand pounds , and the Jewes which then dwelled in the Realm threescore thousand . 
 Having thus got sufficient money for the exploit , he sent certain Earls and Barons to Philip the French king in the time of his Parliament at S. Denis , to put him in mind of his promise made for the recovery of 
 319 
 U The oath of fidelity betwixt King Richard , and the French king . 
 The discipline and order of the king . 
 Christs holy patrimony out of the Saracens hands : To whom he sent word again in the month of December , that he had bound himself by solemn other , deposing upon the Evangelists , that he the year next following , about the time of Easter , had certainly prefixed to address himself towards that journey , requiring him likewise not to fail , but to be ready at the term above limited , appointing also the place where both the Kings should meet together . 
 In the year therefore 1190. King Richard having committed the government of this realm in his absence to the bishop of Ely then Chancellor of England , advanced forward his journey , and came to Turon to meet with Philip the French king , & after that went to Vizeliac , where the French king & he joining together , for the more continuance of their journey , assured themselves by solemn other , swearing fidelity one to the other : the form of whose oath was this . 
 That either of them should defend and maintain the honour of the other , and bear true fidelity unto him , of life , members & worldly honour , and that neither of them should fail one the other in their affairs : but the French King should aid the King of England in defending his land and dominions , as he would himself defend his own City of Paris if it were besieged : and that Richard king of England likewise should aid the French king in defending his land and Dominions , no otherwise then he would defend his own City of Roan if it were besieged , etc. 
 Concerning the laws and ordinances appointed by K. Richard for his Navy , the form thereof was this . 
 1. That who so killed any person on shipboard , should be tied with him that was slain , and thrown into the sea . 
 2. And if he killed him on the land , he should in like manner be tied with the party slain , and be buried with him in the earth . 
 320 
 3. He that shall convicted by lawful witness to draw out his knife or weapon to the intent to strike any man , or that hath stricken any to the drawing of blood , shall lose his hand . 
 4. Also he that striketh any person with his hand without effusion of blood , shall be plunged three times in the sea . 
 5. Item , who so speaks any opprobrious or contumelious words in reviling or cursing one another , for so oftentimes as he hath reviled , shall pay so many ounces of silver . 
 6. Item , a thief or felon that hath stolen being lawfully convicted , shall have his head shorn , and boiling pitch poured upon his head , and feathers or down strawed upon the same , whereby he may be known , and so at the first landing place they shall come to , there to be cast up . 
 These things thus ordered , king Richard sending his Navy by the Spanish seas , and by the straights of Gibraltar , between Spaine and Africa , to meet him at Marsilia , he himself went as is said to Vizeliac to the French king . Which two kings from thence went to Lions , where the bridge over the flood Rhodanus with press of people brake , and many both men and women were drowned : by occasion whereof the two kings for the combrance of their trains , were constrained to dissever themselves for time of their journey , appointing both to meet together in Sicily : and so Philip the French king took his way to Genua , and king Richard to Marsilia , where he remained 8. days , appointing there his Navy to meet him . From thence crossing over to Genua where the French king was , he passed forward by the coasts of Italy , and entered into Tiber not far from Room . 
 King Richard staying in Marsilia 8. days for his Navy which came not , he there hired 20. Galleys , and ten great barks to ship over his men , and so came to Naples , and so partly by horse and wagon , and partly by iv 321 x 
 the sea , passing to Falernum , came to Calabria , where after that he had herd that his ships were arrived at Messana in Sicilie , he made the more speed , and so the 23. of September entered Messana with such a noise of Trumpets and Shaums , with such a rout and show , that it was to the great wonderment and terror both of the Frenchmen , and of all other that did hear and behold the sighed . 
 [ II i . 22. ] To the said town of Messana the French king was come before the 16. of the same month of September , and had taken up the palace of Tancredus king of Sicily for his lodging : to whom king Richard after his arrival ! eftsoons resorted , and when the two kings had communed together , immediately the French king took shipping and entered the seas , thinking to sail towards the land of Jerusalem : but after he was out of the haven , the wind rising contrary against him , returned him back again to Messana . Then king Richard ( whose lodging was prepared in the suburbs without the City ) after he had resorted again and talked with the French king , and also had sent to Tancredus king of Sicily , for deliverance of Joane his sister ( who had been sometimes Queen of Sicily ) and had obtained her to be sent unto him , the last day of September passed over the straight deal Fare , and there getting a strong hold called de la Baguare , or le Bamare , and there placing his sister with a sufficient garrison , he returned again to Messana . 
 The 2. of October king Richard won another strong hold , called Monasterium Griffonum , situated in you midst of the straight deal Fare , between Messana & Calabria , from whence you Monks being expulsed , he reposed there all his store and provision of victuals , which came from England or other places . 
 The Citizens of Messana seeing that the king of England had won the castle and Island de le Baguare , and also the Monastery of the Griffons , and doubting least the king would extend his power further to invade their City , & get if he could the whole Isle of Sicilie , 
 322 
 began to stir against the Kings army , and to shut the Englishmen out of the gates , and kept their walls against them . The Englishmen seeing that , made to the gates , and by force would have broken them open , insomuch that the King riding among them with his staff , and breaking diverse of their heads , could not assuage their fierceness , such was the rage of the Englishmen against the citizens of Messana . The King seeing the fury of his people to be such that he could not stay them , took boat , and went to the palace of king Tancred , to talk of the matter with the French king , in which mean time the matter was so taken up by the wise handling of the ancients of the city , that both parts laying down their armour , went home in peace . 
 The fourth day of the said month of October , came to king Richard the Archbishop of Messana with two other Archbishop's also with the French king , and sundry other Earls , Barons , and Bishops , to entreat of peace , who as they were together consulting , and had almost concluded upon the peace , the Citizens of Messana issuing out of the town , some went up upon the mountains , some with open force invaded the mansion or lodging of Hugh Brune and English captain . The noise whereof coming to the ears of the King , he suddenly breaking off talk with the French king and the rest , departed from them , and coming to his men , commanded them forthwith to arm themselves . Who then with certain of his soldiers making up to the top of the mountain ( which seemed to pass their power to climb ) there put the Citizens to flight , chasing them down the mountains , unto the very gates of the city , whom also certain of the kings servants pursued into the city , of whom five valiant soldiers & twentie of the kings servants were slain , the French King looking upon , and not once willing to rescue them , contrary to his other , and league before made with the king of England : for the French king with his men 
 323 
 A.D. 
 II90 . 
 being there present , road in the midst of them safely , and without any harm too and from , and might well have eased the Kings party , more then he , if it had so liked him .. 
 This being known to the English host how their fellows were slain , and the Frenchmen permitted in the city , and that they were excluded and the gates barred against them , being also stopped from buying of victuali , & other things , they upon great indignation gathered themselves in arms , braced open the gates , and scaled the walls , and so winning the city , set up their flags with the English arms upon the walls : which when the French King did see , he was mightily offended , requiring the King of England that the Arms of France might also be set up , & joined with his : but King Richard to that would in no case agree , notwithstanding to satisfy his mind , he was contented to take down his Arms , and to commit the custody of the city to the Hospitalaries and Templaries of Jerusalem , till the time that Tancred king of Sicily and he should agree together upon conditions . 
 These things being done the fift and sixt day of October , it followed then upon the eight day of the same , that peace was concluded among the kings . In which peace , first king Richard , & Philip the French king renewed again their oath and league before made , concerning their mutual aid and society , during the time of that peregrination . 
 Secondly , peace also was concluded between king Richard and Tancred king of Sicily aforesaid , with conditions , that the daughter of Tancrede in case king Richard should die without issue , should be married to Arthur Duke of Britaine the kings Nephew and next heir to his crown , whereof a formali chart was drawn , and letters sent thereof to Pope Clement being dated the ninth of November . 
 From this time until Februarie the next year these two kings kept still at Messana , either for lack of 
 324 
 wind and weather , or for the repairing of their ships . And in the aforesaid Februarie , in the year 1191. King Richard sent over his galleys to Naples , there to meet his mother Elinore , and Berengaria the daughter of Zanctius king of Navarre , whom he was purposed to marry , who by that time were come to Brundusium , under the conduct of Philip Earl of Flanders , and so proceeding unto Naples , they found the kings ships wherein they sailed to Messana . 
 In this mean space , king Richard showed himself exceeding bounteous and liberali to all men : to the French king first he gave diverse ships , upon others likewise he bestowed rich rewards , and of Kiss treasure and goods he distributed largely to his soldiers and servants about him , of whom it was reported , that he distributed more in one month , then any of his predecessors did in a whole year : by reason whereof he purchased great love and favour , which not only redounded to the advancement of his fame , but also to his singular use and profit , as the sequel afterwards proved . 
 The first day of March following , he left the city of Messana , where the French King was , and went to Cathneia , a city where Tancredus king of Sicily then lay , where he was honorably received , and there remained with king Tancredus three days and three nights . On the fourth day when he should depart , the aforesaid Tancredus offered him many rich presents in gold and silver , and precious silks , whereof king Richard would receive nothing , but one little ring for a token of his good will : for the which king Richard gave again unto him a rich sword . At length when king Richard should take his leave , king Tancred would not let him so depart , but needs would give him 4. great ships , and 15. galleys , and furthermore he himself would needs accompany him the space of two days journey , to a place called Tavernium . 
 Then the next morning when they should take their leave , Tancredus declared unto him the message , which 
 325 
 the French King a little before had sent unto him by the Duke of Burgundie , the contents whereof were these : That the King of England was a false Traitor , & would never keep the peace that was between them : and if the said Tancredus would war against him , or secretly by night would invade him , he with all his power would assist him , to the destruction of him and all his army . To whom Richard the King protested again , that he was no traitor , nor never had be : and as touching the peace begun betwixt them , the same should never be broken through him : neither could he believe that the French King being his good lord , and his sworn Compartner in that voyage , would utter any such words by him . Which when Tancredus herd , he brings forth the letters of the French King , sent to him by the Duke of Burgundie , affirming moreover , that if the Duke of Burgundie would deny the bringing of the said letters , he was ready to try it with him by any of his Dukes . King Richard receiving the letters , and musing not a little upon the same , returns again to Messana . The same day that King Richard departed , the French king came to Tavernium to speak with Tancred , and there abided with him that night , and on the morrow returned to Messana again . 
 From that time King Richard moved in stomach against King Philip , never showed any gentle countenance of peace & amity , as he before was wont : whereat the French king greatly marvelling , and inquiring earnestly what should be the cause thereof , word was sent him again by Philip earl of Flanders from king Richard , what words he had sent to the king of Sicily , and for testimony thereof the letters were showed , which he wrote by the duke of Burgundie to the king of Sicily : which when the French king understood , first he held his peace as guilty in his conscience , not knowing well what to answer . At length turning his tale to another matter , he began to quarrel with king Richard , pretending as though he sought causes to 326 
 i 191. break with him , and to malign him : and therefore he forged ( said he ) these lies upon him , and all because he by that means would avoid to marry with Alise his sister , according as he had promised . Adding moreover that if he would so do , and would not marry the said Alise his sister according to his oath , he would be and enemy to him , and to his , while he lived . 
 To this king Richard said again , that he could by no means marry that woman , forsomuch as his father had carnail copulation with her , and also had by her a son : for proof whereof he had there presently to bring forth diverse & sundry witnesses to the kings face , to testify with him . 
 In conclusion , through counsel and persuasion of diverse about the French king , agreement at last was made , so that king Philip did acquit king Richard from this bound of marrying his sister , and king Richard again should be bound to pay to him every year for the space of five years , two thousand marks , with certain other conditions beside , not greatly materiali for this place . And thus peace being between them concluded the 28 day of the said month of March , the [ II i . 24. ] French king launching out of the haven of Messana , the 22 day after in the Easter week , came with his army to the siege of Achon . 
 After the departure of the French king from Messana , king Richard with his army yet remaining behind , arrived Queen Alinor the kings mother , bringing with her Berengaria the king of Navars daughter , to be espoused to king Richard : which being done , king Richard in April following , about the 20 day of the said month , departed from the haven of Messana with 150 great ships , and 53 great galleys well manned and The Navy of appointed , and took his journey towards Achon : who Kin&Ruhard‘ being upon the Seas on Good friday about the ninth hour , rose a mighty South wind with a tempest , which dissevered and scattered all his Navy , some to one place , and some to another . The king with a few ships was 
 327 
 driven to the He of Creta , and there before the haven of Rhodes cast anchor . The ships that carried the kings sister , queen of Sicily , and Berengaria the king of Navars daughter , with two ships were driven to the He of Cyprus . 
 The king making great moan for the ships of his sister , and Berengaria his wife that should be , not knowing where they were become , after the tempest was overblown , sent forth his galleys diligently to seek the rest of his Navy dispersed , but especially the ship wherein his sister was , and the maiden whom he should marry , who at length were found safe and merry at the port of Lymszem in the lie of Cyprus , notwithstanding the two other ships , which were in their company before in the same haven , were drowned with diverse of the kings servants and men of worship , among whom was M. Roger , called Malus Catulus , the kings Vicechan-cellour , who was found with the kings seal hanging about his neck . 
 The king of Cyprus was then Isakius ( called also the Emperor of the Griffons ) who took and imprisoned all English men , which by shipwreck were cast upon his land , also inveigled into his hands the goods and prizes of them which were found drowned about his coasts , neither would suffer the ships wherein the two ladies were to enter within the port . 
 The tidings of this being brought to king Richard , he in great wrath gathering his galleys and ships together , boordeth the land of Cyprus , where he first in gentle wise signified ! to king Isakius , how he with his English men , coming as strangers to the supportation of the holy land , were by distress of weather driven upon his bounds , and therefore with all humble petition besought him in Gods behalf , and for reverence of the holy cross , to let go such prisoners of his as he had in captivity , and to restore again the goods of them that were drowned , which he detained in his hands , to be employed for the behoof of their souls . And this the king once , 328 
 twice , and thrice desired of the Emperor : but he proudly answering again , sent the king word , that he neither would let the captives go , nor render the goods of them which were drowned . 
 When king Richard herd this , how light the Emperor Isakius made of his so humble and honest petition , & how that nothing could be got without violent force , eftsoons gives commandment throughout all his host to put themselves in armour and follow him , to revenge the injuries received of that proud and cruel king of Cyprus , willing them to put their trust in God , and not to misdoubt but that the Lord would stand with them , and give them the victory . The Emperor in the mean time with his people stood warding the Sea coasts , where the English men should arrive , with swords , bills , and lances , and such other weapons as they had , setting boards , stools , and chests before them as a wall : few of them were harnessed , and for the most part all unexpert and unskilful in the feats of war . 
 Then king Richard with his soldiers issuing out of their ships , first set his bowmen before , who with their shot made a way for others to follow . The Englishmen thus winning the land upon them , so fiercely pressed upon the GryfFons , that after long fighting and many blows , at last the Emperor was put to flight , whom king Richard valiantly pursued , and slew many , and diverse he took alive , and had gone near also to take the Emperor , had not the night come on and parted the battle . And thus king Richard with much spoil , and great victory , returning to the port Town of Lymszem , which the Townsmen had left for fear , found there great abundance of corn , wine , oil and victuals . 
 The day after the victory got , Joanna the Kings sister , and Berengaria the maiden , entered the Porte and Towne of Lymszem , with 50. great ships , and 14. galliots : so that all the whole Navy there meeting together , were 254. tall ships , and above threescore galliots . Then Isakius the Emperor , seeing no way for 
 329 
 him to escape by Sea , the same night pitched his tents five miles ofF from the English army , swearing that the third day after , he would surely give battle to king Richard : but he preventing him before , suddenly the same morning before the day of battle should be , sets upon the tents of the Griffons early in the morning , they being unawares and a sleep , and made of them a great slaughter , insomuch that the Emperor was feign to run away naked , leaving his tents and pavilions to [ II i . 25. ] the Englishmen , full of horses and rich treasure , also with the Imperial standard , the lower part whereof with a costly streamer was covered , and wrought all with gold . 
 King Richard returning with victory and triumph to his sister and Berengaria , shortly after in the month of May next following , and the 12. day of the said month , married the said Berengaria daughter of Zanctius , king of Navarre , in the isle of Cyprus at Lymszem . 
 The king of Cyprus seeing himself overmatched , was driven at length to yield himself with conditions to give king Richard 20000. marks in gold for amends of such spoils as he had got of them that were drowned , also to restore all the captives again to the king : and furthermore , he in his own person to attend upon the king to the land of Jerusalem , in Gods service and his , with 400. horsemen , and 500. footmen : in pledge whereof he would give to his hands his castles , and his only daughter , and would hold his kingdom of him . 
 This done , and the Emperor swearing fidelity to king Richard before Guido king of Jerusalem , and the prince of Antioche ( who were come thither to king Richard a little before ) peace was taken , and Isakius committed to the ward of certain keepers . Notwithstanding shortly after he breaking from his keepers , was again at defiance with the King : whereupon king Richard besetting the Hand of Cyprus round about with ships and galleys , did in such sort prevail , that the 
 330 
 1191. subject's of the land were constrained to yield themselves to the King , and at last the daughter of the Emperor , and the Emperor himself , whom king Richard caused to be kept in fetters of gold and silver , and to be sent to the city of Tripolis . 
 These things thus done , and all set in order touching The Lord the possession of the He of Cyprus , the keeping whereof Chamberlaine he committed to Radulphe son of Godfrey Lord , 
 Chamberlaine , being then the first day or June upon the of 
 fift of the said month , king Richard departed from the Cyprus . He of Cyprus , with his ships and galleys towards the siege of Achon , and on the next morrow came to Tyrus , where by procurement of the French king he was restrained by the Citizens to enter . The next day after , which was the first day of June , crossing the seas , he met with a great carrack fraught with soldiers and men of war to the number of a thousand and five hundred , which pretending to be Frenchmen , and setting forth their flag with the French arms , were indeed Saracens , A great ship of secretly sent with wild fire and certain barrels of un - Saracens taken known serpents to the defence of the town of Achon , b%rbin& wb which king Richard at length perceiving , eftsoons set ’ upon them and so vanquished them , of whom the most were drowned and some taken alive : which being once known in the city of Achon , as it was a great discomfort to them , so it was a great help to the Christians for winning the city . 
 The next day after which was the seventh of June , King Richard king Richard came to Achon , which at that time had arrived at be long besieged by the Christians . After whose Achm-comming it was not long , but the Pagans within the city , seeing their walls to be undermined and towers overthrown , were driven by composition to escape with life and limb , to surrender the city to the two kings . 
 Another great help to the Christians in winning the city , was this . In the said city of Achon there was a secret Christian among the Saracens , who in time of the siege thereof used at sundry times to cast over the walls 
 331 
 The form of peace concluded between the Kings and the Princes of Achon . 
 [ II i . 26. ] 
 into the camp of the Christians , certain bills written in Hebrew , Greek , and Latin , wherein he disclosed to the Christians from time to time , the doings and counsels of the enemies , advertising them how and what way they should work , and what to beware , and always his letters began thus . In nomine Patris , 8c Filii , 8c Spiritus sancti Amen . By reason whereof the Christians were much advantaged in their proceedings : but this was a great heaviness unto them , that neither he would utter his name , nor when the city was god did they ever understand who he was . 
 To make of a long siege a short narration . Upon the twelfth day of July the year aforesaid , the Princes and Captains of the Pagans , upon agreement resorted to the tent of the Templaries to commune with the two kings touching peace , and giving up of their city : the form of which peace was thus . 
 1 That the Kings should have the city of Achon freely and fully delivered unto them , with all which was therein . 
 2 That 500. captives of the Christians should be restored to them , which were in Achon . 
 3 That the holy cross should be to them rendered , and a thousand Christian captives with two hundreth horsemen , whosoever they themselves would chosen out of all them which were in the power of the Saladine . 
 4 That they would give unto the Kings two hundreth thousand Bysants , so that they themselves should remain as pledges in the Kings hands , for the performance hereof , that if in fortie days , the aforesaid covenants were not accomplished , they should abide the Kings mercy touching life and limb . 
 These covenants being agreed upon , the Kings sent their soldiers and servants into the city , to take a hundreth of the richest 8c best of the city , to close them up in towers under strong keeping , 8c the residue they committed to be kept in houses and in streets , ministering unto them according to their necessities : to 
 332 
 whom notwithstanding this they premitted , that so many of them as would be baptised and receive the faith of Christ , should be free to go whither they would : whereupon many there were of the Pagans , which for fear of death pretended to be baptised , but afterwards so soon as they could , revolted again to the Sala-dine : for the which it was afterwards commanded by the Kings , that none of them should be baptised against their wills . 
 The thirteenth day of the said month of July , King Philip of France , and king Richard , after they had obtained the possession of Achon , divided between them all things therein contained as well the people as gold and silver , with all other furniture whatsoever was remaining in the city : who in dividing the spoil , were so good carvers to themselves that the Knights and Barons had but title to their share , whereupon they began to show themselves somewhat discontented , which being known of the kings , they sent them answer that their wills should be satisfied . 
 The twentieth day of July , king Richard speaking with the French King , desired him that they two with their armies , would bind themselves by other to remain there still in the land of Jerusalem the space of 3. years , for the winning and recovering again of those countries' : but he said he would swear no such other , and so the next day after king Richard with his wife and sister entered into the city of Achon , and there placed himself in the kings palace : The French king remaining in the houses of the Templaries , where he continued till the end of that month . 
 About the beginning of the month of August , Philip the French king after that he and King Richard had made agreement between Guido & Con-radus the Marks , about the kingdom of Jerusalem , went from Achon to Tyrus , notwithstanding king Richard & all the Princes of the Christian army with great intreaty desired him to tarry , showing what a 
 333 
 shame it were for him to come so far , and now to leave undone that for which he came , and on the 3. day of August departed from Tyrus , leaving the half part of the City of Achon , in the hands of the aforesaid Conradus Marques . 
 The French After his departure the Pagans refused to keep their kings shame - covenants made , who neither would restore the holy fMreturne Cross nor the money , nor their captives , sending word me ' to king Richard , that if he beheaded the pledges left with him at Achon , they would chop off the heads of such captives of the Christians , as were in their hands . 
 Shortly after this the Saladine sending great gifts to king Richard , requested the time limited for beheading of the captives to be prorogued , but the king refused to take his gifts , and to grant his request , whereupon the Saladine caused all the Christian captives within his possession forthwith to be beheaded , which was the 28. of August : which albeit king Richard understood , yet would not he prevent the time before limited for the execution of his prisoners , being the The captives 20. day of August : upon which day he caused thee of the Saracens prisoners of the Saracens openly in the sighed of ^Richard th6 Saladines army to lose their heads : the number 
 ' of whom came to two thousand and five hundreth , 
 save only that certain of the principal of them he reserved for purposes and considerations , especially to make exchange for the holy Cross , and certain other of the Christian captives . 
 After this king Richard purposed to besiege the City of Joppe , where by the way between Achon and Joppe , near to a town called Assur , Saladine with a great multitude of his Saracens came fiercely against the kings rearward , but through Gods merciful grace in the same battle , the kings warriors acquitted themselves so well , that the Saladine was put to flight , whom the tone against Christians pursued the space of 3. miles , & he lost the Saladine . that same day many of his Nobles & Captains , in 334 
 such sort ( as it was thought ) that the Saladine was not put to such confusion 40. years before , and but one Christian Captain called James Avernus in that conflict was overthrown . 
 From thence king Richard proceeding further went to Joppe , and then to Ascalon , where he found first the city of Joppe forsaken of the Saracens , who durst not abide the kings coming : Ascalon the Saladine threw down to the ground , & likewise forsook the whole land of Syria , through all which land the king had free passage without resistance : neither durst the Saracen Prince encounter after that with K. Richard . King Richard Of all which his atchevances the said K. Richard sent ™ f ™ esslmof his letters of certificate as well into England , as also y ’ to the Abbot of Clara valle in France , well hoping y‘ he God willing should be able to make his repair again to them by Easter next . 
 Many other famous acts were done in this voyage by these two Kings , and more should have be , had not they falling into discord dissevered themselves , by reason whereof Philip the French king returned home again within short space : who being returned again eftsoons invaded the country of Normandy , exciting also John the brother of king Richard , to take on him the kingdom of Englande in his brother's absence : who then made league upon the same with the French [ II i . 27. ] king , and did homage unto him , which was about the fourth year of king Richard . Who then being in 1193. Syria , and hearing thereof , made peace with the Turkes for three years : and not long after , king Richard the King Richard next spring following returned also , who in his return retumethfrom driven by distress of weather about the parts of Palartina . Histria , in a town called Synaca , was there taken by Lympold , Duke of the same country , and so sold to the Emperor for sixtie thousand Marks : who for no small joy thereof , writeth to Philip the French king , these letters here following . 
 [ The letter 
 335 
 The letter of the Emperor to Philip the French king , concerning the taking of King Richard . 
 HEnricus Dei gratia Romanorum Imperator , & semper Augustus , Dilecto & speciali amico suo , Philippo illustri Francorum Regi salutem , & sincerae dilectionis affectum . Quoniam Imperatoria Celsitudo non dubitat Regalem Magnificentiam tuam laetiorem effici , de universis quibus omnipotentia creatoris nostri nos ipsos , & Romanum Imperium honoraverit & exaltaverit , nobilitati tuae tenore praesentium declarare duximus , quod inimicus Imperii nostri , & turbator Regni tui Rex Angliae , quum esset in transeundo mare ad parts suas reversurus , accidit ut ventus rupta navi sua , in qua ipse erat , induceret eum in parts Histriae ad locum qui est inter Aquileiam , & Venetias . Ubi Rex , Dei permissidne passus naufragium cum paucis evasit . 
 Quidam itaque fidelis noster Comes , Maynardus de Grooxce , & populus regionis illius , audito quod in terra erat , & considerato diligentius , qualem nominatus Rex in terra promissionis proditionem & traditionem , & perditionis suae cumulum exercuerat , insecuti sunt , intendentes eum captivare . Ipso autem Rege in fugam converso , ceperunt de suis octo milites : Postmodum processit Rex ad Burgum in Archiepiscopatu Salsebur-gensi , qui vocatur Frisorum , ubi Fridericus de Betesow , Rege cum tribus tantum versus Austriam properante , noctu sex milites de suis coepit : Dilectus autem Consanguineus noster Lympoldus Dux Austrias , observata strata saepe , dictum Regem juxta Denam in villam viciniori in domo despecta captivavit . 
 Cum itaque in nostra nunc habeatur Potestate , & ipse semper tua molestavit , & turbationis operam praestiterit , ea quae praemisimus , nobilitati tuae insinuare curavimus : scientes ea dilectioni tuae bene placita existere , animo tuo uberrimam importare laetitiam . Datum apud Ritheoun-tum 5. Kalendas Janua . 
 King Richard being thus traitorously taken , and sold 336 
 to the Emperor by the Duke of Austridge for 60000. marks , was there kept in custody a year and 3. months . 
 In some stories it is affirmed , that King Richard returning out of Asia , came to Italy with prosperous wind , where he desired of the Pope to be absolved of and other made against his will and could not obtain it : and so setting out from thence towards England , passing by the Country of Conradus the Marques , whose death ( he being slain a little before ) was falsely imputed by the French king to the king of England , there traitorously was taken ( as is aforesaid ) by Limpoldus duke of Austridge . 
 Albeit in another story I find the matter more credibly set forth : which says thus . That king Richard slew the brother of this Limpoldus , playing with him at Chess in the French Kings Court : and Limpoldus taking his vantage , was more cruel against him and delivered him ( as is said ) to the Emperor . In whose custody he was detained during the time above mentioned , a year & 3 months . During which time of the kings endurance , the French king in the mean season stirred war in Normandie : and Earle John the Kings brother , made stir and invaded England , but the Barons and Bishops of the land mightily withstood him . 
 At length it was so agreed and concluded with the Emperor , that king Richard should be released for a hundreth and foure thousand pound : of which money part should remain to the Duke of Austridge , the rest should be the Emperors . The sum of which money was here gathered and made in England of chalices , crosses , shrines , candlesticks and other Church plate , also with public contribution of Friars , Abbots , and other subject's of the Realm : whereof part was presently paid , and for the residue remaining , hostages and pledges were taken , which was about the fift year of his reign : and then it was obtained of the Pope , that Priests might celebrate with Chalices of latten and tin . 
 At what time this aforesaid money was paid , and iv 337 v 
 A.D. 
 1193 - 
 The just judgement of God upon the Duke of Austria . 
 [ II i . 28. ] 
 Civitas Joppe . 
 the hostages given for the ransom of the King , I have and old historic which says , that the aforesaid Duke of Austridge was shortly after plagued by God , with 5. sundry plagues . 
 First , with the burning of his chief Towns . 
 2. With drowning of tenne thousand of his men in a flood happening no man can tell how . 
 3. By turning all the ears of his corn fields into worms . 
 4. By taking away almost all the Nobles of his land by death . 
 5. By breaking his own leg falling from his horse , which leg he was compelled to cut ofF with his own hands , and afterwards died of the same : who then at his death is reported to forgive K. Richard 50000. marks , and sent home the hostages that were with him . And further a certain book entitled Eulogium declareth , that the said Limpoldus duke of Ostrich fell in displeasure with the bishop of Room , and died excommunicate the next year after , Anno 1196. 
 But thus , as you have herd , Richard the King was ransomed & delivered from the covetous captivity of the Emperor , and returning home made and end of his voyage for Asia , which was both honourable to himself and to all Christian states , but to the Saracens the enemies of Christianitie , terrible and dishonourable . 
 This historic of King Richards voyage to Jerusalem is very excellently and largely written in Latin by Guilielmus Neobrigensis , and Roger Hoveden . 
 Epitaphium Richardi primi regis Anglorum apud fontem Ebraldi . 
 SCribitur hoc auro , rex auree , laus tua tota aurea , materiae convenient nota . 
 Laus tua prima fuit Siculi , Cyprus altera , Dromo tertia , Caruanna quarta , suprema * Jope . 
 Retrusi Siculi , Cyprus pessundata , Dromo mersus , Caruanna capta , retenta Jope . 
 . 