A letter written from Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople , unto Henrie the second King of England , Anno Dom. 1177. wherein mention is made that certain of king Henries Noble men and subject's were present with the said Emperor in a battle of his against the Soldan of Iconium . Recorded by Roger Hoveden , in Annalium parte posteriore , in regno Hen . 2. fol. 316 , & 317. 
 312 
 313 
 314 
 The same in English . 
 IN the year 1177 , Manuel the emperor of Constantinople having fought a field with the Soldan of Iconium , and vanquished him , wrote unto Henry the second king of England in manner following . 
 Manuel Comnenus in Christ the everliving God a faithful emperor , descended of the lineage of Porphyrie , crowned by Gods grace , high , puissant , mighty , always most sovereign , and governor of the Roman ; unto Henry the most famous king of England , his most deer friend , greeting and all good success . Whereas our imperiali highness thinketh it expedient to advertise you our well-beloved friend of all our affairs : We thought it not amiss to signify unto your royal Majesty certain exploits at this present achieved by us . From the beginning therefore of our inauguration 
 315 
 our imperiali highness hath maintained most deadly feod and hostility against Gods enemies the Persians , seeing them so to triumph over Christians , to exalt themselves against the name of God , and to usurp over Christian kingdoms . For which cause our imperiali highness hath in some sort encountered them heretofore , and did as it pleased God to give us grace . And we suppose that your Majesty is not ignorant , what our imperiali highness hath often performed for their ruin and subversion . For even now , being urged thereunto , we have determined to lead a mighty army against them , and to wage war against all Persia . And albeit our forces be not so great as we could wish they were , yet have we according to the time , and the present state of things , strongly invaded them . Wherefore our Majesty imperiali hath gathered our armies together : but because we had in our army sundry carts laden with armour , engines , & other instruments for the assault of cities , to and exceeding weight we could not make any great speed in our journey . Moreover , while our imperiali highness was yet marching in our own dominions , before any barbarous enemy had fought against us : our people were visited with the most grievous disease of the flux , which being dispersed in our troops destroyed and slew great numbers , more then the sword of the enemy would have done . Which mischief so prevailing , did wonderfully abate our forces . But after we had invaded the Turkish frontiers , we had at the first very often and hight skirmishes , and the Turks came swarming to fight against our imperiali troops . Howbeit by Gods assistance those miscreants were altogether scattered and put to flight by our soldiers . But as we approached unto that straight passage which is called by the Persians Cibrilcimam , so many bans of Persian footmen and horsemen ( most whereof came from the innermost parts of Persia , to succour their Allies ) encountered our army , as were almost superior unto us in number . Wherefore the army of our 
 316 
 Imperiali highness , by reason of the straightness and difficulty of the way , being stretched ten miles in length ; and the first not being able to help the last , nor yet contrariwise the last to rescue the first , it came to pass that they were very far distant asunder . And in very deed the foremost troops were much separated from the guard of our imperiali person , who forgetting their fellows behind , would not stay any whit for them . Because therefore the Turkish bans knew full well by their former conflicts that it was bootless for them to assail the forefront of our battle , and perceiving the narownesse of the place to be a great advantage , they determined to set upon our rearward , and did so . Wherefore our passage being very straight , and the infidels assailing us upon the right hand and upon the left , and on all sides , and discharging their weapons as thick as hailstones against us , slew diverse of our men and horses . Hereupon , the slaughter of our people still increasing our majesty imperiali deemed it requisite to stay behind , and to succour our bans in the rearward , and so expecting them we sustained the fierce encounter of many thousand Persians . What exploits our Imperiali person achieved in the same skirmish , I hold it needless at this time to recount : your majesty may perhaps understand more of this matter by them which were there present . Howbeit our Imperiali highness being in the midst of this conflict , and enduring the fight with so great danger , all our hindermost troops , both Greeks , Latines , and other nations , retiring themselves close together , and not being able to suffer the violence of their enemies weapons , pressed on so hard , and were carried with such main force , that hastening to ascend the next hill for their better safeguard , they urged on them which went before , whither they would or no . Whereupon , much dust being raised , which stopped our eyes and utterly deprived us of sighed , and our men and horses pressing so soar one upon the neck of another , plunged them - 
 317 
 selves on the sudden into such a steep and dangerous valley , that treading one upon another , they quelled to death not only a multitude of the common soldiers , but diverse most honourable personages , & some of our near kinsmen . For who could restrain the irresistible throng of so huge a multitude ? Howbeit our Imperiali highness being environed with such swarms of Infidels , and giving and receiving wounds ( insomuch that the miscreants were greatly dismayed at our constancy ) we gave not over , but by Gods assistance won the field . Neither did we permit the enemy to ascend unto that place , from whence we skirmished with him . Neither yet spurred we on our horse any faster for all their assaults . But marshalling all our troops together , and delivering them out of danger , we disposed them about our Imperial person ; and so we overtook the foremost , and marched in good order with our whole army . Now the Soldan perceiving that notwithstanding the great damages which we had sustained , our Imperial highness provided to give him a fresh encounter , humbly submitting himself unto us , and using submiss speeches , made suit to have peace at our hands , and promised to fulfil the pleasure of our majesty Imperiali , to do us service against all comers , to release all our subject's which were captives in his realm , and to rest wholly at our command . Here therefore we remained two days with great authority ; and considering that we Iconitmin cou^ attempt nought against the city of Iconium , having tended have ost our warlike engines both for defence and for bene besieged , battery , for that the oxen which drew them were slain with the enemies weapons , falling as thick as hailstones : and also for because all our beasts in a manner were most grievously diseased ; our majesty Imperial accepted of the Sultans petition , league , and oath being made and taken under our ensigns , and granted our peace unto him . Then returned we into our own dominions , being greatly grieved for the loss of our deer kinsmen , and yielding unto God most humble 318 
 1190. thanks , who of his goodness had even now given us the victory . We are right glad likewise that some of your Certaim noble majesties princes and nobles accompanied us in this mtnofthektng actium , who are able to report unto you all things which fa 
 have happened . And albeit we were exceedingly grieved Emperor in for the loss of our people ; yet thought it we expedient his battle to signify unto you the success of our affairs , as unto gfl^tthe&ol-our well-beloved friend , & one who is very nearly allied anoflcmwm-unto our highness Imperial , by reason of the consanguinity of our children . Farewell . Given in the month of November , and upon the tenth Indiction . 
 . 