The life and travails of Baldwinus Devonius , sometime Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 The same in English . 
 BAldwine a Devonshire man born in Exceter of mean parentage , was a very eloquent man , and exact Philosopher , and in those days very excellent in all kind of studies . He was first of all a Schoolmaster : afterwards he became and Archdeacon , very famous for his learning 339 
 & wisdom in all his doings . He was also a Cistercian Monk and Abbot of Foord Monastery , and the chief of all those that were of his order : he grew after this to be bishop of Worcester , and at last after the death of Archb. Richard he was promoted & made Archbishop of Canterbury , and Primate of all England . In the discharge of which place he being very vigilant , showed himself a worthy Pastor , sowing the seed of Gods word in every place as far forth as the iniquity of that time permitted . In his time king Richard with all endeavour prepared a Fleet and all things necessary for waging of war against the Infidels at Jerusalem , taking with him the standard and ensigns of the kingdom . This Baldwine eftsoons followed the king into Syria and Palestina , as one desirous to be partaker of his travails , pains , and perils in so holy a voyage . He was Archbishop of Canterburie almost sixe years : but having followed the king into 
 where he was also buried . 
 [ II i . 29. ] And annotation concerning the travails of the said Baldwine , taken out of Giraldus Cam-brensis , in his Itinerarium Cambrias , lib . 2. Cap. 14. Fol. 229. 
 340 
 Syria , in the year 1190. he died at Tyre , 
 The same in English . 
 THis Baldwine being the second successor unto Thomas Becket , after he had herd you wrong which was done to our Saviour , and the sign of the Cross by Saladine the Sultan of Egypt , taking upon him the Lords Character , he courageously performed his office of preaching in the obedience thereof , as well in far distant Countries as at home . And afterwards taking his journey and embarking himself at Marseils , having at length passed you Levant sea , he arrived safely in the Haven of Tyrus , and from thence went over to Achon unto our army , besieging the Town , and yet ( as it were ) besieged it self : where finding many of our Countrymen , and almost all men remaining in wonderful pensiveness and despair , through the withdrawing of the Princes , some of them tired with long expectation , others grievously afflicted with hunger and poverty , and others distempered with the heat of the weather , being ready happily to end his days in the Holy land , embracing every one according to his ability in the bound of love , he aided them at his costs and charges , and them with his words and good exam 
 strengthened of life . 
 . 