The voyage of William | | Longespee Earl of II Or , Sarisburie into Asia , in the year 1248 , and sword ' in the 32 year of the reign of Henry the third , king of England . 
 Ewis the French king being recovered of his sickness which he fell into , in the year 1234 , vowed thereupon for a free will sacrifice to God , that he ( if the Council of his realm would suffer him ) would in his own person visit the Holy land : which matter was opened and 
 debated in the Parliament of France held in the year 1247. Where at length it was concluded , that the king according to his vow should take his journey into Asia , and the time thereof was also prefixed , which should be after the feast of S. John Baptist the next year ensuing . 
 At which time William Longespee a worthy warrior , with the bishop of Worcester and certain other great men in the Realm of England ( moved with the example of the Frenchmen ) prepared themselves likewise to the same journey . 
 It fell out in this enterprise , that about the beginning of October , the French king assaulted and took Damiata , being the principali fort or hold of the iv 353 z 
 Saracens in all Egypt , Anno 1249. and having fortified the City with and able garrison left with the Duke of Burgundie , he removed his tents from thence to go Eastward . In whose army followed William Longespee , accompanied with a piked number of English warriors retaining unto him . But such was the disdain of the Frenchmen against this William Longespee and the Englishmen that they could not abide them , but flouted them after and opprobrious manner with English tails , insomuch that the French king himself had much ado to keep peace between them . 
 The originali cause of this grudge between them began thus . There was not far from Alexandria in Egypt a strong fort or castle replenished with great A fort wone by Ladies and rich treasure of the Saracens : which hold the English - chanced the said William Longespee with his com-men‘ pany of English soldiers to get , more by politic dexterity then by open force of arms , wherewith he & his retinue were greatly enriched . When the Frenchmen had knowledge hereof ( they not being made privy hereto ) began to conceive and heart burning against the English soldiers , & could not speak well of them after that . 
 It happened again not long after , that the said William had intelligence of a company of rich merchant's among the Saracens going to a certain Fair about the parts of Alexandria , having their camels , asses and mules , richly laden with silks , precious jewels , spices , gold & silver , with cart loads of other wares , beside victuali and other furniture , whereof the soldiers then A rich booty stood in great need : he having secret knowledge “ the English - hereof ’ gathered all the power of Englishmen unto him men . that he could , and so by night falling upon the mere - 
 chants , some he slew with their guides and conductors , some he took , soihe he put to flight : the carts with the drivers , and with the oxen , camels , asses and mules , with the whole carriage and victuals he took & brought with him , losing in all the skirmish but one soldier , 354 
 and eight of his servitors : of whom notwithstanding some he brought home wounded to be cured . 
 This being known in the Camp , forth came the Frenchmen which all this while loitered in their pavilions , and meeting this carriage by the way , took all the foresaid pray whole to themselves , rating the said injury of William and the Englishmen for adventuring and issuing out of the Camp without leave or knowledge ' 
 of their general , contrary to the discipline of war . 
 William said again he had done nothing but he would answer to it , whose purpose was to have the spoil divided to the behoof of the whole army . 
 When this would not serve , he being soar grieved in his mind so cowardly to be spoiled of that which he so adventurously had travailed for , went to the King to complain : But when no reason nor complaint would serve by reason of the proud Earl of Artoys the Kings brother , which upon spite and disdain stood against him , he bidding the King farewell said he would serve him no longer : and so William de Longespee with the LonS-rest of his company breaking from the French host went to Achon . Upon whose departure the earl or Artoys king . said , Now is the army of French men well rid of these tailed people , which words spoken in great despite were ill taken of many good men that herd them . 
 But not long after , when the keeper of Cayro & Babylonia , bearing a good mind to the Christian religion , and being offended also with the Sultan , promised to deliver the same to the French king , instructing him what course was best for him to take to accomplish it , the king hereupon in all haste sent for William Longespee , promising him a full redress of all his injuries before received : who at the kings request came to him again , and so joined with the French power . 
 After this , it happened that the French king passing with his army towards Cayro aforesaid , came to the great river Nilus , on the further part whereof the Soldan had pitched himself to withstand his coming over : 
 355 
 there was at this time a Saracen lately converted to Christ , serving the earl Robert the French kings brother , who told him of the absence of the Soldan from his tents , and of a shallow ford in the river where they might easily pass over . Whereupon the said earl Robert & the Master of the Temple with a great power , esteemed to the third part of the army issued over the river , after whom followed W. Longspee with his band of English soldiers . These being joined together on the other side of the water , encountered the same day with the Saracens remaining in the tents & put them to the worst . Which victory being got , the French earl surprised with pride and triumph , as though he had conquered the whole earth , [ II i , 35. ] would needs forward , dividing himself from the main host , thinking to win the spurs alone . To whom certain sage men of the Temple , giving him contrary counsel , advised him not to do so , but rather to return and take their whole company with them , and so should they be more sure against all deceits and dangers , which might be laid privily for them . The manner of that people ( they said ) they better knew , and had more experience thereof then he : alleging moreover their wearied bodies , their tired horses , their famished soldiers , and the insufficiency also of their number , which was not able to withstand the multitude of the enemies , especially at this present brunt , in which the adversaries did well see the whole state of their dominion now to consist either in winning all or losing all . 
 Which when the proud earl did hear , being inflated with no less arrogance then ignorance , with opprobrious taunts reviled them , calling them cowardly dastards , & betrayers of the whole country , objecting unto them the common report of many , which said , that the land of the holy cross might soon be won to Christendom , were it not for rebellious Templaries , with the Hospitalaries , and their followers . 
 To these contumelious rebukes , when the master of 356 
 the Temple answered again for him and his fellows , bidding him display his ensign when he would , and where he durst , they were as ready to follow him , as he to go before them . Then began William de Longespe the worthy knight to speak , desiring the earl to give ear to those men of experience , who had better knowledge of those countries and people then had he , commending also their counsel to be discreet and wholesome , and so turning to the master of the Temple , began with gentle words to mitigate him likewise . The knight had not half ended his talk , when the Earl taking his words out of his mouth , began to fume and swear , crying out of those cowardly Englishmen with tails : What a pure army ( said he ) should we have here , if these tails and tailed people were purged from it , with other like words of villainy , and much disdain : whereunto the English knight answering again , well , Earl Robert ( said he ) wheresoever you dare set your foot , my step shall go as far as yours , and ( as I believe ) we go this day where you shall not dare to come near the tail of my horse , as in deed in the event it proved true : for Earl Robert would needs set forward , weening to get all the glory to himself before the coming of the host , and first invaded a little village or castle , which was not far ofF , called Mansor . The country Boors and Pagans in the villages , seeing the Christians coming , ran out with such a main cry and shout , that it came to the Sultans hearing , who was nearer then our men did think . In the mean time , the Christians invading and entering into the munition incircumspectly , were pelted and pashed with stones by them which stood above , whereby a great number of our men were lost , and the army soar maimed , and almost in despair . 
 Then immediately upon the same , comes the Sol-dan with all his main power , which seeing the Christian army to be divided , and the brother separated from the brother , had that which he long wished for , and so 357 
 The worthy answer of WilliamLong-spe to Earl Robert . 
 enclosing them round about , that none should escape , had with them a cruel fight . 
 Then the earl began to repent him of his heady rashness , but it was too late , who then seeing William the English knight doughtily fighting in the chief brunt The cowardly of the enemies , cried unto him most cowardly to fly , fi^^Eark seeing God ( says he ) does fight against us : To whom a ert ' the Knight answering again , God forbid ( say he ) that my father's son should run away from the face of a Saracen . The Earl then turning his horse , fled away , thinking to avoid by the swiftness of his horse , and so taking the river Thafnis , oppressed with harness , was there sunken and drowned . 
 Thus the Earl being gone , the Frenchmen began to despair and scatter . Then William de Longespe bearing all the force of the enemies , stood against them as long as he could , wounding and slaying many a Saracen , till at length his horse being killed , and his legs The valiant maimed , he could no longer stand , who yet notwith-ende of Will - stanj ; ng . as he was Jowne mangled their feet and legs , and did the Saracens much sorrow , till at last after many blows and wounds , being stoned of the Saracens , he yielded his life . And after the death of him , the Saracens setting upon the residue of the army , whom they had compassed on every side , devoured and destroyed them all , insomuch that scarce one man remained alive , saving two Templaries , one Hospitaler , and one poor rascal soldier , which brought tidings , hereof to the King . 
 And thus by the imprudent and foolish hardiness of that French Earl , the Frenchmen were discomfited , and that valiant English Knight overmatched , to the grief of all Christian people , the glory of the Saracens , and the utter destruction and ruin of the whole French army , as afterwards it appeared . 
 . 