The Voyage of Prince Edward the son of king Henry the third into Asia in the year 1270. 
 Bout the year of our Lord , 1267. Octobonus the Popes Legate being in England , prince Edward the son of king Henry , and diverse other Noble men of England took upon them the cross upon S. John Baptists day , by the said Legates hands at Northhampton , to the relief of the 
 Holy land , and the subversion of the enemies of the cross of Christ . For which purpose , and for the better furnishing of the prince towards the journey , there was granted him a subsidy throughout all the realm , and in the month of May , in the year of our Lord 1270. he began to set forward . 
 At Michaelmas following he with his company came to Eguemortes , which is from Marsilia eight leagues Westward , and there taking ship again ( having a merry and prosperous wind ) within ten days arrived at Tunez , where he was with great joy welcomed , and entertained of the Christian princes that there were to this purpose assembled , as of Philip the French King , whose father Lodovicus died a little before , of Carolus the king of Sicilia , and the two kings of Navarre and Arragon , and as this lord Edward came thither for his father the king of England , thither came also Henry the son of the king of Almain for his father , who at his return from the voyage was slain in a chapel at Viterbium . 
 When prince Edward demanded of these kings and princes what was to be done , they answered him again , and said , the prince of this city and the province adjoining to the same hath be accustomed to pay tribute unto the king of Sicily every year : and now for that the same hath be for the space of seven years unpaid and more , therefore we thought good to make invasion upon him . But the king knowing 359 
 the same tribute to be but justly demanded , had now according to our own desire satisfied for the time past , and also paid his tribute before hand . 
 Then said he , My Lords , what is this to the purpose ? are we not here all assembled , & have taken upon us the Lords Character to fight against the infidels & enemies of Christ ? What mean you then to conclude a peace with them ? God forbid we should do so , for now the land is plain and hard , so that we may approach to you holy city Jerusalem . Then said they , now have we made a league with them , neither is it lawful for us to break the same . But let us return again to Sicilia , and when the winter is past we may well take shipping to Aera . But this counsel nothing at all liked him , neither did he show himself well pleased therewith : but after he had made them a princely banquet , he went into his closet or privy chamber from among them , neither would be partaker of any of that wicked money which they had taken . They notwithstanding continuing their purpose , at the next merry wind took shipping , and for want of ships left 200. of their men a shore , crying out , and piteous lamenting for the peril and hazard of death that they were in : wherewith prince Edward being somewhat moved to compassion , came back again to the land , and received and stowed them in his own ships , being the last that went aboard . 
 Within seven days after , they arrived in the kingdom of Sicilia , over against the City Trapes , casting their anchors a league from thence within the sea , for that their ships were of great burden , and thoroughly fraught : and from the haven of the city they sent out barges and boats to receive and bring such of the Nobility to land as would , but their horses for the most part , and all their armour they kept still within board . 
 At length towards the evening the sea began to be rough , & increased to a great tempest and a mighty : insomuch that their ships were beaten one against another's sides , and drowned there was of them at that 360 
 tempest lying at anchor more then 120. with all their armour and munition , with innumerable souls beside , and that wicked money also which they had taken before , likewise perished , and was lost . 
 But the tempest hurt not so much as one ship of prince Edwards , who had in number 13. nor yet had one man lost thereby , for that ( as it may be presupposed ) he consented not to the wicked counsel of the rest . 
 When in the morning the princes and kings came to the sea side , and saw all their ships drowned , and saw their men and horses in great number cast upon the land drowned , they had full heavy hearts , as well they might , for of all their ships and mariners , which were in number 1500. beside the common soldiers , there was no more saved then the mariners of one only ship , and they in this wise . 
 There was in that ship a good & wise Matron , a Countess or and Earls wife , who perceiving the tempest to grow , & fearing her self , called to her the M. of the ship , & asked him whither in attempting to the shore it were not possible to save themselves : he answered , that to save the ship it was impossible : howbeit the men [ II i . 37 - ] that were therein by Gods help he doubted not . Then said the cOUNTESS , for the ship force no whit , save the souls therein , and have to thee double the valve of the ship : who immediately hoisting the sails with all force , ran the ship aground so never the shore as was possible , so that with the vehemency of the weather & force he came withal , he braced the ship and saved all that was within the same , as he had showed , and said before . 
 Then the kings and princes ( altering their purpose after this so great a shipwreck ) returned home again every one unto their own lands : only Edward the son of the king of England , remained behind with his men and ships , which the Lord had saved and preserved . 
 Then prince Edward renovating his purpose , took shipping again , and within fifteene days after Easter 361 
 The arrival of arrived he at Aera , and went aland , taking with him a prince Ed - thousand of the best soldiers and most expert , and war at ci a. tarjej there a whole month , refreshing both his men and horses , and that in this space he might learn and know the secrets of the land . After this he took with 
 Nazareth taken by the prince . 
 A victory against the Saracens , wherein iooo of them were slain . 
 The princes of Cyprus acknowledge obedience to the kings of England . 
 him sixe or seven thousand soldiers , and marched forward twenty miles from Aera , and took Nazareth , and those that he found there he slew , and afterwards returned again to Aera . But their enemies following after them , thinking to have set upon them at some strait or other advantage , were espied by the prince , and returning again upon them gave a charge , and slew many of them , and the rest they put to flight . 
 After this , about Midsummer , when the prince had understanding that the Saracens began to gather at Cakow which was forty miles from Aera , he marching thither , set upon them very early in the morning , and slew of them more then a thousand , the rest he put to flight , and took rich spoils , marching forward till they came to a castle nam Castrum peregrinorum , situate upon the sea coast , and tarried there that night , and the next day they returned again towards Aera . 
 In the mean season the king of Jerusalem sent unto the noble men of Cyprus , desiring them to come with speed to aid the Christians , but they would not come , saying they would keep their own land , and go no further . Then prince Edward sent unto them , desiring that at his request they would come and join in aid with him : who immediady thereupon came unto him with great preparation & furniture for the wars , saying , that at his commandment they were bound to do no less , for that his predecessors were sometime the governors of that their land , and that they ought always to show their fidelity to the kings of England . 
 Then the Christians being herewith animated , made a third voyage or road , and came as far as the fort called Vincula sancti Petri , and to S. Georgius , and when they had slave certain there , not finding any to make 362 
 resistance against them , they retired again from whence they came : when thus the fame of prince Edward grew among his enemies , and that they began to stand in doubt of him , they devised among themselves how by some policy they might circumvent him , and betray him . Whereupon the prince and admiral of Joppa sent unto him , feigning himself under great deceit willing to become a Christian , and that he would draw with him a great number beside , so that they might be honorably entertained and used of the Christians . This talk pleased the prince well , and persuaded him to finish the thing he had so well begun by writing again , who also by the same messenger sent and wrote back unto him diverse times about the same matter , whereby no mistrust should spring . 
 This messenger ( say mine author ) was one ex caute nutritis , one of the stony hearted , that neither feared God nor dreaded death . 
 The fift time when this messenger came , and was of the princes servants searched according to the manner and custom what weapon and armour he had about him , as also his purse , that not so much as a knife could be seen about him , he was had up into the princes chamber , and after his reverence done , he pulled out certain letters , which he delivered the prince from his lord , as he had done others before . This was about eight days after Whitsuntide , upon a Tuesday , somewhat before night , at which time the prince was laid upon his bed bore headed , in his jerkin , for the great heat and intemperature of the weather . 
 When the prince had read the letters , it appeared by them , that upon the Saturday next following , his lord would be there ready to accomplish all that he had written and promised . The report of these news by the prince to the Standers by , liked them well , who drew somewhat back to consult thereof among themselves . In the mean time , the messenger kneeling , and making his obeisance to the prince ( questioning further with him ) 363 
 Prince Edward traitorously wounded . 
 put his hand to his belt , as though he would have pulled out some secret letters , and suddenly he pulled out and envenomed knife , thinking to have stroken the prince into the belly therewith as he lay : but the prince lifting up his hand to defend the blow , was stricken a great wound into the arm , and being about to fetch another stroke at him , the prince again with his foot took him such a blow , that he felled him to the ground : with that the prince gate him by the hand , and with such violence wrasted the knife from him , that he hurt himself therewith on the forehead , and immediately thrust the same into the belly of the messenger and striker , and slew him . 
 The princes servants being in the next chamber not far off , hearing the bustling , came with great haste running in , and finding the messenger lying dead in the floor , one of them took up a stool , and beatrice out his brains : whereat the prince was wroth for that he stroke a dead man , and one that was killed before . 
 But the rumour of this accident , as it was strange , so it went soon throughout all the Court , and from thence among the common people , for which they were very heavy , and greatly discouraged . To him came also the Captain of the Temple , and brought him a costly and precious drink against poison , lest the venom of the knife should penetrate the lively blood , and in blaming wise said unto him : did I not tell your Grace before of the deceit and subtlety of this people ? Notwithstanding , said he , let your Grace take a good heart , you shall not die of this wound , my life for yours . But straight way the Surgeons and Physicians were sent for , and the prince was dressed , and within few days after , the wound began to putrify , and the flesh to look dead and black : whereupon they that were about the prince began to mutter among themselves , and were very sad and heavy . 
 Which thing he himself perceiving , said unto them : why mutter you thus among your selves ? what see 364 
 1270. you in me , can I not be healed ? tell me the truth , be you not afraid . Whereupon one said unto him , and it like your Grace you may be healed , we mistrust not , but yet it will be very painful for you to suffer . May suffering ( said he again ) restore health ? yea say the other , on pain of losing my head . Then said the prince , I commit my self unto you , do with me what you think good . 
 Then said one of the Physicians , is there any of your Nobles in whom your Grace reposes special trust ? to whom the prince answered Yea , naming certain of the Noble men that stood about him . Then said the Physician to the two , whom the prince first nam , the Lord Edmund , and the lord John Voisie , And do This lord you also faithfully love your Lord and Prince ? Who Edmund was answered both , Yea undoubtedly . Then say he , take you away this gentlewoman and lady ( meaning his wife ) ' and let her not see her lord and husband , till such time as I will you thereunto . Whereupon they took her from the princes presence , crying out , and wringing her hands . Then said they unto her , Be you contented good Lady & Madame , it is better that one woman should weep a little while , then that all the realm of England should weep a great season . 
 Then on the morrow they cut out all the dead and invenimed flesh out of the princes arm , and threw it from them , and said unto him : how cheereth your Grace , we promise you within these fifteene days you shall show your self abroad ( if God permit ) upon your horseback , whole and well as ever you were . And according to the promise he made the prince , it came to pass , to the no little comfort and admiration of all his subject's . 
 When the great Sultan herd hereof , and that the prince was yet alive , he could scarcely believe the same , and sending unto him three of his Nobles and Princes , excused himself by them , calling his God to witness that the same was done neither by him nor his 365 
 consent . Which princes and messengers standing aloof off from the kings son , worshipping him , fell flat upon the ground : you ( said the prince ) do reverence me , but yet you love me not . But they understood him not , because he spoke in English unto them , speaking by and Interpreter : nevertheless he honourably entertained them , and sent them away in peace . 
 Thus when prince Edward had been eighteene months in Aera , he took shipping about the Assumption of our Lady , as we call it , returning homeward , and after seven weeks he arrived in Sicilia at Trapes , and from thence travailed thorough the mids of Apulia , till he came to Room , where he was of the Pope honorably entertained . 
 From thence he came into France , whose fame and noble prowess was there much bruited among the common people , and envied of the Nobility , especially of the earl of Chalons , who thought to have entrapped him and his company , as may appear in the story : but Prince Edward continued forth his journey to Paris , and was there of the French king honourably entertained : and after certain days he went thence into Gascoine , where he tarried till that he herd of the death of the king his father , at which time he came home , and was crowned king of England , in the year of our Lord 1274. 
 . 