372 
 374 
 375 
 376 
 377 
 378 
 380 
 A.D. 
 1330 - 
 iv 385 2 B 
 Java . 
 386 
 387 
 389 
 390 
 391 
 393 
 395 
 Pythagorica 
 Chilenso . 
 Thalay . 
 Kakam . 
 Caramoran . 
 Cambalec . 
 397 
 398 
 400 
 iv 401 2 c 
 402 
 403 
 405 
 406 
 Here begins the journal of Frier Odoricus , one of the order of the Minorites , concerning strange things which he saw among the Tartars of the East . 
 Pera. 
 [ II i . 5+ - ] 
 Lbeit many and sundry things are reported by diverse authors concerning the fashions and conditions of this world : notwithstanding I friar Odoricus of Friuli , de portu Vahonis being desirous to travel unto the foreign and remote nations of infidels , saw and herd great and mira - 
 culous things , which I am able truly to avouch . First of all therefore sailing from Pera by Constantinople , I arrived at Trapesunda . This place is right commodi-ously situate , as being and haven for the Persians and Medes , and other countries beyond the sea . In this land I beheld with great delight a very strange spectacle , namely a certain man leading about with him more then foure thousande partridges . The man himself walked upon the ground , and the partridges flew in the air , which he led unto a certain castle called Zavena , being three days journey distant from Trapesunda . The said partridges were so tame , that when the man was desirous to lie down and rest , they 408 
 would all come flocking about him like chickens . And so he led them unto Trapesunda , and unto the palace of the Emperor , who took as many of them as he pleased , and the rest the said man carried unto the place from whence he came . In this city lies the body of Athanasius , upon the gate of the city . And then I passed on further unto Armenia major , to a The city of certain city called Azaron , which had be very rich Azaronin Ar-in old time , but now the Tartars have almost laid maJor-it waste . In the said city there was abundance of bred and flesh , and of all other victuals except wine and fruits . This city also is very cold , and is reported to be higher situated , then any other city in the world . It hath most wholesome and sweet waters about it : for the veins of the said waters seem to spring and flow from the mighty river of Euphrates , which is but a days journey from the said city . 
 Also , the said city stands directly in the way to Tauris . And I passed on unto a certain mountain called Sobissacalo . In the foresaid country there is the very Sobissacalo . same mountain whereupon the Ark of Noah rested : unto the which I would willingly have ascended , if my company would have stayed for me . Howbeit the people of that country report , that no man could ever ascend the said mountain , because ( say they ) it pleases not the highest God . And I travailed on further unto 
 Tauris that great and royal city , which was in old time Tauris a city called Susis . This city is accounted for traffic of °f^ersta-marchandize the chief city of the world : for there is no kind of victuals , nor any thing else belonging unto merchandise , which is not to be had there in great abundance . This city stands very commodiously : for unto it all the nations of the whole world in a manner may resort for traffic . Concerning the said city , the Christians in those parts are of opinion , that the Persian Emperor receives more tribute out of it , then the King of France out of all his dominions . Near unto the said city there is a salt-hill yielding salt unto the city : and of 
 409 
 that salt each man may take what pleases him , not paying ought to any man therefore . In this city many Christians of all nations do inhabit , over whom the Saracens bear rule in all things . Then I traveled on further unto a Or , Sum / tania . city called * Soldania , wherein the Persian Emperor lies all Summer time : but in winter he takes his progress The Caspian unto another city standing upon the Sea called * Baku . sea - Also the foresaid city is very great and cold , having 
 good and wholesome waters therein , unto the which also store of merchandise is brought . Moreover I traveled with a certain company of Caravans towards upper India : and in the way , after many days journey , I came unto Or , Cassibin . the city of the three wise men called * Cassan , which is a noble and renowned city , saving that the Tartars have destroyed a great part thereof , and it aboundeth with bred , wine , and many other commodities . From this city unto Jerusalem ( whither the three foresaid wisemen were miraculously led ) it is fiftie days journey . There be many wonders in this city also , which , for brevities sake , I omit . From thence I departed unto a certain Geste . city called * Geste , whence the Sea of Sand is distant , one days journey , which is a most wonderful and dangerous thing . In this city there is abundance of all kinds of victuals , and especially of figs , reisins , and grapes ; more ( as I suppose ) then in any part of the whole world beside . This is one of the three principali cities in all the Persian Empire . Of this city the Saracens report , that no Christian can by any means live therein above a year . Then passing many days journey on forward , I Como . came unto a certain city called * Comum , which was and huge and mighty city in old time , containing well nigh fiftie miles in circuit , and hath done in times passed great damage unto the Romans . In it there are stately palaces altogether destitute of inhabitants , notwithstanding it aboundeth with great store of victuals . From hence traveling through many countries' , at length I came unto the land of Job nam Hus , which is rail of all kind of victuals , and very pleasantly situated . There - 
 410 
 about are certain mountains having good pastures for cattle upon them . Here also Manna is found in great abundance . Foure partridges are here sold for less then a groat . In this country there are most comely old men . Here also the men spin and carded , and not the women . This land bordereth upon the North part of Chaldasa . 
 Of the manners of the Chaldasans , and of India . 
 FRom thence I traveled into Chaldaea , which is a great kingdom , and 1 passed by the tower of Babel . This tw °f region hath a language peculiar unto it self , and there are beautiful men , and deformed women . The men of the same country use to have their hair kempt , and trimmed like unto our women : and they wear golden turbans upon their heads richly set with pearl , and precious stones . The women are clad in a course smock only reaching to their knees , and having long sleeves hanging down to the ground . And they go barefooted , wearing breeches which reach to the ground also . They wear no attire upon their heads , but their hair hangs disheaveled about their ears : and there be many [ II i . $5. ] other strange things also . From thence I came into the lower India , which the Tartars overran and wasted . And in this country the people eat dates for the most part , whereof 42. li . are there sold for less then a groat . I passed further also many days journey unto the Ocean sea , and the first land where I arrived , is called * Ormes , Ormus . being well fortified , and having great store of merchandise and treasure therein . Such and so extreme is the heat in that country , that the privities of men come out of their bodies and hang down even unto their mid-legs . And therefore the inhabitants of the same place , to preserve their own lives , do make a certain ointment , and anointing their privy members therewith , do lap them up in certain bags fastened unto their bodies , for otherwise they must needs die . Here also they use a kind of Bark or ship called Jase being compact together only 
 411 
 with hemp . And I went on board into one of them , wherein I could not find any iron at all , and in the Thana , where - space of 28. days I arrived at the city of Thana , wherein of Frederick foure of our Friars were martyred for the faith of Christ . 
 etfl This country is well situate , having abundance of bred and wine , and of other victuals therein . T. his kingaome in old time was very large and under the dominion of king Porus , who fought a great battle with Alexander the great . The people of this country are idolaters worshipping fire , serpents and trees . And over all this land the Saracens do bear rule , who took it by main force , and they themselves are in subjection unto king Daldilus . There be diverse kinds of beasts , as namely black lyons in great abundance , and apes also , and monkeis , and bats as big as our doves . Also there are mice as big as our country dogs , and therefore they are hunted with dogs , because cats are not able to encounter them . Moreover , in the same country every man hath a bundle of great boughs standing in a waterpot before his door , which bundle is as great as a pillar , and it will not wither , so long as water is applied thereunto : with many other novelties and strange things , the relation whereof would breed great delight . 
 How peper is had : and where it grows . 
 MOreover , that it may be manifest how peper is had , it is to be understood that it grows in a certain Malabar . kingdom whereat I my self arrived , being called * Minibar , and it is not so plentiful in any other part of the world as it is there . For the wood wherein it grows containeth in circuit 18. days journey . And in the said Or , Alan - wood or forest there are two cities , one called * Flan - 
 dnna . drina , and the other Cyncilim . In Flandrina both Jewes 
 and Christians do inhabit , between whom there is often contention and war : howbeit the Christians overcome the Jewes at all times . In the foresaid wood pepper is had after this manner : first it grows in leaves like unto potherbs , which they plant near unto great trees 
 412 
 as we do our vines , and they bring forth pepper in clusters , as our vines do yield grapes , but being ripe , they are of a green colour , and are gathered as we gather grapes , and then the grains are laid in the Sun to be dried , and being dried are put into earthen vessels : and thus is pepper made and kept . Now , in the same wood there be niany rivers , wherein are great store of Crocodiles , and of other serpents , which the inhabitants thereabouts do burn up with straw and with other dry fuel , and so they go to gather their pepper without danger . At the South end of the said forest stands the city of Polumbrum , which aboundeth with merchandise of all Polumbrum . kinds . All the inhabitants of that country do worship a living ox , as their god , whom they put to labour for sixe years , and in the seventh year they cause him to rest from all his work , placing him in a solemn and public place , and calling him and holy beast . Moreover they use this foolish ceremony : Every morning they take two basons , either of silver , or of gold , and with one they receive the urine of the ox , and with the other his dung . 
 With the urine they wash their face , their eyes , and all their five senses . Of the dung they put into both their eyes , then they anoint the bals of their cheeks therewith , and thirdly their breast : and then they say that they are sanctified for all that day ; And as the people do , even so do their King and Queen . This people worshippeth also a dead idol , which , from the navel upward , resembles a man , and from the navel downward and ox . The very same Idol delivers oracles unto them , and sometime requires the blood of fourtie virgins for his hire . And therefore the men of that region do consecrate their daughters and their sons unto their idols , even as Christians do their children unto some Religion or Saint in heaven . Likewise they sacrifice their sons and their daughters , and so , much people is put to death before the said Idol by reason of that accursed ceremony . Also , many other heinous and abominable villainies doth that brutish beastly people commit : and I saw many 
 413 
 more strange things among them which I mean not here to insert . Another most vile custom the foresaid The burning nation doth retai ne : for when any man dieth they burn of their dead , dead corpse to ashes : and if his wife surviveth him , 
 her they burn quick , because ( say they ) she shall accompany her husband in his tilth and husbandry , when he is come into a new world . Howbeit the said wife having children by her husband , may if she will , remain [ II i . 56. ] still alive with them , without shame or reproach : notwithstanding , for the most part , they all of them make choice to be burned wl their husbands . Now , albeit the wife dieth before her husband , that law binds not the husband to any such inconvenience , but he may marry another wife also . Likewise , you said nation hath another strange custom , in that their women drink wine , but their men do not . Also the women have the lids & brows of their eyes & beards shaved , but the men have not : with many other base & filthy fashions which the said women do use contrary to the nature of their sex . From that kingdom I traveled 10. days journey unto Mobar , or another kingdom called Mobar , which containeth many Maltapor . cities . Within a certain church of the same country , the body of S. Thomas the Apostle is interred , the very same church being full of idols : and in 15. houses round about the said Church , there dwell certain priests who are Nestorians , that is to say , false , and bad Christians , and schismatics . 
 Of a strange and uncouth idol : and of certain customs and ceremonies . 
 IN the said kingdom of Mobar there is a wonderful strange idol , being made after the shape and resemblance of a man , as big as the image of our Christopher , & consisting all of most pure and glittering gold . And about the neck thereof hangs a silk ribbon , full of most rich & precious stones , some one of which is of more valve then a whole kingdom . The house of this idol is all of beaten gold , namely the roof , the pave - 
 414 
 meant , and the sieling of the wall within and without . Unto this idol the Indians go on pilgrimage , as we do unto S. Peter . Some go with halters about their necks , some with their hands bound behind them , some other with knives sticking on their arms or legs : and if after their peregrination , the flesh of their wounded arm festereth or corrupteth , they esteem that limb to be holy , & think that their God is well pleased with them . Near unto the temple of that idol is a lake made by the hands of men in and open & common place , whereinto the pilgrimss cast gold , silver , & precious stones , for the honour of the idol and the repairing of his temple . And therefore when any thing is to be adorned or mended , they go unto this lake taking up the treasure which was cast in . Moreover at every yearly feast of the making or repairing of the said idol , the king and queen , with the whole multitude of the people , & all the pilgrimss assemble themselves , & placing the said idol in a most stately & rich chariot , they carry him out of their temple with songs , & with all kind of musical harmonic , & a great company of virgins go procession-wise two and two in a rank singing before him . Many pilgrim's also put themselves under the chariot wheels , to the end that their false god may go over them : and all they over whom the chariot runneth , are crushed in pieces , & divided asunder in the midst , and slain right out . Yea , & in doing this , they think themselves to die most holily & securely , in the service of their god . And by this means every year , there die under the said filthy idol , more then 500. persons , whose carcases are burned , and their ashes are kept for relics , because they died in that sort for their god . Moreover they have another detestable ceremony . For when any man offers to die in the service of his false god , his parents , & all his friends assemble themselves together with a consort of musicians , making him a great & solemn feast : which feast being ended , they hang 5. sharp knives about his neck carrying him before the idol , & so soon as he is come thither , he 
 415 
 takes one of his knives crying with a loud voice , For the worship of my god do I cut this my flesh , and then he casts the morsel which is cut , at the face of his idol : but at the very last wound wherewith he murdereth himself , he utterth these words : Now do I yield my self to death in the behalf of my god , and being dead , his body is burned , & is esteemed by all men to be holy . The king of the said region is most rich in gold , silver , and precious stones , & there be the fairest unions in all the world . Traveling from thence by the Ocean sea 50. days journey southward , I came unto a certain land nam Perhaps he Lammori , where , in regard of extreme heat , the people means Co - both men and women go stark-naked from top to toe : mort‘ who seeing me appareled scoffed at me , saying , that God made Adam & Eve naked . In this country all women are common , so that no man can say , this is my wife . Also when any of the said women bears a son or a daughter , she bestows it upon any one that hath lain with her , whom she pleases . Likewise all the land of that region is possessed in common , so that there is not mine & thine , or any propriety of possession in the division of lands : howbeit every man hath his own house peculiar unto himself . men flesh , if it be fat , is eaten as ordinarily there , as beef in our country . And albeit the people are most lewd , yet the country is exceeding good , abounding with all commodities , as flesh , corn , rise , silver , gold , wood of aloes , Campheir , and many other things . Merchants coming unto this region for traffic do usually bring wl them fat men , selling them unto the inhabitants as we sei hogs , who immediately kill & eat them . In this island towards the Sumatra . south , there is another kingdom called Simoltra , where both men and women mark themselves with redhot iron in 12. sundry spots of their faces : and this nation is at continual war with certain naked people in another region . Then I traveled further unto another Java . island called Java , the compass whereof by sea is 3000. 
 [ II i . 57. ] miles < The king of this Hand hath 7. other crowned 
 416 
 kings under his jurisdiction . The said Hand is thoroughly inhabited , & is thought to be one of the principali Hands of you whole world . In the same Hand there grows great plenty of cloves , cubibez , and nutmegs , and in a word all kinds of spices are there to be had , and great abundance of all victuals except wine . The king of the said land of Java hath a most brave and sumptuous palace , the most loftily built , that ever I saw any , & it hath most high greeses & stayers to ascend up to the rooms therein contained , one stair being of silver , & another of gold , throughout the whole building . Also the lower rooms were paved all over with one square plate of silver , & another of gold . All the walls upon the inner side were seeled over with plataeae of beaten gold , whereupon were engraven you pictures of knights , having about their temples , each of them a wreathe of gold , adorned with precious stones . The roof of the palace was of pure gold . With this king of Java the great Can of Catay hath had many conflicts in war : whom notwithstanding the said king hath always overcome & vanquished . 
 Of certain trees yielding meal , honey , and poison . 
 Near unto the said Hand is another country called Panten , or Tathalamasin . And the king of the same country hath many Hands under his dominion . In this land there are trees yielding meal , honey , & wine , & : the most deadly poison in all you whole world : for against it there is but one only remedy : & that is this : if any man hath taken of the poison , & would be delivered from the danger thereof , let him temper the dung of a man in water , & so drink a good quantity thereof , & it expels the poison immediately , making it to avoid at the fiinde-ment . Meal is produced out of the said trees after this manner . They be mighty huge trees , and when they are cut with and axe by the ground , there issueth out of the stock a certain liquour like unto gum , which they take 
 IV 417 2D 
 and put into bags made of leaves , laying them for 15 days together abroad in the sun , & at the end of those 15 days , when the said liquour is thoroughly parched , it becomes meal . Then they steep it first in sea water , washing it afterwards with fresh water , and so it is made very good & savoury past , whereof they make either meat or bred , as they think good . Of which bred I my self did eat , & it is fairer without & somewhat brown within . By this country is the sea called Mare mortuum , which runneth continually Southward , into you which whosoever falls is never seen after . In this country also are found canes of and incredible length , namely of 60 paces high or more , & they are as big as trees . Other canes there be also called Cassan , which overspread the earth like grass , 8c out of every knot of them spring forth certain branches , which are continued upon the ground almost for the space of a mile . In the said canes there are found certain stones , one of which stones , whosoever carrieth about with him , cannot be wounded with any iron : 8c therefore the men of that country for the most part , carry such stones with them , whithersoever they go . Many also cause one of the arms of their children , while they are young , to be lanced , putting one of the said stones into the wound , healing also , and closing up the said wound with the powder of a certain fish ( the name whereof I do not know ) which powder does immediately consolidate and cure the said wound . And by the virtue of these stones , the people aforesaid do for the most part triumph both on sea and land . Howbeit there is one kind of stratagem , which the enemies of this nation , knowing the virtue of the said stones , do practise against them : namely , they provide themselves armour of iron or steel against their arrows , 8c weapons also poisoned with the poison of trees , 8c they carry in their hands wooden stakes most sharp 8c hard-pointed , as if they were iron : likewise they shoot arrows without iron heads , and so they confound 8c slay some of their un - 
 418 
 1330armed foes trusting too securely unto the virtue of their stones . Also of the foresaid canes called Cassan they make sails for their ships , and little houses , and many made other necessaries . From thence after many days travel ! , °freedes-I arrived at another kingdom called Campa , a most Campa . beautiful and rich country , & abounding with all kind of victuals : the king whereof , at my being there , had so many wives & concubines , that he had 300 sons & daughters by them . This king hath 10004 tame Elephants , which are kept even as we keep droves of oxen , or flocks of sheep in pasture . 
 Of the abundance of fish , which cast themselves upon the shore . 
 IN this country there is one strange thing to be observed , the every several kind of fish in those seas come swimming towards the said country in such abundance , that , for a great distance into the sea , nothing can be seen but you backs of fish : which , casting themselves upon the shore when they come near unto it , do suffer men , for the space of 3. days , to come & to take as many of them as they please , & then they return again unto the sea . After that kind of fish comes another kind , offering it self after the same manner , and so in like sort all other kinds whatsoever : notwithstanding they do this but once in a year . And I demanded of the inhabitants there , how , or by what means this strange accident could come to pass ? They answered , that fish were taught , even by nature , to come & to do homage unto their , Emperor . There be Tortoises also as big as and oven . Many other T'artojses . things I saw which are incredible , unless a man should I-11 ' b see them with his own eyes . In this country also dead men are burned , & their wives are burned alive with them , as in the city of Polumbrum above mentioned : for the men of that country say that she goes to accompany him in another world , that he should take none other wife in manage . Moreover I traveled on 
 419 
 further by the ocean-sea towards the south , passed through many countries and islands , wherot one is called Moumoran , & it containeth in compass ii . M. miles , wherein men & women have dogs faces , and worship and ox for their god : and therefore every one of them carry the image of and ox of gold or silver upon their foreheads . The men and the women of this country go all naked , saving that they hang a linen cloth before their privities . The men of the said country are very tall and mighty , and by reason that they go naked , when they are to make battle , they carry iron or steel-targets before them , which do cover and defend their bodies from top to toe : and whomsoever of their foes they take in battle not being able to ransom himself for money , they presently devour him : but if he be able to redeem himself for money , they let him go free . Their king weareth about his neck 300. great and most beautiful unions , and says every day 300. prayers unto his god . He weareth upon his finger also a stone of a span long , which seems to be a flame of fire , and therefore when he weareth it , no man dare once approach unto him : and they say that there is not any stone in the whole world of more valve then it . Neither could at any time the great Tartarian Emperor of Katay either by force , money , or policy obtain it at his hands : notwithstanding that he hath done the utmost of his endeavour for this purpose . 
 Of the island of Sylan : and of the mountain where Adam mourned for his son Abel . 
 1 Passed also by another island called Sylan , which containeth in compass above ii . M. miles : wherein are and infinite number of serpents , & great store of lions , bears , & all kinds of ravening & wild beasts , and especially of elephants . In the said country there is and huge mountain , whereupon the inhabitants of that region do report that Adam mourned for his son Abel you space of 500. years . In the midst of this mountain 
 420 
 there is a most beautiful plain , wherein is a little lake containing great plenty of water , which water you inhabitants report to have proceeded from the tears of Adam & Eve : howbeit I proved that to be false , because I saw the water flow in the lake . This water is full of horseleeches , & bloodsuckers , & of precious stones also : which precious stones the king takes not unto his own use , but once or twice every year he permitteth certain poor people to dive under the water for you said stones , & all that they can get he bestoweth upon them , to the end they may pray for his soul . But ill they may with less danger dive under the water , they take limons which they pil , anointing themselves thoroughly with the juice thereof , & so they may dive naked under you water , the horseleeches not being able to hurt them . From this lake the water runneth even unto the sea , and at a low ebb the inhabitants dig rubies , diamonds , pearls , & other precious stones out of the shore : whereupon it is thought , that you king of this island hath greater abundance of precious stones , then any other monarch in the whole earth besides . In the said country there be all kinds of beasts and fowls : & the people told me , that those beasts would not invade nor hurt any stranger , but only the natural inhabitants . I saw in this island fouls as big as our country geese , having two heads , and other miraculous things , which I will not here write off Traveling on further towards the south , I arrived at a certain island called Bodin , which Or^Dadin . signifies in our language unclean . In this island there do inhabit most wicked persons , who devour & eat raw flesh committing all kinds of uncleanness & abominations in such sort , as it is incredible . For the father eateth his son , & the son his father , the husband his own wife , & the wife her husband : and that after this manner . 
 If any men father be sick , the son straight goes unto the soothsaying or prognosticating priest , requesting him to demand of his god , whither his father shall recover of that infirmity or no ? Then both of them 
 421 
 go unto and idol of gold or of silver , making their prayers unto it in manner following : Lord , thou art our god , & thee we do adore , beseeching thee to resolve us , whither such a man must die , or recover of such and infirmity or no ? Then the devil answereth out of the foresaid idol : if he says ( he shall live ) then returns his son and ministereth things necessary unto him , till he hath attained unto his former health : but if he says ( he shall die ) then goes you priest unto him , & putting a cloth into his mouth does strangle him therewith : which being done , he cuts his dead body into morsels , & all his friends and kinsfolks are invited unto the eating thereof , with music and all kind of mirth : howbeit his bones are solemnly buried . And when I found fault with that custom demanding a reason thereof , one of them gave me this answer : this we do , lest the worms should eat his flesh , for then his soul should suffer great torments , neither could I by any means remove them from that error . Many other novelties and strange things there be in this country , which no man would credit , unies he saw them with his own eyes . Howbeit , I ( before almighty [ II i . 59. ] God ) do here make relation of nothing but of that only , whereof I am as sure , as a man may be sure . Concerning the foresaid islands I inquired of diverse well-experienced persons , who all of them , as it were with one consent , answered me saying , That this India contained 4400. islands under it , or within it : in which islands there are sixtie and foure crowned kings : and they say moreover , that the greater part of those islands are well inhabited . And here I conclude concerning that part of India . 
 Or , China . Of the upper India : and of the province of Maney . 
 First of all therefore , having traveled many days journey upon the Ocean-sea towards the East , at length I arrived at a certain great province called 
 422 
 Maney , being in Latin nam India . Concerning this India I inquired of Christians , of Saracens , & of Idolaters , and of all such as bore any office under the great Can . Who all of them with one consent answered , that this province of Maney hath more then 2000. great cities within the precincts thereof , & that it aboundeth with all plenty of victuals , as namely with bred , wine , rise , flesh , and fish . All the men of this province be artificers & merchants , who , though they be in never so extreme penury , so long as they can help themselves by the labour of their hands , will never beg alms of any man . The men of this province are of a fair and comely personage , but somewhat pale , having their heads shaved but a little : but the women are the most beautiful under the sun . The first city of you said India which I came unto , is called Ceuskalon , which Or , Ceuskala . being a days journey distant from the sea , stands upon a river , the water whereof , never unto the mouth , where it exonerateth it self into the sea , does overflow the land for the space of 12. days journey . All the inhabitants of this India are worshippers of idols . The foresaid city of Ceuskalon hath such and huge navy belonging thereunto , that no man would believe it unless he should see it . In this city I saw 300.lL of good & new ginger sold for less then a groat . There are the He means greatest , and the fairest geese , & most plenty of them to be sold in all the whole world , as I suppose : they are as aniarci5 cai white as milk , and have a bone upon the crown of their Alcatrarzi . heads as big as and egg , being of the colour of blood : under their throat they have a skin or bag hanging down half a foot . They are exceeding fat & well sold . Also they have ducks and hens in that country , one as big as two of ours . There be monstrous great serpents likewise , which are taken by the inhabitants & eaten : whereupon a solemn feast among them without serpents is nought set by : and to be brief , in this city there are all kinds of victuals in great abundance . From thence I passed by many cities & at length I came unto a city 
 423 
 nam Cai tan , wherein you friars Minorites have two places of abode , unto the which I transported the bones of the dead friars , which suffered martyrdom for the faith of Christ , as it is above mentioned . In this city there is abundance of all kind of victuals very cheap . The said city is as big as two of Bononia , & in it are many monasteries of religious persons , all which do worship idols . I my self was in one of those Monasteries , & it was told me , that there were in it iii . M. religious men , having xi . M. idols : and one of you said idols which seemed unto me but little in regard of the rest , was as big as our Christopher . These religious men every day do feed their idol-gods : whereupon at a certain time I went to behold the banquet : and indeed those things which they brought unto them were good to eat , & fuming hight , insomuch that the steam of the smoke thereof ascended up unto their idols , & they said that their gods were refreshed with the smoke : howbeit all the meat they conveyed away , eating it up their own selves , and so they fed their dumb gods with the smoke only . 
 Of the city Fuco . 
 TRaveling more eastward , I came unto a city nam Fuco , which containeth 30. miles in circuit , wherein be exceeding great & fair cocks , and all their hens are as white as the very snow , having will in stead of feathers , like unto sheep . It is a most stately & beautiful city & stands upon the sea . Then I went 18. days journey on further , & passed by many provinces & cities , and in the way I went over a certain great mountain , upon you one side whereof I beheld all living creatures to be as black as a coal , & the men and women on that side differed somewhat in manner of living from others : howbeit , on the other side of the said hill every living thing was snow-white , & the inhabitants in their manner of living , were altogether unlike unto others . There , all married women carry in token that they have husbands , a great trunk of horn upon their heads . From thence I 424 
 traveled 18. days journey further , and came unto a certain great river , and entered also into a city , where - A great unto belongeth a mighty bridge to pass the said river . nver-And mine host with whom I sojourned , being desirous to show me some sport , said unto me : Sir , if you will see any fish taken , go with me . Then he led me unto the foresaid bridge , carrying in his arms with him certain dive-doppers or water-fowls , bound unto a company routs Catch-of poles , and about every one of their necks he tied a ingfish . thread , lest they should eat the fish as fast as they took them : and he carried 3. great baskets with him also : then loosed he the dive-doppers from the poles , which presently went into the water , & within less then the space of one hour , caught as many fish as filled the 3. 
 baskets : which being full , mine host untied the threads from about their necks , and entering the second time into the river they fed themselves with fish , and being satisfied they returned and suffered themselves to be bound unto the said poles as they were before . And when I did eat of those fish , me thought they were exceeding good . Travailing thence many days journeys , at length I arrived at another city called * Canasia , which Cansahor signifies in our language , the city of heaven . Never in Quinzat-all my life did I see so great a city ; for it containeth in circuit and hundreth miles : neither saw I any plot thereof , which was not thoroughly inhabited : yea , I saw many houses of tenne or twelve stories high , one above another . It hath mighty large suburbs containing more people then the city it self . Also it hath twelve principali gates : and about the distance of eight miles , in the high way unto every one of the said gates stands a city as big by estimation as Venice , and Padua . The foresaid city of Canasia is situated in waters or marshes , which always stand still neither ebb - 
 ing nor flowing : howbeit it hath a defence for the wind The Italian like unto Venice . In this city there are more then 10002. 
 bridges , many whereof I numbered and passed over them : 7ioo^ and upon every of those bridges stand certain watch - bridges . 
 425 
 men of the city , keeping continual watch and ward about the said city , for the great Can the Emperor of Catay . The people of this country say , that they have one duty enjoined unto them by their lord : for every fire payeth one Balis in regard of tribute : and a Balis is five papers or pieces of silk , which are worth one floren and and half of our coin . Tenne or twelve households are accounted for one fire , and so pay tribute but for one fire only . All those tributary fires amount unto the number of 85. Thuman , with other foure Thuman of the Saracens , which make 89. in all ; And one Thuman con-sisteth 10000. fires . The residue of the people of the city are some of them Christians , some merchants , and some travellers through the country : whereupon I marveiled much how such and infinite number of persons could inhabit and live together . There is great abundance of victuals in this city , as namely of bred and wine , and especially of hogs-flesh , with other necessaries . 
 Of a Monastery where many strange beasts of diverse kinds do live upon and hill . 
 IN the foresaid city foure of our friars had converted a mighty and rich man unto the faith of Christ , at whose house 1 continually abided , for so long time as I remained in the city . Who upon a certain time said unto me : Ara , that is to say , Father , will you go and behold the city ? And I said , yea . Then embarked we our selves , and directed our course unto a certain great Monastery : where being arrived , he called a religious person with whom he was acquainted , saying unto him concerning me : this Raban Francus , that is to say , this religious Frenchman comes from the Western parts of the world , and is now going to the city of Cambaleth to pray for the life of the great Can , and therefore you must show him some rare thing , that when he returns into his own country , he may say , this strange sighed or novelty have I seen in the city of Canasia . Then the said religious man took two great 426 
 baskets full of broken relics which remained of the table , and led me unto a little walled park , the door whereof he unlocked with his key , and there appeared unto us a pleasant fair green plot , into the which we entered . In the said green stands a little mount in form of a steeple , replenished with fragrant herbs , and fine shady trees . And while we stood there , he took a cymbali or bell , and rang therewith , as they use to ring to dinner or bevoir in cloisters , at the found whereof many creatures of diverse kinds came down from the mount , some like apes , some like cats , some like monkeys ; and some having faces like men . And while I stood beholding of them , they gathered themselves together about him , to the number of 4200. of those creatures , putting themselves in good order , before whom he set a platter , and gave them the said fragments to eat . And when they had eaten he rang upon his cymbal the second time , and they all returned unto their former places . Then , wondering greatly at the matter , I demanded what kind of creatures those might be ? They are ( quoth he ) the souls of noble men which we do here feed , for the love of God who governeth the world : and as a man was honourable or noble in this life , so his soul after death , entereth into the body of some excellent beast or other , but the souls of simple and rustical people do possess the bodies of more vile and brutish creatures . Then I began to refute that foul error : howbeit my speech did nothing at all prevail with him : for he could not be persuaded that any soul might remain without a body . From thence I departed unto a certain city nam Chilenso , the walls whereof contained 40. miles in cir - Chilenso . cuit . In this city there are 360. bridges of stone , the fairest that ever I saw : and it is well inhabited , having a great navy belonging thereunto , & abounding with all kinds of victuals and other commodities . And thence I 
 went unto a certain river called Thalay , which , where it Thalay . is most narrow , is 7. miles broad : and it runneth through the midst of the land of Pygmaei , whose chief city is 
 427 
 Cakam . called Cakam , and is one of the goodliest cities in the [ II i . 61. ] world . These Pigmaeans are three of my spans high , and they make larger and better cloth of cotton and silk , then any other nation under the sun . And coasting along by the said river , I came unto a certain city Janzu . nam Janzu , in which city there is one receptacle for 
 the Friars of our order , and there be also three Churches of the Nestorians . This Janzu is a noble and great city , containing 48 Thuman of tributary fierce , and in it are all kinds of victuals , and great plenty of such beasts , fowls and fish , as Christians do usually live upon . The lord of the same city hath in yearly revenues for salt only , fiftie Thuman of Balis , and one balis is worth a floren and a half of our coin : insomuch that one Thuman of balis amounteth unto the valve of fifteene thousand florens . Howbeit the said lord favoureth his people in one respect , for sometime he forgiveth them freely two hundred Thuman , lest there should be any scarcity or dearth among them . There is a custom in this city , that when any man is determined to banquet his friends , going about unto certain taverns or cooks houses appointed for the same purpose , he say unto every particular host , you shall have such , and such of my friends , whom you must entertain in my name , and so much I will bestow upon the banquet . And by that means his friends are better feasted at diverse places , then they should have been at one . Tenne miles from the said city , about the head of the foresaid river of Thalay , there is a certain other city called Montu , which hath the greatest navy that I saw in the whole world . All their ships are as white as snow , and they have banqueting houses in them , and many other rare things also , which no man would believe , unless he had seen them with his own eyes . 
 428 
 Traveling eight days journey further by diverse territories and cities , at length I came by fresh water unto a certain city nam Leneyn , standing upon the river of * Karavoran , which runneth through the midst of Cataie , and doth great harm in the country when it overfloweth the banks , or breaks forth of the channel . From thence passing along the river Eastward , after many days travel , and the sighed of diverse cities , 1 arrived at a city called * Sumakoto , which aboundeth more with silk then any other city in the world : for when there is great scarcity of silk , fortie pound is sold for less then eight groats . In this city there is abundance of all merchandise , and of all kinds of victuals also , as of bred , wine , flesh , fish , with all choice and delicate spices . Then traveling on still towards the East by many cities , I came unto the noble and renowned city of Cambaleth , which is of great antiquity , being situate in the province of Cataie . This city the Tartars took , and near unto it within the space of half a mile , they built another city called Caido . The city of Caido hath twelve gates , being each of them two miles distant from another . Also the space lying in the midst between the two foresaid cities is very well and thoroughly inhabited , so that they make as it were but one city between them both . The whole compass or circuit of both cities together , is 40. miles . In this city the great emperor Can hath his principali seat , and his Imperiali palace , the walls of which palace contain foure miles in circuit : and near unto this his palace are many other palaces and houses of his nobles which belong unto his court . Within the precincts of the said palace Imperiali , there is a most beautiful mount , set and replenished with trees , for which cause it is called the Green mount , having a most royal and sumptuous palace standing thereupon , in which , for the most part , the great Can is resident . Upon the one side of the 
 429 
 Karamoron . 
 Sumacoto . 
 said mount there is a great lake , whereupon a most stately bridge is built , in which lake is great abundance of geese , ducks , and all kinds of water fowls : and in the wood growing upon the mount there is great store of all birds , and wild beasts . And therefore when the great Can will solace himself with hunting or hawking , he needs not so much as once to step forth of his palace . Moreover , the principali palace , wherein he makes his abided , is very large , having within it 14 pillars of gold , and all the walls thereof are hanged with read skins , which are said to be the most costly skins in all the world . In the midst of the palace stands a cistern of two yards high , which consisteth of a precious stone called Merdochas , and is wreathed about with gold , & at each corner thereof is the golden image of a serpent , as it were , furiously shaking and casting forth his head . This cistern also hath a kind of network of pearl wrought about it . Likewise by the said cistern there is drink conveyed thorough certain pipes and conducts , such as uses to be drunk in the emperor's court , upon the which also there hang many vessels of gold , wherein , whosoever will may drink of the said liquour . In the foresaid palace there are many peacocks of gold : & when any Tartar makes a banquet unto his lord , if the guests chance to clap their hands for joy and mirth , the said golden peacocks also will spread abroad their wings , and lift up their trains , seeming as if they danced : and this I suppose to be done by art magic or by some secret engine under the ground . 
 Of the glory and magnificence of the great Can . 
 MOreover , when the great emperor Can sitteth in his imperiali throne of estate , on his left hand sitteth his queen or empress , and upon another inferior seat there fit two other women , which are to accompany the emperor , when his spouse is absent , but in the lowest place of all , there fit all the ladies of his kindred . All the married women wear upon their heads a kind of orna-43° 
 meant in shape like unto a men foot , of a cubit and a half in length , and the lower part of the said foot is adorned with cranes feathers , and is all over thick set with great and orient pearls . Upon the right hand of the great Can sitteth his first begotten son and heir apparent unto his empire , and under him fit all the nobles of the blood royal . There be also foure Secretary's , which put all things in writing that the emperor speaks . In whose presence likewise stand his Barons and diverse others of his nobility , with great trains of followers after them , of whom none dare speak so much as one word , unless they have obtained licence of the emperor so to do , except his jesters and stageplayers , who are appointed of purpose to solace their lord . Neither yet dare they attempt to do ought , but only according to the pleasure of their emperor , and as he enjoins them by law . About the palace gate stand certain Barons to keep all men from treading upon the threshold of the said gate . When it pleases the great Can to solemnize a feast , he hath about him 14000. Barons , carrying wreathes & little crowns upon their heads , and giving attendance upon their lord , and every one of them weareth a garment of gold and precious stones , which is worth ten thousand Florens . His court is kept in very good order , by governors of tens , governors of hundreds , and governors of thousands , insomuch that every one in his place performeth his duty committed unto him , neither is there any defect to be found . I Friar Odoricus was there present in person for the space of three years , and was often at the said banquets ; for we friars Minorites have a place of abode appointed out for us in the emperor's court , and are enjoined to go and to bestow our blessing upon him . And I inquired of certain Courtiers concerning the number of persons pertaining to the emperor's court ? And they answered me , that of stageplayers , musicians , and such like , there were eighteene Thuman at the least , and that the keepers of dogs , beasts and fowls were 
 431 
 fifteene Thuman , and the physicians for the emperors body , were foure hundred ; the Christians also were eight in number , together with one Saracen . At my being there , all the foresaid number of persons had all kind of necessaries both for apparel and victuals out of the emperor's court . Moreover , when he will make his progress from one country to another , he hath foure troops of horsemen , one being appointed to go a days journey before , and another to come a days journey after him , the third to march on his right hand , and the fourth on his left , in the manner of a cross , he himself being in the midst , and so every particular troop have their daily journeys limited unto them , to the end they may provide sufficient victuals without defect . Now the great Can himself is carried in manner following ; he rides in a chariot with two wheels , upon which a majestical throne is built of the wood of Aloe , being adorned with gold and great pearls , and precious stones , and foure elephants bravely furnished doe draw the said chariot , before which elephants foure great horses richly trapped and covered do led the way . Hard by the chariot on both sides thereof , are foure Barons laying hold and attending thereupon , to keep all persons from approaching near unto their emperor . Upon the chariot also two milkwhite Jerfalcons do fit , and seeing any game which he would take , he lets them fly , and so they take it , and after this manner doth he solace himself as he rides . Moreover , no man dare come within a stones cast of the chariot , but such as are appointed . The number of his own followers , of his wives attendants , and of the train of his first begotten son and heir apparent , would seem incredible unto any man , unless he had seen it with his own eyes . The foresaid great Can hath divided his Empire into twelve parts or Provinces , and one of the said provinces hath two thousand great cities within the precincts thereof . Whereupon his empire is of that length and breadth , that unto whatsoever part thereof he 
 43 2 
 ... I33°* intends his journey , he hath space enough for six months continual progress , except his Islands which are at the least 5000. 
 Of certain Inns or hospitals appointed for travelers throughout the whole empire . 
 THe foresaid Emperor ( to the end that travelers may have all things necessary throughout his whole empire ) hath caused certain Inns to be provided in sundry places upon the high ways , where all things pertaining unto victuals are in a continual readiness . And when any alteration or news happen in any part of his Empire , if he chance to be far absent from that part , his ambassadors upon horses or drome - [ II i . 63. ] daries ride post unto him , and when themselves and their beasts are weary , they blow their horn , at the noise whereof , the next Inn likewise provideth a horse and a man , who takes the letter of him that is weary , and runneth unto another Inn : and so by diverse Inns , and diverse posts , the report , which ordinarily could scarce come in 30. days , is in one natural day brought unto the emperor : and therefore no matter of any moment can be done in his empire , but straightway he hath intelligence thereof . Moreover , when you great Can himself will go on hunting , he uses this custom . Some twenty days journey from the city of Kambaleth there is a forest containing sixe days journey in circuit , in which forest there are so many kinds of beasts and birds , as it is incredible to report . Unto this forest , at the end of every third or fourth year , himself with his whole train resorteth , and they all of them together environ the said forest , sending dogs into the same , which by hunting do bring forth the beasts : namely , lions and stags , and other creatures , unto a most beautiful plain in the midst of the forest , because all the beasts of the forest do tremble , especially at the cry of hounds . Then comes the great Can himself , being carried upon three elephants , and shoots five 
 iv 433 2 e 
 arrows into the whole heard of beasts , and after him all his Barons , and after them the rest of his courtiers and family do all in like manner discharge their arrows also , and every men arrow hath a sundry mark . Then they all go unto the beasts which are slain ( suffering the living beasts to return into the wood that they may have more sport with them another time ) and every man enjoyeth that beast as his own , wherein he finds his arrow sticking . 
 Of the foure feasts which the great Can solemnize every year in his Court . 
 FOure great feasts in a year doth the emperor Can celebrate : namely , the feast of his birth , the feast of his circumcision , the feast of his coronation , and the feast of his marriage . And unto these feasts he inviteth all his Barons , his stageplayers , and all such as are of his kindred . Then the great Can sitting in his throne , all his Barons present themselves before him , with wreaths and crowns upon their heads , being diversely attired , for some of them are in green , namely , the principali : the second are in read , and the third in yellow , and they hold each man in his hand a little Ivory table of elephants tooth , and they are girded with golden girdles of half a foot broad , and they stand upon their feet keeping silence . About them stand the stageplayers or musicians with their instruments . And in one of the corners of a certain great palace , all the Philosophers or Magicians remain for certain hours , and do attend upon points or characters : and when the point and hour which the said Philosophers expected for , is come , a certain crier cries out with a loud voice , saying , Incline or bow your selves before your Emperor : with that all the Barons fallen flat upon the earth . Then he cries out again ; Arise all , and immediately they all arise . Likewise the Philosophers attend upon a point or character the second time , and when it is fulfilled , the crier cries out amain ; Put 
 434 
 your fingers in your ears : and forthwith again he sayeth ; Pluck them out . Again , at the third point he cries , Boult this meal . Many other circumstances also do they perform , all which they say have some certain signification : howbeit , neither would I write them , nor give any heed unto them , because they are vain and ridiculous . And when the musicians hour is come , then the Philosophers say , Solemnize a feast unto your Lord : with that all of them found their instruments , making a great and a melodious noise . And immediately another cries , Peace , peace , and they are all whist . Then come the women-musicians and sing sweetly before the Emperor , which music was more delightful unto me . After them come in the lions and do their obeisance unto the great Can . Then the jugglers cause golden cups full of wine to fly up and down in the air , and to apply themselves unto men's mouths that they may drink of them . These and many other strange things I saw in the court of the great Can , which no man would believe unless he had seen them with his own eyes , and therefore I omit to speak of them . I was informed also by certain credible persons , of another miraculous thing , namely , that in a certain kingdom of the said Can , wherein stand the mountains called Kapsei ( the kingdoms name is Kalor ) there grow great Gourds or Pompions , which lamb in a being ripe , do open at the tops , and within them is & urd " found a little beast like unto a young lamb , even as I my self have herd reported , that there stand certain trees upon the shore of the Irish sea , bearing fruit like unto a gourd , which , at a certain time of the year do fallen into the water , and become birds called Barnacles , and this is most true . 
 Of diverse provinces and cities . 
 A Nd after three years I departed out of the empire His retume of Cataie , travailing fiftie days journey towards Westward . 
 the West . And at length I came unto the empire of 
 435 
 [ II i . 64. ] Pretegoani , whose principali city is Kosan , which hath many other cities under it . From thence passing many 
 Casan . days travel , I came unto a province called Casan , which is for good commodities , one of the only provinces under the Sun , and is very well inhabited , insomuch that when we depart out of the gates of one city we may behold the gates of another city , as I my self saw in diverse of them . The breadth of the said province is fifty days journey , & the length above sixty . In it there is great plenty of all victuals , and especially of chestnuts , and it is one of the twelve provinces of the great Can . Going on further , I came unto a certain 
 II Or , Thebet . kingdom called II Tebek , which is in subjection unto the great Can also , wherein I think there is more plenty of bred & wine then in any other part of the world beside . The people of the said country do , for the most part , inhabit in tents made of black felt . Their principali city is environed with fair and beautiful walls , being built of most white and black stones , which are disposed checkerwise one by another , and curiously compiled together : likewise all the high ways in this country are exceedingly well paved . In the said country none dare shed the blood of a man , or of any beast , for the reverence of a certain idol . In the foresaid city their Abassi , that is to say , their Pope is resident , being the head and prince of all idolaters ( upon whom he bestoweth and distributeth gifts after his manner ) even as our pope of Rome accounts himself to be the head of all Christians . The women of this country wear above and hundreth tricks and trifles about them , and they have two teeth in their mouths as long as the tusks of a boar . When any men father deceaseth among them , his son assembleth together all the priests and musicians that he can get , saying that he is determined to honour his father : then causeth he him to be carried into the field ( all his kinsfolks , friends , and neighbours , accompanying him in the said actium ) where the priests with great solemnity cut 436 
 off the father's head , giving it unto his son , which being done , they divide the whole body into morsels , and so leave it behind them , returning home with prayers in the company of the said son . So soon as they are departed , certain vultures , which are accustomed to such banquets , come flying from the mountains , and carry away all the said morsels of flesh : and from thenceforth a fame is spread abroad , that the said party deceased was holy , because the angels of God carried him into paradise . And this is the greatest and highest honour , that the son can devise to perform unto his deceased father . Then the said son takes his father's same head , seething it and eating the flesh thereof , but of storycmcern-the skull he makes a drinking cup , wherein himself same people with all his family and kindred do drink with great in William de solemnity and mirth , in the remembrance of his dead Rubricis . and devoured father . Many other vile and abominable things does the said nation commit , which I mean not to write , because men neither can nor will believe , except they should have the sighed of them . 
 Of a certain rich man , who is fed and nourished by fiftie virgins . 
 WHile I was in the province of Maney , I passed by the palace of a certain famous man , which hath fifty virgin damosels continually attending upon him , feeding him every meal , as a bird feeds her young ones . Also he hath sundry kinds of meat served in at his table , and three dishes of each kind : and when the said virgins feed him , they sing most sweetly . This man hath in yearly revenues thirty thuman of tagars of rise , every of which thuman yields tenne thousand tagars , and one tagar is the burden of and ass . His palace is two miles in circuit , the pavement whereof is one plate of gold , and another of silver . Near unto the wall of the said palace there is a mount artificially wrought with gold and silver , whereupon stand turrets and steeples and other delectable things for the solace 
 437 
 and recreation of the foresaid great man . And it was told me that there were foure such men in the said kingdom . It is accounted a great grace for the men Long nails . of that country to have long nails upon their fingers , and especially upon their thumbs , which nails they may fold about their hands : but the grace and beauty of their women is to have small and slender feet : and therefore the mother's when their daughters are young , do bind up their feet , that they may not grow great . Traveling on further towards the South , I arrived at a Melistorte . certain country called Melistorte , which is a pleasant and fertile place . And in this country there was a certain aged man called Senex de monte , who round about two mountains had built a wall to enclose the said mountains . Within this wall there were the fairest and most crystal fountains in the whole world : and about the said fountains there were most beautiful virgins in great number , and goodly horses also , and in a word , every thing that could be devised for bodily solace and delight , and therefore the inhabitants of the country call the same place by the name of Paradise . 
 The said old Senex , when he saw any proper and valiant young man , he would admit him into his paradise . Moreover by certain conducts he makes wine and milk [ II i . 65. ] to flow abundantly . This Senex , when he hath a mind to revenge himself or to slay any king or baron , commands him that is governor of the said paradise , to bring thereunto some of the acquaintance of the said king or baron , permitting him a while to take his pleasure therein , and then to give him a certain potion being of force , to cast him into such a slumber as should make him quite void of all sense , and so being in a profound sleep to convey him out of his paradise : who being awaked , & seeing himself thrust out of the paradise would become so sorrowful , that he could not in the world devise what to do , or whither to turn him . Then would he go unto the foresaid old man , beseeching him that he might be admitted again into 438 
 his paradise : who says unto him , You cannot be admitted thither , unless you will slay such or such a man for my sake , and if you will give the attempt only , whither you kill him or no , I will place you again in paradise , that there you may remain always : then would the party without fade put the same in execution , endeavouring to murder all those against whom the said old man had conceived any hatred . And therefore all the kings of the east stood in awe of the said old man , and gave unto him great tribute . 
 Of the death of Senex de monte . 
 A Nd when the Tartars had subdued a great part of the world , they came unto the said old man , and took from him the custody of his paradise : who being incensed thereat , sent abroad diverse desperate and resolute persons out of his forenamed paradise , and caused many of the Tartarian nobles to be slain . The Tartars seeing this , went and besieged the city wherein the said old man was , took him , and put him to a most cruel and ignominious death . The friars in that place have this speciali gift and prerogative : namely , that by the virtue of the name of Christ Jesu , and in the virtue of his precious blood , which he shed upon the cross for the salvation of mankind , they do cast forth devils out of them that are possessed . And because there are many possessed men in those parts , they are bound and brought ten days journey unto the said friars , who being dispossessed of the unclean spirits , do presently believe in Christ who delivered them , accounting him for their God , and being baptised in his name , and also delivering immediately unto the friars all their idols , and the idols of their cattle , which are commonly made of felt or of women's hair : then the said friars kindle a fire in a public place ( whereunto the people resort , that they may see the false gods of their neighbours burned ) and cast the said idols thereinto : howbeit at the first those idols came out of the fire again . Then the friars sprinkled 
 439 
 A.D. 
 1330 - 
 the said fire with holy water , casting the idols into it the second time , and with that the devils fled in the likeness of black smoke , and the idols still remained till they were consumed unto ashes . Afterwards , this noise & outcry was herd in the air : Behold and see how I am expelled out of my habitation . And by these means the friars do baptise great multitudes , who presently revolt again unto their idols : insomuch that the said friars must eftsoons , as it were , underprop them , and inform them anew . There was another terrible thing which I saw there : for passing by a certain valley , which is situate beside a pleasant river , I saw many dead bodies , and in the said valley also I herd diverse sweet sounds and harmonies of music , especially the noise of citherns , whereat I was greatly amazed . This valley containeth in length seven or eight miles at the least , into the which whosoever entereth , dieth presently , and can by no means pass alive thorough the midst thereof : for which cause all the inhabitants thereabouts decline unto the one side . Moreover , I was tempted to go in , and to see what it was . At length , making my prayers , and recommending my self to God in the name of Jesu , I entered , and saw such swarms of dead bodies there , as no man would believe unless he were and eye witness thereof . At the one side of the foresaid valley upon a certain stone , I saw the visage of a man , which beheld me with such a terrible aspect , that I thought verily I should have died in the same place . But always this sentence , the word became flesh , and dwelled among us , I ceased not to pronounce , signing my self with the sign of the cross , and nearer then seven or eight pases I durst not approach unto the said head : but I departed & fled unto another place in the said valley , ascending up into a little sandy mountain , where looking round about , I saw nothing but the said citherns , which me thought I herd miraculously sounding and playing by themselves without the help of musicians . And being upon the top of the mountain , I found 
 440 
 silver there like the scales of fish in great abundance : and I gathered some part thereof into my bosom to show for a wonder , but my conscience rebuking me , 1 cast it upon the earth , reserving no whit at all unto my self , and so , by Gods grace I departed without danger . And when the men of the country knew that I was returned out of the valley alive , they reverenced me much , saying that I was baptised and holy , and that the foresaid bodies were men subject unto the devils infernali , who used to play upon citherns , to the end they might allure people to . enter , and so murder them . Thus much concerning those things which I beheld most certainly with mine eyes , I friar Odoricus have here written : many strange things also I have of purpose [ II i . 66. ] omitted , because men will not believe them unless they should see them . 
 Of the honour and reverence done unto the great Can . 
 I Will report one thing more , which I saw , concerning the great Can . It is and usual custom in those parts , that when the foresaid Can travelleth thorough any country , his subject's kindle fires before their doors , casting spices thereinto to make a perfume , that their lord passing by may smell the sweet and delectable odours thereof , and much people come forth to meet him . And upon a certain time when he was coming towards Cambaleth , the fame of his approach being published , a bishop of ours with certain of our minorite friars and my self , went two days journey to meet him : and being come nigh unto him , we put a cross upon wood , I my self having a censer in my hand , and began to sing with a loud voice : Veni creator spiritus . And as we were singing on this wise , he caused us to be called , commanding us to come unto him : notwithstanding ( as it is above mentioned ) that no man dare approach within a stones cast of his chariot , unless he be called , but such only as keep his chariot . And when we came 
 441 
 near unto him , he veiled his hat or bonnet being of and inestimable price , doing reverence unto the cross . And immediately I put incense into the censer , and our bishop taking the censer perfumed him , and gave him his benediction . Moreover , they that come before the said Can do always bring some oblation to present unto him , observing the ancient law : Thou shalt not appear in my presence with and empty hand . And for that cause we carried apples with us , and offered them in a platter with reverence unto him : and taking out two of them he did eat some part of one . And then he signified unto us , that we should go apart , lest the horses coming on might in ought offend us . With that we departed from him , and turned aside , going unto certain of his barons , which had be converted to the faith by certain friars of our order , being at the same time in his army : and we offered unto them of the foresaid apples , who received them at our hands with great joy , seeming unto us to be as glad , as if we had given them some great gift - . .... 
 All the premises abovewritten friar William de Solanga hath put down in writing even as the foresaid friar Odoricus uttered them by word of mouth , in the year of our Lord 1330 , in the month of May , and in the place of S. Anthony of Padua . Neither did he regard to write them in difficult Latin or in and eloquent style , but even as Odoricus himself rehearsed them , to the end that men might the more easily understand the things reported . I friar Odoricus of Friuli , of a certain territory called Portus Vahonis , and of the order of the minorites , do testify and bear witness unto the reverend father Guidotus minister of the province of S. Anthony , in the marquesate of Treviso ( being by him required upon mine obedience so to do ) that all the premises above written , either I saw with mine own eyes , or herd the same reported by credible and substantiali persons . The 442 
 common report also of the countries where I was , testifieth those things , which I saw , to be true . Many other things I have omitted , because I beheld them not with mine own eyes . Howbeit from day to day I purpose with my self to travel countries or lands , in which actium I dispose my self to die or to live , as it shall please my God . 
 Of the death of friar Odoricus . 
 IN the year therefore of our Lord 1331 the foresaid friar Odoricus preparing himself for the performance of his intended journey , that his travel and labour might be to greater purpose , he determined to present himself unto pope John the two and twentieth , whose benediction and obedience being received , he , with a certain number of friars willing to bear him company , might convey himself unto all the countries of infidels . And as he was traveling towards the pope , and not far distant from the city of Pisa , there meets him by the way a certain old man , in the habit and attire of a pilgrim , saluting him by name , and saying : All hail friar Odoricus . And when the friar demanded how he had knowledge of him : he answered : Whilst you were in India I knew you full well , yea , and I knew your holy purpose also : but see that you return immediately unto the coven from whence you came , for tenne days hence you shall depart out of this present world . Wherefore being astonished and amazed at these words ( especially the old man vanishing out of his sighed , presently after he had spoken them ) he determined to return . And so he returned in perfect health , feeling no crazedness nor infirmity of body . And being in his coven at Udene in the province of Padua , the tenth day after the foresaid vision , having received the Communion , and preparing himself unto God , yea , being strong and found of body , he happily rested in the Lord : whose sacred departure was signified unto the [ II i . 67. ] 
 443 
 Pope aforesaid , under the hand of the public notary in these words following . 
 In the year of our Lord 1331 , the 14. day of Januarie , Beatus Odoricus a Friar minorite deceased in Christ , at whose prayers God showed many and sundry miracles , which I Guetelus public notary of Utina , son of M. Damianus de Porto Gruaro , at the commandment and direction of the honourable Conradus of the Borough of Gastaldion , and one of the Council of Utina , have written as faithfully as I could , and have delivered a copy thereof unto the Friars minorites : howbeit not of all , because they are innumerable , and too difficult for me to write . 
 . 