The coming of Lion King of Armenia into England , in the year 1386 , and in the ninth year of Richard the second , in trust to find some means of peace or good agreement between the King of England and the French king . John Froyssart lib . 3. cap . 56. 
 Hus in abiding for the Duke of Berrie , and for the Constable , who were behind , then king Lion of Armenia , who was in France , and had assigned him by the king , sixe thousande franks by the year to maintain his estate , took upon him for a good intent to go into Eng 
 land to speak with the king there and his Council , to see if he might find any matter of peace to be 
 had , between the two Realms , England and France : And so he departed from his lodging of Saint Albeyne beside Saint Denice , alonely with his own company , and with no great apparel . So he road to Boloine , and there he took a ship , and so sailed forth till he came to Dover ; and there he found the Earl of 
 Cambridge , and the Earl of Buckingham , and more then a hundreth men of arms , and a two thousand Archers , who lay there to keep that passage , for the brutus ran , that the Frenchmen should land there or at Sandwich , and the king lay at London , and part of his Council with him , and daily herd tidings from all the Ports of England . When the king of Armenia was arrived at Dover , he had there good cheer , because he was a stranger , and so he came to the kings Uncles there , who sweetly received him , and at a time convenient , they demanded of him from whence he came and whither he would . The king answered and said , that in trust of goodness he was come thither to see the king of England , and his Council , to treat of peace between England and France , for he said that he 
 445 
 thought the war was not meet : for he said , by reason of war between these two Realms , which hath injured so long , the Saracens , Jewes & Turkes are waxed proud , for there is none that make them any war , and by occasion thereof I have lost my land and Realm , and am not like to recover them again without there were firm peace in all Christendome : & I would gladly show the matter that touches all Christendome to the king of England , and to his Council , as I have done to the French king . Then the kings Uncles demanded of him if the French king sent him thither or no ; he answered and said , no : there is no man that sent me , but I am come hither by mine own motion to see if the king of England & his Council would any thing lean to any treaty of peace , then was he demanded where the French king was , he answered I believe he be at Sluice , I saw not him since I took my leave of him at Senlize . Then he was demanded , how he could make any treaty of peace , and had no charge so to do , and Sir , if ye be conveyed to the King our Nephew and to his Counsel , and the French king in the mean season enter with his puissance into England ; ye may happen thereby to receive great blame , and your person to be in great jeoperdy with them of the Country . Then the King answered and said , I am in surety of the French king , for I have sent to him , desiring him till I return again , not to remove from Sluice , and 1 repute him so noble and so well advised , that he will grant my desire , and that he will not enter into the sea , till I come again to him . Wherefore , sirs , I pray you in the instance of love and peace , to convey me to speak with the King , for I desire greatly to see him : or else ye that be his Uncles , if you have authority , to give me answer to all my demands . Then the Earl of Buckingham said , sir king of Armenia , we be ordained here to keep and defend this passage , and the frontiers of England , by the King and his Counsel , and we have no charge to meddle 
 446 
 any further with the business of the Realm , without we be otherwise commanded by the King . But sith you be come for a good intent into this Country , you be right welcome ; but sir , as for any firm answer you can have none of us , for as now we be not of the Council , but we shall convey you to the king without peril or danger . The king thanked them , and said : I desire nothing else but to see the king and to speak with him . 
 How the King of Armenia returned out of England , and of the answer that was made to him . 
 Hen the king of Armenia was refreshed at Dover a day , and had spoken with the kings Uncles at good leisure , then he departed towards London , with a good conduct that the Lords appointed to him , for fear of any recounters : so long he road that he came to London , 
 and in his riding through London he was well regarded , because he was a stranger , and he had good cheer made him , and so was brought to the king , who lay at the Royal at the Queens wardrobe , and his Council were in London at their lodgings : The Londoners were soar fortifying of their city . When the coming of the king of Armenia was known , the kings Council drew to the King to hear what tidings the King brought in that troublous season : When the king of Armenia was come into the kings presence , he made his salutation and then began his process to the states , how he was come out of France principally to see the king of England whom he had never seen before , & said , how he was right joyous to be in his presence , trusting that some goodness might come thereby . And there he showed by his words , that to withstand the great pestilence that was likely to be in England ; therefore he was come of his own good will to do good therein if he might , not sent from the 
 447 
 French king , willing to set some accord and peace between the two Realms England and France . Many fair pleasant words the king of Armenia spoke to the king of England , and to his Counsel , then he was shortly answered thus : Sir king , you be welcome into this Realm , for the king our Sovereign lord , and all we are glad to see you here , but sir , we say that the king hath not here all his Council , but shortly they shall be here , and then you shall be answered . The king of Armenia was content therewith , and so returned to his lodging . Within foure days after the king was counseled ( and I think he had sent to his Uncles to know their intents , but they were not present at the answer giving ) to go to the palace at Westminster and his Council with him , such as were about him , and to send for the king of Armenia to come thither . And when he was come into the presence of the king of England and his Council , the king sat down , and the king of Armenia by him , and then the Prelates and other of his Council . There the king of Armenia rehearsed again his requests that he made , and also showed wisely how all Christendome was soar decayed and feeblished by occasion of the wars between England and France . And how that all the knights and Squires of both Realms intended nothing else , but always to be on the one part or of the other : whereby the Empire of Constantinople leeseth , and is like to lose ; for before this war the Knights and Squires were wont to adventure themselves . And also the king of Armenia showed that by occasion of this war he had lost his Realm of Armenia , therefore he desired for Gods sake that there might be some treaty of peace had between the two Realms England and France . To these words answered the Archbishop of Canterburie , for he had charge so to do ; And he said , Sir king of Armenia , it is not the manner nor never was seen between two such enemies as the king of England and the French king , that the king my Sovereign lord should be required of peace , and he to enter his land with 448 
 1386. a puissant army , wherefore sir , we say to you , that if it please you , you may return to the French king , and cause him and all his puissance to return back into their own [ II i . 69. ] countries' . And when every man be at home , then if it please you you may return again hither , and then we shall gladly intend to your treaty . 
 This was all the answer the king of Armenia could get there , and so he dined with the king of England , and had as great honour as could be devised , and the king offered him many great gifts of gold and silver , but he would take none though he had need thereof , but alonely a ring to the valve of a hundreth Franks . After dinner he took his leave and returned unto his lodging , and the next day departed , and was two days at Dover , and there he took his leave of such lords as were there , and so took the sea in a passager , and arrived at Calais and from thence went to Sluice , and there he spoke with the French king and with his Uncles , and showed them how he had be in England , and what answer he had : the French king and his Uncles took no regard of his saying , but sent him back again into France , for their full intention was to enter into England as soon as they might have wind and weather , and the Duke of Berry and the Constable came to them : The wind was soar contrary to them , for therewith they could never enter into England but the wind was good to go into Scotland . 
 IV 
 . 