The voyage of M. Roger Bodenham with the great Bark Aucher to Candia and Chio , in the year 1550. 
 N the year 1550. the 13 of November I Roger Bodenham Captain of the Bark Aucher entered the said ship at Gravesend , for my voyage to the Hands of Candia and Chio in the Levant . The master of my ship was one William Sherwood . From thence we departed to The Bark 
 Tilbery hope , and there remained with contrary winds Aucher g > eth until the 6. of January 1551. The 6 of Januarie , the f°rLevant-M . came to Tilbery , and I had provided a skilful pilot to carry me over the lands end , whose name was M. Wood , and with all speed I valed down that night 
 xo miles to take the tide in the morning , which happily I did , and that night came to Dover , and there came to and anchor , and there remained until tuesday , meeting with the worthy knight sir Anthony Aucher owner of the said ship . 
 [ II i . ico . ] The ii day we arrived in Plimoth , and the 13 in the morning we set forward on our voyage with a prosperous wind , and the 16 we had sighed of Cape Finister on the coast of Spaine . 
 The 30 we arrived at Cades , and there discharged certain merchandise , and took others aboard . 
 The 20 of February we departed from Cades , & passed the straights of Gibraltar that night , and the 25 Mallorca . we came to the He of Mallorca , and stayed there five days with contrary winds . 
 The first of March , we had sighed of Sardenna , and the Messina . fift of the said month we arrived at Messina in Sicilia , and there discharged much goods , and remained there until good Fryday in Lent. 
 The chief merchant that jaded the said Bark Aucher was a merchant stranger called Anselm Salvago , and because the time was then very dangerous , and no going into Levant , especially to Chio , without a safe conduct from the Turke , the said Anselm promised the owner Sir Anthony Aucher , that we should receive the same at Messina . But I was posted from thence to Candia , and there I was answered that I should send to Chio , and there I should have my safe conduct . I was forced to send one , and he had his answer that the Turke would give none , willing me to look what was best for me to do , which was no small trouble to me , considering I was bound to deliver the goods that were in the ship at Chio , or send them at mine adventure . The merchants without care of the loss of the ship would have compelled me to go , or send their goods at mine The Turke adventure , the which I denied , and said plainly I would armylo be ” not go > because the Turkes galleys were come forth to siege Malta , go against Malta , but by the French kings means , he 
 ■ was persuaded to leave Malta , and to go to Tripoly in Barbary , which by the French he won . In this time there were in Candia certain Turkes vessels called Skyrasas , which had brought wheat thither to fell , and were ready to depart for Turkey . And they departed in the morning be times , carrying news that I would not go forth : the same night I prepared beforehand what I thought good , without making any man privy , until I saw time . Then I had no small business to cause my mariners to venture with the ship in such a manifest danger . Nevertheless I won them to go all with me , except three which I set on land , and with all diligence I was ready to set forth about eight of the clock at night , being a fair moon shine night , & went out . Then my 3 mariners made such requests unto the rest of my men to come aboard , as I was constrained to take them in . And so with good wind we put into the Archipelago , & being among the Hands the wind scanted , & I was forced to anchor at and Hand called Micone , where I tarried 10 or 12 days , having a greek Pilot to carry t^eat the ship to Chio. In this mean season , there came many small boats with mysson sails to go for Chio , with diverse goods to fell , & the Pilot requested me that I would let them go in my company , to which I yielded . After the said days expired , I weighed & set sail for the Island of Chio , with which place I fell in the after noon , whereupon I cast to seaward again to come with the Island in the morning betimes . The foresaid small vessels which came in my company , departed from me to win the shore , to get in you night , but upon a sudden they espied 3 foists of Turkes coming upon them to spoil them . My Pilot , having a son in one of those small vessels , entreated me to cast about towards them , which at his request I did , and being some thing far from them , I caused my Gunner to shoot a demy-colvering at a foist that was ready to enter one of the boats . This was so happy a shot , that it made the Turke to fallen a stern of the boat and to leave him , 
 by the which means he escaped . Then they all came to me , and requested that they might hang at my stern until day light , by which time I came before the Mole of Chio , and sent my boat on land to the merchants of that place to send for their goods out of hand , or else I would return back with all to Candia , & they should fetch their goods there . But in fine , what by persuasion of my merchant's English men , & those of Chio , I was entreated to come into the harbour , and had a safe assurance for 20 days against the Turkes army , The town of with a bound of the city in the sum of 12000 ducats . Chio is bound go j made haste & sold such goods as I had to Turkes ucau^fir thee came thither , & put all in order , with as much speed safeguard of as I could , fearing the coming of the Turkes navy , the Bark of the which , the chief of the city knew right well . 
 Aucher . go UpOn the sudden they called me of great friendship , 
 & in secret told me , I had no way to save my self but to be gone , for said they , we be not able to defend you , that are not able to help our selves , for the Turke where he comes , takes what he • will , & leaveth what he list , but the chief of the Turkes set order y‘ none shall do any harm to the people or to their goods . This was such news to me , that indeed I was at my wits end , & was brought into many imaginations how to do , for that the wind was contrary . In fine , I determined to go forth . But the merchants English men and other regarding more their gains then the ship , hindered me very much in my purpose of going forth , and made the mariners to come to me to demand their wages to be paid them out of hand , and to have a time [ II i . 101. ] to employ the same there . But God provided so for 
 me > that I paid them their money that night , and then against their charged them , that it they would not set the ship forth , Captain . I would make them to answer the same in England , with danger of their heads . Many were married in England and had somewhat to lose , those did stick to me . I had twelve gunners : the Master gunner who was a mad brained fellow , and the owners servant had 
 a parliament between themselves , and he upon the same came up to me with his sword drawn , swearing that he had promised the owner Sir Anthony Aucher , to live and die in the said ship against all that should offer any harm to the ship , and that he would fight with the whole army of the Turkes , and never yield : with this fellow I had much to do , but at the last I made him confess his fault and follow mine advice . Thus with much labour I got out of the Mole of Chio , into the sea by warping forth , with the help of Genoueses boats , and a French boat that was in the Mole , and being out God sent me a speciali gale of wind to go my way . Then I caused a piece to be shot off for some of my men that were yet in the town , & with much a do they came aboard , and then I set sail a little before one of the clock , and I made all the sail I could , and about half and hour passed two of the clock there came seven galleys into Chio to stay the ship : Turkes 
 and the admiral of them was in a great rage because ' she Ga^tesco^e‘° was gone . Whereupon they put some of the best in prison , and took all the men of the three ships which I left in the port , and put them into the Galleys . They would have followed after me , but that the towns men found means they did not . The next day came thither a hundred more of Galleys , and there tarried for their whole company , which being together were about two hundred & 50 sail , taking their voyage for to surprise the Hand of Malta . The next day after I departed , I had the sighed of Candia , but I was two days after or ever I could get in , where I thought my self out of their danger . There I continued until the Turkes army was passed , who came within the sighed of the town . There was preparation made as though the Turks had come thither . There be in that Hand of Candia many Fwe thousand banished men , that live continually in the mountains , they came down to serve , to the number of foure or ’ ' 
 five thousand , they are good archers , every one with his bow and arrows , a sword and a dagger , with long hair , 
 Master Mathew Baker . 
 and boots that reach up to their grine , and a shirt of male , hanging the one half before , and the other half behind , these were sent away again assoon as the army was passed . They would drink wine out of all measure . Then the army being passed , I jaded my ship with wines and other things : and so after I had that which I left in Chio , I departed for Messina . In the way I found about Zante , certain Galliots of Turkes , laying aboard of certain vessels of Venice laden with Muscatels : I rescued them , and had but a barrel of wine for my powder and shot : and within a few days after I came to Messina . I had in my ship a Spanish pilot called Noblezia , which I took in at Cades at my coming forth : he went with me all this voyage into the Levant without wages , of good will that he bore me and the ship , he stood me in good steed until I came back again to Cades , and then I needed no Pilot. And so from thence I came to London with the ship and goods in safety , God be praised . And all those Mariners that were in my said ship , which were , beside boys , threescore and tenne , for the most part were within five or sixe years after , able to take charge , and did . Richard Chanceller , who first discovered Russia , was with me in that voyage , and Mathew Baker , who afterwards became the Queens Majesties chief shipwright . 
 . 