A discourse of the trade to Chio , in the year 1569. made by Gaspar Campion , unto master Michael Lock , and unto master William Winter , as by his letters unto them both shall appear . Written the 14. of February . 
 Orshipfull Sir , etc. As these days passed 1569. 
 I spoke unto you about the procurement of a safe conduct from the great Turke , for a trade to Chio : The way and manner how it may be obtained with great ease shall plainly appear unto you in the lines following . Sir , you shall under 
 stand that the Island of Chio in time passed hath be a Signiory or lordship of it self , and did belong unto the Genowaies . There were 24. of them that governed the island which were called Mauneses . But in continuance of time the Turke waxed so strong and mighty , that they , considering they were not able to keep it , unless they should become his tributaries , because the Island had no corn , nor any kind of victuals to sustain themselves , but only that which must of necessity come out of the Turkes dominions , and the said island being enclosed with the Turks round about , and but 12. miles from the Turks Continent , therefore the said Genowaies did compound and agree to be the Turkes tributaries , and to pay him 14000. thousand ducats yearly . Always provided , that they should keep their laws both spirituali and temporali , as they did when the Hand [ II i . 115. ] was in their own hands . Thus he granted them their privilege , which they enjoyed for many years , so that all strangers , and also many English men did trade thither of long continuance , and went and came in safety . The Prince In this mean time , the prince Pedro Doria ( being a Pedro Doria Genouois ) became a captain to serve the Emperor with u °f 30 or 40 galleys against the Turke . And since that time diverse other captains belonging to Genoa have be in Emperor . 
 The Mauneses put out of the Hand of Chio by the Turke . 
 The custom throughout all Turkey is ten in every hundreth . 
 English men do buy more commodities of Chio then any other nation . 
 the service of king Philip against the Turke . Moreover , whensoever the Turke made out any army , he perceived that no nation did him more hurt then those Genouois , who were his tributaries . Likewise at the Turkes siege of Malta , before which place he lay a great while , with loss of his men , and also of his galleys , he found none so troublesome unto his force , as one Juanette Doria a Genouois , and diverse others of the Hand of Chio , who were his tributaries . At which sighed , he took such displeasure against them of Chio , that he sent certain of his galleys to the Hand , for to seize upon all the goods of the 24 Mauneses , and to turn them with their wives and children out of the Hand , but they would let none other depart , because the Hand should not be unpeopled . So that now the Turke hath sent one of his chief men to rule there : whereby now it will be more easy for us to obtain our safeconduct then ever it was before . For if the townsmen of Chio did know that we would trade thither ( as we did in times past ) they themselves , and also the customer ( for the Turke in all his dominions does rend his customs ) would be the chiefest procurer of this our safeconduct for his own gain : which is no small matter : for we can pay no less then ten in the hundred throughout the Turks whole dominion . Insomuch , that if one of our ships should go thither , it would be for the customers profit 4000 ducats at least , whereas if we should not trade thither , he should loose so much . Also the burgesses , and the common people would be very glad of our trade there , for the Communally do get more by our countrymen then they do by any other nation whatsoever : for we do use to buy many of their silk quilts , and of their Scamato and Dimite , that the poor people make in that town , more then any other nation , so that we would not so gladly trade , but the people of the country would be twice so willing . Wherefore they themselves would be a means unto their governor , by their petition to bring this trade to pass : giving him to understand that of 
 112 
 all nations in the world we do him least hurt , and that we may do his country great good in consuming those commodities which his country people make . Furthermore , it were far more requisite that we should carry our own commodities , then to suffer a stranger to carry them thither , for that we can afford them better cheap then a stranger can . 1 write not this by hearsay of other men , but of mine own experience , for I have traded in the country above this 30 years , and have be married in the town of Chio full 24 years , so that you may assure yourself that I will write nothing but truth . Now I will declare unto you the wares and commodities that are in the countries near about Chio. There are Great store of very good galls , the best sort whereof are sold in sundrycom-England five shillings dearer then any other country ‘ 
 galls . There is also cotton wool , tanned hides , hides in the hair , wax , chamlets , mocayares , grogerams , silk of diverse countries , cordovan skins tanned white , to be made black , of them great quantity , and also course wool to make beds . The natural commodities growing in the Hand it self are silk raw , and mastic . Of these commodities there are laden yearly ten or twelve great ships of Genoa , beside five or sixe that do belong to the town of Chio , which ships are fraughted for Genoa , Messina , and Ancona . And now that the Mauneses and the chief merchant's of Genoa are banished , the trade is clean lost , by reason whereof merchandise must now of necessity be better cheap then they have be in times past . But yet when all those ships did trade to the country , & also our ships , we never had less then three kintals of galls for a carsie , and in England we sold them for 35 and 36 shillings the hundred . And whereas now they are brought by the Venetians , they fell them unto us for three pound tenne shillings , and foure pound the hundred . Also we had three kintals of cotton wool for a carsie , and sold the wool in England for 50 shillings or 3 pound at the most , whereas now the Italians fell the same to us 
 v 113 h 
 Diverse places where we may have sweet tiles fir our clothing far cheaper then out of Spaine . 
 for 4 pound 10 shillings and 5 pound the hundred . In like manner chamlets , whereas we had three pieces , and of the best sort two and a half for a carsie , and could not fell them above 20 shillings and 22 shillings the piece , they fell them for 30 and 3 5 shillings the piece . Also grogerams , where we had of the best , two pieces and a half for a carsie , they fell them for foure shillings and foure shillings and sixe pence the yard . Carpets the smaller sort which serve for cupboards , we had three for a carsie : whereas we at the most could not fell them but for 20 shillings the piece , they fell them for 35 shillings the piece . And so all other commodities that the Venetians do bring , they fell them to us for the third part more gains then we our selves in those days that we traded in those parts . Likewise the barrels of oil that they bring from Candia , we never could fell them above foure nobles the barrel ! , where they fell them always for 50 shillings & 3 pound the barrel . What great pity is this , that we should loose so good a trade , and may have it in our own hands , and be better welcome to that country then the Venetians . Moreover , the Venetians come very little to Chio , for their most trade is into Alexandria . And for to assure you that we had these commodities in barter of our carsies , look into your father's books , and the books of Sir John Gresham , and his brothers , and you shall find what I have said to be true . 
 Also you know , that we are forced to seek oils out of Spaine , and that for these many years they have be sold for 25 pound and 30 pound the tun : whereas , if we can obtain the foresaid safeconduct from the Turke , there are diverse places in his dominions , where we may lade 500 tons , at 5 pound sterling the tun . The places are Modon , and Coron , which are but twelve miles distant the one from the other , and do stand in our way to Chio , as you may plainly see by the Card. Also these are places where we may utter our own commodities , and not only these two places , 114 
 but many others , where we may have oils , and be better used then we are in Spaine , where we pay very deer , and also are very evil entreated many ways , as to you is not unknown . So that by these means ( if the merchants will ) we may be eased , and have such a trade as the like is not in Christendome . Now , as for getting thee safeconduct , if I were but able to spend one hundred pounds by the year , I would be bound to loose it , if that I did not obtain the foresaid safeconduct . For I know that if the inhabitants of Chio did but think that we would trade thither again , they at their own cost would procure to us a safeconduct , without any penny of charges to the merchants . So that if the merchants will but bear my charges to solicit the cause , I will undertake it my self . Wherefore I pray you speak to M. Winter and the other merchants , that this matter may take effect . And let me have your answer herein assoon as conveniently you may , for that the time of the year draws nigh that this business must be done . Thus I commit you to God , and rest always yours to command . 
 Yours as your servant Gaspar Campion . 
 . 