The manner of the entering of Soliman the great Turke , with his army into Aleppo in Syria , marching towards Persia against the Great Sophy , the fourth day of November , 1553 , noted by Master Anthony Jenkinson , present at that time . 
 0Here marched before the Grand Signior , otherwise called the Great Turke , 6000 Esperes , otherwise called light horsemen very brave , clothed all in scarlet . 
 After , marched 10000 men , called Nortans , which be tributaries to the Great Turke , clothed all in yellow velvet , and hats of the same , of the Tartary fashion , two foot long , with a great role of the same colour about their foreheads , richly decked , with their bows in their hands , of the Turkish fashion . 
 After them marched foure Captains , men of arms , called in Turkish Saniaques , clothed all foure in crimson 105 
 velvet , every one having under his banner twelve thousand men of arms well armed with their morrions upon their heads , marching in good order , with a short weapon by their sides , called in their language , Simiterro . 
 After came 16000 Janizaries , called the slaves of the Grand Signior , all a foot , every one having his harquebus , who be his guard , all clothed in violet silk , and appareled upon their heads with a strange form , called Cuocullucia , fashioned in this sort : the entering in of the forehead is like a skull made of white velvet , & hath a train hanging down behind , in manner of a French hood , of the same colour , and upon the forepart of the said skull , just in the mids of his forehead there is standing bolt upright like a trunk of a foot [ IL i . 113. ] long of silver , garnished most richly with Goldsmiths work , and precious stones , and in the top of the said trunk a great bush of feathers , which waveth up and down most bravely when he marches . 
 After this , there cam 1000. pages of honour , all clothed in cloth of gold , the half of them carrying harquebusses , and the other half Turkish bows , with their trusses of arrows , marching in good order . 
 Then came three men of arms well armed , and upon their harness coats of the Turkes fashion , of Libard skins , and murrions upon their heads , their spears charged , and at the end of their staff hard by you head of the spear , a horse tail died in a bloody colour , which is their ensign : they be the challengers for the Turkes own person . 
 After them came seven pages of honour in cloth of silver , upon seven white horses , which horses were covered with cloth of silver , all embroidered and garnished with precious stones , emeralds , diamonds , and rubies most richly . 
 After them also came sixe more pages of honour , clothed in cloth of gold , every one having his bow in his hand , and his fawchine of the Turkes fashion by his side . 
 106 
 Immediately after them came the great Turke himself with great pomp & magnificence , using in his countenance and gesture a wonderful majesty , having only on each side of his person one page clothed with cloth of gold : he himself was mounted upon a goodly white horse , adorned with a robe of cloth of gold , embroidered most richly with the most precious stones , and upon his head a goodly white tuck , containing in length by estimation fifteene yards , which was of silk and linen woven together , resembling something Callicut cloth , but is much more fine and rich , and in the top of his crown , a little pinnach of white Ostrich feathers , and his horse most richly appareled in all points correspondent to the same . 
 After him followed sixe goodly young ladies , mounted upon fine white hackneis , clothed in cloth of silver , which were of the fashion of men's garments , embroidered very richly with pearl and precious stones , and had upon their heads caps of Goldsmiths work , having great flackets of hair , hanging out on each side , died as read as blood , and the nails of their fingers died of the same colour , every of them having two eunuchs on each side , and Iide bows in their hands , after and Antic fashion . 
 After marched you great Basham chief conductor of the whole army , clothed with a robe of Dollymant crimson , and upon the same another short garment very rich , and about him fiftie Janizaries afoot , of his own guard , all clothed in crimson velvet , being armed as the great Turks own Janizaries . 
 Then after ensued three other Bashas , with slaves about them , being afoot , to the number of three thousand men . 
 After came a company of horsemen very brave , and in all points well armed , to the number of foure thousand . 
 All this aforesaid army , most pompous to behold , which was in number foure score and eight thousand men , encamped about the city of Aleppo , and the Grand 107 
 A.D. 
 1553 
 Signior himself was lodged within the town , in a goodly castle , situated upon a high mountain : at the foot whereof runneth a goodly river , which is a branch of that famous river Euphrates . 
 The rest of his army passed over the mountains of Armenia called now the mountains of Carnarie , which are foure days journey from Aleppo , appointed there to tarry the coming of the Grand Signior , with the rest of his army , intending to march into Persia , to give battle to the great Sophy . So the whole army of the Grand Signior , containing as well those that went by the mountains , as also those that came to Aleppo in company with him , with horsemen & footmen , and the conductors of the camels and victuals , were the number of 300000. men . 
 The camels which carried munition and victuals for the said army , were in number 200000. 
 . 