A brief description of the Hand of Cyprus : by the which not only the Venetians title why they have so long enjoyed it , but also the Turks , whereby now he claimeth it , may plainly appear . 
 ESTgjlHe Hand of Cyprus is environed with diverse seas : f°r Westward it is washed with the sea called SmhShI Pamphilium : Southward , with the sea TEgyptium : on the East part , with the sea Syrium : and Northward , with the sea called Cilicium . The which Hand in time passed had diverse names : called once Acamantis , as Sabellicus witnesseth . Philonides makes mention , that it was called sometime Cerasis . Xenogoras writeth , that it was nam Aspelia , Amathusa , & Macaria . There were in times passed fifteene cities or famous towns in it , but now very few , among the which Famagusta is the chiefest & strongest , situated by the sea side . There is also Nicosia , which was wont , by the traffic 124 
 of Merchants , to be very wealthy : beside the city of Baffo , Arnica , Saline , Limisso , Melipotamo , & Episcopia . Timosthenes affirmeth , that this Hand is in compass 429 miles : and Arthemidorus writeth the length of the same to be 162 miles , measuring of it from the East to the West , betwixt two promontories nam Dinaretta and Acamanta . This Hand is thought to be very rich , abundant of Wine , Oil , Grain , Pitch , Rozin , Alum , Salt , and of diverse precious stones , pleasant , profitable , and necessary for men use , and much frequented of Merchants of Syria , unto the which it lies very never . It hath be , as Plinie writeth , joined sometime with Syria , as Sicilia hath been also with Italy . It was a long time subject unto the Roman , after to the Persians , and to the Soldan of . / Egypt . The selfsame Hand was sometime also English , being conquered by king Richard the first , in his voyage to Hierusalem in the year of our Lord 1192. Who ( as Polydore writeth in his fourteenth book of our English historic ) being prohibited by the Cypriottes from arrival there , invaded and conquered the same soon after by force : and having left behind him sufficient garrisons to keep the same , departed from thence to Ptolemayda : who afterwards exchanged the same with Guy of Lusignan , that was the last christened king of Hierusalem , for the same kingdom . For the which cause the kings of England were long time after called kings of Hierusalem . And last of all , the Venetians have enjoyed it of late a long time , in this order following . In the year of our Lord 1470 , John king of the said Hand , son to Janus of Lusignan , had by Helen his wife , which was of the Imperial house of Paleologus , one daughter only called Charlotta , and a bastard called James : the which James was afterwards consecrated Bishop of Nicosia . This Charlotta was married first to the king of Portingall , of whom he had no issue , so that he being dead , Lewes Duke of Savoy ( to whom she was the second time married ) son to Lewes the second of that name ( unto 
 125 
 whom the said Hand by the right of this his wife Charlotta did appertain ) had the possession of the same . James the bastard assoon as his father was dead , of a Bishop became a soldier , and with and army won the Hand , making it his own by force . This Duke of Savoy hearing these news , with a number of well appointed soldiers , arrived shortly after in Cyprus , and recovering again the Hand , compelled the bastard to fly forthwith over to the Soldan of / Egypt . Who making himself his subject , in time so wrought and tempered the matter , that the Soldan in person at his request passed over into Cyprus , besieged Duke Lewes in the castle of Nicosia , and at length compelled him to depart , leaving his kingdom . So that this Bishop became again King of this Hand : who shortly after cleaving to the Venetians having made a league of friendship with them , married by their consent one Catherina the daughter of Marco Cornaro , which Catherin the Senate of Venice adopted unto them soon after as their daughter . This Bishop not long after sickened , and died , leaving this his wife with child , who lived not long after his father's death . By the which means the Venetians making themselves the next heirs to Catherina by the law of adoption , took unto them the possession of this kingdom , and have kept and enjoyed the same almost this hundred years . Now this great Turke called Sultan Selim in the right of the Soldan of / Egypt , whom his grandfather ( called also Sultan Selim ) conquered , pretendeth a right title unto it , and now , as you may understand by reading of this short Treatise , hath by conquest obtained the same . Whom I pray the everliving God , if it be his holy will , shortly to root out from thence . 
 126 
 Am not ignorant ( gentle Reader ) how hard a matter it is for any one man to write that , which should please and satisfy all persons , we being commonly of so diverse opinions and contrary judgements : again Tully affirmeth it to be a very difficult thing , to find out any 
 matter which in his own kind may be in all respects perfect . Wherefore I trust by your own judgement I ought of reason to be the sooner pardoned ( my translation being precisely tied to mine authors meaning ) if any thing herein beside be thought to be wanting : I have learned by the way how cumbrous a thing it is to turn the selfsame matter out of the Italian language into our country speech . But who so doth what he possibly can is bound to no more . And I now at the request of others ( who put me in mind , that I was not only born unto my self ) have accomplished that in the end , which I promised and was required . With what pain and diligence , I refer me [ II i . 121. ] to them which are skilful in the Italian tongue , or may the better judge , if it please them to try the same , casting aside this exampier . I speak it not arrogantly , I take God to witness : but men's painful travels ought not lightly to be condemned : nor surely at any time are wont to be of the learned , or discreet . By whose gentle acceptation if these my present doings be now supported , I will persuade my self that I have reaped sufficient fruit of my travel . Unto whom with all my heart I wish prosperous success in all their affairs . 
 Ann. Dom. 1572. W. M. 
 [ In Turchas 
 127 
 Um Deus , succurre tuis , miseresce tuorum , Et subeat gentis te nova cura tuae . 
 Quem das tantorum finem , Rex magne , laborum ? 
 In nos vibrabit tela quousque Sathan ? 
 Ante Rhodum , mox ind^ Chium , nunc denique Cyprum , Turcharum cepit sanguinolenta manus . 
 Mustafa foedifragus parts grassatur in omnes , Et Veneta Cypriam strage cruentat humum . 
 Nec finem imponit sceleri , molli tue furorem , Nec nisi potato sanguine pastus abit . 
 Qualis , quae nunquam nisi plena tum^nsque cruore Sanguisuga obsessam mittit hirudo cutem . 
 Torturam sequitur tortura , cruorque cruorem , Et caedem admissam caedis alius amor . 
 Saevit inops animi , nec vel se temperate ipse , Vel manus indomitum nostra domare potest . 
 At tu , magne Pater , tumidum disperde Tyrannum , Nec sine mactari semper ovile tuum . 
 Exulet hoc monstrum , ne sanguine terra redundet . 
 Excutiantque novum Cypria regna jugum . » Et quod Christicolae foedus pepigere Monarchae , Id faustum nobis omnibus esse velis . 
 Tu pugna illorum pugnas , & bella secundes . 
 Captiv6sque tibi subde per arma Scythas . Sic tua per totum fundetur gloria mundum , Unus sic Christus fiet , & una fides . 
 Gulielmus Malim . 
 128 
 The true report of all the success of Famagusta , made by the Earl Nestor Martiningo , unto the renowned Prince the Duke of Venice . 
 He sixteenth day of February , * 1571 , the fleet which had brought the aid unto Famagusta , departed from thence , whereas were found in all the army , but foure thousand footmen , eight hundred of them chosen soldiers , and three thousand ( accounting the Citizens and other of 
 the Villages ) the rest two hundred in number were 
 * In Italy and other places the date of the year of the Lord is always changed the first of January , or on New years day , and from that day reckoned upon : although we he ere in England , especially the temporali lawyers for certain causes are not wont to altar the same un till the Annunciation of our Lady . 
 soldiers of Albania . After the arrival of the which 
 succour , the fortification of the City went more diligently forward of all hands , then it did before , the whole garrison , the Grecian Citizens inhabiting the Town , the Governors and Captains not withdrawing themselves from any kind of labour , for the better encouragement and good example of others , both night and day searching the watch , to the intent with more careful heed taking they might beware of their enemies , against whom they made no sally out of the City to skirmish but very seidome , especially to understand when they might learn the intent of the enemies . Whilst we made 
 this diligent provision within the City , the Turks without made no less preparation of all things necessary , fit to batter the fortress withal , as in bringing out of Caramania and Syria with all speed by the Sea , many woollpacks , a great quantity of wood and timber , diverse pieces of artillery , engines , and other things expedient for their purpose . 
 At the beginning of April Halli Basham landed there 
 with fourscore galleys or thereabouts in his company , who [ II i . 122. ] brought thither that , which of our enemies was desired , who soon after departing from thence , and leaving behind him thirty galleys , which continually transported soldiers , munition , fresh victuals , and other necessaries , 
 v 129 i 
 * Carumusa-lini be vessels like unto the French Ga-bards , sailing daily upon the river of Bordeaux , which sail w* a misen or triangle sail . 
 * Maone be vessels like unto you great hulks , which come hither from Denmarke , some of the which carry 7 or 8 hundred tons a piece , flat and broad , which sail some of them with seven misens a piece . * Palandrie be great flat vessels made like Feriboats to transport horse . 
 Nicosia , otherwise called Nicosia . 
 Sig. Braga-dino was Proveditore , that is , Governor , and Sig. BagHone general of the Christian army . 
 beside a great number of * Caramusalins , or Brigandines , great Hulks called * Maones , and large broad vessels termed of them * Palandrie , which continually passed to and from between Cyprus and Syria , and other places thereabouts , which they did with great speed , standing in fear of the Christian army . And about the midst of the same month the Turkes caused to be brought out of the City of Nicosia , which they had won a little before , fifteene pieces of artillery , and raising their army from whence they were before , making ditches and trenches necessary , encamped themselves in gardens , and towards the West part of Famagusta near a place called Precipola . 
 The five and twentieth day of the same month they raised up mounts to plant their artillery upon , and caused trenches to be made for harquebusiers , one very nigh another , approaching still very near the City , in such order , as was almost impossible to stay the same , fortie thousand of their Pioneers continually labouring there the most part of all the night . The intent of the enemy being then known , and in what part of the City he minded most to plant his battery , we took diligent heed on the other part , to repair and fortify all places necessary within . For the which cause we placed a great watch in that way , which was covered with a counterscarp , and in the sallies of their privy Posterns , for the defence of the said counterscarp , there were new flankers made , also Traverses called Butterisses made upon the Cortaine , with one trench of Turves two foot high and broad , the which was made on that side of the wall of the City , which was already battered with the shot of the Turkes , with certain loop holes for our Harquebusiers , by the which they defended the counterscarp . Two noble personages Bragadino and Baglione personally took this charge on them , by the which means the Christian affairs passed in very good order . All the bred for our Soldiers was made in one storehouse , of the which the noble gentleman Lorenzo 
 130 
 Tiepolo captain of * Baffo had charge , who refused no pain , where he thought his travel might prevail . In the castle was placed that famous gentleman Andrea Bragadino , who with a diligent guard had charge on that part of the castle principally , next unto the sea side , trimming and digging out new flankers for the better defence of the * Arsenal . 
 A valiant knight nam Foito was appointed Master of the Ordinance , who was slave within few days after in a skirmish , whose garrison the noble Bragadino Proveditore before nam presently delivered over to me . Three other captains were appointed over the wildfire with twentie footmen for every one of them , chosen out of the army , to use and execute the same as occasion should serve . The best pieces of Ordinance were brought forth unto that side of the Town , where the battery was looked for to be made : and they made privy fences to cover the better their cannon shot withal . There was no want in the Christians to annoy their enemies in issuing often out of every side against them , aswell to hinder their determinations , as to hurt them otherwise at diverse times . They also rendered to us the like . For three hundred of the inhabitants of Famagusta one time issuing out of the city , armed only with their swords and targets , with so many Italian Harquebusiers also in their company , received great damage , because the trenches of the enemies were made about so thick , although at the same present we compelled them to fly , and slew also many of them : yet they increased to such number , that they killed presently thirty , and hurt there threescore of our company . For the which cause order was taken , that our men should no more come forth of their hold , committing themselves to manifest peril to bid their enemies the base . 
 The Turkes in process of time by little and little with their trenches , came at length to the top of the counterscarp , and having furnished their forts the nineteenth day of May , began their battery with ten forts , having 
 131 
 A.D. 
 1571. 
 * Baffo of the ancient writers nam Paphos , in the which City there was a sumptuous Church dedicated to Venus . 
 * Arsenal in Constantinople and Venice is the place for munition and artillery to lie in . 
 threescore and foureteene pieces of great artillery within their custody , among the which there were foure Basilisks ( for so they term them ) of and immeasurable greatness , and began to batter from the gate Limisso unto the Arsenal , and laid five batteries against the town , the one against the great high Turret of the Arsenal , which was battered with five pieces of Ordinance mounted upon that fort of the rock , the other against the Cortaine it self of the Arsenal , battered by one fort with eleven pieces : another against the Keep of Andruzzi with two commanders , or cavaliers , which were above with one fort of eleven other pieces : another battery against the Turret of S. Nappa , the which was battered with foure Basilisks . The gate of Limisso , which had one high commander or cavalier alone , and a Brey and Cortaine without was battered by the forts with three and thirty pieces of artillery , whereas Mustafa himself general of the Turkes army took the charge in person . At the first they seemed not to care much to spoil the walls , but shot still into the city , [ II i . 123. ] and against our Ordinance , which greatly galled them . 
 Whereupon they , who were within the city , aswell our soldiers , as the Grecians , assoon as the battery began , withdrawing themselves , came and dwelled by the walls of the city , whereas they continued from that time to the end of the siege . The noble Bragadino lodged in the Keep of Andruzzi , Baglioni in that ward of S. Nappa . The honourable Tiepolo in that which was called Campo Santo . Wherefore they being present at all that was done , both encouraged , and punished the soldiers according to their deserts . The right worshipful Luigi Martiningo was appointed chief over the Ordinance , who answering all men's expectation of him , with great courage divided the charge thereof unto sixe other inferior captains , who took order and care for that company , and for the provision of things necessary for the gunners : one company of the Grecians being appointed to every gate of the City for to attend upon 132 
 the service of the artillery . The valiant captain Francesco Bagone warded at the Keep , and at the great Commander of the Arsenal . Captain Pietro Conte attended upon the Cortaine , at the Commander of the Volti , and at the Keep of Campo Santo . I for my part attended upon the Commander of Campo Santo , and upon the Commander of Andruzzi , and of the Cortaine , unto the Turret of Santa Nappa . The Earl Hercole Martiningo attended upon the Commander of Santa Nappa , and to the whole Cortaine , unto the gate of Limisso . Horatio Captain of Veletri attended upon the Brey and Cortaine towards the Bulwark . Upon the high Commander of Limisso , which was more troubled then all the rest , attended the Captain Roberto Malvezzi . At the same time , when the battery began ( by the commission of the honourable Bragadino ) victuals were appointed , and given to all the soldiers , aswell Grecians , as Italians , and Gunners : namely Wine , Pottage , Cheese , and Bacon : all the which things were brought to the walls as need did require in very good order , so that no soldier there spent any more in bred then two souses a day . They were paid at the end of every thirty days with the great travel of that right worshipful Venetian gentleman M. Giovanni Antonio Querini , who beside this his ordinary charge was found present in all weighty and dangerous affairs to the great encouragement of our soldiers . And we made a counterbattery against our enemies for ten days space , with so great rage , that we choked and destroyed fifteene of their best pieces , also we killed and dispatched of them about thirty thousand at that season , so that they were disappointed at that time of their battery in that place , and were greatly dismayed . But we foreseeing that we had no great store of powder left , there was made a restraint , and such order taken , that thirty pieces should not shoot off but thirty shot a piece every day , and that in the presence of the Captains , who were still present , because the Soldiers and Gunners should not shoot off in vain . 
 133 
 Two Venetian souses or Soldi amount but to one penny English . 
 The nine and twentieth day of May there came towards us from Candia a Fregat or Pinnace , the which giving us great hope and lightning of aid , increased marvellously every men courage . The Turks with great travel and slaughter of both sides , had woonne at the last the counterscarp from us , with great resistance and mortality on both parts . Whereupon they began on the other side of the fift battery to fill up the ditch , with the earth that they threw down , which was taken near the wall of the counterscarp . But all that earth and falling down of the wall made by the shot of their artillery , was carried away of us within the city , all our company labouring continually aswell by night as day , until our enemies had made certain loopholes in the wall , thorough the which they flanking and scouring all the ditch with their harquebus , stopped our former course of carrying , or going that way any more , without certain and express danger . But M. Giovanni Marmori , a fortifier , had devised a certain kind of joined boards , the which being carried of the soldiers , defended them from the shot of the Harquebusiers , so that some other quantity of earth , but no great store , was carried also away : in the which place this foresaid fortifier was slain , who had done especial good service in all our necessary affairs . And our enemies having cast so much earth into the ditch , as filled it up again , and made it a firm way to the wall of the counterscarp , and casting before them the earth by little and little , they made one traverse even unto the wall on two sides in all their batteries , the which they made thick and strong with woolpacks , and other faggots , to assure themselves the better of our flankers . 
 When they had once possessed the ditch , that they could not be hurt of us but by chance , they began forthwith to cast and dig out undermines to undermine the Brey , the Turret of Santa Nappa , the Commander of Andruzzi , the Keep of Campo Santo , the Cortaine , and the Turrion of the Arsenal : so that being able not 
 134 
 longer to serve our turn enjoy those few flankers , we threw down wildfire into our enemies camp , the which annoyed them very soar , because it fired their woolpacks , & also their faggots . And for the better encouragement of the soldiers , the right honourable Bragadino gave to every soldier one ducat , you which could gain or recover any of the former woolpackes , [ II i . 124. ] making countermines in all places . To the which charge Maggio the fortifier knight was appointed , who in all our business served with such diligence and courage , as he was able , or was requisite . But the countermines met not , saving those of the Commander of S. Nappa , of Andruzzi , and that of Campo Santo , because they * ^Ibanois were open , and our men sallied out often both by day soldiers , soul-and night into the ditch to perceive better the way of dyers of the mines , and to fire the faggots and wool . Nor we ceased at any time through the unspeakable travel of caved the Lord Baglione ( who had the oversight of all these who commonly matters ) to trouble our enemies intents , by all manner of serve the wit and policy , dividing the companies for the batteries , Returns both joining and planting in all places a garrison of the mdfiottVery * Albanois soldiers , who aswell on foot as on horse - skilful y back , showed always notable courage and manhood , painful . 
 The first assault . 
 THe one and twentieth day of June they put fire to the mine of the Turret of the Arsenal , whereas Giambelat Bey took charge , who with great ruin rend in sunder a most great and thick wall , and so opened the same , that he threw down more then half thereof , breaking also one part of the vaimure , made before to uphold the assault . And suddenly a great number of the Turkes skipping upon the ruins thereof , displayed their Ensigns , even to the top of the same . Captain Pietro Conte with his company was in that ward , the which was much shaken and terrified by that sudden ruin . I with my company came first thither , so that they shortly took the repulse , and although they re - 
 135 
 Of this noble fit painful Venetian gentleman M. Gio. Antonio Querini ( who was afterwards hewn in sunder by the commandment of Mustafa ) I was entertained very courteously in my travel ! at Corcyra , now called Corfu , he being then there Mag. Castellano or Capitaine of one of the Castles . 
 In extremities men have no regard to spare trifles . 
 freshed themselves with new supplies five or sixe times , yet they failed of their purpose . There fought personally the Lord Baglione : Bragadino and Querini being armed stood not far off to refresh and comfort our Soldiers , and the Captain of the Castle with the Ordinance , that was planted upon the Butteries destroyed many of our enemies , when they gave the assault , the which endured five hours together : so that of Turks were slain very many , and of our side between them that were slain and hurt one hundred : most part of the which number were cast away by a mischance of our wildfire , the which being unadvisedly and negligently handled , burned up many of our own company . There died at that present the Earl Gio. Francesco Goro , the Captain Barnardino Agubio : and by the throwing of stones Hercole Malatesta , Captain Pietro Conte , with other Captains and Standerdbearers , were very soar hurt . 
 The night following arrived in Cyprus a Pinnace from Candia , which bringing news of most certain aid , greatly increased both the mirth and courage of us all , so that we made soon after , with the help of the Captain Marco Crivellatore , and Maggio the knight , certain retreats flanked to all the places beaten down , and whereas they suspected that the enemy had dug up any mines , with Hogsheads , Chests , Tikes , and Sacks stuffed full of moist earth ( the Grecians with all speed having already brought almost all that which they had ) > because they having dispatched their Canveis about necessary uses , they brought their hangings , cortaines , carpets , even to their very sheets , to make and stuff up their foresaid sacks , a very good and ready way to make up again their vaimures , the which were thrown down with the fury of the artillery , which never stinted , so that we made up again still that in the night , the which was thrown down and broken in the day , sleeping very seidome : all the soldiers standing always upon the walls , visited continually of the 136 
 Governors of the City , which slept at no time , but in Provident the extreme heat of the day , having no other time oarefull to take their rest , because the enemy was at hand , giving us continually alarms , not suffering us long to seidome skepe breath . all the night 
 at any time , The second assault . muchiessein 
 - j . ... - dangerous 
 ' I ' He nine and twentieth day of the same month seasons . 
 A they set the mine made towards the Brey on fire , the which mine was dug in stone , which brake and cleft all things in pieces , and caused great ruin , making and easy way for the enemy to assault us , who with and outrageous fury came to the top , whereas Mustafa their general was altogether present , which assault was received , and stayed at the beginning of sma^ the Earl Hercole Martiningo with his garrison , and at . the so were repulsed by our company , who fought with - time g0 „ e out any advantage of covert , the vaimure being helpeth much . thrown down by the mine . There were slain of our company Captain Meani the Sergeant Major of our army , Captain Celio de Fuochi , Captain Erasmo da Fermo : and Captain Soldatello , Antonio d’Ascoli , Captain Gio. d’Istria , Standard bearer , with many other officers , were soar wounded , there died also 30 other of our common soldiers . At the Arsenal they were beaten back with greater damage of our enemies , and small hurt to us . Five only of our [ II i . 125. ] part being slain there , whereas Captain Giacomo de Fabriano also was killed , and I was wounded in my left leg with and harquebus shot . The which assault That certain continued sixe hours , the Bishop of Limisso standing women in-up there , encouraging the Soldiers . Where also th ” were found present stout women , who came thither or man _ with weapons , stones , and water , to help the Soul - kind , I saw diours . Our enemies understanding how great hin - sufficient trial derance they had received at these two assaults , changed their minds , and began again with greater fury then ever they had before accustomed to lay Saline . 
 137 
 It is accounted a good warlike shift , to leave that to our enemies with hindrance , which we can not any longer keep , and use to our own commodity . 
 battery to all places , and into our retreats , so that they labouring more speedily then ever they did , made seven other forts more , under the castle , and taking away the artillery from them which were farther off , planting of it somewhat nearer , to the number of fourescore , they battered the hold with so great rage , that on the eighth day of July , with the same night also were numbered five thousand Canon shot , and after that sort they overthrew to the ground the vaimures , that scarcely with great travel and pain we could repair them again , because our men that laboured about them were continually slain by their Ordinance , and by reason of the endless tempest of the shot of their Harquebusiers . And our men began to decrease . For the Turkes caused us to retire from our Breyes , by the violence of their artillery and mining , in such sort , that there being no more standing left for our Soldiers , because we making our vaimures more thick , our standing began to wax narrower , the which presently we of necessity enlarged with boards as a scaffold to the vaimure , whereby we might have more elbow room to fight . Captain Maggio also made one mine under the said Brey , to the intent , that we being not able any longer to keep it , the same might be left to our enemies to their great hindrance . 
 The third assault . 
 TO the said Brey the ninth day of July they gave the third assault , to the Turrion of Santa Nappa , to that of Andruzzi , to the Cortaine , to the Keep of the Arsenal : the which assault having continued more then sixe hours , they were beaten back in foure places , but we left the Brey to their great loss , and ours also : because we being assaulted , our company being not able to manage their Pikes in good order , by reason of the narrowness of the standing where they were , being willing to retire in that order , as the L. Baglione had prescribed unto them , and could not , 138 
 I57I-cast themselves at the last into a confuse order , and retired , they being mingled among the Turkes : so that fire being given to our mine , the same ( with a terrible sighed to behold ) slew presently of our enemies more then one thousand , and above one hundred of us . There was slain Roberto Malvezzi , and Captain Marchetto de Fermo was grievously wounded . At the assault of the Arsenal was slain Captain David Noce master of the Camp , & I my self was hurt by the racing of a Cannon shot . This assault continued five hours , and the Citizens of Famagusta showed great courage in every place , with their women also , and young striplings . The Brey was so defaced by reason of this mine set on fire , that no body any more attempted to recover the same : because there was no apt place remaining to stay upon . The left flanker only remained still , whereas another mine was made . The gate of Limisso was over against this foresaid Brey , and somewhat lower , which was always open , having made to the same a Portali , with a Percollois annexed to it , the which Percollois by the cutting of a small cord , was a present defence to the gate , and our Soldiers gave their attendance by that gate to bring in the battered earth , which fell in the ditches from the rampaire : and when they saw that their enemies in foure days came not thither , they began to entrench above the Brey , and by the flankers above they suffered no ™ person to pass out of the gate , the which thing at brought great suspicion unto our enemies , because they dangerous were often times assailed of our company . times not only 
 muck come - 
 The fourth assault . forteth the 
 common soulWHerefore they came the foureteenth day of July dier , but also to assault the gate of Limisso , and laying their increases battery to all other places , they came and planted their Ensigns even before the gate , whereas the L. Baglione , endation^ ' and Sig. Luigi were in readiness , who had taken upon all men . 
 139 
 them to defend that gate of the City . Who assoon as they had encouraged their Soldiers , sallying swiftly forth , killed , and put to flight the greater part of them , and at the last giving fire to the mine of the flanker slew foure hundred Turkes , and Sig. Baglione at the same time won and Ensign of our enemies , wresting it violently out of one of the Ensign bearer hands . The day following they gave fire to the mine of the Cortaine , the which thing not [ II i . 126. ] falling out greatly to their purpose , they followed not their prepared assault . Wherefore they began to fortify , and advance higher their traverses in the ditches , for their better assurance against they should give the assault : and they had emptied and carried away all the earth near unto the counterscarf , where they lodged in their pavilions , so that we could not descry them . They shot seven pieces of artillery upon the wall of the counterscarp so covertly , that they were not seen : two from the Brey of the Turrion of Santa Nappa , one from Andruzzi , and two other all along the battery of the Cortaine . And they came with certain boards covered with raw and green e hides , under which they brought their men to dig in the vaimures , we being nothing behind or forgetful to cast wildfire among them , and sometime to issue forth of our sallies called Posterns , to offend their Pioneers , although to our great hindrance . And we still repaired the vaimures by all means possible , with BufFe skins , being moist and wet , throwing in also earth , shreads , and cotton with water , being well bound together with cords : all the women of Famagusta gathering themselves together into companies in every street ( being guided of one of their Monks called Caloiero ) resorted daily to a certain place appointed , to labour , gathering and providing for the soldiers , stones and water , the which was kept for all assaults in half buts to quench the fire , which the Turks threw among them . 
 140 
 Having had no great success in taking of the gate , they found out a new way , never herd of before , in gathering together a great quantity of certain wood called Teglia , which easily burned , and smelled very evil , the which they throwing before the former gate of the City , and faggots fastened to the same , with certain beams besmeared with Pitch , kindled suddenly so great a fire , as was not possible for us to quench the same , although we threw upon it whole Buts of water , which were thrown down from and high Commander , which Buts presently brake in sunder . 
 This fire continued foure days , wherefore we were enforced by reason of the extreme heat and stinch , to withdraw our selves further inward , and they descending towards their lower flankers , began other mines , so that the gate was shut up , because it could be no longer kept open , and suddenly ( a thing marvellous to be spoken ) the standing of the Brey being repaired , and made up again , they planted one piece over against the gate , the which of us with stones , earth and other things , was suddenly buried up . By this time we were driven to and exigent , all our provision within the City stooping very low , saving only hope , the noble courage of the Governors and Captains , and the stout readiness of the Soldiers : our wine , and flesh as well forsaketh . powdered as unpowdered was spent , nor there was any Saguntina Cheese to be got , but upon and unreasonable price , our fame's . company having eaten up their Horses , Asses , and Cats , for lack of other victualis : there was nothing left to 
 Teglia in Latin called Teda is a certain wood which burns easily , and savoureth unpleasantly , of the which there is great store in Sicilia . • sometime it is used for a torch . 
 No necessary thing to be done was left unattempted on either part . 
 men courage oft abateth , but hope seidome 
 be eaten , but a small quantity of Bred , and Beans , and we drank water and Vinegar together , whereof was not much left . When that we perceived that our enemies had dug and cast up three mines in the Commander of the gate , they labouring in all places more diligently then ever they did before , bringing into the ditch , over against the battery of the Cortaine , a hill of earth , as high as the wall : and already they came to the wall above the Counterscarp over against the Turrion of the Arsenal , 
 141 
 wont to travel , but by night only . A letter or supplication exhibited by 
 1571. 
 and had made one Commander complete , fenced with shares , like unto plough shares , in proportion and height correspondent to ours . 
 Within the City were remaining but five hundreth Italian Soldiers , who were not hurt , yet very faint and weary by their long watching and pains , in fighting in In July the those fervent and burning heats , which are in those heat is so ex - partS - And the greater and better part also of the Ilandlhatthe Grecians were by this time slain , whenas the chief of inhabitants those Citizens remaining did fully resolve themselves ( the thereof are not which was about the twentieth day of July ) to present a supplication in writing to that noble gentleman Bragadino Proveditore , desiring and beseeching him , that seeing their Ci tie and Fortress was thus battered and brought to extremity , without sufficient aid to defend the same , without substance or sustenance , having no hope of 
 the Cypriot - SUCCOur , or any new supply , they having spent and con-^ragad^w ' summed not only their goods , but also their lives for the ’ defence of them , and in testifying of their dutiful service towards the noble and royal state of the Signiory of Venice , that it might now please him , and the rest of the honourable Governors , that were present , and put in trust , having a careful eye unto some honourable conditions , to have now at the last a respect to the credit and honour of their long traveled wives , and the safeguard of their poor children , which otherwise were shortly very like to be a prey to their bloudthirsting and ravening The answer enemies . To the which letter or supplication speedy of the firmer answer was made by the forenamed honourable Braga-e er ' dino , comforting them , that they should by no means abate their courage , and that shortly he looked for succour from the Signiory , diminishing as much as he might , the fear which they had conceived in their hearts , dispatching and sending away suddenly from Cyprus into [ IL i . 127. ] Candia , a Pinnace to certify the duke and governors there , in what extremity they were . The Turkes by this time had ended their mines , and set them on fire , the 29. of July : in the which space our men , according as they 142 
 were wont to do , renewed and made up again the vaimures ruined before by the Ordinance , and having no other stuff left to advance them with , made sacks of 
 It stands with reason , 
 Kersie , unto the which the noble Tiepolo diligently looked . The three mines of the Commander did great damage to us , having thrown down the greater part of the earth , whereas the governor Randacchi was slain . ™ a " ingthe The mine of the Arsenal overthrew all the rest of the greater , to let 
 Turrion , having garrison of our remaining . 
 smoldered and choked one whole the sser soldiers , the two flankers only still 
 The fift assault . 
 THe enemies traveled much to become master's of those foresaid flankers , and to sally forth by the other batteries , and this assault lasted from three of the clock in the after noon until night , where , and at what time were slain very many of our enemies . In this assault Sig. Giacomo Strambali , among the rest , showed much worthiness , as he had done before in other conflicts . 
 The sixt and last assault . 
 THe next morning following , at the break of the day , they assailed all places , the which assault continued more then sixe hours , with very little hurt on our side , because our enemies fought more coldly then they were wont to do , annoying of us continually on the Sea side with their Galleys , shooting in all their assaults and batteries continually Cannon shot in all parts of the City , as near as they might . After we Necessity oft had defended and repulsed this assault , and perceived timetyesseth things brought to a narrower strait then they were that , whick wont to be at , we having left in all the whole City our will cm-but seven barrels of powder , the governors of the tinually City fully determined to yield up themselves and the sPurneth City , with honourable conditions . Wherefore the first aSamst " of August in the after noon , they took a truce , one 
 143 
 being come for that purpose from Mustafa the general , with whom they concluded the next morning following to give two hostages a piece , until such time as both armies were agreed . For our hostages ( by the appointment of the right honourable Bragadino ) were sent forth the earl Hercole Martinengo , and Signior Matteo Colsi a Citizen of Famagusta , and from our enemies came into the City the Lieutenant of Mustafa , Giannezeribe and the Agam of the Giannizzers , the which were met , e^tw-ke6 even unto e gate City , of Signiour Baglione 
 that ’ / Iga de two hundreth harquebusiers : ours also were met 
 Giannizeri is in like manner with great pomp with horsemen and the captain of harquebusiers , with the son also of Mustafa in person , the Turkes who made very much of them . 
 & are ’ The Lord Baglione imparld with these hostages , 
 which were then come for that purpose of the articles of peace , requiring by them of their general , their lives , armour , and goods , five . pieces of Ordinance , three of the best horses , and safe passage from thence unto Candia accompanied with their Galleys , and last of all , that the Grecians inhabiting the Island , might dwell there still quietly , and enjoy peaceably their own goods and possessions , living still Christians Just Turkish hereafter , as they had done before . All the which dealing , to requests and articles were agreed upon , granted , and speakeandnot subscribed unto by the hand of Mustafa . Forthwith daintily to pro - were sent Galleys , and other vessels into the haven , so mice , and that our soldiers immediately began to embark them-never to per - selves , of the which the greater part were already gone firm the same . aboard , the Nobility and our chief Captains also being likewise very desirous to depart . 
 The 15. of August in the morning , the worthy Bragadino sent me with a letter unto Mustafa , by the which he signified , that the same night he would come unto him to deliver up the keys of the City , and that he would leave in the hold the honourable gentleman Tiepolo , praying him therefore , that whilst he should have just cause thus to be abroad , that there might be 
 144 
 no harm done at home , and in the City . The Turkes from our truce taking until that time , practised with us all familiarly , and without any suspicion of sinister or double dealing , they having showed us much courtesy both in word and deed . Mustafa himself by word of mouth presently answered me to this letter , in this sort , that I should return , and make relation to this noble man Bragadino , who had sent me , that he should come over to him at his own pleasure , for he was very desirous both to see and know him , for his great worthiness and prowess , that he had tried to be in him , and in the other of his Captains and Soldiers , of whose manhood and courage he would honourably report , where soever he came , as occasion should serve thereunto : and to conclude , that he should nothing doubt of any thing : because in no manner of condition he would suffer any [ II i . 128. ] violence to be done to those , which remained behind within the City . So I speedily returning made true report of the same : and towards night about foure of the clock , the right honourable Bragadino accompanied with the L. Baglione , with Signior Aluigi Martinengo , with the right worshipful Signior Gio. Antonio Querini , with the right worshipful Signior Andrea Bragadino , with the knight of Haste , with the captain Carlo Ragonasco , with captain Francesco Straco , with captain Hector of Brescia , with captain Girolomo di Sacile , and with other gentlemen and fiftie soldiers , the Governors and Noble men with their swords , and the soldiers with their harquebusses came forth of their hold , and went unto the pavilion of Mustafa , of whom , all they at the beginning were courteously received , and caused to fit down by him , he reasoning and discoursing with them of diverse things , a certain time , and drawing them from one matter to another , at the last upon a sudden picked a quarrel unto them , especially burdening that noble Bragadino with and untruth , laying to his charge y‘ he had caused certain of his slaves in the time that the truce continued between them , to be put to death . The 
 v 14s K 
 The property of true fortitude is , not to be broken with sudden terrors . 
 Mustafa , cousin germane to you thief , which hung on the left side of our Saviour at his Passion . 
 which thing was most false . So that he being angry therewith , suddenly stepped forth , and commanded them to be bound . Thus they being unarmed ( not suffered at that time to enter into his pavilion , with their former weapons ) and bound , were led one by one into the market place , before his pavilion , being presently cut and hewn in sunder in his presence , and last of all from that worthy and noble Bragadino ( who being bound as the rest , and being commanded twice or thrice to stretch forth his neck , as though he should have be beheaded , the which most boldly he did without any spark of fear ) his ears were cut off , and causing him to be stretched out most vilely upon the ground , Mustafa talked with him , and blasphemed the holy name of our Saviour , demanding him , where is now thy Christ , that he helpeth thee not ? To all the which no answer at all was given of that honourable gendeman . The earl Hercole Martinengo , which was sent for one of the hostages , who was also bound , was hidden by one of Mustafas eunuchs until such time as his fury was passed , afterwards his life being granted him , he was made the eunuchs slave . Three Grecians which were under his pavilion were left untouched . All the soldiers which were found in the camp , and all sorts of Christians to the number of three hundred , were suddenly slain , they nothing mistrusting any such treason , or tyranny . The Christian soldiers which were embarked a Iide before , were linked and fettered with iron chains , made slaves , all things being taken from them , and stripped into their shirts . 
 The second day after this murder was committed , which was the 17. of August , Mustafa entered the first time into the City , and caused the valiant and wise governor Tiepolo to be hanged , who remained behind , waiting the return of Signior Bragadino . I being in the city at that present , when other of my countrymen were thus miserably slain and made slaves , hid my self in certain of the Grecians houses the space of five days , 146 
 and they not being able to keep me in covert any longer for fear of the great penalty , which was proclaimed against such transgressors and concealers , I ofired , and gave my self slave to one Sangiaccho deal Bir , promising him five hundred * Zechins for my ran - * TO . echini , be some , with whom I remained in the Camp . The Friday following ( being the Turkes sabbath day ) this worthy coined in Ve-and patient gentleman Bragadino was led still in the nice , every one presence of that unfaithful tyrant Mustafa , to the of the which is batteries made unto the Ci tie , whereas he being compelled to carry two baskets of earth , the one upon his nce^tf^ur ? back , the other in his hand slavelike , to every sundry many , iAsome-battrie , being inforced also to kiss the ground as oft as what better . • he passed by him , was afterwards brought unto the sea side , where he being placed in a chair to lean and stay upon , was winched up in that chair , and fastened unto Byraltom . the maineyard of a galley , and hoist up with a crane , to show him to all the Christian soldiers and slaves 
 ( which were in the haven already shipped ) he being afterwards let down , and brought to the market place , the tormenters took of his clothes from him , and tacked him unto the pillory , whereas he was most cruelly flayed quick ; with so great constancy and faith on his part , that he never lost or abated any jot of his steadfast courage , being so far from any fainting , that he at that present with most stout heart reproached them , and spoke much shame of his most traitorous dealing in breaking of his faithful promise . At the last without any kind of alteration of his constancy , he recommending his soul unto almighty God , gave up the ghost . When he had thus ended his life ( thanks be to God ) his skin being taken and filled with straw , was commanded forthwith to be hanged upon the bowsprit of a * Foist , and to be carried alongst the coast of Syria by the sea side , that all the port towns might see , and understand who he was . 
 This is now so much as I am able to declare to your highness by that I saw my self , and can remember 147 
 His death answerable to his former life . 
 * A Foist is as it were a Bri-gandine , being somewhat larger then half a galley , much used of the Turkish Cursaros , or as we call them Pirates or Rovers . 
 ople : the which they call in the Turkish language Stanboli . 
 ad . 
 I57I > 
 whilst that I was in the Fortress : that also which by true relation of others I could understand , and saw also my self in the camp , whilst I was slave , I will likewise briefly utter unto you . The enemies army was in num - [ II i . 129. ] ber two hundred thousand persons of all sorts and qualities . Of soldiers which took pay there were 80. thousand , beside the which number , there were 14. thousand of Giannizzers taken out from all the holds of Syria , Caramania , Natolia , and part of them also which * The gate of came from the * gate of the great Turke . The venturers ^Isas th6 sword were 60. thousand in number . The much to say reason , why there were so many of this sort , was because as Constantin - Mustafa had dispersed a rumour through the Turkes dominion , that Famagusta was much more wealthy and rich , then the city of Nicosia was : so for that cause , and by the commodious and easy passage from Syria over into Cyprus , these venturers were easily induced to come thither . In 75. days ( all the which time the battery 
 GliVenturieri still continued ) 140. thousand iron pellets were shot of , numbered , and seen . The chief personages which were in their army near unto Mustafa , were these following : the Bassa of Aleppo , the Bassa of Natolia , Musafer Bassa of Nicosia , the Bassa of Caramania , the Agam of the Giannizzers , Giambelat * Bey , the Sangiaccho of Tripolis , the * Begliarbei of Greece , the Bassa of Scivassi and of Marasco , Ferca Framburaro , the * Sangiaccho of Antipo , Soliman Bey , three Sangiacchos of Arabia , Mustafa Bey generail of the Venturers , Fergat governor of Malathia , the Framburaro of Diverie , the Sangiaccho of Arabia and other Sangiacchos of lesser credit , with the number of fourescore thousand persons beside , as by the muster made by his Commission might well appear . 
 The Framburaro which was at Rhodes , was appointed and left governor at Famagusta , and the report was that there should be left in all the Island of Cyprus , twentie thousand persons , with two thousand horses , many of the which I saw , being very lean and evil appointed for 148 
 aa spada , are a kind of venturing soldiers , who commonly are wont to follow the army in hope of the spoil . 
 Aleppo , a famous city near unto Antiochia , otherwise called in Greek , 17X16-iroXis , the city of the Suns . 
 * Bey in the Turkish language , signifies knight withus . 
 service . It seems also a thing not impertinent to the * Begliarbei matter , to signify to you , how I , by the especial grace of dgftfiethlord God , was delivered out of their cruel hands , I having # g^'accho paid within two & fortie days ( all the which time I was - u that^erson slave ) five hundred Zechins for my ransom to him , w* the whose prisoner I was , by the means of the Consul for Turkes , that the French merchant's , a ligier then at Tripolis , who a & vernetha little before came from Tripolis in Syria unto Cyprus , into ountrey^ the Turkes camp . Yet for all that I had paid this God suffers sum of money to him , he would not so set me at much to be liberty , but fed me up still with fair words , and pro - t0 his mised me that he would first bring me unto his servant^ government , which abutted upon a piece of the famous them^ river of Euphrates , and afterwards dismiss me . The Necessity oft which malice and falsehood of his I perceiving , deter - times sharp-mined with my self to give him the slip , and to fly ; so en^ ™ ns I waiting my time , and repairing often to the City , at tk length met with a small Fisher boat , of the which a poor Grecian was Owner and master , with whom in one night with two only oars and a small sail made of two shirts , I passed over from Cyprus unto Tripolis , being in very great danger of drowning , whereas I remained in covert in the house of certain Christians , until the five and twentie of September , at what time I departed from thence in a little French ship called Santa Vittor , which came into these parts , and as we road , we touched at a part of Cyprus Westward , called Capo delle Gat , where as I came on land , and talking with certain of the inhabitants of the Villages , who were then by chance a Hawking , demanded of them , how they were entreated of the Turkes , and after what sort the Island was tilled : to the which they answered , that they could not possibly he nature be in worse pickle then they were at that present , not every commoenjoying that quietly which was their own , being made ditie is sooner vifiaines and slaves , and almost always carrying away the understood by Bastinados , so that now ( they said ) they knew by trial too perfectly the pleasant and peaceable government of enjoying of the Christians , wishing and praying God that they might the same . 
 149 
 * Candia , of the old writers called Creta in latin , YiKO . TOp.rroX.l'S in Greek , because it had once a 100. Cities in it , now there remaining but only 4. thus commonly nam , Candia , la Cania , Retima , and Scythia . 
 [ IL i . 130. ] 
 shortly return . And concerning the tillage of the Island they made answer moreover , that no part of it was plowed or laboured , saving only that mountain which was towards the West , and that because they were little troubled with the cruelty of the Turkes , but as for the plain and East part of the Island , there was small seed sown therein , but became in a manner desert , there being left but few inhabitants , and less store of cattle there . Afterwards we departing from thence arrived in * Candia , I for my part being clothed in sackcloth , whereas soon after by the great courtesy of the right honourable Signior Latino Orsino , I was new appareled accordingly , friendly welcomed , and my necessity relieved . From whence I shortly after sailing in a Cypriottes ship ( thanks be to almighty God ) arrived in this City in Health , and am safely come home now at the honourable feet of your highness . 
 The Captains of the Christians slain in Famagusta . 
 THe lord Estor Baglione . 
 The lord Aluigi Martinengo . 
 The lord Federico Baglione . 
 The knight of Asta Vicegovernor . 
 The capitaine David Noce Master of the Camp . 
 The capitaine Meani of Perugia Sergeant Major . 
 The earl Sigismond of Casoldo . 
 The earl Francesco of Lobi of Cremona . 
 The captain Francesco Troncavilla . 
 The captain Hannibal Adamo of Fermo . 
 The captain Scipio of the city of Castello . 
 The captain Charles Ragonasco of Cremona . 
 The captain Francesco Siraco . 
 The captain Roberto Malvezzo . 
 The captain Caesar of Adversa . 
 The captain Bernardin of Agubio . 
 The captain Francesco Bugon of Verona . 
 The captain James of Fabiano . 
 150 
 The captain Sebastian deal Sole of Florence . 
 The captain Hector of Brescia , the successor to the captain Caesar of Adversa . 
 The captain Flaminio of Florence , successor unto Sebastian deal Sole . 
 The captain Erasmus of Fermo , successor to the captain of Cernole . 
 The captain Bartholomew of Cernole . 
 The captain John Battista of Rivarole . 
 The captain John Francesco of Venice . 
 The names of Christians made slaves . 
 THe Earl Herocles Martinengo , with Julius Caesar Ghelfo a Soldier of Bressa . 
 The earl Nestor Martinengo , which fled . 
 The captain Marco Crivellatore . 
 The lord Herocles Malatesta . 
 The captain Peter Conte of Montalberto . 
 The captain Horatio of Veletri . 
 The captain Aluigi Pezano . 
 The Conte James of Corbara . 
 The captain John of Istria . 
 The captain Soldatelli of Agubio . 
 The captain John of Ascoli . 
 The captain Antonie of the same town . 
 The captain Sebastian of the same town . 
 The captain Salgano of the city of Castello . 
 The captain Marcheso of Fermo . 
 The captain John Antonio of Piacenza . 
 The captain Carletto Naldo . 
 The captain Lorenzo Fornaretti . 
 The captain Barnardo of Brescia . 
 The captain Barnardino Coco . [ David Noce . 
 The captain Simon Bagnese , successor to the captain 
 The captain Tiberio Ceruto , successor unto Conte Sigismond . 
 The captain Joseph of Lanciano , successor unto captain Francesco Troncavilla . 
 The captain Morgante , successor to captain Hannibal . 
 The Lieutenant , successor unto the captain Scipio . 
 The Standerdbearer , successor to captain Roberto . 
 The captain Ottavio of Rimini , successor to the captain Francesco Bugon . 
 The captain Mario de Fabiano , successor to captain Jacomo . 
 The captain Francesco of Venice , successor unto captain Antonio . 
 The captain Matteo of Capua . 
 The captain John Maria of Verona . 
 The captain Mancino . 
 The Fortifiers . 
 John Marmori , slain . 
 The knight Maggio , slave . 
 Turkish Captains at Famagusta . 
 MUstafa general . 
 The Bassa of Aleppo . 
 The Bassa of Natolia , slain . 
 Musafer Bassa of Nicosia . 
 The Bassa of Caramania . 
 The Agam of the Giannizers . 
 Giambelat Bey . 
 The Sangiaccho of Tripolis , slain . 
 The Begliarbei of Greece . 
 [ II i . 131. ] The Bassa of Scivassi and Marasco . 
 Ferca Framburaro . 
 The Sangiaccho of Antipo , slain . 
 Soliman Bey , slain . 
 Three Sangiacchos of Arabia , slain . 
 Mustafa Bey , General of the Venturers , slave . 
 Fergat , ruler of Malathia , slain . 
 The Framburaro of Diverie , slain . 
 . 