The voyage of M. John Lock to Jerusalem . 
 N my voyage to Jerusalem , I embarked my self the 26 of March 1553 in the good ship called the Mathew Gonson , which was bound for Livorno , or Legorne and Candia . It fell out that we touched in the beginning of Aprill next ensuing at Cades in Andalozia , where the Spaniardes , 
 according to their accustomed manner with all ships of extraordinary goodness and burden , picked a quarrel against the company , meaning to have forfeited , or at the least to have arrested the said ship . And they 76 
 grew so malicious in their wrongful purpose , that I being utterly out of hope of any speedy release , to the end that my intention should not be overthrown , was enforced to take this course following . Notwithstanding this hard beginning , it fell out so luckily , that I found in the road a great ship called the Cavalia of Venice , wherein after agreement made with the patron , I shipped my self the 24. of May in the said year 1553 , and the 25 by reason of the wind blowing hard and contrary , we were not able to enter the straits of Gibraltar , but were put to the coast of Barbarie , where we anchored in the main sea 2. leagues from shore , and continued so until two hours before sun set , and then we weighed again , and turned our course towards the Straits , where we entered the 26 day aforesaid , the wind being very calm , [ II i . 102. ] but the current of the straits very favourable . The same day the wind began to rise somewhat , and blew a furthering gale , and so continued at Northwest until we arrived at Legorne the third of June . And from thence riding over land unto Venice , I prepared for my voyage to Jerusalem in the Pilgrimss ship . 
 I John Lock , accompanied with Master Anthony Rastwold , with diverse other , Hollanders , Zelanders , Almains and French pilgrimss entered the good ship The ship Fila called Fila Cavena of Venice , the 16 of July 1553. and the 17 in the morning we weighed our anchor and sailed towards the coast of Istria , to the port of Rovigno , and Rovignlo a the said day there came aboard of our ship the Percevena port in Istria . of the ship nam Tamisari , for to receive the rest of all the pilgrimss money , which was in all after the rate of 55. Crowns for every man for that voyage , after the rate of five shillings starling to the crown : This done , he returned to Venice . 
 The 19 day we took fresh victuals aboard , and with the boat that brought the fresh provision we went on land to the Town , and went to see the Church of Sancta Eufemia , where we saw the body of the said . Saint Eufemia . 
 The 20 day we departed from Rovignio , and about Monte de noon we had sighed of Monte de Ancona , and the hills 
 ncona . of paimatiaj or eise of Sclavonia both at one time , and by 
 report they are 100. miles distant from each other , and more . 
 The 21 we sailed still in sighed of Dalmatia , and a little before noon , we had sighed of a rock in the midst of the 11 pomo . sea , called in Italian , il Porno , it appears a far off to be in shape like a sugarloafe . Also we saw another Sant Andrea , rock about two miles compass called Sant Andrea : on this rock is only one Monastery of Friars : we sailed between them both , and left S. Andrea on the left hand of us , and we had also kenning of another Hand Lissaanlland . called Lissa , all on the left hand , these three Hands lie East and West in the sea , and at sun setting we had passed them . Il pomo is distant from Sant Andrea 18 miles , and S. Andrea from Lissa io miles , and Lissa from Lezina Hand . another Hand called Lezina , which stands between the main of Dalmatia and Lissa , tenne miles . This Hand is inhabited , and hath great plenty of wine and fruits and hereagainst we were becalmed . 
 The 22 we had sighed of another small Hand called Catza . Catza , which is desolate and on the left hand , and on 
 Pelagosa . the right hand , a very dangerous Hand called Pelagosa , 
 this is also desolate , and lies in the midst of the sea between both the maines : it is very dangerous and low land , and it hath a long ledge of rocks lying out sixe miles in to the sea , so that many ships by night are cast away upon them . There is between Catza and Pelagosa 30 miles , and these two Hands are distant from Venice 400 miles . There is also about twelve miles Augusta . eastward , a great Hand called Augusta , about 14 miles in length , somewhat hilly , but well inhabited , and fruitful ! of vines , corn and other fruit , this also we left on the left hand : & we have hitherto kept our course from Rovignio East southeast . This Hand is under the Signiory or government of Ragusa , it is distant from Ragusa 50 miles , and there is by that Hand a greater , 78 
 nam Meleda , which is also under the government of Mekda . Ragusa , it is about 30 miles in length , and inhabited , and hath good ports , it lies by East from Augusta , and over against this Hand lies a hill called Monte S. Monte Sant Angelo , upon the coast of Puglia in Italy , and we had - Angplo . sighed of both lands at one time . 
 The 23 we sailed all the day long by the bowline alongst the coast of Ragusa , and towards night we were within 7 or 8 miles of Ragusa , that we might see the white walls , but because it was night , we cast about to the sea , minding at the second watch , to bear it again to Ragusa , for to know the news of the Turkes army , but the wind blew so hard and contrary , that we could not . This city of Ragusa payeth tribute to the Turke Ragusa paleth yearly fourteene thousand Sechinos , and every Sechino t0 is of Venetian money eight livers and two soldes , beside the Turke other presents which they give to the Turkes Bassas yearly . when they come thither . The Venetians have a rock or crag within a mile of the said town , for the which the Raguseos would give them much money , but they do keep it more for the namesake , then for profit . This rock lies on the Southside of the town , and is called II cromo , there is nothing on it but only a 11 Cromo . Monastery called Sant Jeronimo . The main of the Turkes country is bordering on it within one mile , for the which cause they are in great subjection . This night we were put back by contrary winds , and anchored at Melleda - 
 The 24 being at and anchor under Melleda , we would have gone on land , but the wind came so fair that we presently set sail and went our course , and left on the right hand of us the forenamed Hand , and on the left hand between us and the main the Hand of Zupanna , and within a mile of that under the main Zupanna . by East , another Hand called Isola de Mezo . This Hand de 
 hath two Monasteries in it , one called Santa Maria de ’ 
 Bizo , and the other Sant Nicholo . Also there is a third rock with a Frierie called Sant Andrea : these Hands are Sant^n^'ea - 
 Boca de Cataro , The town Cataro . Budoa . Antiveri . Marchevetti . The end of Sclavonia and the beginning of Albania . 
 Puglia . 
 Cape Chimera . 
 CapeOtranto . 
 11 fano . 
 from the main but two miles , and the channel between Melleda and Zupanna is but foure or five miles over by guess , but very deep , for we had at and anchor fortie fathoms . The two Hands of Zupanna and Mezo are well inhabited , and very fair buildings , but nothing plenty save wine only . This night towards sun set it waxed calm , and we sailed little or nothing . 
 The 24 we were passed Ragusa 14 miles , and there we met with two Venetian ships , which came from Cyprus , we thought they would have spoken with us , for we were desirous to talk with them , to know the news of the Turkes army , and to have sent some letters by them to Venice . About noon , we had scant sighed of Castle novo , which Castle a few years passed the Turke took from the Emperor , in which fight were slain three hundred Spanish soldiers , beside the rest which were taken prisoners , and made galley slaves . This Castle is hard at the mouth of a channel called Boca de Cataro . The Venetians have a hold within the channel called Cataro , this channel goes up to Budoa , and further up into the country . About suneset we were over against the hills of Antiveri in Sclavonia , in the which hills the Venetians have a town called Antiveri , and the Turkes have another against it called Marchevetti , the which two towns continually skirmish together with much slaughter . At the end of these hills endeth the Country of Sclavonia , and Albania begins . These hills are thirtie miles distant from Ragusa . 
 The 27 we kept our course towards Puglia , and left Albania on the left hand . The 28. we had sighed of both the maines , but we were nearer the coast of Puglia , for fear of Foists . It is between Cape Chimera in Albania and Cape otranto in Puglia 60 miles . Puglia is a plain low land , and Chimera in Albania is very high land , so that it is seen the further . Thus sailing our course along the coast of Puglia , we saw diverse white Towers , which serve for seamarks . About three of the clock in the after noon , we had sighed of a rock called II fano , 48 80 
 miles from Corfu , and by sun set we discovered Corfu . Corfu . Thus we kept on our course with a prosperous wind , and made our way after twelve mile every hour . Most part of this way we were accompanied with certain fish called in the Italian tongue Palomide , it is a fish three Pahmide . quarters of a yard in length , in colour , eating , and making like a Makarell , somewhat big and thick in body , and the tail forked like a half moon , for the which cause it is said that the Turke will not suffer them to be taken in all his dominions . 
 The 29 in the morning we were in sighed of and Hand , which we left on our left hand called Cephalonia , it is Cephalonia under the Venetians and well inhabited , with a fair town 1 strongly situated on a hill , of the which hill the Hand bears her name , it hath also a very strong fortress or Castle , and plenty of corn and wine , their language is Greeke , it is distant from the main of Morea , thirtie Morea . miles , it is'in compass 80 miles . One hour within night we sailed by the town standing on the South cape of Cephalonia , whereby we might perceive their lights . There come oftentimes into the creeks and rivers , the Turkes foists and galleys where at their arrival , the Country people do signify unto their neighbours by so many lights , as there are foists or galleys in the Hand , and thus they do from one to another the whole Hand over . About three of the clock in the afternoon the wind scanted , and we minded to have gone to Zante , Zante . but we could not for that night . This Hand of Zante is distant from Cephalonia , 12 or 14 miles , but the town of Cephalonia , from the town of Zante , is distant fortie miles . This night we went but little forward . 
 The 30 day we remained still turning up and down because the wind was contrary , and towards night the wind mended , so that we entered the channel between Cephalonia , 8c Zante , the which channel is about eight or tenne miles over , and these two bear East and by South , and West and by North from the other . The town of Zante lies within a point of the land , 
 v 81 F 
 where we came to and anchor , at nine of the clock at night . 
 John Lock , The 31 about sixe of the clock in the morning , I and five Hol - £ve Hollanders went on land , and hosted at the ‘ tand’5°n house of Pedro de Venetia . After breakfast we went 
 * to see the town , and passing along we went into some of the Greek churches , wherein we saw their Altares , Images , and other ornaments . This done , we went to Santa Maria a Monastery of Friars called Sancta Maria de la Croce , de la Croce , these are western Christians , for the Greeks have nothing to do with them , nor they with the Greeks , for they differ very much in religion . There are but 2. Friars in this Friery . In this Monastery we saw the The tomb of tomb that M. T. Cicero , was buried in , with Terentia M. T. Cicero . Antonia , his wife . This tomb was found about sixe years since , when the Monastery was built , there was in time passed a street where the tomb stood . At the finding of the tomb there was also found a yard under ground , a square stone somewhat longer than broad , upon which stone was found a writing of two several hands writing , the one as it seemed , for himself , and the other for his wife , and under the same stone was [ II i . 104. ] found a glass somewhat proportioned like and urinali , but that it was eight square and very thick , wherein were the ashes of the head and right arm of Mar. T. Cicero , for as stories make mention he was beheaded as I remember at Capua , for insurrection . And his wife having god his head and right arm , ( which was brought to Room to the Emperor ) went from Rome , and came to Zante , and there buried his head and arm , and wrote * Or , Ave. upon his tomb this style M. T. Cicero . * Have . Then follows in other letters , Et tu Terentia Antonia , which difference of letters declare that they were not written The detcrip - both at one time . The tomb is long and narrow , and deep , walled on every side like a grave , in the bottom ' whereof was found the said stone with the writing on it , & the said glass of ashes , and also another little glass of the same proportion , wherein , as they say , are 
 the tears of his friends , that in those days they did use to gather and bury with them , as they did use in Italy and Spaine to tear their hair , to bury with their friends . In the said tomb were a few bones . After dinner we rested until it drew towards evening by reason of the heat . And about foure of the clock we walked to another Frierie a mile out of the town called Sant Elia , these are white Friars , there were two , but $ant Elia , but one is dead , not sixe days since . This Frierie hath a me Friar ' garden very pleasant , and well furnished with Oranges , Lemons , pomegranates , and diverse other good fruits . 
 The way to it is somewhat ragged , up hill and down , and very stony , and in winter very dirty . It stands very pleasant in a clift between two hills , with a good prospect . From thence we ascended the hill to the Castle , which is situated on the very top of a hill . 
 This Castle is very strong , in compass a large mile descrip-and a half , which being victualed , ( as it is never unfurnished ) and manned with men of trust , it may defend Zante . it self against any Princes power . This Castle takes the just compass of the hill , and no other hill near it , it is so steep down , and so high and ragged , that it will tyre any man or ever he be half way up . Very nature hath fortified the walls and bulwarks : It is by nature foure square , and it commands the town and port . The Venetians have always their Podesta , or Governor , with his two Counsellors resident therein . The town is well inhabited , & hath great quantity of householders . The Hand by report is threescore and tenne miles about , it is able to make twentie thousand fighting men . They say they have always five or sixe hundred horsemen ready at and hours warning . They 2% Turke say the Turke hath assayed it with ioo . Galleys , but he could never bring his purpose to pass . It is strange to me how they should maintain so many men in this Hand , for their best sustenance is wine , and the rest but miserable . 
 The first of August we were warned aboard by the » 3 
 patron , and towards evening we set sail , and had sighed The Castle of of a Castle called Torneste , which is the Turkes , and is Tomeste . ten miles frOm Zante , it did belong to the Venetians , but they have now lost it , it stands also on a hill on the Twelve turks Sea side in Morea . All that night we bore into the sea , ^Modonand because we had news ' at Zante of twelve of the Turkes Conn and galleys » that came from Rhodes , which were about Candla . Modon , Coron , and Candia , for which cause we kept at the sea . 
 The second of August we had no sighed of land , but kept our course , and about the third watch the wind Modon . scanted , so that we bore with the shore , and had sighed Coron . of Modon and Coron . 
 Cavo Matta - The third we had sighed of Cavo Mattapan , and all ? and - that day by reason of contrary winds , which blew somewhat hard , we lay a hull until morning . 
 The fourth we were still under the said Cape , and ' so continued that day , and towards night there grew a contention in the ship among the Hollanders , and it had like to have be a great inconvenience , for we had all our weapons , yea even our knives taken from us that night . 
 The fift , . we sailed by the Bowline , and out of the Candia . top we had sighed of the Hand of Candia , and towards noon we might see it plain , and towards night the wind waxed calm . 
 The sixt towards the break of day we saw two small Gezi . Hands called Gozi , and towards noon we were between them : the one of these Hands is fifteene miles about , and the other io miles . In those Hands are nourished store of cattle for butter and cheese . There are to the 
 Candia . 
 Cape Spada . 
 C. Salomon . 
 number of fiftie or sixtie inhabitants , which are Greeks , and they live chiefly on milk and cheese . The Hand of Candia is 700 miles about , it is in length , from Cape Spada , to Cape Salomon , 300 miles , it is as they say , able to make one hundred thousand fighting men . We sailed between the Gozi , and Candia , and they are distant from Candia 5 or 6 miles . The Candiots are strong 84 
 men , and very good archers , and shoot near the mark . 
 This Island is from Zante 300 miles . 
 The seventh we sailed all along the said Hand with little wind and unstable , and the eight day towards night we drew to the East end of the Hand . 
 The 9 and 10 we sailed along with a prosperous wind and saw no land . 
 The ii in the morning , we had sighed of the Hand of Cyprus , and towards noon we were thwart the Cape called Ponta Malota , and about foure of the clock we Ponta , were as far as Baffo , and about sun set we passed Cavo Bianco , and towards nine of the clock at night we doubled Cavo de la gat , and anchored afore Limisso , j 
 but the wind blew so hard , that we could not come Cavo de la near the town , neither durst any man go on land . & atte-The town is from Cavo de le gat twelve miles distant . 
 The 12. of August in the morning we went on land to Limisso : this town is ruinated and nothing in it Limisso . worth writing , save only in the mids of the town there hath be a fortress , which is now decayed , and the walls part overthrown , which a Turkish Rover with certain galleys did destroy about 10. or 12. years past . 
 This day walking to see the town , we chanced to see in the market place , a great quantity of a certain vermin called in the Italian tongue Cavalette . It is as I can Cavalette , is learn , both in shape and bigness like a grasshopper , for 
 I can judge but little difference . Of these many years 7^7 of they have had such quantity y* they destroy all their Cyprus . corn . They are so plagued with them , y‘ almost every year they do well nigh lose half their corn , whither it be the nature of the country , or the plague of God , that let them judge that best can define . But that there may no default be laid to their negligence for the destruction of them , they have throughout the whole land a constituted order , that every Farm or or husbandman ( which are even as slaves bought and sold to their lord ) shall every year pay according to his territory , a 
 The pilgrimss going to the Greek churches . 
 measure full of the seed or eggs of these forenamed Cavalette , the which they are bound to bring to the market , and present to the officer appointed for the same , the which officer takes of them very straight measure , and writeth the names of the presenters , and putteth the said eggs or seed , into a house appointed for the same , and having the house full , they beat them to powder , and cast them into the sea , and by this policy they do as much as in them lies for the destruction of them . This vermin breeds or engendereth at the time of corn being ripe , and the corn being had away , in the clods of the same ground do the husbandmen find you nests , or , as I may rather term them , cases of the eggs of the same vermin . Their nests are much like to the keys of a hasel-nut tree , when they be dried , and of the same length , but somewhat bigger , which case being broken you shall see the eggs lie much like unto ants eggs , but somewhat lesser . Thus much I have written at this time , because I had no more time of knowledge , but I trust at my return to note more of this island , with the commodities of the same at large . 
 The 13. day we went in the morning to the Greeks church , to see the order of their ceremonies , & of their communion , of the which to declare the whole order with the number of their ceremonious crossings , it were to long . Wherefore lest I should offend any man , I leave it unwritten : but only that I noted well , that in all their Communion or service , not one did ever kneel , nor yet in any of their Churches could I ever see any graved images , but painted or portrayed . Also they have store of lamps alight , almost for every image one . Their women are always separated from the men , and generally they are in the lower end of the Church . This night we went aboard the ship , although the wind were contrary , we did it because the patron should not find any lack of us , as sometime he did : when as tarrying upon his own busi ness , he would colour it with the delay of the pilgrimss . 
 The 14. day in the morning we set sail , and lost sighed of the Island of Cyprus , and the 15. day we were likewise at Sea , and saw no land : and the 16. day towards night , we looked for land , but we saw none . But because we supposed our selves to be near our port , we took in all our sails except only the foresail and the missen , and so we remained all that night . 
 The 17. day in the morning , we were by report of the Mariners , some sixe miles from Jaffa , but it proved contrary . But because we would be sure , we came to and anchor seven miles from the shore , and sent the skifFe with the Pilot and the master gunner , to learn the coast , but they returned , not having seen tree nor house , nor spoken with any man . But when they came to the sea side again , they went up a little hill standing hard by the brink , whereon as they thought they saw the hill of Jerusalem , by the which the Pilot knew ( after his judgement ) that we were passed our port . And so this place where we road was , as the mariners said , about 50. mile from Jaffa . This coast all alongst is very low , plain , white , sandy , and desert , for which cause it hath few marks or none , so that we road here as it were in a gulf between two Capes . 
 The 18. day we abided still at anchor , looking for a gale A great curto return back , but it was contrary : and the 19. we rant-set sail , but the currant having more force then the wind , we were driven back , insomuch , that the ship being under sail , we cast the sounding led , & ( notwithstanding the wind ) it remained before the ship , there we had muddy ground at fifteene fathom . The same day about 4. of the clock , we set sail again , and sailed West alongst the coast with a fresh side-wind . 
 It chanced by fortune that the ships Cat leapt into thee A Cat fallen Sea , which being down , kept her self very valiantly read . above water , notwithstanding the great waves , still swimming , the which the master knowing , he caused the Skiff with half a dosen men to go towards her and fetch her again , when she was almost half a mile 
 [ II i . 106. ] from the ship , and all this while the ship lay on stays . I hardly believe they would have made such haste and means if one of the company had be in the like peril . They made the more haste because it was the patrons cat . This I have written onelyto note the estimation that cats are in , among the Italians , for generally they esteem their cats , as in England we esteem a good Spaniel . The same night about tenne of the clock the wind calmed , and because none of the ship knew where we were , we let fallen and anchor about 6 mile from the place we were at before , and there we had muddy ground at twelve fathom . 
 The 20 it was still calm , and the current so strong still one way , that we were not able to stem the stream : moreover we knew not where we were , whereupon doubting whither we were passed , or short of our port , the Master , Pilot , and other Officers of the ship entered into counsel what was best to do , whereupon they agreed to send the boat on land again , to seek some man to speak with all , but they returned as wise as they went . Then we set sail again and sounded every mile or half mile , and found still one depth , so we not knowing where we were , came again to and anchor , seven or eight miles by West from the place we were at . Thus still doubting where we were , the boat went on land again , and brought news that we were short 80 miles of the place , whereas we thought we had been overshot by east fiftie miles . Thus in these doubts we lost foure days , and never a man in the ship able to tell where we were , notwithstanding there were diverse in the ship They with with bat bad been there before . Then said the Pilot , that on land ™ at hi® coming to the shore , by chance he saw two wayfaring men , which were Moors , and he cried to them in Turkish , insomuch that the Moors , partly for fear , and partly for lack of understanding , ( seeing them to be Christians ) began to fly , yet in the end with much a do , they stayed to speak with them , which men when they came together , were not able to understand each 88 
 1553-other , but our men made to them the sign of the Cross on the sand , to give them to understand that they were of the ship that brought the pilgrim's . Then the Moors knowing ( as all the country else does ) that it was the use of Christians to go to Jerusalem , showed them to be yet by west of Jaffa . Thus we remained all that night at anchor , and the farther west that we sailed , the less water we had . 
 The 21 we set sail again , and kept our course Northeast , but because we would not go along the shore by night , we came to and anchor in foure and twentie fathom water . Then the next morning being the 22 we set sail again , and kept our course as before , and about three of the clock in the afternoon we had sighed of the two towers of Jaffa , and about five of thee The two clock , we were with a rock , called in the Italian tongue , Scolio di Santo Petro , on the which rock they $ Santg say he fished , when Christ bid him cast his net on the Petro . right side , anfd caught so many fish . This rock is now almost worn away . It is from Jaffa two or three mile : here before the two towers we came to and anchor . 
 Then the pilgrimss after supper , in salutation of the holy land , sang to the praise of God , Te Deum laudamus , with Magnificat , and Benedictus , but in the ship was a Friar of Santo Francisco , who for anger because he was not called and warned , would not sing with us , so that he stood so much upon his dignity , that he forgotten his simplicity , and neglected his devotion to the holy land for that time , saying that first they ought to have called him year they did begin , because he was a Fryer , and had been there , and knew the order . 
 The 23 we sent the boat on land with a messenger to messenger the Padre Guardian of Jerusalem . This day it was notified unto me by one of the ship that had been Mahomet is a slave in Turkey , that no man might wear green in clothed in this land , because their prophet Mahomet went in green . greene-This came to my knowledge by reason of the Scrivanello , 
 who had a green cap , which was forbidden him to wear on the land . 
 The 24. 25. and 26 we tarried in the ship still looking for the coming of the Padre guardian , and the 26 at night we had a storm which lasted all the next day . The Guardian The 27 in the morning , came the Cadi , you Subassi , 
 of Jerusalem & the Meniwe , with the Padre guardian , but they could ‘ ja^with not cotne at us by reason of the stormy weather : in the Cady , and the afternoon we assayed to send the boat on land , Subassi . but the weather would not suffer us . Then again towards night the boat went a shore , but it returned not that night . The same day in the afternoon we saw in the element , a cloud with a long tail , like unto the tail A cloud called of a serpent , which cloud is called in Italian Cion , the of Italians tail of this cloud did hang as it were into the sea : and dangerous we see watef under the said cloud ascend , as it ' were like a smoke or mist , the which this Cion drew up to it . The Mariners reported to us that it had this property , that if it should happen to have lighted on any part of the ship , that it would rend and wreth sails , mast , shrouds and ship and all in manner like a with : on the land , trees , houses , or whatsoever else it lights on , it would rend and wreth . These marA conjuration , riners did use a certain conjuration to break the said [ IL i . 107. ] tail , or cut it in two , which as they say does prevail . 
 They did take a black hafted knife , and with the edge of the same did cross the said tail as if they would cut it in twain , saying these words , Hold thou Cion , eat this , and then they stuck the knife on the ship side with the edge towards the said cloud , and I saw it therewith vanish in less then one quarter of and hour . But whither it was then consumed , or whither by virtue of the Enchantment it did vanish I know not , but it was gone . Hereof let them judge that know more then I . This afternoon we had no wind , but the Sea very stormy , insomuch that neither chest , pot , nor any thing else could stand in the ship , and we were driven to keep our meat in one hand , and the pot in the other , 90 
 and so fit down upon the hatches to eat , for stand we could not , for that the Seas in the very port at and anchor went so high as if we had be in the bay of Portugall with stormy weather . The reason is , as the Mariners said to me , because that there meet all the waves from all places of the Straights of Gibraltar , and there break , and that in most calms there go greatest seas , whither the wind blow or not . 
 The 28. the weather growing somewhat calm , we went on land and rested our selves for that day , and the next day we set forward towards the city of Jerusalem . 
 What I did , and what places of devotion I visited in Jerusalem , and other parts of the Holy land , from this my departure from Jaffa , until my return to the said port , may briefly be seen in my Testimoniali , under the hand & seal of the Vicar general of Mount Sion , which for the contentment of the Reader I thought good here to interlace . 
 UNiversis & singulis praesentes litteras inspecturis salutem in Domino nostro Jesu Christo . Attestamur vobis ac aliis quibuscunque , qualiter honorabilis vir Johannes Lok civis Londoniensis , filius honorabilis viri Guilhelmi Lok equitis aurati , ad sacratissima terrae sanctae loca personaliter se contulit , sanctissimum Domini nostri Jesu Christi sepulchrum , e quo die tertia glorious a mortuis resurrexit , sacratissimum Calvariae montem , in quo pro nobis omnibus cruci affixus mori dignatus est , Sion etiam montem ubi coenam illam mirificam cum discipulis suis fecit , & ubi spiritus sanctus in die sancto Pentecostes in discipulos eosdem in linguis igneis descendit , Olivetique montem ubi mirabiliter coelos ascendit , intemeratae virginis Mariae Mausoleum in Josaphat vallis medio situm , Bethaniam quoque , Bethlehem civitatem David in qua de purissima virgin Maria natus est , ibique inter animalia reclinatus , pluraque loca alia tam in Hierusalem civitate sancta terre Judaeae , quam extra , a modernis peregrinis visitari solita , devotissimi visitavit , 91 
 The pilgrimss returns from Jerusalem . 
 Mount Carmel . 
 Pesce columbini . 
 pariterque adoravit . In quorum fidem , ego frater Anthonius de Bergamo ordinis fratrum minorum regularis observantiae , provinciae divi Anthonii Sacri conventus montis Sion vicarius ( licet indignus ) necnon aliorum locorum terrae Sanctae , apostolica authoritate comissarius & rector , has Sigillo maiori nostri officii nostraque subscription muniri volui . Datum Hierosolymis apud sacratissimum domini coenaculum in saepe memorato monte Sion , Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo , quinquagesimo tertio , die vero sexto mensis Septembris . 
 Frater Antonius qui supra . 
 THe 15. of September being come from our pilgrimage , we went aboard our ship , and set sail , and kept our course West towards the Island of Ciprus , but all that night it was calm , and the 16. the wind freshed , and we passed by Mount Carmel . 
 The 17. the wind was very scant , yet we kept the sea , and towards night we had a gust of rain whereby we were constrained to strike our sails , but it was not very stormy , nor lasted very long . 
 The 18. 19. 20. and 21. we kept still the sea and saw no land because we had very little wind , and that not very favourable . 
 The 22. at noon the Boatswain sent some of the Mariners into the boat , ( which we toed astern from Jaffa ) for certain necessaries belonging to the ship , wherein the Mariners found a certain fish in proportion like a Dace , about 6. inches long ( yet the Mariners said they had seen the like a foot long and more ) the which fish had on every side a wing , and towards the tail two other lesser as it were fins , on either side one , but in proportion they were wings and of a good length . These wings grow out between the gills and the carcase of the same fish . They are called in the Italian tongue Pesce columbini , for in deed , the wings being spread it is like to a flying dove , they say it will fly far , and very high . So it seems that being weary of her flight , 92 
 she fell into the boat , and not being able to rise again died there . 
 The 23. 24. and 25. we sailed our direct course with a small gale of wind , and this day we had sighed of the Island of Cyprus . The first land that we discovered was a headland called Cavo de la Griega , and about mid - Cavo de la night we anchored by North of the Cape . This cape is Grie&-a high hill , long and square , and on the East corner it hath a high cop , that appears unto those at the sea , like . a white cloud , for towards the sea it is white , and it lies into the sea Southwest . This coast of Cyprus is high declining towards the sea , but it hath no cliffs . 
 The 26. we set sail again , and towards noon we came into the port of Salini , where we went on land and lodged that night at a town one mile from thence called Arnacho di Salini , this is but a village called in Italian , Casalia . This is distant from Jaffa 250. Italian miles . 
 The 27. we rested , and the 28. we hired horses to [ H. i . 108. ] ride from Arnacho to Salina , which is a good mile . The Salmi . 
 1 , ■ .. • 1 • Arnacho dt 
 salt pit is very near two miles in compass , very plain and level , into the which they let run at the time of Casalia . rain a quantity of water coming from the mountains , which water is let in until the pit be full to a certain mark , which when it is full , the rest is conveyed by a trench into the sea . This water is let run in about October , or sooner or later , as the time of the year does afford . There they let it remain until the end of July or the midst of August , out of which pits at that time , in stead of water that they let in they gather very fair white salt , without any further art or labour , for it is only done by the great heat of the sun . This the Venetians have , and do maintain to the use of S. Mark , and the Venetian ships that come to this Hand are bound to cast out their ballast , and to lade with salt for Venice . Also there may none in all the Hand buy salt but of these men , who maintain these pits for S. Mark . This place is watched by night with 6. horse - 
 Sixe horsemen men to the end it be not stolen by night . Also under to watch the Venetians dominions no town may spend any salt , sa but they must buy it of Saint Mark , neither may any 
 man buy any salt at one town to carry to another , but every one must buy his salt in the town where he dwells . Neither may any man in Venice buy more salt then he spendeth in the city , for if he be known to carry but one ounce out of the city and be accused , he loses and ear . The most part of all the salt they have in Venice comes from these Salines , and they have it so plentiful , that they are not able , never a year to gather the one half , for they only gather in July , August , and September , and not fully these three months . Yet notwithstanding the abundance that the ships carry away yearly , there remain heaps like hills , some heaps able to lade nine or tenne ships , and there are heaps of two years gathering , some of three and some of nine or tenne years making , to the valve of a great sum of gold , and when the ships do lade , they never take it by measure , but when they come at Venice they measure it . This salt as it lies in the pit is like so much ice , and it is sixe inches thick : they dig it with axes , and cause their slaves to carry it to the heaps . This night at midnight we road to Famagusta , which is eight leagues from Salina , which is 24 English miles . 
 The 29 about two hours before day , we alighted at Famagusta . Famagusta , and after we were refreshed we went to see the town . This is a very fair strong hold , and the strongest and greatest in the Hand . The walls are fair and new , and strongly rampired with foure principali bulwarks , and between them turrions , responding one to another , these walls did the Venetians make . They have also on the haven side of it a Castle , and the haven is chained , the city hath only two gates , to say , one for the land and another for the sea , they have in the town continually , be it peace or wars , 800 soldiers , and fortie and sixe gunners , beside Captains , petie 
 Captains , Governor and general . The land gate hath always fiftie soldiers , pikes and gunners with their harness , watching thereat night and day . At the sea gate five and twentie , upon the walls every night do watch fifteene men in watch houses , for every watch house five men , and in the market place 30 soldiers continually . There may no soldier serve there above 5. years , neither will they without friendship suffer them to depart afore 5. years be expired , and there may serve of all nations except Greeks . They have every pay , which is 45. days , 15 Mozenigos , which is 15 shillings sterling . Mozenigo . Their horsemen have only sixe soldes Venetian a day , Sold of and provender for their horses , but they have also cer - enice-taine land therewith to blow and sow for the maintenance of their horses , but truly I marvel how they live being so hardly fed , for all the summer they feed only upon chopped straw and barley , for heigh they have none , and yet they be fair , fat and serviceable . The Venetians send every two years new rulers , which they call Castellani . The town hath allowed it also two galleys Castellani . continually armed and furnished . 
 The 30 in the morning we rid to a chapel , where they say Saint Katherin was born . This Chapel is Saint Kathe-in old Famagusta , the which was destroyed by English - Fama-men , and is clean overthrown to the ground , to this g^ta . day desolate and not inhabited by any person , it was of a great circuit , and there be to this day mountains of fair , great , and strong buildings , and not only there , but also in many places of the Island . Moreover when ers coins they dig , plow , or trench they find sometime old er ancient coins , some of gold , some of silver , and some of copper , yea and many tombs and vauts with sepulchers in them . This old Famagusta is from the other , foure miles , and stands on a hill , but the new town on a plain . Thence we returned to new Famagusta again to dinner , and towards evening we went about the town , and in the great Church we saw the tomb of king Jaques , which was the last king of Cyprus , and 
 [ II i . 109. ] Cornari , a family of Venice marled to king Jaques , 
 No victuals must be sold out of the city of Famagusta . 
 was buried in the year of Christ one thousand foure hundred seventie & three , and had to wife one of the daughters of Venice , of the house of Cornari , the which family at this day hath great revenues in this Island , and by means of that marriage the Venetians challenge the kingdom of Cyprus . 
 The first of October in the morning , we went to see the relief of the watches . That done , we went to one of the Greeks Churches to see a pot or Jar of stone , which is said to be one of the seven Jars of water , the which the Lord God at the marriage converted into wine . It is a pot of earth very fair , white enameled , and fairly wrought upon with drawn work , and hath on either side of it , instead of handles , ears made in form as the Painters make angels wings , it was about and elle high , and small at the bottom , with a long neck and correspondent in circuit to the bottom , the belly very great and round , it holds full twelve gallons , and hath a taphole to draw wine out thereat , the Jar is very ancient , but whither it be one of them or not , I know not . The air of Famagusta is very unwholesome , as they say , by reason of certain marish ground adjoining unto it . They have also a certain yearly sickness reigning in the same town , above all the rest of the Island : yet nevertheless , they have it in other towns , but not so much . It is a certain redness and pain of the eyes , the which if it be not quickly helped , it takes away their sighed , so that yearly almost in that town , they have about twentie that loose their sighed , either of one eye or both , and it comes for the most part in this month of October , and the last month : for I have met diverse times three and foure at once in companies , both men and women . Their living is better cheap in Famagusta then in any other place of the Island , because there may no kind of provision within their liberty be sold out of the City . 
 The second of October we returned to Arnacho , where we rested until the sixt day . This town is a pretty 96 
 * 553-Village , there are thereby towards the Sea side diverse Great nines monuments , that there hath be great overthrow of in Cyprus . buildings , for to this day there is no year when they find not , digging under ground , either coins , caves , and sepulchres of antiquities , as we walking , did see many , so that in effect , all alongst the Sea coast , throughout the whole Island , there is much ruin and overthrow of buildings : for as they say , it was disinhabited sixe Cyprus 36. and thirtie years , before Saint Helens time for lack of water . And since that time it hath be ruinated and cluofwater overthrown by Richard the first of that name , king of Cypr. ruin-England , which he did in revenge of his sisters ravish - “ ted by Rich. meant coming to Jerusalem , the which enforcement was * • done to her by the king of Famagusta . 
 The sixt day we rid to Nicosia , which is from Arnacho Nicosia . seven Cyprus miles , which are one and twentie Italian miles . This is the ancientest city of the Island , and is walled about , but it is not strong neither of walls nor situation : It is by report three Cyprus miles about , it is not thoroughly inhabited , but hath many great gardens in it , and also very many Date trees , and plenty of Pomegranates and other fruits . There dwell all the Gentility of the Island , and there hath every Cavalier or Conte of the Island and habitation . There is in this dfiuntaine city one fountain rented by saint Mark , which is bound every eight days once , to water all the gardens city . in the town , and the keeper of this fountain hath for every tree a Bizantin , which is twelve soldes Venice , and A Bizantin is six pence sterling . He that hath that to farm , with a sterltn& fair and profitable garden thereto belonging , payeth every year to saint Mark , fifteene hundred crowns . The streets of the city are not paved , which makes it with the quantity of the gardens , to seem but a rural habitation . But there be many fair buildings in the City , there be also Monasteries both of Franks & Greeks . 
 The Cathedral church is called Santa Sophia , in the which a 
 there is and old tomb of Jaspis stone , all of one piece , chirch-of made in form of a carriage coffer , twelve spans long , Nicosia . 
 v 97 G 
 [ II i . i io . ] 
 Limisso , 
 sixe spans broad , and seven spans high , which they say was found under ground . It is as fair a stone as ever I have seen . 
 The seventh day we rid to a Greek Frierie half a mile without the town . It is a very pleasant place , and the Friars feasted us according to their ability . These Friars are such as have be Priests , and their wives dying they must become Friars of this place , and never after eat flesh , for if they do , they are deprived from saying mass : neither , after they have taken upon them this order , may they marry again , but they may keep a single woman . These Greekish Friars are very continent and chaste , and surely I have seidome seen ( which I have well noted ) any of them fat . 
 The 8. day we returned to Arnacho , and rested there . The 9. after midnight my company rid to the hill called Monte de la Croce ( but I not disposed would not go ) which hill is from Arnacho 15. Italian miles . Upon the said hill is a certain cross , which is , they say , a holy Cross . This Cross in times past did by their report of the Island , hang in the air , but by a certain earthquake , the cross and the chapel it hung in , were overthrown , so that never since it would hang again in the air . But it is now covered with silver , and hath 3. drops of our lords blood on it ( as they say ) and there is in the midst of the great cross , a little cross made of the cross of Christ , but it is closed in the silver , you must ( if you will ) believe it is so , for see it you cannot . This cross hangs now by both ends in the wall , that you may swing it up and down , in token that it did once hang in the air . This was told me by my fellow pilgrimss , for I saw it not . 
 The 10. at night we went aboard by warning of'the patron : and the 11. in the morning we set sail , and crept along the shore , but at night we anchored by reason of contrary winds . 
 The 12. we set sail towards Limisso , which is from Salines 50. miles , and there we went on land that night . 
 The 13. and 14. we remained still on land , and the 15. the patron sent for us ; but by reason that one of our company was not well , we went not presently , but we were forced afterwards to hire a boat , and to overtake the ship tenne miles into the sea . At this Limisso all the Venetian ships lade wine for their provision , and some for to fell , and also vinegar . They lade also great store of Carrobi : for all the country thereabouts adjoin - Carrobi . king , and all the mountains are full of Carrobi trees , they lade also cotton wool there . In the said town we did see a certain foul of the land ( whereof there are many in this Island ) nam in the Italian tongue Vulture . It is a fowl that is as big as a Swan , Vulture . and it lives upon carrion . The skin is full of soft down , like to a fine fur , which they use to occupy when they have evil stomachs , and it makes good digestion . This bird ( as they say ) will eat as much at one meal as shall serve him fortie days after , and within the compass of that time careth for no more meat . The country people , when they have any dead beast , they carry it into the mountains , or where they suppose the said Vultures to haunt , they seeing the carrion do immediately greedily seize upon it , and do so ingraft their talents , that they cannot speedily rise again , by reason whereof the people come and kill them : sometime they kill them with dogs , and sometimes with such weapons as they have . This foul is very great and hardy , much like and Eagle in the feathers of her wings and back , but under her great feathers she is only down , her neck also long and full of down . She hath on the neck bone , between the neck and the shoulders , a heap of feathers like a Tassel , her thighs unto her knees are covered with down , her legs strong and great , and dareth with her talents assault a man . They have also in this Island a certain small Great plenty bird , much like unto a Wagtail in feathers and making , fat these are so extreme fat that you can perceive nothing ’ else in all their bodies : these birds are now in season . 
 They take great quantity of them , and they use to pickle them with vinegar and salt , and to put them in pots and send them to Venice and other places of Italy for presents of great estimation . They say they send almost 1200. Jarres or pots to Venice , beside those which are consumed in the Island , which are a great number . These are so plentiful that when there is no shipping , you may buy them for 10. Carchies , which coin are 4. to a Venetian Soldo , which is penny farthing the dozen , and when there is store of shipping , 2. pence the dozen , after TheFamagus - that rate of their money . They of the limits of Fama-tans observe gUsta do keep the statutes of the Frenchmen which sometime did rule there . And the people of Nicosia observe the order of the Genoueses , who sometime also did rule them . All this day we lay in the sea with little wind . 
 The 16. we met a Venetian ship , and they willing to speak with us , and we with them , made towards each other , but by reason of the evil stirrage of the other ship , we had almost boarded each other to our great Cavo Bianco , danger . Towards night we anchored under Cavo Bianco , but because the wind grew fair , we set sail again presently . 
 The 17. 18. 19. and 20. we were at sea with calm summer weather , and the 20. we had some rain , and Another Cion , saw another Cion in the element . This day also we A ship called saw atlj spoke with a Venetian ship called el Bonna , el Bonna . l j r A - 
 bound tor Ciprus . 
 The 21. we sailed with a reasonable gale , and saw no A great tem - land until the 4. of November . This day we had rain , Pest ' thunder , lightning , and much wind and stormy weather , but God be praised we escaped all dangers . 
 The 4. of November , we had first sighed of the Island Candia , Gozi . of Candia , and we fell with the Islands called Gozi , by Antonie Gel - South of Candia . This day departed this present life , ber departeth one of our company nam Anthonie Gelber of Prussia , this life . who only took his surfeit of Cyprus wine . This night 
 we determined to ride a try , because the wind was contrary , and the weather troublesome . 
 100 
 The 5. we had very rough stormy weather . This day was the said Anthonie Gelber sowed in a Chavina filled with stones and thrown into the sea . By reason of the freshness of the wind we would have made towards the shore , but the wind put us to the sea , where we endured a great storm and a troublesome night . 
 The 6. 7. and 8. we were continually at the sea , & this day at noon the wind came fair , whereby we recovered the way which we had lost , and sailed out of sighed of Candia . 
 The 9. we sailed all day with a prosperous wind after [ II i . in . ] 14. mile and hour : and the 10. in the morning , we had sighed of Cavo Matapan , and by noon of Cavo Gallo , Cavo Mata-in Morea , with which land we made by reason of contrary Ga^ wind , likewise we had sighed of Modon , under the which Modon . place we anchored . This Modon is a strong town , and built in the sea , and joins on the North side to the land . It hath a little castle built into the sea , with a peer for little ships and galleys to harbour in . It hath on the South side of the channel , the Island of Sapientia , Sapientia . with other little Islands all disinhabited . The channel lies Southwest and Northeast between the Islands and Morea , which is firm land . This Modon was built by the Venetians , but as some say it was taken from them by force of the Turke , and others say by composition : in like case Coron , and Napolis de Romania , which Corm . is also in Morea . This night the Flemish pilgrimss being drunk would have slain the patron because ne anchored here . 
 The r 1. day we set sail again , and as we passed by Modon , we saluted them with ordinance , for they that pass by this place , must salute with ordinance , ( if they have ) or else by striking their top sails , for if they do not , the town will shoot at them . This day towards 2. of the clock we passed by the Island of Prodeno , Prodeno . which is but little , and desert , under the Turke . About 2. hours before night , we had sighed of the Islands of 
 IOI 
 Zante and Zante and Cephalonia , which are from Modon one Cephalonia . hundreth miles . 
 The 12. day in the morning , with the wind at West , Castle Tor - doubled between Castle Torneste , and the Island of Turke ^ante . This castle is on the firm land under the Turke . W e ' This night we anchored afore the town of Zante , where we that night went on land , and rested there the 13. 14. and 15. at night we were warned aboard by the patron . This night the ship took in victuals and other necessaries . 
 Cavo S. The 16. in the morning we set sail with a prosperous Maria on the w ; nj and ( j ^g n , we had sighed of Cavo de santa Maria Albania . in Albania , on our right hand , and Corfu on the left Corfu Island , hand . This night we anchored before the castles of Corfu , and went on land and refreshed our selves . 
 The descrip - The 18. by means of a friend we were licenced to ^cfofCorfu enter the castle or fortress of Corfu , which is not only ’ of situation the strongest I have seen , but also of edification . It hath for the Inner ward two strong castles situated on the top of two high crags of a rock , a bow shoot distant the one from the other : the Vocke is unassaultable , for the second ward it hath strong walls , with rampiers and trenches , made as well as any art can devise . For the third ward and uttermost , it hath very strong walls with rampires of the rock it self cut out by force , and trenched about with the Sea. The bulwarks of the uttermost ward are not yet finished , which are in number but two : there are continually in the castle seven hundred soldiers . Also it hath continually foure wards , to wit , for the land entry one , for the sea entry another , and two other wards . Artillery and other munition of defence always ready planted it hath sufficient , beside the store remaining in their storehouses . The Venetians hold this for the key of all their dominions , and for strength it may be not The Island of less . This Island is very fruitful and plentiful of wine plntifalL^ and corn very good , and olives great store . This Island 
 is parted from Albania with a channel , in some places T02 
 eight and ten , and in other but three miles . Albania is under the Turke , but in it are many Christians . All the horsemen of Corfu are Albaneses ; the Island is not above 80. or 90. miles in compass . 
 The 19. 20. and 21. we remained in the town of Corfu . 
 The 22. day we went aboard and set sail , the wind being very calm we toed the ship all that day , and towards Sun set , the castle sent a Fragatta unto us , to give us warning of three Foists come mi ng after us , for whose coming we prepared and watched all night , but they came not . 
 The 23. day in the morning being calm , we toed out of the Straight , until we came to the old town , whereof there is nothing standing but the walls . There is also a new Church of the Greeks called Santa Maria di Cassopo , and the towns name is called Cassopo . It Cassopo . is a good port . About noon we passed the Straight , and drew towards the end of the Island , having almost no wind . This night after supper , by reason of a certain A dangerous Hollander that was drunk , there arose in the ship such tumult in the a troublesome disturbance , that all the ship was in and s^ ’ uproar with weapons , and had it not be rather by Gods help , and the wisdom and patience of the patron , more then by our procurement , there had be that night a great slaughter . But as God would , there was no hurt , but only the beginner was put under hatches , and with the fallen hurt his face very soar . All this night the wind blew at Southeast , and sent us forward . 
 The 24. in the morning we found our selves before and Island called Saseno , which is in the entry to Valona , Saseno . and the wind prosperous . Valona . 
 The 25. day we were before the hills of Antiveri , and about sun set we passed Ragusa , and three hours [ II i . 112. ] within night we anchored within Meleda , having Sclavonia Meleda . or Dalmatia on the right hand of us , and the wind Southwest . 
 103 
 In the Hand of Lesina , are taken store of Sardinas . 
 The gulf of Quernero . 
 Rovignio . 
 Parenzo . 
 S. Nicolo and Hand . 
 The 26 in the morning we set sail , and passed the channel between Sclavonia and Meleda , which may be eight mile over at the most . This Hand is under the Raguses . At after noon with a hard gale at west and by north we entered the channel between the Hand Curzola and the hills of Dalmatia , in the which channel be many rocks , and the channel not passed 3 miles over , and we anchored before the town of Curzola . This is a pretty town walled about and built upon the sea side , having on the top of a round hill a fair Church . This Hand is under the Venetians , there grow very good vines , also that part towards Dalmatia is well peopled and husbanded , especially for wines . In the said Hand we met with the Venetian army , to wit , tenne galleys , and three foists . All that night we remained there . 
 The 27 we set sail and passed along the Hand , and towards afternoon we passed in before the Hand of Augusta , and about sun set before the town of Lesina , whereas I am informed by the Italians , they take all the Sardinas that they spend in Italy . This day we had a prosperous wind at Southeast . The Hand of Lesina is under the Venetians , a very fruitful Hand adjoining to the main of Dalmatia , we left it on our right hand , and passed along . 
 The 28 in the morning we were in the Gulf of Quernero , and about two hours after noon we were before the cape of Istria , and at sun set we were at anchor afore Rovignio which is also in Istria and under the Venetians , where all ships Venetian and others are bound by order from Venice to take in their Pilots to go for Venice . All the summer the Pilots lie at Rovignio , and in winter at Parenzo , which is from Rovignio 18 miles by West . 
 The 29 we set sail and went as far as Parenzo , and anchored there that day , and went no further . 
 The 30 in the morning we rowed to Sant Nicolo a little Hand hard by uninhabited , but only it hath a Monastery , & is full of Olive trees , after mass we 104 
 returned and went aboard . This day the patron hired a Bark to embark the pilgrim's for Venice , but they departed not . In the afternoon we went to see the town of Parenzo , it is a pretty handsome town , under the Venetians . After supper we embarked our selves again , and that night we sailed towards Venice . 
 The first of December we passed a town of the Vene - Cmrk stand-tians , standing on the entery to the Palude or marshes tnSati^ of Venice : which town is called Caorle , and by contrary Marshes * 0 } winds we were driven thither to take port . This is 60 Venice . miles from Parenzo , and forty from Venice , there we remained that night . 
 The second two hours before day , with the wind at Southeast , we sailed towards Venice , where we arrived arrival ( God be praised ) at two of the clock after dinner , and at V ™ ™ 1-landed about foure , we were kept so long from landing , because we durst not land until we had presented to the Provider de la Sanita , our letter of health . 
 . 