The worthy enterprise of John Foxe and Englishman in delivering 266. Christians out of the captivity of the Turkes at Alexandria , the 3. of Januarie 1577. 
 Mong our merchant's here in England , it is a common voyage to traffic into Spaine : whereunto a ship , being called The three half Moons , manned with 38. men , and well fenced with munitions , the better to encounter their enemies withal , and having wind & tide , set from 
 Portsmouth , 1563. and bent her journey towards Sivill a city in Spaine , intending there to traffic with them . And falling near the Straights , they perceived themselves to be beset round with eight galleys of the Turkes , in such wise , that there was no way for them to fly or escape away , but that either they must yield or else be sunk . Which the owner perceiving , manfully encouraged his company , exhorting them valiantly to show their manhood , showing them that God was their God , and not their enemies , requesting them also not to faint in seeing such a heap of their enemies ready to devour them ; putting them in mind also , that if it were Gods pleasure to give them into their enemies hands , it was not they y‘ ought to show one displeasant look or countenance thereagainst ; but to take it patiently , & not to prescribe a day and time for their deliverance , as the citizens of Bethulia did , but to put themselves under his mercy . And again , if it were his mind and good will to show his mighty power by them , if their enemies were ten times so many , they were not able to stand in their hands ; putting them likewise in mind of the old and ancient worthiness of their countrymen , who in the hardest extremities have always most prevailed and gone away conquerors , yea , and where it hath be almost impossible . Such ( quoth he ) hath ’S3 
 John Fox taken 1563. 
 be the valiantness of our countrymen , and such hath be the mighty power of our God . 
 With other like encouragements , exhorting them to behave themselves manfully , they fell all on their knees making their prayers briefly unto God : who being all risen up again perceived their enemies by their signs and defiances bent to the spoil , whose mercy was nothing else but cruelty , whereupon every man took him to his weapon . 
 Then stood up one Grove the master , being a comely man , with his sword and target , holding them up in defiance against his enemies . So likewise stood up the Owner , the Master's mate , Boateswaine , Purser , and every man well appointed . Now likewise sounded up the drums , trumpets and flutes , which would have encouraged any man , had he never so little heart or courage in him . 
 Then takes him to his charge John Foxe the gunner in the disposing of his pieces in order to the best effect , and sending his bullets towards the Turkes , who likewise bestowed their pieces thrice as fast towards the Christians . But shortly they drew near , so that the bowmen fell to their charge in sending forth their arrows so thick among the Galleys , & also in doubling their shot so soar upon the galleys , that there were twice so many of the Turkes slain , as the number of the Christians were in all . But the Turks discharged twice as fast against the Christians , & so long , that the ship was very soar stricken & bruised under water . Which the Turkes perceiving , made the more haste to come aboard the Ship : which ere they could do , many a Turke bought it dearly with the loss of their lives . Yet was all in vain , and boarded they were , where they found so hight a skirmish , that it had be better they had not meddled with the feast . For the Englishmen showed themselves men in deed , in working manfully with their brown bills and halberds : where the owner , master , boateswaine , and their company stood to it so 
 154 
 lustily , that the Turkes were half dismayed . But chiefly The valour IS the boateswaine showed himself valiant above the rest : fair 
 for he fared among the Turkes like a wood Lion : for Boatswatne-there was none of them that either could or durst stand in his face , till at the last there came a shot from the Turkes , which brake his whistle asunder , and smote him on the breast , so that he fell down , bidding them farewell , & to be of good comfort , encouraging them likewise to win praise by death , rather then to live captives in misery and shame . Which they hearing , in deed intended to have done , as it appeared by their skirmish : but the press and store of the Turkes was so great , that they were not able long to endure , but were so overpressed , that they could not wield their weapons : 
 by reason whereof , they must needs be taken , which none [ II i . 132. ] of them intended to have be , but rather to have died : except only the master's mate , who shrunk from the skirmish , like a notable coward , esteeming neither the valour of his name , nor accounting of the present example of his fellows , nor having respect to the misery's , whereunto he should be put . But in fine , so it was , that the Turks were victor's , whereof they had no great cause to rejoice , or triumph . Then would it have grieved any hard heart to see these Infidels so violently entreating the Christians , not having any respect of their manhood which they had tasted of , nor yet respecting their own state , how they might have met with such a booty , as might have given them the overthrow : but no remorse hereof , or any thing else does bridle their fierce and tyrannous dealing , but that the Christians must needs to the galleys , to serve in new offices : and they were no sooner in them , but their garments were pulled over their ears , and torn from their backs , and they set to the oars . 
 I will make no mention of their misery's , being now under their enemies raging stripes . I think there is no man will judge their fare good , or their bodies unladen of stripes , and not pestered with too much heat , and 
 * 55 
 The Englishmen carted prisoners unto and Haven never Alexandria . 
 also with too much cold : but I will go to my purpose , which is , to show the end of those , being in mere misery , which continually do call on God with a steadfast hope that he will deliver them , and with a sure faith that he can do it . 
 Nigh to the city of Alexandria , being a haven town , and under the dominion of the Turkes , there is a road , being made very fensible with strong walls , whereinto the Turkes do customably bring their galleys on shore every year , in the winter season , and there do trim them , and lay them up against the spring time . In which road there is a prison , wherein the captives & such prisoners as serve in the galleys , are put for all that time , until the seas be calm and passable for the galleys , every prisoner being most grievously laden with irons on their legs , to their great pain , and soar disabling of them to any labour taking . Into which prison were these Christians put , and fast warded all the Winter season . But ere it was long , the Master and the Owner , by means of friends , were redeemed : the rest abiding still by the misery , while that they were all ( through reason of their ill usage and worse fare , miserably starved ) saving one John Fox , who ( as some men can abide harder and more misery , then other some can , so can some likewise make more shift , and work more devises to help their state and living , then other some can do ) being somewhat skilful in the craft of a Barbour , by reason thereof made great shift in helping his fare now and then with a good meal . Insomuch , till at the last , God sent him favour in the sighed of the keeper of the prison , so that he had leave to go in and out to the road , at his pleasure , paying a certain stipend unto the keeper , and wearing a lock about his leg : which liberty likewise , sixe more had upon like sufferance : who by reason of their long imprisonment , not being feared or suspected to start aside , or that they would work the Turkes any mischief , had liberty to go in and out at the said road , in such manner , as this John Fox 156 
 THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX did , with irons on their legs , and to return again at night . 
 In the year of our Lord 1577. in the Winter season , the galleys happily coming to their accustomed harbour , and being discharged of all their masts , sails , and other such furnitures , as unto galleys do appertain , and all the Master's and mariners of them being then nested in their own homes : there remained in the prison of the said road two hundred threescore and eight Christian prisoners , who had be taken by the Turks force , and were of sixteen sundry nations . Among which there were three Englishmen , whereof one was nam John Fox of Woodbridge in Suffolke , the other William Wickney of Portsmouth , in the County of Southhampton , and the third Robert More of Harwich in the County of Essex . Which John Fox having be thirteene or fourteen years under their gentle entreatance , and being too too weary thereof , minding his escape , weighed with himself by what means it might be brought to pass : and continually pondering with himself thereof , took a good heart unto him , in hope that God would not be always scourging his children , and never ceased to pray him to further his pretended enterprise , if that it should redound to his glory . 
 Not far from the road , and somewhat from thence , at one side of the City , there was a certain victualling house , which one Peter Unticaro had hired , paying also a certain fee unto the keeper of the road . This Peter Unticaro was a Spaniard born , and a Christian , and had be prisoner about thirtie years , and never practised any means to escape , but kept himself quiet without touch or suspect of any conspiracy : until that now this John Foxe using much thither , they brake one to another their minds , concerning the restraint of their liberty and imprisonment . So that this John Fox at length opening unto this Unticaro the devise which he would feign put in practice , made privy one more to this their intent . Which three debated of this matter 
 157 
 A.D. 
 1577 - 
 Januarie . 
 at such times as they could compass to meet together : insomuch , that at seven weeks end they had sufficiently concluded how the matter should be , if it pleased God to farther them thereto : who making five more privy to this their devise , whom they thought they might safely trust , determined in three nights after to accomplish their deliberate purpose . Whereupon the same John Fox , and Peter Unticaro , and the other sixe appointed to meet all together in the prison the next day , being the last day of December : where this John Fox certified the rest of the prisoners , what their intent and devise was , and how and when they minded to bring their purpose to pass : who thereunto persuaded them without much a do to further their devise . Which the same John Fox seeing , delivered unto them a sort of files , which he had gathered together for this purpose , by the means of Peter Unticaro , charging them that every man should be ready discharged of his irons by eight of the clock on the next day at night . 
 On the next day at night , this said John Fox , and his sixe other companions , being all come to the house of Peter Unticaro , passing the time away in mirth for fear of suspect , till the night came on , so that it was time for them to put in practise their devise , sent Peter Unticaro to the master of the road , in the name of one of the Master's of the city , with whom this keeper was acquainted , and at whose request he also would come at the first : who desired him to take the pains to meet him there , promising him , that he would bring him back again . The keeper agreed to go with him , willing the warders not to bar the gate , saying , that he would not stay long , but would come again with all speed . 
 In the mean season , the other seven had provided them of such weapons , as they could get in that house : and John Fox took him to and old rusty sword blade , without either hilt or pomell , which he made to serve his turn , in bending the hand end of the sword , in steed 158 
 THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX of a pomell , and the other had god such spits and glaives as they found in the house . 
 The keeper now being come unto the house , and perceiving no light , nor hearing any noise , straightway suspected the matter : and returning backward , John Fox standing behind the corner of the house , stepped forth unto him : who perceiving it to be John Fox , said , Oh Fox , what have I deserved of thee , that thou shouldst seek my death ? Thou villain ( quoth Fox ) hast be a bloodsucker of many a Christians blood , and now thou shalt know what thou hast deserved at my hands : wherewith he lift up his bright shining sword of tenne years rust , and stroke him so main a blow , as therewithal ! his head clave a sunder , so that he fell Stark dead to the ground . Whereupon Peter Unticaro went in , and certified the rest how the case stood with the keeper : who came presently forth , and some with their spits ran him through , and the other with their glaives hewed him in sunder , cut ofF his head , and mangled him so , that no man should discern what he was . 
 Then marched they towards the road , whereinto they entered softly , where were six warders , whom one of them asked , saying , who was there ? quoth Fox & his company , all friends . Which when they were all within , proved contrary : for , quoth Fox , my master's , here is not to every man a man , wherefore look you play your parts . Who so behaved themselves in deed , that they had dispatched these sixe quickly . Then John Fox intending not to be barred of his enterprise , and minding to work surely in that which he went about , barred the gate surely , and planted a Canon against it . 
 Then entered they into the Gaolers lodge , where they found the keys of the fortress & prison by his bed side , and there had they all better weapons . In this chamber was a chest , wherein was a rich treasure , and all in ducats , which this Peter Unticaro , & two more , opening , stuffed themselves so full as they could , between their shirts and their skin : which John Fox 
 159 
 would not once touch , and said , that it was his and their liberty which he sought for , to the honour of his God , & not to make a mart of the wicked treasure of the Infidels . Yet did these words sink nothing into their stomachs , they did it for a good intent : so did Saul save the fattest Oxen , to offer unto the Lord , and they to serve their own turn . But neither did Saul escape the wrath of God therefore , neither had these that thing which they desired so , and did thirst after . Such is Gods justice . He that they put their trust in , to deliver them from the tyrannous hands of their enemies , he ( I say ) could supply their want of necessaries . 
 Now these eight being armed with such weapons as they thought well of , thinking themselves sufficient champions to encounter a stronger enemy , and coming unto the prison , Fox opened the gates and doors thereof , and called forth all the prisoners , whom he set , some to ramming up the gate , some to the dressing up of a certain galley , which was the best in all the road , and was called the captain of Alexandria , whereinto some carried masts , sails , oars , and other such furniture as does belong unto a galley . 
 At the prison were certain warders , whom John Fox and his company slew : in the killing of whom , there were eight more of the Turkes , which perceived them , and god them to the top of the prison : unto whom John Fox , and his company , were feign to come by ladders , where they found a hight skirmish . For some of them were there slain , some wounded , and some but scarred , and not hurt . As John Fox was thrice shot through his apparel , and not hurt , Peter Unticaro , and the other two , that had armed them with the ducats , were slain , as not able to wield themselves , being so pestered with the weight and uneasy carrying of the wicked and profane treasure : and also diverse Christians were aswell hurt about that skirmish , as Turkes slain . 
 among the Turkes was one thrust thorough , who ( let us not say that it was ill fortune ) fell off from the top 160 
 of the prison wall , and made such a lowing , that the inhabitants thereabouts ( as here and there scattering stood a house or two ) came and dawed him , so that they understood the case , how that the prisoners were paying their ransoms : wherewith they raised both Alexandria which lay on the west side of the road , and a Castle which was at the Cities end , next to the road , and also and other Fortress which lay on the Northside of the road : so that now they had no way to escape , but one , which by men reason ( the two holds lying so upon the mouth of the road ) might seem impossible to be a way for them . So was the read sea impossible for the Israelites to pass through , the hills and rocks lay so on the one side , and their enemies compassed them on the other . So was it impossible , that the walls of Jericho should fallen down , being neither undermined , nor yet rammed at with engines , nor yet any men wisdom , policy , or help set or put thereunto . Such impossibilities can our God make possible . He that held the Lyons jaws from renting Daniel asunder , yea , or yet from once touching him to his hurt : can not he hold the roaring canons of this hellish force ? He that kept the fierce rage in the hight burning Oven , from the three children , that praised his name , can not he keep the fierce flaming Wastes from among his elect ? 
 Now is the road fraught with lusty soldiers , laborers , and mariners , who are feign to stand to their tackling , in setting to every man his hand , some to the carrying in of victuals , some munitions , some oars , and some one thing , some another , but most are keeping their enemy from the wall of the road . But to be short , there was no time mispent , no man idle , nor any men labour ill bestowed , or in vain . So that in short time , this gaily was ready trimmed , up . Whereinto every man leapt in all haste , hoyssing up the sails lustily , yielding themselves to his . mercy and grace , in whose hands are both wind and . weather . 
 Now is this gaily on float , and out of the safety of the v 161 ! ■ 
 road : now have the two Castles full power upon the gaily , now is there no remedy but to sink : how can it be avoided ? The canons let fly from both sides , and the gaily is even in the midst , and between them both . What man can devise to save it ? there is no man , but would think it must needs be sunk . 
 There was not one of them that feared the shot , which went thundering round about their ears , nor yet were once scarred or touched , with five & forty shot , which came from the Castles . Here did God hold forth his buckler , he shieldeth now this gaily , and hath tried their faith to the uttermost . Now comes his speciali help : yea , even when man thinks them passed all help , then comes he himself down from heaven with his mighty power , then is his present remedy most ready pressed . For they sail away , being not once touched with the glance of a shot , and are quickly out of the Turkish canons reach . Then might they see them coming down by heaps to the water side , in companies like unto swarms of bees , making show to come after them with galleys , in bustling themselves to dress up the galleys , which would be a swift piece of work for them to do , for that they had neither oars , masts , sails , gables , nor any thing else ready in any gaily . But yet they are carrying them into them , some into one gaily , and some into another , so that , being such a confusion among them , without any certain guide , it were a thing impossible to overtake them : beside that , there was no man that would take charge of a gaily , the weather was so rough , and there was such and amasednes among them . And verily I think their God was amazed thereat : it could not be but he must blush for shame , he can speak never a word for dulness , much less can he help them in such and extremity . Well , howsoever it is , he is very much to blame , to suffer them to receive such a gibe . But howsoever their God behaved himself , our God showed himself a God indeed , and that he was the only living God : for the seas were swift under his faithful , which 
 162 
 made the enemies aghast to behold them , a skilfuller Pilot ieades them , and their mariners bestir them lustily : but the Turkes had neither mariners , Pilot , nor any skilful Master , that was in a readiness at this pinch . 
 When the Christians were safe out of the enemies coast , John Fox called to them all , willing them to be thankful unto almighty God for their delivery , and most humbly to fallen down upon their knees , beseeching him to aid them unto their friends land , and not to bring them into and other danger , sith he had most mightily delivered them from so great a thraldom and bondage . 
 Thus when every man had made his petition , they fell straight way to their labour with the oars , in helping one [ II i . 135. ] another , when they were wearied , and with great labour striving to come to some Christian land , as near as they could guess by the stars . But the winds were so diverse , one while driving them this way , another while that way , that they were now in a new maze , thinking that God had forsaken them , and left them to a greater danger . And forasmuch as there were no victuals now left in the gaily , it might have been a cause to them ( if they had been the Israelites ) to have murmured against their God : but they knew how that their God , who had delivered them out of TEgypt , was such a loving and merciful God , as that he would not suffer them to be confounded , in whom he had wrought so great a wonder : but what calamity soever they sustained , they knew it was but for their further trial , and also ( in putting them in mind of their farther misery ) to cause them not to triumph and glory in themselves therefore . Having ( I say ) no victuals in the gaily , it might seem that one misery continually fell upon and others neck : but to be Extremity of brief , the famine grew to be so great , that in 28 days , famine-wherein they were on the sea , there died eight persons , to the astonishment of all the rest . 
 So it fell out , that upon the 29 day , after they set from Alexandria , they fell on the Isle of Candie , and landed at Gallipoli , where they were made much of by the Abbot 
 163 
 and Monks there , who caused them to stay there , while John Fox his they were well refreshed and eased . They kept there the sword heaped as sword , wherewith John Fox had killed the keeper , Gallipoli . esteeming it as a most precious jewel , and hung it up tor a monument . 
 When they thought good , having leave to depart from thence , they sailed along the coast , till they arrived at Tarento , where they sold their galley , and divided it , every man having a part thereof . The Turkes receiving so shameful a foil at their hand , pursued the Christians , and scoured the seas , where they could imagine that they had bent their course . And the Christians had departed from thence on the one day in the morning , and seven galleys of the Turkes came thither that night , as it was certified by those who followed Fox , and his company , . fearing lest they should have be met with . And then they came a foot to Naples , where they departed a sunder , every man taking him to his next way home . From whence John Fox took his journey unto Room , where he was well entertained of and Englishman , who presented his worthy deed unto the Pope , who rewarded him liberally , , and gave him his letters unto the king of Spaine , where he was very well entertained of him there , who for this his most worthy enterprise gave him in fee twentie pence a day . From whence , being desirous to come into his own country , he came thither at such time as he conveniently could , which was in the year of our Lord God , 1579. Who being come into England , went unto the Court , and showed all his travel unto the Council : who considering of the state of this man , in that he had spent and lost a great part of his youth in thraldom and bondage , extended to him their liberality , to help to maintain him now in age , to their right honour , and to the encouragement of all true hearted Christians . 
 164 
 The copy of the certificate for John Fox , and his company , made by the Prior , and the brothers of Gallipoli , where they first landed . 
 WE the Prior , and Father's of the Covent of the Amerciates , of the city of Gallipoli , of the order of Preachers do testify , that upon the 29 of January last passed , 1577 , there came in to the said city a certain gaily from Alexandria , taken from the Turkes , with two hundreth fiftie and eight Christians , whereof was principal Master John Fox , and Englishman , a gunner , and one of the chiefest that did accomplish that great work , whereby so many Christians have recovered their liberties . In token and remembrance whereof , upon our earnest request to the same John Fox , he hath left here and old sword , wherewith he slew the keeper of the prison : which sword we do as a monument and memoriali of so worthy a deed , hang up in the chief place of our Covent house . And for because all things aforesaid , are such as we will testify to be true , as they are orderly passed , and have therefore good credit , that so much as is above expressed is true , and for the more faith thereof , we the Prior , and Father's aforesaid , have ratified and subscribed these presents . Given in Gallipoly , the third of Februarie 1577. 
 I Friar Vincent Barba , Prior of the same place , confirm the premises , as they are above written . 
 I Friar Albert Damaro , of Gallipoly , Subprior , confirm as much . 
 I Friar Anthony Celleler of Gallipoly , confirm as aforesaid . 
 I Friar Bartiemew of Gallipoly , confirm as above said . 
 I Friar Francis of Gallipoly , confirm as much . 
 [ The Bishop 165 
 The Bishop of Rome his letters in the behalf of John Fox . 
 BE it known unto all men , to whom this writing shall come , that the bringer hereof John Fox Englishman , a Gunner , after he had served captive in the Turkes galleys , by the space of fourteene years , at length , through God his help , taking good opportunity , the third of Januarie last passed , slew the keeper of the prison , ( whom he first stroke on the face ) together with foure and twentie other Turkes , by the assistance of his fellow prisoners : and with 266. Christians ( of whose liberty he was the author ) launched from Alexandria , and from thence arrived first at Gallipoly in Candie , and afterwards at Tarento in Apulia : the written testimony and credit of which things , as also of others , the same John Fox hath in public tables from Naples . 
 Upon Easter eve he came to Room , and is now determined to take his journey to the Spanish Court , hoping there to obtain some relief towards his living : wherefore the poor distressed man humbly beseecheth , and we in his behalf do in the bowels of Christ , desire you , that taking compassion of his former captivity , and present penury , you do not only suffer him freely to pass throughout all your cities and towns , but also succour him with your charitable alms , the reward whereof you shall hereafter most assuredly receive , which we hope you will afford to him , whom with , tender affection of pity we commend unto you . At Rome , the 20 of Aprill 1577. 
 Thomas Grolos Englishman Bishop of Astraphen . Richard Silleum Prior Angliae . 
 Andreas Ludovicus Register to our Sovereign Lord the Pope , which for the greater credit of the premises , have set my seal to these presents . At Rome , the day and year above written . 
 Mauricius Clement the governor and keeper of the English Hospitali in the city . 
 166 
 The King of Spaine his letters to the Lieutenant , for the placing of John Fox in the office of a Gunner . 
 TO the illustrious Prince , Vespasian Gonsaga Colonna , our Lieutenant and Captain general of our Realm of Valentia . Having consideration , that John Fox Englishman hath served us , and was one of the most principali , which took away from the Turkes a certain galley , which they have brought to Tarento , wherein were two hundred , fiftie , and eight Christian captives : we licence him to practise , and give him the office of a Gunner , and have ordained , that he go to our said Realm , there to serve in the said office in the Galleys , which by our commandment are lately made . And we do command , that you cause to be paid to him eight ducats pay a month , for the time that he shall serve in the said Galleys as a Gunner , or till we can otherwise provide for him , the said eight ducats monthly of the money which is already of our provision , present and to come , and to have regard of those which come with him . From Escuriall the tenth of August , 1577. 
 I the King . 
 Juan del Gado . 
 And under that a confirmation of the Council . 
 . 