The letters sent from the Imperiali Musulmanlike highness of Zuldan Murad Can , to the sacred regal Majesty of Elizabeth Queen of England , the fifteenth of March 1579 , containing the grant of the first privileges . 
 N greatness and glory most renowned Elizabeth , most sacred Queen , and noble prince of the most mighty worshippers of Jesus , most wise governor of the causes and affairs of the people and family of Nazareth , cloud of most pleasant rain , and sweetest fountain of 
 nobleness and virtue , lady & heir of the perpetuali happiness & glory of the noble Realm of England ( whom all sorts seek unto and submit themselves ) we wish most prosperous success and happy ends to all your actions , and do offer unto you such pleasures and courtesies as are worthy of our mutual and eternal familiarity : thus ending ( as best beseems us ) our former salutations . 
 In most friendly manner we give you to understand , that a certain man hath come unto us in the name of your most excellent Regal Majesty , commending unto us from you all kindness , courtesy and friendly offices on your part , and did humbly require that our Imperiali 169 
 highness would vouchsafe to give leave and liberty to | | These two him and unto II two other merchant's of your kingdom , to resort hither and return again , and that by way of ^andM^vh - traffic they might be suffered to trade hither with their ard Staper . goods and merchandizes to our Imperiali dominions , and in like sort to make their return . 
 Our stately Court and Country hath been ever open for the access both of our enemies and friends . But because we are informed that your most excellent Regal Majesty does abound with good will , humani tie , & all kind of loving affection towards us , so much the rather shall the same our Country be always open to such of your subject's , as by way of merchandise shall trade hither : and we will never fail to aid & succour any of them that are or shall be willing to esteem of our friendship , favour , & assistance : but will reckon it some part of our duty to gratify them by all good means . And forasmuch as our Imperiali highness is given to understand that your most excellent Regal Majesty does excel in bounty & courtesy , we therefore have sent out our Imperiali commandment to all our kings , judges , and travellers by sea , ' to all our Captains and voluntary seafaring men , all condemned persons , and officers of Ports and customs , straightly charging and commanding them , that such foresaid persons as shall resort hither by [ II i . 138.3 sea from the Realm of England , either with great or small vessels to trade by way of merchandise , may lawfully come to our imperiali Dominions , and freely return home again , and that no man shall dare to molest or trouble them . And if in like sort they shall come into our dominions by land , either on foot or on horseback , no man shall at any time withstand or hinder them : but as our familiars and confederates , the French , Venetians , | | He calls Polonians , and the II king of Germany , with diverse other the Germane our neighbours about us , have liberty to come hither , & emperor but ° tO ’ 
 king of Her - to return again into their own countries' , in like sort many . the merchants of your most excellent Regal Majesties kingdom shall have safe conduct and leave to repair 
 170 
 hither to our Imperiali dominions , and so to return again into their own Country : straightly charging that they be suffered to use and trade all kind of merchandise as any other Christians do , without let or disturbance of any . 
 Therefore when these our Imperiali letters shall be brought to your most excellent Regal Majesty , it shall be meet , according to our benevolence , humanity , and familiarity towards your most excellent Majesty , that you likewise bethink your self of your like benevolence , humanity and friendship towards us , to open the gate thereof unto us , and to nourish by all good means this kindness and friendship : and that like liberty may be granted by your Highness to our subject's and merchant's to come with their merchandizes to your dominions , either by sea with their ships , or by land with their wagons or horses , and to return home again : and that your most excellent Regal Majesty do always declare your humanity , good will , and friendship towards us , and always keep open the door thereof unto us . 
 The Turke demandethlike privileges for his subject's in the Queens dominions . 
 Given at our city of Constantinople the fifteenth day of March , and in the year of our most holy Prophet Mahomet II 987. II at * e 
 year 1579. 
 . 