The first voyage or journey , made by Master Laurence Aldersey , Merchant of London , to the Cities of Jerusalem , and Tripolis , etc. In the year 1581. Penned and set down by himself . 
 Departed from London the first day of April , in the year of our Lord 1581 , passing through the Nether-land and up the river Rhene by Colen , and other cities of Germanie . And upon Thursday , the thirde day of May , I came to Augusta , where I delivered the letter I had to 
 Master Jenise , and Master Castler , whom I found very willing to pleasure me , in any thing that I could or would reasonably demand . He first furnished me with a horse to Venice , for my money , and then took me with him a walking , to show me the Ci tie , for that I had a day 
 202 
 to tarry there , for him that was to be my guide . He The descrip-shewed me first the Statehouse , which is very fair , and . beautiful : then he brought me to the finest garden , and orchard , that ever I saw in my life : for there was in it a place for Canary birds , as large as a fair Chamber , trimmed with wier both above and beneath , with fine little branches of trees , for them to fit in , which was full of those Canary birds . There was such and other for Turtle doves : also there were two pigeon houses joining to them , having in them store of Turtle doves , and pigeons . In the same garden also were sixe or seven fishponds , all railed about , and full of very good fish . 
 Also , seven or eight fine fountains , or water springs , of diverse fashions : as for fruit , there wanted none of all sorts , as Oranges , figs , raisons , walnuts , grapes , beside apples , pears , fillbirds , small nuts , and such other fruit , as we have in England . 
 Then did he bring me to the water tower of the same City , that by a sleight and devise hath the water brought up as high , as any Church in the town , and to tell you the strange devises of all , it passes my capacity . Then he brought me to another fair garden , called the Shooters hoose , where are buts for the long bow , the cross bow , the stone bow , the long piece , and for diverse other exercises more . 
 After this , we walked about the walls of the City , where is a great , broad , and deep ditch , upon one side of the town , so full of fish , as ever I saw any pond in my life , and it is reserved only for the States of the City . And upon the other side of the City is also a deep place all green , wherein Dear are kept , and when it pleases the States to hunt for their pleasure , thither they resort , and have their courses with grayhounds , which are kept for that purpose . 
 The fift of May , I departed from Augusta towards Venice . Venice , and came thither upon Whitsunday , the thirteenth of the same month . It is needless to speak of the height of the mountains that I passed over , and 
 203 
 [ II i . I 5 I . ] The number of J ewes in Venice . 
 of the danger thereof , it is so well known already to the world : the heighth of them is marvelous , and I was the space of sixe days in passing them . 
 I came to Venice at the time of a Fair , which lasted foureteene days , wherein I saw very many , and fair shows of wares . I came thither too short for the first passage , which went away from Venice about the seventh or eight of May , and with them about three score pilgrim's , which ship was cast away at a town called Estria , two miles from Venice , and all the men in her , saving thirtie , or thereabouts , lost . 
 Within eight days after fell Corpus Christi day , which was a day among them of procession , in which was showed the plate and treasure of Venice , which is esteemed to be worth two millions of pounds , but I do not account it worth half a quarter of that money , except there be more than I saw . To speak of the sumptuousness of the Copes and Vestments of the Church , I leave , but the truth is , they be very sumptuous , many of them set all over with pearl , and made of cloth of gold . And for the Jesuits , I think there be as many at Venice , as there be in Colen . 
 The number of Jewesis there thought to be 1000 , who dwell in a certain place of the City , and have also a place , to which they resort to pray , which is called the Jewes Synagogue . They all , and their offspring use to wear read caps , ( for so they are commanded ) because they may thereby be known from other men . For my further knowledge of these people , I went into their Synagogue upon a Saturday , which is their Sabbath day : and I found them in their service or prayers , very devout : they receive the five books of Moses , and honour them by carrying them about their Church , as the Papists do their cross . 
 Their Synagogue is in form round , and the people fit round about it , and in the midst , there is a place for him that readeth to the rest : as for their apparel , all of them wear a large white lawn over their 204 
 garments , which reaches from their head , down to the ground . 
 The Psalms they sing as we do , having no image , nor using any manner of idolatry : their error is , that they believe not in Christ , nor yet receive the New Testament . This City of Venice is very fair , and greatly to be commended , wherein is good order for all things : and also it is very strong and populous : it stands upon the main Sea , and hath many Islands about it , that belong to it . 
 To tell you of the duke of Venice , and of the Signiory : there is one chosen that ever bears the name of a duke , but in truth he is but servant to the Signiory , for of himself he can do little : it is not otherwise with him , then with a Priest that is at Mass upon a festival day , which putting on his golden garment , seems to be a great man , but if any man come unto him , and crave some friendship at his hands , he will say , you must go to the Master's of the Parish , for I can not pleasure you , otherwise then by preferring of your suit : and so it is with the duke of Venice , if any man having a suit , come to him , and make his complaint , and deliver his supplication , it is not in him to help him , but he will tell him , You must come this day , or that day , and then I will prefer your suit to the Signiory , and do you the best friendship that I may . Furthermore , if any man bring a letter unto him , he may not open it , but in the presence of the Signiory , and they are to see it first , which being read , perhaps they will deliver it to him , perhaps not . Of the Signiory there be about three hundreth , and about fourtie of the privy Counsel of Venice , who usually are arrayed in gowns of crimson Satin , or crimson Damask , when they fit in Counsel . 
 In the City of Venice , no man may wear a weapon , except he be a soldier for the Signiory , or a scholar of Padua , or a gentleman of great countenance , and yet he may not do that without licence . 
 205 
 The excess of As for the women of Venice , they be rather monsters , the women of then women . Every Shoemakers or Tailors wife will Venice . have a gown of silk , and one to carry up her train , wearing their shoes very near half a yard high from the ground : if a stranger meet one of them , he will surely think by the state that she goes with , that he meeteth a Lady . 
 I departed from this City of Venice , upon Midsummer day , being the foure and twentieth of June , and thinking that the ship would the next day depart , I stayed , and lay a shippeboord all night , and we were made believe from time to time , that we should this day , and that day depart , but we tarried still , till the His embark - fourteenth of July , and then with scant wind we set ing at Venice say } ej anj sailed that day and that night , not above or erusaem . miies . anJ UpOn the sixteene day at night , 
 the wind turned flat contrary , so that the Master knew not what to do : and about the fift hour of the night , which we reckon to be about one of the clock after midnight , the Pilot descried a sail , and at last perceived it to be a Galley of the Turkes , whereupon we were in great fear . 
 The Master being a wise fellow , and a good sailor , began to devise how to escape the danger , and to lose little of our way : and while both he , and all of us were in our dumps , God sent us a merry gale of wind , that we ran threescore and tenne leagues before it was twelve a clock the next day , and in sixe days after we were seven leagues passed Zante . And upon Munday morning , being the three and twentie of the same month , we came in the sighed of Candia which day the wind came contrary , with great blasts , and storms , until the eight and twentie of the same month : in which time , the Mariners cried out upon me , because I was and English man , & said , I was no good Christian , and wished that I were in the midst of the Sea , saying , that they , and the ship , were the worse for me . I answered , truly it may well be , for I think my self the 206 
 worst creature in the world , and consider you your selves also , as I do my self , and then use your discretion . The Friar preached , and the sermon being done , I was demanded whither I did understand him : I answered , yea , and told the Friar himself , thus you said in your sermon , that we were not all good Christians , or else it were not possible for us to have such weather : to which I answered , be you well assured , that we are not indeed all good Christians , for there are in the [ II i . 152. ] ship some that hold very unchristian opinions : so for that time I satisfied him , although ( they said ) that I would not see , when they said the procession , and honoured their images , and prayed to our Lady , and S. Mark . 
 There was also a Gentleman , and Italian , which was a passenger in the ship , and he told me what they said of me , because I would not sing , Salve Regina , and Have Maria , as they did : I told them , that they that prayed to so many , or sought help of any other , then of God the Father , or of Jesus Christ his only son , go a wrong way to work , and robbed God of his honour , and wrought their own destructions . 
 All this was told the Friars , but I herd nothing of it in three days after : and then at evening prayer , they sent the purser about with the image of our Lady to every one to kiss , & I perceiving it went another way from him , and would not see it : yet at last he fetched his course about , so that he came to me , & offered it to me as he did to others , but I refused it : whereupon there was a great stir : the patron and all the friars were told of it , and every one said I was a Lutheran , and so called me : but two of the friars that were of greatest authority , seemed to bear me better good will then the rest , and traveled to the patron in my behalf , and made all well again . 
 The second day of August we arrived in Cyprus , at Cyprus . a town called Missagh : the people there be very rude , and like beasts , and no better , they eat their meat sitting 
 207 
 upon the ground , with their legs a cross like tailors , their beds for the most part be hard stones , but yet some of them have fair mattraces to lie upon . 
 Joppa . Upon thursday the eight of August we came to Joppa 
 in a small bark , which we hired betwixt Missagh and Salina , and could not be suffered to come on land till noon the next day , and then we were permitted by thee The Basham of great Basham , who sat upon the top of a hill to see us Joppa . sent away , Being come on land , we might not enter into any house for victuals , but were to content our selves with our own provision , and that which we bought to carry with us was taken from us . I had a pair of stirrups , which I bought at Venice to serve me in my journey , and trying to make them fit for me , when the Basham saw me up before the rest of the company , he sent one to dismount me , and to strike me , whereupon I turned me to the Basham , and made a long leg , saying , Grand mercy Signior : and after a while we were horsed upon little asses , and sent away , with about fiftie light horsemen to be our conduct through the wilderness , called , Deserta foelix , who made us good sport by the way with their pikes , guns , and fauchins . 
 Rama . That day being S. Laurence day , we came to Rama , 
 which is tenne Italian miles from Joppa , and there we stayed that night , and paid to the captain of the castle every man a chekin , which is seven shillings and two pence sterling . So then we had a new guard of soldiers , and left the other . 
 The house we lodged in at Rama had a door so low to enter into , that I was feign to creep in , as it were upon my knees , & within it are three rooms to lodge travellers that come that way : there are no beds , except a man buy a mat , and lay it on the ground , that is all the provision , without stools or benches to fit upon . Our victuals were brought us out of the town , as hens , eggs , bred , great store of fruit , as pom-granates , figs , grapes , oringes , and such like , and drink we drew out of the well . The town it self 208 
 1581-is so ruinated , that I take it rather to be a heap of stones then a town . 
 Then the next morning we thought to have gone away , but we could not be permitted that day , so we stayed there till two of the clock the next morning , and then with a fresh guard of soldiers we departed towards Jerusalem . We had not rid five English miles , but we were encountered with a great number of the Arabians , Tropes of who stayed us , and would not suffer us to pass till they Ara~ had somewhat , so it cost us for all our guard above ’ twentie shillings a man betwixt Joppa and Jerusalem . 
 These Arabians troubled us oftentimes . Our Truchman that paid the money for us was stricken down , and had his head broken because he would not give them as much as they asked : and they that should have rescued both him and us , stood still , and durst do nothing , which was to our cost . 
 Being come within sighed of Jerusalem , the manner is arrival to kneel down , and give God thanks , that it hath “ the pleased him to bring us to that holy place where he ' himself had been : and there we leave our horses , and go on foot to the town , and being come to the gates , there they took our names , and our father's names , and so we were permitted to go to our lodgings . 
 The governor of the house met us a mile out of the town , and very courteously bade us all welcome , and brought us to the monastery . The gates of the city are all covered with iron , the entrance into the house of the Christians is a very low & narrow door , barred or plated with iron , and then come we into a very dark entry : the place is a monastery : there we lay , & dieted of free cost , we fared reasonable well , the bred and wine was excellent good , the chambers clean , & all the meat [ II i . 153. ] well served in , with clean linen . 
 We lay at the monastery two days , friday and Saturday , and then we went to Bethlem with two or three of the friars of the house with us : in the way thither we saw many monuments , as : 
 v 209 oh 
 The monuments in and about Jerusalem . 
 The mountain where the Angel took up Abacuck by the hair , and brought him to Daniel in the Lions den . 
 The fountain of the prophet Jeremie . 
 The place where the wise men met that went to Bethlem to worship Christ , where is a fountain of stone . 
 Being come to Bethlem we saw the place where Christ was born , which is now a chapel with two altars , whereupon they say mass : the place is built with grey marble , and hath be beautiful , but now it is partly decayed . 
 Near thereto is the sepulchre of the innocents slain by Herod , the sepulchres of Paul , of Jerome , and of Eusebius . 
 Also a little from this monastery is a place under the ground , where the virgin Marry abided with Christ when Herod sought him to destroy him . 
 We stayed at Bethlem that night , and the next day we went from thence to the mountains of Judea , which are about eight miles from Jerusalem , where are the ruins of and old mohasterie . In the mid way from the monastery to Jerusalem is the place where John Baptist was born , being now and old monastery , and cattle kept in it . Also a mile from Jerusalem is a place called Inventio sanctae crucis , where the wood was found that made the cross . 
 In the city of Jerusalem we saw the hall where Pilate sat in judgement when Christ was condemned , the stairs whereof are at Room , as they told us . A little from thence is the house where the was born . 
 There is also the piscina or fishpool where the sick folks were healed , which is by the walls of Jerusalem . But the pool is now dry . 
 The mount of Calvaria is a great church , and within the door thereof , which is little , and barred with iron , and five great holes in it to look in , like the holes 210 
 virgin Marry 
 of tavern doors in London , they fit that are appointed to receive our money with a carpet under them upon a bank of stone , & their legs a cross like tailors : having paid our money , we are permitted to go into the church : right against the church door is the grave where Christ was buried , with a great long stone of white marble over it , and railed about , the outside of the sepulchre is very foul , by means that every man scrapes his name and mark upon it , and is ill kept . 
 Within the sepulchre is a partition , & in the further part thereof is a place like and altar , where they say mass , and at the door thereof is the stone whereupon the Angel sat when he said to marry , He is risen , which stone was also rolled to the door of the sepulchre . 
 The altar stone within the sepulchre is of white marble , the place able to contain but foure persons , right over the sepulchre is a devise or lantern for light , and over that a great lover , such as are in England in ancient houses . There is also the chapel of the sepulchre , and in the mids thereof is a canopy as it were of a bed , with a great sort of Estridge eggs hanging at it , with tassels of silk and lamps . 
 Behind the sepulchre is a little chapel for the Chaldeans and Syrians . 
 Upon the right hand coming into the church is the tomb of Baldwine king of France , and of his son : and in the same place the tomb of Mel-chisedech . 
 There is a chapel also in the same church erected to S. Helen , through which we go up to the place where Christ was crucified : the stairs are fiftie steps high , there are two altars in it : before the high altar is the place where the cross stood , the hold whereof is trimmed about with silver , and the depth of it . is half a men arm deep : the rend also of the mountain is there to be seen in the crevice , wherein a man may put his arm . 
 211 
 S. Helens chapel . 
 Upon the other side of the mount of Calvarie is the place where Abraham would have sacrificed his son . Where also is a chapel , and the place paved with stones of diverse colours . 
 There is also the house of Annas the high Priest , and the Olive tree whereunto Christ was bound when he was whipped . Also the house of Caiphas , and by it the prison where Christ was kept , which is but the room of one man , and hath no light but the opening of the door . 
 Without Jerusalem in the valley of Josaphat is a church under the ground , like to the shrouds in Pauls , where the sepulchre of the virgin Marry is : the stairs be very broad , and upon the stairs going down are two sepulchres : upon the left hand lies Josaphat , and upon the right hand lies Joachim and Anna , the father and mother of the virgin Marry . 
 Going out of the valley of Josaphat we came to mount Olivet , where Christ prayed unto his father before his death : and there is to be seen ( as they told me ) the water & blood that fell from the eyes of Christ . A little higher upon the same mount is the place where the Apostles slept , and watched not . At the foot of the mount is the place where Christ was imprisoned . 
 Upon the mountain also is the place where Christ stood when he wept over Jerusalem , and where he ascended into heaven . 
 Now having seen all these monuments , I with my company set from Jerusalem , the 20 day of August , and came again to Joppa the 22 of the same month , where we took shipping presently for Tripolis , and in foure days we came to Mecina the place where the ships lie that come for Tripolis . 
 The city of Tripolis is a mile and a half within the land , so that no ship can come further then Mecina : so that night I came thither , where I lay nine days for passage , and at last we embarked our 
 212 
 1581. selves in a good ship of Venice called the new Nave Ragasona . We entered the ship the second of September , the fourth we set sail , the seventh we came to Salina , which is 140 miles from Tripolis : there we stayed foure days to take in more lading , in which mean time I fell sick of and ague , but recovered again , I praise God . 
 Salina is a ruinated city , and was destroyed by the Salina . Turke ten years past : there are in it now but seventeen persons , women and children . A little from this city of Salina is a salt piece of ground , where the water grows salt that rains upon it . 
 Thursday the 21 of September , we came to Missagh , Missagh a & there we stayed eight days for our lading : the 18 in of September before we came to Missagh , and within ten cMrttS-miles of the town , as we lay at and anchor , because the wind was contrary , there came a great boat full of men to board us , they made and excuse to seek for foure men which ( they said ) our ship had taken from theirs about Tripolis , but our captain would not suffer any of them to come in to us . 
 The next morning they came to us again with a great gaily , manned with 500 men at you least , whereupon our captain sent the boat to them with twelve men to know their pleasure : they said they sought for 4 men , and therefore would talk with our master : so then the masters mate was sent them , and him they kept , and went their way : the next morning they came again with him , & with three other galleys , and then would needs speak with our captain , who went to them in a gown of crimson damask , and other very brave apparel , and five or sixe other gentlemen richly appareled also . They having the Turks safe conduct , showed it to the captain of the galleys , and laid it upon his head , charging him to obey it : so with much ado , and with the gift of 100 pieces of gold we were quit of them , and had our man again . 
 That day as aforesaid , we came to Missagh , and there Candie . 
 213 
 stayed eight days , and at last departed towards Candie , with a scant wind . 
 The 11 day of October we were boarded with foure galleys , manned with 1200 men , which also made a sleeveless arrant , and troubled us very much , but our captains passport , and the gift of 100 chekins discharged all . 
 Zante , The 27 of October we passed by Zante with a merry wind , the 29 by Corfu , and the third of November we arrived at Istria , and there we left our great ship , and took small boats to bring us to Venice . 
 The 9 of November I arrived again at Venice in good health , where I stayed nine days , and the 25 of the same month I came to Augusta , and stayed there but one day . 
 The 27 of November I set towards Nuremberg where I came the 29 , and there stayed till the 9 of December , and was very well entertained of the English merchants there : and the governors of the town sent me and my company sixteene gallons of excellent good wine . 
 From thence I went to Frankford , from Frankford to Collen , from Collen to Arnam , from Arnam to Utreight , from Utreight to Dort , from Dort to Antwerpe , from Antwerpe to Flushing , from Flushing to London , where I arrived upon Twelfe eve in safety , and gave thanks to God , having finished my journey to Jerusalem and home again , in the space of nine months and five days . 
 . 