The Queens Commission under her great seal , [ n . i . 157. ] to her servant master William Hareborne , to be her majesties Ambassador or Agent , in the parts of Turkey . 1582. 
 221 
 The same in English . 
 ELizabeth , by the clemency of the most good and most great God , the only creator and governor of all things , Queen of England , France , and Ireland , invincible , and most mighty defender of the true faith , against all Idolaters falsely professing the name of Christ , to all and singular persons , to whose sighed and view these our present letters may come , greeting . Whereas the 222 
 COMMISSION TO WILLIAM HAREBORNE o . 1582. 
 most renowned , and most invincible Prince Zuldan Murad Can , the most mighty governor of the kingdom of Turkey , and Monarch of the East Empire , hath entered into league and friendship with us , ( which we for our part , as much as lies in us , do purpose solemnly , and inviolably to keep in all times to come ) and whereas for the better countenancing and authorizing of the same , the foresaid renowned Emperor hath granted unto our subject's free liberty of traffic , in all the parts of his sacred Empire , with as ample and large a grant of privileges , as is given to other good Princes our neighbours and confederates , the grant of which privileges , we taking very thankfully , and acceptably , are certainly , and thoroughly determined to keep and maintain , with the like goodness and courtesy of mind , desiring nothing more , then with and honourable respect to nourish , and deserve the benevolent affections of good Princes towards us : Know you , that we thinking well , and having good [ II i . 158. ] confidence in the singular trustiness , obedience , wisdom , and disposition of our well-beloved servant William Hareborne , one of the Esquires of our body , towards us , and our service , do by these presents , make , ordain and constitute him our true and undoubted Orator , Messenger , Deputie , and Agent . Giving and granting unto him power and authority , in our name , and for us , to confirm the foresaid league of friendship , to take into his hands , and to ratify the grant of the privileges , and to command , and enjoin by the authority of our Majesty , all and singular our Subject's trading and dealing in any of the coasts and kingdoms of that Empire , that as long as they remain in traffic with his subject's , they be obedient to the prescription and order of the foresaid privileges , applying themselves in all things , and through all things , to such duties and services as appertain to so great a league and friendship , and the offenders against this our league to receive justice , and punishment accordingly . We further give unto him power and authority over all and singular our Subject's , dealing , and 
 223 
 using traffic in any place or part whatsoever , subject to the government of that Empire , to appoint the places of their traffics , in what Haven or City it shall please him , and to prohibit them from all other places , and wheresoever their traffics are appointed to be kept , there to make and create Consuls or Governors , to enact laws and statutes , by the virtue and tenor whereof all our foresaid subject's , and every one of them , shall both publicly and privately use and behave themselves , to correct and punish the breakers of those laws : and last of all , to do and fulfil all and singular things whatsoever , which shall seem requisite and convenient for the honest and orderly government of our said subject's , and of the manner of their traffic in those parts . Promising assuredly , and in the word of a Prince , that whatsoever shall be done of our said Orator and Agent , in all , or in any of the premises , not repugnant and contrary to our laws , shall be accepted , ratified , and confirmed by us . In witness whereof , we have caused these our letters to be made patents , and our seal thereunto to be appensed . Given at our Castle of Windsore , the 20. day of November , in the year of Christ 1582. and of our reign the 24. 
 . 