Notes concerning the trade of Alger . 
 He money that is coined in Alger is a piece of gold called Asiano , & Doublaes , and two Doubla's make and Asiano , but that for all things which Doubla there . 
 The Asper there is not so good by half & more , as that in Constantinople ; for the Chekin of gold of 270 
 e Doubla is most used , be sold by Doublaes , is fiftie of their Aspers 
 1584. the Turks made at Constantinople is at Alger worth and 150. Aspers , and at Constantinople it is but 66. 
 Aspers . 
 The pistolet and royals of plate are most currant there . 
 The said pistolet goes for 130. Aspers there : & the piece of 4. royals goes for 40. Aspers , but oftentimes is sold for more , as men need them to carry up into Turkey . 
 Their Asianos and Doublaes are pieces of course gold , worth here but 40. S. the ounce , so the same is currant in no place of Turkey out of the kingdom of Alger , neither the Aspers , for that they be less then others be , for they coin them in Alger . 
 The custom to the king is inward 10. per centum , The custom . to the Turke , to be paid of the commodi tie it self , or as it shall be rated . 
 There is another custom to the Ermine , of one & and half per centum , which is to the Justice of the Christians : the goods for this custom are rated as they are for the kings custom . 
 Having paid custom inward , you pay none outward for any commodity that you do lade , more then a reward to the gate keepers . 
 The weight there is called a Cantare for fine wares , as The weights . metals refined , and spices etc. which is here 120.lL subtle . 
 Mettle not refined , as led , iron , and such gross wares , are sold by a great Cantare , which is half as big again : so it is 180. IL subtle of ours here . 
 The measure of corn is by a measure called a The measure . Curtia , which is about 4. bushels of our measure , and corn is plentiful there and good cheap , except when there happeneth a very dry year . 
 The surest lodging for a Christian there is in a The surest Jewes house : for if he have any hurt , the Jew and M&ngfir a his goods shall make it good , so the Jew takes great ckrisAan ' care of the Christian and his goods that lies in his house , for fear of punishment . 
 271 
 And Englishman called Thomas Williams , which is M. John Tiptons man , lies about trade of merchandise in the street called The Soca of the Jewes . 
 This is another officer . 
 Other small customs you pay beside , which may be at two in the hundred : and fir Consullage you pay two in the hundred . 
 [ II i . 177. ] 
 Notes concerning the trade in Alexandria . 
 Lexandria in Egypt is a free port , and when a man comes within the castles , presently the Ermyn sends aboard to have one come and speak with him , to know what goods are aboard : and then he will set guards aboard the ship to see all the goods 
 discharged . And then from the Ermine you go to the * buy , only for that he will inquire news of you , and so from thence to the Consuls house where you lie . The Venetians have a Consul themselves . But all other nations go to the French nations Consul , who will give you a chamber for your selves apart , if you will so have it . 
 The customs inward of all commodities are ten in the hundred , & the custom is paid in wares also that you buy : for the same wares in barter you pay also ten in the hundred , at the lading of the wares . But if you fell for money , you pay no more custom but the ten aforesaid , and one and a half in the hundred , which is for the custom of the goods you lade for the said money , for more custom you pay not . But for all the money you bring thither , you pay nothing for the custom of the same . And if you fell your wares for money , and with the same money buy wares , you pay but two in the hundred for the custom thereof . And if you steal any custom , if it be taken , you pay double custom for that you steal . 
 The weight of Alexandria is called Pois Forforeine , which is a kintal in that place , which makes at Marseils 109. U. of Marseils weight , at 15 ounces the pound , which is 103.lL of 16. ounces to the li . There 272 
 is another weight called Pois Gerrin , which is 150.lL of Marseils weight , by which are sold all things to eat : but spice is sold by the former weight . - 
 From Alexandria to Cairo is three days journey , , Cairo three but you must take a Janissarie with you : & to go ies j^wy 
 up thither by water it is 8. days journey . Royals or dria jand 
 Spaine are currant money there , and are the best money you can carry . And 4. royals are worth 13. Medins , 
 and 2. Medins , are 3. Aspers . Pistolets and crowns 
 of France and Dollars will go , but of all Royals are best . 
 Rice is not permitted to go out of the land , but is kept for a victuali . But with a present to the buy and Ermine some may pass . 
 All sorts of spices be garbled after the bargain is made , and they be Moors which you deal withal , which be good people and not ill disposed . And after you be searched & have leave to pass , you must presently depart out of the port , and if you do not , they will search you again . And you must depart in the day , for in the night the castles will not suffer you to depart . The duty to the Consul is 2. in the hundred , for his aid , and meat and drink and all . And the port of Alexandria is good when one is within it with good anchors and cables . Silver is better currant then gold in Alexandria , but both are good . 
 Commonly the Caravans come thither in October from Mecca to Cairo , and from thence to Alexandria , where the merchant's be that buy the spices , and therefore the spices are brought most to Alexandria , where each Christian nation remains at the Consuls houses . Yet oftentimes the Christians go up to Cairo to buy drugs & other commodities there , as they see cause . And the commodities there vendible are all sorts of kersies , but the most part blews , and of clothes all colours except mingled colours and blacks . Pepper is usually sold for 24. ducats the quintal , v 273 s 
 Ginger for 14. ducats . You must take canvas to make bags to put your commodity in from Alexandria , for there is none . There is also fine flax , and good store of Buff hides . 
 . 