The voyage made to Tripolis in Barbarie , in the year 1583. with a ship called the Jesus , wherein the adventures and distresses of some Englishmen are truly reported , and other necessary circumstances observed . Written by Thomas Sanders . 
 His voyage was set forth by the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight , chief merchant of all the Turkish company , and one master Richard Staper , the ship being of the burden of one hundred tons , called the Jesus , she was budded at Farmne a river by Portsmouth . The 
 owners were master Thomas Thomson , Nicholas Carnaby , and John Gilman . The master was one Aches Hellier of Black-wall , and his Mate was one Richard Morris of that place : their Phot was one Anthonie Jerado a Frenchman , of the province of Marseils : the purser was one William Thomson our owners son : the merchant's factors were Roman Sonnings a Frenchman , and Richard Skegs servant unto the said master Staper . The owners were bound unto the merchant's by charter party thereupon , in one thousand marks , that the said ship by Gods permission should go for Tripolis in Barbarie , that is to say , first from Portsmouth to Newhaven in Normandie , from thence to S. Lucar , otherwise called Saint Lucas in Andeluzia , and from thence to Tripolie , which is in the East part of Africa , and so to return unto London . But here ought every man to note and consider the works of our God , that many times what man does determine God does disappoint . The said master having some occasion to go to Farmne , took with him the Pilot and the Purser , and returning again by means of a perry of wind , the boat wherein they were , was drowned , with the said master , the purser , and all the company : only the said Pilot by experience in swimming saved himself : 
 292 
 these were the beginnings of our sorrows . After which the said master's mate would not proceed in that voyage , and the owner hearing of this misfortune , and the unwillingness of the master's mate , did send down one Richard nm ma ! ter Deimond , and shipped him for master , who did choose ch°sen-for his Mate one Andrew Dier , and so the said ship departed on her voyage accordingly : that is to say , about the 16 of October , in An. 1583. she made sail from Portsmouth , and the 18 day then next following she arrived at Newhaven , where our said last master Dei - new mond by a surfeit died . The factors then appointed master te • the said Andrew Dier , being then master's mate , to be their master for that voyage , who did choose to be his Mates the two quarter master's of the same ship , to wit , Peter Austine , and Shillabey , and for Purser was shipped one Richard Burges . Afterwards about the 8 day of November we made sail forth ward , and by force of weather we were driven back again into Portesmouth , where we renewed our victuals and other necessaries , and then the wind came fair . About the 29 day then next following we departed thence , and the first day of December by means of a contrary wind , we were driven'to Plimmouth . The 18 day then next following , we made forthward again , & by force of weather we were driven to Falmouth , where we remained until the first day of January : at which time the wind coming fair , we departed thence , and about the 20 day of the said month we arrived safely at S. Lucar . 
 And about the 9 day of March next following , we made sail from thence , and about the 18 day of the same month we came to Tripolis in Barbarie , where we were very well entertained by the king of that country , and also of the commons . The commodities of that place are ’ sweet oils : the king there is a merchant , and the rather ( willing to prefer himself before his commons ) requested our said factors to traffic with him , and promised them that if they would take his oils at his [ n . i . 185. ] own price , they should pay no manner of custom , and 
 293 
 Another ship of Bristow came to Tripolis . 
 they took of him certain tons of oil : and afterward perceiving that they might have far better cheap notwithstanding the custom free , they desired the king to licence them to take the oils at the pleasure of his commons , for that his price did exceed theirs : whereunto the king would not agree , but was rather contented to abate his price , insomuch that the factors bought all their oils of the king custom free , and so jaded the same aboard . 
 In the mean time there came to that place one Miles Dickenson in a ship of Bristow , who together with our said Factors took a house to themselves there . Our French Factor Roman Sonnings desired to buy a commodity in the market , and wanting money , desired the said Miles Dickenson to lend him and hundred Chikinoes until he came to his lodging , which he did , and afterwards the same Sonnings met with Miles Dickenson in the street , and delivered him money bound up in a napkin : saying , master Dickenson there is the money that I borrowed of you , and so thanked him for the same : he doubted nothing less then falsehood , which is seidome known among merchants , and specially being together in one house , and is the more detestable between Christians , they being in Turkey among the heathen . The said Dickenson did not tell the money presently , until he came to his lodging , and then finding nine Chikinoes lacking of his hundred , which was about three pounds , for that every Chikino is worth seven shillings of English money , he came to the said Roman Sonnings and delivered him his handkerchief , and asked him how many Chikinoes he had delivered him ? Sonnings answered , and hundred : Dickenson said no : and so they protested and swore on both parts . But in the end the said Roman Sonnings did swear deeply with detestable oaths and curses , and prayed God that he might show his works on him , that other might take ensample thereby , and that he might be hanged like a dog , and never come into England again , if he did 
 294 
 not deliver unto the said Dickenson and hundred Chikinoes . And here behold a notable example of all blasphemers , cursers and swearers , how God rewarded 
 him accordingly : for many times it comes to pass , that God shows his miracles upon such monstrous blasphemers , to the ensample of others , as now hereafter you shall hear what befell to this Roman Sonnings . 
 There was a man in the said town a pledge , whose name was Patron Norado , who the year before had done this Sonnings some pleasure there . The foresaid Patron 
 Norado was indebted unto a Turke of that town , in the sum of foure hundred and fiftie crowns , for certain 
 goods sent by him into Christendome in a ship of his 
 own , and by his own brother , and himself remained 
 in Tripolis as pledge until his said brother's return : and , as the report went there , after his brother's arrival 
 into Christendome , he came among lewd company , and lost his brother's said ship and goods at dice , and never 
 returned unto him again . 
 The said Patron Norado being void of all hope , 
 and finding now opportunity , consulted with the said Sonnings for to swim a seaboorde the Islands , and the ship being then out of danger , should take him in ( as after was confessed ) and so to go to Tolon in the province of Marseilis with this Patron Norado , and there to take in his lading . 
 The ship being ready the first day of May , and having her sails all aboard , our said Factors did take their leave of the king , who very courteously bid them farewell , and when they came aboard , they commanded the Master and the company hastily to get out the ship : the Master answered that it was unpossible , for that the 
 A conspiracy practised by the French Factor , to deceive a Turkish merchant of 4 50 crowns . 
 wind was contrary and overblowed . And he required us upon forfeiture of our bands , that we should do our endeavour to get her forth . Then went we to warp out the ship , and presently the king sent a boat aboard of us , with three men in her , commanding the said Sonnings to come a shore : at whose coming , the 
 295 
 king demanded of him custom for the oils : Sonnings answered him that his highness had promised to deliver them custom free . But notwithstanding the king weighed not his said promise , and as and infideli that hath not the fear of God before his eyes , nor regard of his word , albeit he was a king , he caused the said Sonnings to pay the custom to the uttermost penny . And afterward willed him to make haste gway , saying , that the Janizaries would have the oil ashore again . 
 These Janizaries are soldiers there under the great Turke , and their power is above the Kings . And so the said Factor departed from the king , and came to the waterside , and called for a boat to come aboard , and 
 The beginning he brought with him the foresaid Patron Norado . The ' froMes and comPanie inquisitive to know what man that was , occasion of all Sonnings answered , that he was his countryman , a their misery . passenger : I pray God said the company , that we come not into trouble by this man . Then said Sonnings angrily , what have you to do with any matters of mine ? if any thing chance otherwise then well , I must answer for all . 
 Now the Turke unto whom this Patron Norado was 
 [ II i . 186. ] indebted , missing him ( supposed him to be aboard of our ship ) presently went unto the King , and told him that he thought that his pledge Patron Norado was aboard of the English ship , whereupon the King presently sent a boat aboard of us , with three men in her , commanding the said Sonnings to come a shore , and not speaking any thing as touching the man , he said that he would come presently in his own boat , but assoon as they were gone , he willed us to warp forth the ship , and said that he would see the knaves hanged before he would go a shore . And when the king saw that he came not a shore , but still continued warping away the ship , he straight commanded the gunner of the bulwark next unto us , to shoot three shoots without ball . Then we came all to the said Sonnings , and asked of him what the matter was that we were shot at , he said 
 296 
 that it was the Janizaries who would have the oil a shore again , and willed us to make haste away , and after that he had discharged three shots without ball , he commanded all the gunners in the town to do their endeavour to sink us , but the Turkish gunners could not once strike us , wherefore the king sent presently to the Banio : ( this Banio is the prison whereas all the captives lay at night ) and promised if that there were any that could either sink us , or else cause us to come in again , he should have a hundred crowns , and his liberty . With that came forth a Spaniard called Sebastian , which had be and old servitor in Flanders , and he said , that upon the performance of that promise , he would undertake either to sink us , or to cause us to come in again , and thereto he would gage his life , and at the first shot he split our rudders head in pieces , and the second shot he strake us under the water , and the third shot he shot us through our foremast with a Colvering shot , and thus he having rend both our rudder and mast , and shot us under water , we were enforced to go in again . 
 This Sebastian for all his diligence herein , had neither his liberty , nor and hundred crowns , so promised by the said king , but after his service done was committed again to prison , whereby may appear the regard that the Turke or infideli hath of his word , although he be able to perform . it , yea more , though he be a king . 
 Then our merchant's seeing no remedy , they together with five of our company went a shore , and then they ceased shooting : they shot unto us in the whole , nine and thirtie shoots , without the hurt of any man . 
 And when our merchants came a shore , the King commanded presently that they with the rest of our company that were with them , should be cheined foure & foure , to a hundred weight of iron , and when we came in with the ship , there came presently above and hundred Turks aboard of us , and they searched us , and stripped our very clothes from our backs , and brake open our chests , 
 297 
 and made a spoil of all that we had : and the Christian caitiffs likewise that came a board of us made spoil of our goods , and used us as ill as the Turkes did . And our master's mate having a Geneva Bible in his hand , there came the kings chief gunner , and took it out from him , who showed me of it , and I having the language , went presently to the kings treasurer , and told him of it , saying , that sith it was the will of God that we should fallen into their hands , yet that they should grant us to use our consciences to our own discretion , as they suffered the Spaniards and other nations to use theirs , and he granted us : then I told him that the master gunner had taken away a Bible from one of our men : the Treasurer went presently and commanded him to deliver up the Bible again , which he did : & within a little after he took it from the man again , and I showed the Treasurer of it , and presently he commanded him to deliver it again : saying , thou villain , wilt thou turn to Christianitie again ? for he was a Renegado , which is one that first was a Christian , and afterwards becomes a Turke , and so he delivered me the Bible the second time . And then I having it in my hand , the gunner came to me , and spoke these words , saying , thou dog , I will have the book in despite of thee , and took it from me , saying : If thou tell the kings treasurer of it any more , by Mahomet I will be revenged of thee . Notwithstanding I went the third time unto the kings Treasurer , and told him of it , and he came with me , saying thus unto the gunner : by the head of the great Turke , if thou take it from him again , thou shalt have and hundred bastinades . And forthwith he delivered me the book , saying , he had not the valve of a pin of the spoil of the ship , which was the better for him , as hereafter you shall hear : for there was none , neither Christian nor Turke that took the valve of a pennyworth of our goods from us , but perished both body and goods 
 298 
 within seventeene months following , as hereafter shall plainly appear . 
 Then came the Guardian Basham , which is the keeper of the kings captives , to fetch us all a shore , and then I remembering the miserable estate of poor distressed captives , in the time of their bondage to those infidels , went to mine own chest , and took out thereof a jar of oil , and filled a basket full of white Ruske to carry a shore with me , but before I came to the Banio , the Turkish boys had taken away almost all my bred , and the keeper said , deliver me the jar of oil , and when thou comest to the [ II i . 187. ] Banio thou shalt have it again , but I never had it of him any more . 
 But when I came to the Banio , and saw our Merchants and all the rest of our company in chains , and we all ready to receive the same reward , what heart in the world is there so hard , but would have pitied our cause , hearing or seeing the lamentable greeting there was betwixt us : all this happened the first of May , 1584. 
 And the second day of the same month , the King The English-with all his counsel sat in judgement upon us . The araigud . first that were had forth to be arraigned , were the Factors , and the Master's , and the King asked them wherefore they came not a shore when he sent for them . And Roman Sonnings answered , that though he were king on shore , and might command there , so was he as touching those that were under him : and therefore said , if any offence be , the fault is wholly in my self , and in no other . Then forthwith the king gave judgement , that the said Roman Sonnings should be hanged over the Northeast bulwark : from whence he conveyed the forenamed Patron Norado , and then he called for our Master Andrew Dier , and used few words to him , and so condemned him to be hanged over the walls of the Westermost bulwark . 
 299 
 Then fell our other Factor ( nam Richard Skegs ) upon his knees before the king , and said , I beseech your highness either to pardon our Master , or else suffer me to die for him , for he is ignorant of this cause . And then the people of that country favouring the said Richard Skegs besought the king to pardon them both . So then the king spoke these words : Behold , for thy sake , I pardon the Master . Then presently the Turkes shouted , and cried , saying : Away with the Master from the presence of the king . And then he came into the Banio whereas we were , and told us what had happened , and we all rejoiced at the good hap of Master Skegs , that he was saved , and our Master for his sake . 
 But afterwards our joy was turned to double sorrow , for in the mean time the kings mind was altered : for that one of his counsel had advised him , that unless the Master died also , by the law they could not confiscate the ship nor goods , neither captive any of the men : Master Dier whereupon the king sent for our Master again , and gave condemned to anotijer judgement after his pardon for one cause , a bulwark^ which was that he should be hanged . Here all true Christians may see what trust a Christian man may put in and infidels promise , who being a King , pardoned a man now , as you have herd , and within and hour after hanged him for the same cause before a whole multitude : and also promised our Factors their oils custom free , and at their going away made them pay the uttermost penny for the custom thereof . 
 A Frenchman And when that Roman Sonnings saw no remedy but turnedTurke , shou | j die , he protested to turn Turke , hoping 
 ™ fe^and after - thereby to have saved his life . Then said the Turke , If ward was thou wilt turn Turke , speak the words that thereunto 
 hanged . belong : and he did so . Then said they unto him , Now 
 thou shalt die in the faith of a Turke , and so he did , as the Turkes reported that were at his execution . And the forenamed Patron Norado , whereas before he had liberty and did nothing , he then was condemned slave 
 300 
 * 5 $4-perpetuali , except there were payment made of the foresaid sum of money . 
 Then the king condemned all us , who were in number sixe and twentie , of the which , two were hanged ( as you have herd ) and one died the first day we came on shore , by the visitation of Almighty God : and the other three and twentie he condemned slaves perpetually unto the great Turke , and the ship and goods were confiscated to the use of the great Turke : and then we all fell down upon our knees , giving God thanks for this sorrowful visitation , and giving our selves wholly to the Almighty power of God , unto whom all secrets are known , that he of his goodness would vouchsafe to look upon us . 
 Here may all true Christian hearts see the wonderful works of God showed upon such infidels , blasphemers , whoremasters , and renegade Christians , and so you shall read in the end of this book , of the like upon the unfaithful king and all his children , and of as many as took any portion of the said goods . 
 But first to show our miserable bondage and slavery , Every jive and unto what small pittance and allowance we were ™ en tied , for every five men had allowance but five aspers ot ofbreadaday . bred in a day , which is but two pence English : and our lodging was to lie on the bore boards , with a very simple cape to cover us , we were also forceably and most violently shaved , head and beard , and within three days after , I and sixe more of my fellows , together with fourescore Italians and Spaniards were sent forth in a Galeot to take a Greekish Carmosell , which came into Africa to steal Negroes , and went out of Tripolis unto that place , which was two hundred and fourtie leagues thence , but we were chained three and three to and oar , and we rowed naked above the girdle , and the Boatswain of the Galley walked abaft the mast , and his Mate afore the mast , and eke of them a bulls pissell dried in their hands , and when their devilish choler rose , they would strike the Christians for no cause : And [ II i . 188. ] 
 301 
 The Christians sent 3. times a week 30. miles to fetch wood . 
 they allowed us but half a pound of bred a man in a day without any other kind of sustenance , water excepted . And when we came to the place whereas we saw the Carmosell , we were not suffered to have neither needle , bodkin , knife , or any other weapon about us , nor at any other time in the night , upon pain of one hundred bastinades : we were then also cruelly manackled in such sort , that we could not put our hands the length of one foot asunder the one from the other , and every night they searched our chains three times , to see if they were fast riveted : we continued fight with the Carmosell three hours , and then we took it , and lost but two of our men in that fight , but there were slain of the Greeks five , and foureteene were cruelly hurt , and they that were found , were presently made slaves , and chained to the oars : and within fifteene days after we returned again into Tripolis , and then we were put to all manner of slavery . I was put to hew stones , and other to carry stones , and some to draw the Cart with earth , and some to make mortar , and some to draw stones , ( for at that time the Turkes built a church : ) And thus we were put to all kind of slavery that was to be done . And in the time of our being there , the Moors that are the husbandmen of the country , rebelled against the king , because he would have constrained them to pay greater tribute then heretofore they had done , so that the Soldiers of Tripolis marched forth of the town to have joined battle against the Moors for their rebellion , and the King sent with them foure pieces of Ordinance , which were drawn by the captives twentie miles into the Country after them , and at the sighed thereof the Moors fled , and then the Captains returned back again . Then I and certain Christians more were sent twelve miles into the country with a Cart to load timber , and we returned again the same day . 
 Now the king had 18. captives , which three times a week went to fetch wood thirtie miles from the town : 
 302 
 and on a time he appointed me for one of the 18. and we departed at eight of the clock in the night , and upon the way as we road upon the camels , I demanded of one of our company , who did direct us the way ? he said , that there was a More in our company which was our guide : and I demanded of them how Tripolis and the wood bore one off the other ? and he said , East Northeast , and West Southwest . And at midnight or near thereabouts , as I was riding upon my camel , I fell asleep , and the guide and all the rest road away from me , not thinking but I had be among them . When I awoke , and finding my self alone durst not call nor hallow for fear least the wild Moors should hear me , because they hold this opinion , that in killing a Christian they do God good service : and musing with my self what were best for me to do , if I should go forth , and the wild Moors should hap to meet with me , they would kill me : and on the other side , if I should return back to Tripolis without any wood or company , I should be most miserably used : therefore of two evils , rather I had to go forth to the losing of my life , then to turn back and trust to their mercy , fearing to be used as before I had seen others : for understanding by some of my company before , how Tripolis and the said wood did lie one off another , by the North star I went forth at adventure , and as God would have it , I came right to the place where they were , even about and hour before day : there altogether we rested and gave our camels provender , and assoon as the day appeared , we . road all into the wood : and I seeing no wood there , but a stick here and a stick there , about the bigness of a men arm growing in the sand , it caused me to marveile how so many camels should be laden in that place . The wood was Juniper , we needed no axe nor edge tool to cut it , but plucked it up by strength of hands roots and all , which a man might easily do , and so gathered it together , a little at one place and so at another , and jaded our camels , and came home about seven of the clock that 
 3°3 
 Eighteen captives runaway from Tripolis . 
 The judgement of God upon blasphemers . 
 £11 . i . 189. ] 
 The Green Dragon . 
 night following : because I fell lame , and my camel was tired , I left my wood in the way . 
 There was in Tripolis that time a Venetian , whose name was Benedetto Venetiano , and seventeene captives more of his company , which ran away from Tripolis in a boat , and came in sighed of and Island called Malta , which lies fourtie leagues from Tripolis right North , and being within a mile of the shore , & very fair weather , one of their company said , In dispetto de dio adesso venio a pilliar terra , which is as much to say : In the despite of God I shall now fetch the shore , and presently there arose a mighty storm , with thunder and rain and the wind at North , their boat being very small , so that they were enforced to bear up room , and to shear right afore the wind over against the coast of Barbarie from whence they came , and rowing up and down the coast , their victuals being spent , the 21. day after their departure they were enforced through the want of food to come ashore , thinking to have stolen some sheep : but the Moors of the country very craftily perceiving their intent , gathered together a threescore horsemen , and hid themselves behind a sandy hill , and when the Christians were come all a shore , and passed up half a mile into the country , the Moors road betwixt them and their boat , and some of them pursued the Christians , and so they were all taken and brought to Tripolis , from whence they had before escaped : and presently the king commanded that the foresaid Benedetto with one more of his company should loose their ears , and the rest should be most cruelly beaten , which was presently done . This king had a son which was a ruler in and Island called Gerbi , whereunto arrived and English ship called the Green Dragon , of the which was Master one M. Blonket , who having a very unhappy boy in that ship , and understanding that whosoever would turn Turke should be well entertained of the kings son , this boy did run a shore , and voluntarily turned Turke . Shortly after the kings son came to 3°4 
 Tripolis to visit his father , and seeing our company , he greatly fancied Richard Burges our Purser , and James Smith : they were both young men , therefore he was very desirous to have them to turn Turkes , but they would not yield to his desire , saying : We are your father's slaves , and as slaves we will serve him . Then his father the king sent for them , and asked them if they would turn Turkes ? And they said : If it please your highness , Christians we were born , and so we will remain , and beseeched the king that they might not be enforced thereunto . The king had there before in his house a son of a yeoman of our Queens guard , whom the kings son had enforced to turn Turke , his name was John Nelson : him the king caused to be brought to these young men , and then said unto them : Will not you bear this your countryman company , and be Turke as he is ? And they said , that they would not yield thereunto during life . But it fell out , that within a month after , the kings son went home to Gerbi again , being sixe score miles from Tripolis , and carried our two foresaid young men with him , which were Richard Burges , and James Smith : and after their departure from us , they sent us a letter , signifying that there was no violence showed unto them as yet , but within three days after they were violently used , for that the kings son demanded of them again , if that they would turn Turke ? Then answered Richard Burges , a Christian I am , and so I will remain . Then the kings son very angrily said unto him : By Mahomet thou shalt presently be made Turke . Then called he for his men , and commanded them to make him Turke , and they did so , and circumcised him , and would have had him speak the words that thereunto belonged , but he answered them stoutly that he would not : and although they had put on him the habit of a Turke , yet said he , A Christian I was born , and so I will remain , though you force me to do otherwise . 
 And then he called for the other , and commanded v 305 u 
 A.D. 
 I584 . 
 The kings son had a captive that vias son to one of the Queens Majesties guard , that was forced to turn Turke . 
 The first motion for those Englishmens delwerie . 
 him to be made Turke perforce also : but he was very strong , for it was so much as eight of the kings sons men could do to hold him , so in the end they circumcised him , and made him Turke . Now to pass over a little , and so to show the manner of our deliverance out of that miserable captivity . 
 In May aforesaid , shortly after our apprehension , I wrote a letter into England unto my father dwelling in Tavistoke in Devonshire , signifying unto him the whole estate of our calamities : and I wrote also to Constantinople to the English Ambassador , both which letters were faithfully delivered . But when my father had received my letter , and understood the truth of our mishap , and the occasion thereof , and what had happened to the offenders , he certified the right honourable the earl of Bedford thereof , who in short space acquainted her highness with the whole cause thereof , and her Majesty like a most merciful princess tendering her Subject's , presently took order for our deliverance . Whereupon the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight directed his letters with all speed to the English Ambassador in Constantinople , to procure our delivery : and he obtained the great Turkes Commission , and sent it forthwith to Tripolis , by one Master Edward Barton , together with a Justice of the great Turkes , and one soldier , and another Turke , and a Greek which was his interpretor , which could speak beside Greek , Turkish , Italian , Spanish and English . And when they came to Tripolis , they were well entertained . And the first night they did lie in a Captains house in the town : all our company that were in Tripolis came that night for joy to Master Barton and the other Commissioners to see them . Then master Barton said unto us , welcome my good countrymen , and lovingly entertained us , and at our departure from him , he gave us two shillings , and said , Serve God , for to morrow I hope you shall be as free as ever you were ; We all gave him thanks and so departed . 
 The next day in the morning very early , the King 306 
 having intelligence of their coming , sent word to the keeper , that none of the Englishmen ( meaning our company ) should go to work . Then he sent for Master Barton and the other Commissioners , and demanded of the said Master Barton his message : the Justice answered , that the great Turke his Sovereign had sent them unto him , signifying that . he was informed that a certain English ship , called the Jesus , was by him the said king confiscated , about twelve months since , and now my said Sovereign hath here sent his especial commission by us unto you , for the deliverance of the said ship and goods , and also the free liberty and deliverance of the Englishmen of the same ship , whom you have taken and kept in captivity . And further the same Justice said , I am authorized by my said sovereign [ II i . 190. ] the great Turke to see it done : And therefore I command you by virtue of this commission , presently to make restitution of the premises or the valve thereof : 
 and so did the Justices deliver unto the King the great Engfab-Turkes commission to the effect aforesaid , which come - men released-mission the king with all obedience received : and after the perusing of the same , he forthwith commanded all the English captives to be brought before him , and then willed the keeper to strike off all our irons , which done , the king said , You Englishmen , for that you did offend the laws of this place , by the same laws therefore some of your company were condemned to die as you know , and you to be perpetuali captives during your lives : notwithstanding , seeing it hath pleased my sovereign lord the great Turke to pardon your said offences , and to give you your freedom and liberty , behold , here I make delivery of you to this English Gentleman : so he delivered us all that were there , being thirteene in number , to Master Barton , who required also those two young men which the Kings son had taken with him . Then the king answered that it was against their law to deliver them , for that they were turned Turkes : and touching the ship and goods , the king said , that he had sold her , 
 3°7 
 The plagues and punishments that happened to the King and his people . 
 The king lost 150. Camels , taken by the wild Moors . 
 but would make restitution of the valve , and as much of the goods as came unto his hands , and so the king arose and went to dinner , and commanded a Jew to go with Master Barton and the other commissioners , to show them their lodging , which was a house provided and appointed them by the said king . And because I had the Italian & Spanish tongues , by which their most traffic in that country is , Master Barton made me his Cater to buy his victuals for him and his company , and delivered me money needful for the same . Thus were we set at liberty the 28. day of April , 1585. 
 Now to return to the kings plagues and punishments , which Almighty God at his will and pleasure sends upon men in the sighed of the world , and likewise of the plagues that befell his children and others aforesaid . First when we were made bondmen , being the second day of May 1584. the king had 300. captives , and before the month was expired , there died of them of the plague 150. And whereas there were 26. men of our company , of whom two were hanged , and one died the same day that we were made bondslaves : that present month there died nine more of our company of the plague , and other two were forced to turn Turkes as before is rehearsed : and on the fourth day of June next following the king lost 150. camels , which were taken from him by the wild Moors : and on the 28. day of the said month of June , one Geffrey Maltese , a renegado of Malta , ran away to his country , and stole a Brigandine which the king had built for to take the Christians withal , and carried with him twelve Christians more which were the kings captives . Afterwards about the tenth day of July next following , the king road forth upon the greatest and fairest mare that might be seen , as white as any swan : he had not ridden fourtie paces from his house , but on a sudden the same mare fell down under him stark dead , and I with sixe more were commanded to bury her , skin , shoes and all , which we did . And about three months after our delivery , 308 
 Master Barton , with all the residue of his company , departed from Tripolie to Zante , in a vessel , called a Settea , of one Marcus Segoorus , who dwelled in Zante , and after our arrival at Zante we remained fifteene days there aboard our vessel , before we could have Platego ( that is , leave to come a shore ) because the plague was in that place , from whence we came : and about three days after we came a shore , thither came another Settea of Marseils bound for Constantinople . Then did Master Barton , and his company , with two more of our company , ship themselves as passengers in the same Settea , and went to Constantinople . But the other nine of us that remained in Zante , about three months after , shipped our selves in a ship of the said Marcus Segoorus , which came to Zante , and was bound for England . In which three months , the soldiers of Tripolie killed the said king . And then the Kings son , according to the custom there , went to Constantinople , to surrender up all his father's treasure , goods , captives , and concubines , unto the great Turke , and took with him our said Purser Richard Burges , and James Smith , and also the other two Englishmen , which he the said kings son had enforced to become Turkes , as is aforesaid . And they the said Englishmen finding now some opportunity , concluded with the Christian captives which were going with them unto Constantinople , being in number about one hundred and fiftie , to kill the kings son , and all the Turkes which were aboard of the Galley , and privily the said Englishmen conveyed unto the said Christian captives , weapons for that purpose . And when they came into the main Sea , toward Constantinople ( upon the faithful promise of the said Christian captives ( these foure Englishmen leapt suddenly into the Crossia , that is , into the midst of the Galley , where the canon lies , and with their swords drawn , did fight against all the foresaid Turkes , and for want of help of the said Christian captives , who falsely brake their promises , the said Master Blonkets boy was killed , and the said James Smith , and 
 3°9 
 Two Englishmen shipped to Constantinople with M. 
 Barton . 
 The soldiers of Tripolis kill the King . 
 Two Galleys of Venice took the king of Tripolie his galley , and killed the kings son , and all the Turkes in it , and released all the Christians being in number 150. 
 our Pursser Richard Burges , and the other Englishman , were taken and bound into chains , to be hanged at their arrival in Constantinople : and as the Lords will was , about two days after , passing through the gulf of Venice , at and Island called Cephalonia , they met with two of the duke of Venice his Galleys , which took that Galley , and killed the kings son , and his mother , and all the Turkes that were there , in number 150. and they saved the Christian captives , and would have killed the two Englishmen because they were circumcised , and become Turks , had not the other Christian captives excused them , saying , that they were enforced to be Turks , by the kings son , and showed the Venetians also , how they did enterprise at sea to fight against all the Turks , and that their two fellows were slain in that fight . Then the Venetians saved them , and they , with all the residue of the said captives , had their liberty , which were in number 150. or thereabouts , and the said Galley , and all the Turkes treasure was confiscated to the use of the state of Venice . And from thence our two Englishmen traveled homeward by land , and in this mean time we had one more of our company , which died in Zante , and afterwards the other eight shipped themselves at Zante , in a ship of the said Marcus Segorus , which was bound for England : and before we departed thence , there arrived the Ascension , and the George Bonaventure of London in Cephalonia , in a harbour there , called Arrogostoria , whose Merchants agreed with the Merchants of our ship , and so jaded all the merchandise of our ship into the said ships of London , who took us eight in as passengers , and so we Came home , and within two months after our arrival at London , our said Purser Richard Burges , and his fellow came home also : for the which we are bound to praise Almighty God , during our lives , and as duty binds us , to pray for the preservation of our most gracious Queen , for the great care her Majesty had over us , her poor Subject's , in seeking and procuring of our 
 310 
 deliverance aforesaid : and also for her honourable privy Counsel , and I especial for the prosperity and good estate of the house of the late deceased , the right honourable the Earl of Bedford , whose honour I must confess , most diligently at the suit of my father now departed , traveled herein : for the which I rest continually bounden to him , whose soul I doubt not , but is already in the heavens in joy , with the Almighty , unto which place he vouchsafe to bring us all , - that for our sins suffered most vile and shameful death upon the Cross , there to live perpetually world without end , Amen . 
 . 