Another letter of Master Newberie to the aforesaid M. Poor , written from Babylon . 
 Y last 1 sent you , was the 29 of May last passed from Aleppo , by George Gill the purser of the Tiger , which the last day of the same month came from U thence , & arrived at Feluge the 19 day of June , which Feluge is one days 
 ------------- journey from hence . Notwithstanding some of our company came not hither till the last day of the last month , which was for want of Camels to carry our goods : for at this time of the year , by reason of the great heat that is here , Camels are very scant to be got . And since our coming hither we have 455 
 The best sort of spices at Babylon . 
 Balsara . 
 Ormus . 
 The princes of spices at Babylon . 
 found very small sales , but diverse say that in the winter our commodities will be very well sold , I pray God their words may prove true . I think cloth , kersies & tin , have never be here at so low princes as they are now . Notwithstanding , if I had here so much ready money as the commodities are worth , I would not doubt to make a very good profit of this voyage hither , and to Balsara , and so by Gods help there will be reasonable profit made of the voyage . But with half money & half commodity , may be bought here the best sort of spices , and other commodities that are brought from the Indies , and without money there is here at this instant small good to be done . With Gods help two days hence , I mind to go from hence to Balsara , and from thence of force I must go to Ormus for want of a man that speaks the Indian tongue . At my being in Aleppo I hired two Nazaranies , and one of them hath be twice in the Indies , and hath the language very well , but he is a very lewd fellow , and therefore I will not take him with me . 
 Here follow the princes of wares as they are worth here at this instant . 
 CLoves and Maces , the bateman , 5 ducats . 
 Cinnamon 6 ducats , and few to be got . 
 Nutmegs , the bateman , 45 medins , and 40 medins makes a ducat . 
 Ginger 40 medins . 
 Pepper , 75 medins . 
 Turbetta , the bateman , 50 medins . 
 Neel the churl , 70 ducats , and a churl is 27 rottils and a half of Aleppo . 
 Silk , much better then that which comes from Persia , 11 ducats and a half the bateman , and every bateman here makes 7 pound and 5 ounces English weight . From Babylon the 20 day of July , 1583. 
 Yours , John Newberie . 
 . 