A description of the yearly voyage or pilgrimage of the Mahumitans , Turkes and Moors unto Mecca in Arabia . 
 Lexandria the most ancient city in Africa situated by the seaside containeth seven miles in circuit , and is environed with two walls one near to the other with high towers , but the walls within be far higher then those without , with a great ditch round about the same : yet is not this City very 329 
 strong by reason of the great antiquity , being almost half destroyed and ruinated . The greatness of this City is such , that if it were of double habitation , as it is compassed with a double wall , it might be truly said , that there were two Alexandrias one built upon another , because under the foundations of the said City are great habitations , and incredible huge pillars . True it is , that this part underneath remains at this day inhabitable , because of the corrupt air , as also for that by time , which consumeth all things , it is greatly ruinated . It might well be said , that the founder hereof , as he was worthy in all his enterprises , so likewise in building hereof he did a work worthy of himself , naming it after his own name . This City hath one defect , for it is subject to and evil air , which only proceedeth of that hollowness underneath , out of the which issueth infinite moisture : and that this is true the air without does evidently testify , which is more subtle and wholesome then that beneath . The waters hereof be salt , by reason that the soil of it self is likewise so . And therefore the inhabitants , at such time as the river Nilus flows , are accustomed to open a great ditch , the head whereof extendeth into the said river , and from thence they convey the same within half a mile of Alexandria , and so consequently by means of conductpipes the water comes unto the cisterns of Alexandria , which being full serve the city from one inundation to another . Within the city is a Pyramid's mentioned of in Histories , but not of great importance . Without the city is La colonna di Pompeio , or the pillar of Pompey , being of such height and thickness , that it is supposed there is not the like in the whole world beside . Within the city there is nothing of importance save a little castle which is guarded with 60 Janizaries . Alexandria hath three ports , one towards Rossetto , another to the land ward , & the third to the sea ward , which is called Babelbar , without which appears a broad Hand called Ghesira in the Moors tongue , which is not wholly and 
 330 
 Hand , because a Iide point or corner thereof touches the firm land , and therefore may be called Peninsula , that is to say , almost and Hand . Hereupon are built many houses of the Jewes , in respect of the air . This Peninsula is situate between two very good ports , one of them being much more safe then the other , called The old port , into the which only the vessels of Barbarie , and the sixe Galleys of the Grand Signior deputeth for the guard of Alexandria do enter . And this port hath upon the right hand at the mouth or entrance thereof a cased of small importance , and guarded but with fifteene men or thereabouts . On the other side of this Hand is the other called The new port , which name is not unfidy given unto it , for that in all men's judgement in times passed there hath not been water there , because in the midst of this port , where the water is very deep , there are discovered and found great sepulchres and other buildings , out of the which are daily dug with engines Jaspar and Porphyrie stones of great valve , of the which great store are sent to Constantinople for the ornament of the Mesquitas or Turkish Temples , and of other buildings of the Grand Signior . Into this port enter all such vessels as traffic to this place . This port hath on each side a castle , whereof that upon the Peninsula is called Faraone , upon the top whereof every night there is a light set in a great lantern for direction of the ships , and for the guard thereof are appointed 200 Janizaries : the other on the other side is but a Iide castle kept by 18 men . It is certain , that this haven of Alexandria is one of the chiefest havens in the world : for hither come to traffic people of every Nation , and all sorts of vessels which go round about the city . It is more inhabited by strangers , merchants , and Christians , then by men of the country which are but a few in number . Within Fontechosigni-the city are five Fontechi , that is to say , one of the an h ™ * Frenchmen , where the Consul is resident , & this is the fairest and most commodious or all the rest . Or the other foure , two belong to the Venetians , one to the 
 331 
 Raguseans , and the fourth to the Genoueses . And all strangers which come to traffic there , except the Venetians , are under the French Consuli . It is also to be understood , that all the Christians dwell within their Fontechi , and every evening at the going down of the sun , they which are appointed for that office go about and shut all the gates of the said Fontechi outward , and the Christians shut the same within : and so likewise they do on the Friday ( which is the Moors and the Turkes Sabbath ) till their devotions be expired . And by this means all parties are secure and void of fear : for in so doing the Christians may sleep quietly and not fear robbing , and the Moors need not doubt while they sleep or pray , that the Christians should make any tumult , as in times passed hath happened . 
 Of the Coast of Alexandria . 
 ON the side towards Barbarie along the seacoast for a great space there is found neither hold , nor any thing worthy of mention : but on the other side towards Syria 13 miles from Alexandria stands a little castle Bichier . called Bichier kept by fiftie Turkes , which castle is very old and weak , and hath a port which in times past was good , but at this present is utterly decayed and full of sand , so that the vessels which come thither dare not come near the shore , but ride far off into the sea . Rosetto . Fortie miles further is Rossetto , which is a Iide town without walls , and is situate upon the bank of Nilus three miles from the sea , at which place many times they built ships and other vessels , for government whereof [ II i . 200. ] is appointed a Sanjacbey , without any other guard : it is a place of traffic , and the inhabitants are very rich , but naughty varlets and traitors . Further down along the seaside and the river bank is another Iide cased like unto the abovesaid , and because the Moors believe , that Mecca will in short time be conquered by the Christians , they hold opinion , that the same being lost shall be renewed in this place of Rossetto , namely , 332 
 that all their prayers , vows , and pilgrimages shall be transported to Rossetto , as the religious order of Saint John of the Rhodes is translated thence to Malta . Further forward thirtie miles stands another castle of small importance called Brulles , kept continually by fourtie Turkes , which hath a good and secure port , in form like to a very great lake or pond , wherein is taken great quantity of fish , which they salt , and the merchants of Candie and Cyprus come thither to lade the same , and it is greatly esteemed , especially of the Candiots , who having great abundance of wine adventure abroad to seek meat fit for the taste of the said wine . Distant from Brulles five and thirtie miles there is another castle like unto the abovesaid kept by and Agam with fourtie men or thereabouts . More within the land by the rivers side is Damiata and ancient city environed with walls containing five miles in circuit , and but of small strength . For the government of this place is a Sanjaco with all his household and no other company . This city is very large , delightful , and pleasant , abounding with gardens and fair fountains . Other fortie miles further is Latma , a castle of very small importance , and kept as other with fortie Turkes under and Agam . In this place is no port , but a road very dangerous , and without other habitation . Passing this place we enter Judea . But because our intent is to reason simply of the voyage to Mecca , we will proceed no further this way , but returning to our first way , let it suffice to say , that from Alexandria to Cairo are two hundred miles , in which way I find nothing worthy of memory . 
 Of the mighty City of Cairo . 
 CAiro containeth in circuit eighteene miles , being so inhabited and replenished with people , that almost it cannot receive more ; and therefore they have begun to build new houses without the city and about the walls . In Cairo are people of all Nations , as Christians , Armenians , Abexins , Turkes , Moors , Jewes , Indians , 333 
 Medians , Persians , Arabians , and other sorts of people , which resort thither by reason of the great traffic . This city is governed by a Basham , which ministereth justice , together with the Cadie throughout the whole kingdom . Also there are two and twentie Sanjackes , whose office is only to oversee and guard the kingdom for every good respect . There are also seven thousand Turkes in pay , to wit , three thousand Janizaries , and foure thousand horsemen : The rest of the people in Cairo are for the most part merchants which go and come , and the remnant are Moors and other base people . About two miles from Cairo there is another little Cairo called The old Cairo , which containeth in circuit little more then tenne miles , and the better half is not inhabited , but destroyed , whereof I need not make any other mention . The new Cairo answereth every year in tribute to the grand Signior , 600000 ducats of gold , neat and free of all charges growing on the same , which money is sent to Constantinople , about the fine of September , by the way of Aleppo , always by land , under the custody of three hundred horsemen and two hundred Janizaries footmen . The city of Cairo is adorned with many fair Mesquitas rich , great , and of goodly and gorgeous building , among which are five principali . The first is called Morastano , that is to say , The hospitali , which hath of rend five hundred ducats of gold every day left unto it by a king of Damasco from ancient times ; which king having conquered Cairo , for the space of five days continually put the people thereof to the sword , and in the end repenting him of so great manslaughter , caused this cruelty to cease , and , to obtain remission for his sin committed , caused this hospitali to be built , enriching it as is abovesaid . The second famous monument of Cairo is called Neffisa , of one Neffisa buried there , who was a Dame of honour , and moved by lust , yielded her body voluntarily without reward , to any that required the same , and said she bestowed this alms for the love of her Prophet Maho - 
 334 
 met , and therefore at this day they adore her , reverence her , and finally have canonized her for a Saint , affirming that she did many miracles . The third is called Zavia della Innachari , who was one of the foure Doctors in the law . The fourth is called Imamsciafii , where is buried Sciafii the second Doctor of this law . Of the other two Doctors one is buried in Damasco , the other in Aleppo . The fift & last famous monument is Giamalazar , that is , the house of Lazarus : and this is the generail University of the whole kingdom of Egypt . In this place Anno 1566 in the month of January by misfortune of 1566. fire were burned nine thousand books of great valve , as well for that they were written by hand , as also [ II i . 201. ] wrought so richly with gold , that they were worth 300 and 400 ducats a piece , one with another . And because it could never be known yet how this fire began , they have and do hold the same for a most sinister augury , and and evident and manifest sign of their utter ruin . The houses of Cairo without are very fair , & within the greater number richly adorned with hangings wrought with gold . Every person which resorteth to this place for traffics sake , is bound to pay half a ducat , except the gentlemen Venetians , Siotes , and Rhaguseans , becapse they are tributary to 
 the Grand Signior . Cairo is distant from the river Nilus descnp-a mile and more , being situate on a plain , save that °f^air0‘ on the one side it hath a fair little hill , on the top whereof stands a fair castle , but not strong , for that it may be battered on every side , but very rich & large , compassed about with fair gardens into the which they convey water for their necessity out of Nilus , with certain wheels & other like engines . This magnificent city is adorned with very fruitful gardens both pleasant and commodious , with great plenty of ponds to water the same . ' Notwithstanding the great pleasures of Cairo are in the month of August , when by means of the great rain in Ethiopia the river Nilus overfloweth and watereth all the country , and then they open the mouth of a 
 335 
 great ditch , which extendeth into the river , and passes through the midst of the city , and entering there are innumerable barks rowing too and from laden with gallant girls and beautiful dams , which with singing , eating , drinking and feasting , take their solace . The women of this country are most beautiful , and go in rich attire bedecked with gold , precious stones , and jewels of great valve , but chiefly perfumed with odours , and are very libidinous , and the men likewise , but foul and hard favoured . The soil is very fertile and abundant , the flesh fat which they fell without bones , their candles they make of the marrow of cattle , because the Moors eat the tallow . They use also certain little furnaces made of purpose , under the which they make fire , putting into the furnace foure or five hundred eggs , and the said fire they nourish by little and little , until the chickens be hatched , which after they be hatched , and become somewhat bigger , they fell them by measure in such sort , as we fell and measure nuts and chestnuts and such like . 
 Of certain notable monuments without the city of Cairo . 
 Without the City , sixe miles higher into the land , are to be seen near unto the river diverse Pira-mides , among which are three marvellous great , and very artificially wrought . Out of one of these are daily dug the bodies of ancient men , not rotten but all whole , the cause whereof is the quality of the Egyptian soil , which will not consume the flesh of man , but rather dry and harden the same , and so always con-serveth it . And these dead bodies are the Mummy which the Physicians and Apothecaries do against our wills make us to swallow . Also by digging in these Pyramids oftentimes are found certain Idols or Images of gold , silver , and other mettle , but under the other piramides the bodies are not taken up so whole as in this , but there are found legs and arms comparable to 336 
 the limbs of giants . Near to these piramides appears out of the sand a great head of stone somewhat like marble , which is discovered so far as the neck joineth with the shoulders , being all whole , saving that it wants a little tip of the nose . ' The neck of this head containeth in circuit about sixe and thirty foot , so that it may be according to the neck considered , what greatness the head is of . The river Nilus is a mile broad , wherein are very many great Croccodiles from Cairo upward , but lower then Cairo passes no such creature : and this , they say , is by reason of and enchantment made long since which hindereth their passage for coming any lower then Cairo . Moreover of these creatures there are sometime found some of and incredible bigness , that is to say , of fourtie foot about . The males have their members like to a man , and the females like to a woman . These monsters oftentimes issue out of the water to feed , and finding any small beasts , as sheep , lambs , goats , or other like , do great harm . And while they are forth of the water , if they happen at unwares upon any man , woman or child , whom they can overcome , they spare not their lives . In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and sixtie it happened , that certain poor Christians traveling by Cairo towards the country of Prete Janni to rescue certain slaves , were guided by a Chaus , and journeyed alongst the bank of the said river . The Chaus remained lingering alone behind to make his prayers ( as their custom is ) at a place called Tana , whom being busy in his double devotion one of these Crocodiles ceased by the shoulders , and drew him under water , so that he was never after seen . And for this cause they have made in sundry places certain hedges as banks within the water , so that betwixt the hedge and bank of the river there remains so much water , that the women washing may take water without danger at their pleasure . This country is so fruitful , that it [ H. i . 202. ] causeth the women as also other creatures to bring 
 v 337 y 
 forth one , two , and ofttimes three at a birth . Five miles southward of Cairo is a place called Matarea , where the balm is refined : and therefore some will say , that the trees which bear the balm grow in the said place , wherein they are deceived : for the said trees grow two days journey from Mecca , in a place called Bedrihone , which yields balm in great plenty , but salvage , wild , and without virtue , and therefore the Moors carrying the same within little chests from Bedrihone to Matarea , where the trees being replanted ( be it by virtue of the soil , or the water , air , or any other thing whatsoever ) it suffices that here they bear the true balm and liquour so much in these days esteemed of . In this place of Matarea there are certain little houses , with most goodly gardens , and a chapel of antiquity , where the very Moors themselves affirm , that the mother of the blessed Christ fleeing from the fury of wicked Herode there saved her self with the child , wherein that saying of the Prophet was fulfilled , Ex jEgypto vocavi filium meum . The which Chapel in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and foure , the Magnifico Daniel Barbaro first Consuli of that place went to visit , and caused it to be renewed and reedified , so that in these days there resort thither many Christians , who oftentimes bring with them a Priest , to say mass there . Also about and harquebus-shotte from Matarea is a spire of great height like to that at Room , and more beautiful to behold . Near unto the old Cairo are yet twelve storehouses of great antiquity , but now very much decayed , and these till late days served to keep corn for behoof of the kingdom , concerning which many are of opinion , that the founder hereof was Joseph the son of Jacob , for consideration of the seven deer years . Also passing higher up by the bank of Nilus , there is to be seen a fair City overflowed with water , the which at such time as Nilus flows lies under water , but when the water returns to the mark , there plainly appear princely palaces , and stately pillars , being 
 338 
 of some called Thebes , where they say that Pharao was OUe Thebes . resident . Moreover three days journey higher up are two great images of speckled marble , all whole , and somewhat sunk into the earth , being things wonderful to consider of , for the nose of either is two spans and and half long , and the space from one ear to the other containeth tenne spans , the bodies being correspondent to their heads , and graved in excellent proportion , so that they are shapes of marvellous hugeness , and these they call The wife , and The daughter of Pharao . 
 Of the patriarch of Greece . 
 IN Cairo are two Patriarchs , one of the Greeks , and another of the Jacobites . The Greek Patriarch called 
 Gioechni , being about the age of one hundred and thirteene years , was a very good and holy man . They say , that when Soldan Gauri of Egypt reigned , there was done this miracle following : this good patriarch being envied at by the Jewes of the country , for none other cause , but for his good works , and holy life , it happened ( I say ) that being in disputation with certain of the Hebrews in presence of the Sultan , and reasoning of their law and faith , it was said unto him by one of these Miscreants : sith thou believest in the faith of Christ , take and drink this potion which I will give thee ; and if thy Christ be true Messias and true God , he will ( said he ) deliver thee from danger . To whom the ancient patriarch answered , that he was content : whereupon that cursed Jewe brought him a cup of the most venomous and deadly poison that could be found , which the holy Patriarch having perceived , said : In the name of the father , of the son , and of the holy Ghost . : and having so said he drank it quite up ; which done , he took a drop of pure water , putting it into that very cup , and gave it unto the Jewe , saying unto him , I in the name of my Christ have drunk thy poison , and therefore in the name of thy expected Messias , drink this water of mine within thine own cup . Whereupon the Jewe 
 339 
 took the cup out of the hand of the Patriarch , and having drunk the water , within half and hour burst a sunder . And the Patriarch had none other hurt , save that he became somewhat pale in sighed , and so remained ever after . And this miracle ( which merits to be called no less ) was done to the great commendation of the holy Patriarch in the presence of a thousand persons , and namely of the Soldan of Egypt : who seeing the despite of the Jewes , unto their own cost and confusion compelled them to make the conduct , which with so many engines comes into the castle from Nilus above mentioned . And this triumphant Patriarch not long since was alive , and in perfect health , which God continue long time . 
 [ IL i . 203. ] Of the preparation of the Carovan to go to Mecca . 
 AS touching the Carovan which goes to Mecca , it is to be understood , that the Mahometans observe a kind of lent continuing one whole moon , and being a movable ceremony , which sometime falls high , sometime low in the year called in their tongue Ramazan , and their feast is called Bairam . During this time of lent all they which intend to go unto Mecca resort unto Cairo , because that twentie days after the feast the Carovan is ready to depart on the voyage : and thither resort a great multitude of people from Asia , Grecia , and Barbaria to go on this voyage , some moved by devotion , and some for traffics sake , and some to pass away the time . Now within few days after the feast they which go on the voyage depart out of the city two leagues unto a place called Birca , where they expect the Captain of the Carovan . This place hath a great pond caused by the inundation of Nilus , and so made , that the camels and other beasts may drink therein : whereof , namely , of Mules , Camels , and Dromedaries there are at least fortie thousand , and the persons which follow the Carovan every year are about fiftie thousand , 
 340 
 few more or less , according to the times . Moreover every three years they renew the Captain of the Carovan , called in the Arabian tongue Amarilla Haggi , that is , the Captain of the Pilgrimss , to whom the Grand Signior gives every voyage eighteene purses , containing each of them sixe hundred twentie and five ducats of gold , and these be for the behoof of the Carovan , and also to do alms unto the needful pilgrimss . This Captain , beside other servingmen which follow him , hath also foure Chausi to serve him . Likewise he hath with him for the security of the Carovan foure hundred soldiers , to wit , two hundred Spachi or horsemen mounted on Dromedaries , and two hundred Janizaries riding upon Camels . The Chausi and the Spachi are at the charge of the Captain , but the Janizaries not so , for their provision is made them from Cairo . The Spachi wear caps or bonnets like to the caps of Sergeants , but the Janizaries after another sort , with a lap falling down behind like a French-hood , and having before a great piece of wrought silver on their heads . The charge of these is to cause the Carovan to march in good array when need requires ; these are not at the commandment of any but of the Captain of the Carovan . Moreover the Captain hath for his guide eight pilots , the office of whom is always stable and firm from heir to heir , and these go before guiding the Carovan , and showing the way , as being well experienced in the place , and in the night they govern them as the mariners , by the star . These also use to send before foure or five men carrying pieces of dry wood which give light , because they should not go out of the way , and if at any time through their ill hap they wander astray out •of the way , they are cast down and beaten with so many bastinades upon the soles of their feet , as serve them for a perpetuali remembrance . The Captain of the Carovan hath his Lieutenant accompanied continually with fifteene Spachi , and he hath the charge to set the Carovan in order , and to cause them to depart on their 
 341 
 Pieces of dry wood in stead of torches . 
 journey when need requires : and during the voyage their office is some while to go before with the forward , sometime to come behind with the rearward , sometime to march on the one side , and sometime on the other , to spy , that the coast be clear . The Carovan carrieth with it sixe pieces of ordinance drawn by 12 camels , which serve to terrify the Arabians , as also to make triumph at Mecca , and other places . The merchants which follow the Carovan , some carry for merchandise cloth of silk , some Coral , some tin , others wheat , rise , and all sorts of grain . Some fell by the way , some at Mecca , so that every one brings something to gain by , because all merchandise that goes by land payeth no custom , but that which goes by sea is bound to pay tenne in the hundred . 
 The beginning of the voyage . 
 THe feast before the Carovan sets forth , the Captain with all his retinue and officers resort unto the cased of Cairo before the Basham , which gives unto every man a garment , and that of the Captain is wrought with gold , and the others are served according to their degree . Moreover he delivereth unto him you Chisva Talnabi , which signifies in the Arabian tongue , The garment of the Prophet : this vesture is of silk , wrought in the midst with letters of gold , which signify : La ilia ill ’ alia Mahumet Resullala : that is to say , There are no gods but God , and his ambassador Mahumet . This garment is made of purpose to cover from top to bottom a little house in Mecca standing in the midst of the Mesquita , the which house ( they say ) was built by Abraham or by his son Ismael . After this he delivereth to him a gate made of purpose for the foresaid [ II i . 204. . ] house of Abraham wrought all with fine gold , and being of excellent workmanship , and it is a thing of great valve . Beside , he delivereth unto him a covering of green velvet made in manner of a pyramid , about nine palms high , and artificially wrought with most fine golde* 
 342 
 and this is to cover the tomb of their prophet within Medina , which tomb is built in manner of a pyramid : and beside that covering there are brought many others of gold and silk , for the ornament of the said tomb . Which things being consigned , the Basham departeth not from his place ; but the Captain of the Carovan takes his leave with all his officers and soldiers , and departeth accompanied with all the people of Cairo orderly in manner of a procession , with singing , shouting and a thousand other ceremonies too long to recite . From the castle they go to a gate of the city called Bab-Nassera , without the which stands a Mosquita , and therein they lay up the said vestures very well kept and guarded . And of this ceremony they make so great account , that the world comes to see this sighed , yea the women great with child , and others with children in their arms , neither is it lawful for any man to forbid his wife the going to this feast , for that in so doing the wife may separate her self from her husband , and may lie with any other man , in regard of so great a trespass . Now this procession proceeding from the castle towards the Mosquita , the Camels which bring the vestures are all adorned with cloth of gold , with many little bells , and passing along the street you may see the multitude casting upon the said vestures thousands of beautiful ! flowers ; of diverse colours , & sweet water , others bringing towels & fine cloth touch the same , which ever after they keep as relics with great reverence . Afterwards having left the vesture in the Mosquita , as is aforesaid , they return again into the city , where they remain the space of 20 days , and then the captain departeth with his company , and taking the vestures out of the Mosquita , carrieth the same to the foresaid place of Birca , where the Captain having pitched his tent with the standard of the grand Signior over the gate , & the other principali tents standing about his , stays there some tenne days and no more : in which time all those resort thither that mean to follow the Carovan in this voyage to Mecca . Where 
 343 
 you shall see certain women which intend to go on this voyage accompanied with their parents and friends mounted upon Camels , adorned with so many trifles , tassels , and knots , that in beholding the same a man cannot refrain from laughter . The last night before their departure they make great feasting and triumph within the Carovan , with castles and other infinite devises of firework , the Janizaries always standing round about the tent of the Captain with such shouting and joy , that on every side the earth resoundeth , and this night they discharge all their ordinance , foure or sixe times , and after at the break of the day upon the found of a trumpet they march forward on their way . 
 What times the Carovan travelleth , and when it rests . 
 IT is to be noted , that from Cairo to Mecca they make 40 days journey or thereabouts , & the same great days journeys . For the custom of the Carovan is to travel much and rest little , and ordinarily they journey in this manner : They travel from two a clock in the morning until the sun rising , then having rested till noon , they set forward , and so continue till night , & then also rest again , as is abovesaid , till two of the clock : and this order they observe until the end of the voyage , never changing the same , except in some places , whereof we will hereafter speak , where for respect of water they rest sometime a day and and half , and this they observe to refresh themselves , otherwise both man and beast would die . 
 In what order the Carovan travelleth . 
 THe manner and order which the Carovan observeth in marching is this . It goes divided into three parts , to wit , the forward , the main battle , and the rearward . In the forward go the 8 Pilots before with a Chaus , which hath foure knaves , & each knave carrieth a sinew of a bull , to the end that if occasion requires , you bastonado 344 
 may be given to such as deserve the same . These knaves cast offenders down , turning up the soles of their feet made fast to a staff , giving them a perpetuali remembrance for them & the beholders . This Chaus is as the Captain of the forward , which commands lights to be carried before when they travel in the night . Also there go in this forward 6 Santones with read turbans upon their heads , & these eat and ride at the cost of the Captain of the Carovan . These Santones when the Carovan arriveth at any good lodging , suddenly after they have escried the place , cry with and horrible voice saying , good cheer , good cheer , we are near to the wished lodging . For which good news the chief of the company bestow their benevolence upon them . In this forward goes very near the third part of the people of the Carovan , behind whom go always 25 Spachi armed with swords , bows & arrows to defend them from thieves . Next unto the [ II i . 205. ] forward , within a quarter of a mile , follows the main battle , and before the same are drawn the said sixe pieces of ordinance , with their gunners , and fifteene Spachi Archers . And next unto these comes the chief physician , who is and old man of authority , having with him many medicines , ointments , salves , and other like refreshings for the sick , having also camels with him for the sick to ride on , which have no horse nor beast . 
 Next unto him goes one Carnell alone , the fairest that can be found : for with great industry is sought the greatest and fairest which may be found within the dominions of the Grand Signior . This camel also is decked with cloth of gold and silk , and carrieth a little chest made of pure Legmame made in likeness of the ark of the old Testament : but , as is abovesaid , made of pure Legmame , without gold or any other thing of cost . Within this chest is the Alcoran all written with great letters of gold , bound between e two tables of massy gold , and the chest during their voyage is covered with Silk , but at their entering into Mecca it is all covered with cloth of gold , adorned with jewels , and 
 345 ' 
 the like at the entrance into Medina . The Carnell aforesaid which carrieth the chest , is compassed about with many Arabian singers and musicians , always singing and playing upon instruments . After this follow fifteene other most fair Camels , every one carrying one of the abovesaid vestures , being covered from top to toe with silk . Behind these go twentie other Camels which carry the money , apparel , and provision of the Amir el Cheggi captain of the Carovan . After followeth the royal Standard of the grand Signior , accompanied continually with the musicians of the captain , and five and twentie Spachi archers , with a Chaus before them , and about these marvelous things go all the people and Camels which follow the Carovan . Behind these , less then a mile , followeth the rearward , whereof the greater part are pilgrimss : the occasion whereof is , for that the merchant's seek always to be in the forward for the security of their goods , but the pilgrimss which have little to lose care not though they come behind . Behind these always go five and twentie other Spachi well armed with another Chaus their captain , and fortie Arabians all Archers for guard of the rearward . And because the Carovan goes always along the read sea bank , which in going forth they have on their right hand , therefore the two hundred Janissaries parted into three companies go upon their left hand well armed and mounted upon Camels bound one to another , for upon that side is all the danger of thieves , and on the other no danger at all , the captain of the Carovan always going about his people , sometime on the one side , and sometime on the other , never keeping any firm place , being continually accompanied with a Chaus and 25. Spachi , armed and mounted upon Dromedaries , and 8. musicians with violes in their hands , which cease not sounding till the captain take his rest , upon whom they attend , till such time as he entereth his pavilion , and then licensing all his attendants and followers to depart , they go each man to their lodging . 
 346 
 Of things notable which are seen in this voyage by the way . 
 BEcause in the way there are not many things found worthy memory , for that the Carovan seidome rests in places of habitation , of which in the way there are but few , yea rather the Carovan rests altogether in the field : therefore in this our voyage we will only make mention of certain Castles found in the way , which be these , namely , Agerut , Nachel , Aeba , Biritem , Muel , and Ezlem . Of which five , the two first are kept of Moores , and the other three of Turkes , and for guard they have eight men or tenne at the most in every Castle , with foure or five Smerigli , which serve to keep the water from the Arabians , so that the Carovan coming thither , may have wherewithal ! to refresh it self . Agerut is distant from Suez a port of the read Sea eight miles , where are always resident five and twentie galleys of the Grand Signior for the keeping of that Sea. Nachel is distant from the Sea a days journey . The walls of Aeba are founded upon the read Sea bank . Biritem and Muel likewise are dashed by the waves of the Sea. Ezlem is distant from thence above a days journey . These five Castles abovesaid are not of force altogether to defend themselves against and hundred men . The Carovan departing from Birca until Agerut finds no water by the way to drink , neither from Agerut till Nachel , nor from Nachel till Aeba , but between Aeba and Biritem are found two waters , one called Agium el Cassap , and the other Magaraxiaibi , that is to say , the river of Jethro the father in law of Moses , for this is the place mentioned in the second chapter of Exodus , whither it is said that Moses fled from the anger of Pharao , who would have killed him , because he had slain the egyptian , [ II i . 206. ] which fought with the Hebrew , in which place stood the city of Midian ; and there are yet the ponds , near unto the which Moses sat down . And from that place forward they find more store of water by the way , and 
 347 
 in more places , though not so good . It is also to be noted , that in this voyage it is needful and and usual thing , that the captain put his hand to his purse , in these places , and bestow presents , garments , and turbans upon certain of the chief of the Arabians , to the end they may give him and his Carovan free passage : who also promise , that their followers likewise shall do no damage to the Carovan , and bind themselves to accomplish the same , promising also by word of mouth , that if the Carovan be robbed , they will make restitution of such things as are stolen : but notwithstanding the Carovan is by them oftentimes damnified , and those which are robbed have no other restitution at the Arabians hands then the showing of them a pair of heals , flying into such places as it is impossible to find them . Now the Carovan continuing her accustomed journeys , and having passed the abovesaid castles , and others not worthy mention , at length comes to a place called Jehbir , which is the beginning and confine of the state and realm of Serifo the king of Mecca : where , at their approaching issueth out to meet them the governor of the land , with all his people to receive the Carovan , with such shouting and triumph , as is impossible to express , where they stay one whole day . This place aboundeth with fresh and clear waters , which with streams fallen down from the high mountains . Moreover , in this place are great store of dates , and flesh great store and good cheap , and especially laced muttons which willingly fallen down , and here the weary pilgrimss have commodity to refresh themselves , saying , that this wicked fact purgeth them from a multitude of sins , and beside increases devotion to prosecute the voyage . Touching the building in these places , it is to be judged by the houses half ruinated , that it hath be a magnificent city : but because it was in times past inhabited more with thieves then true men , it was therefore altogether destroyed by Soldan Gauri king of / Egypt , who going on pilgrimage unto Mecca , and passing by this place , there 348 
 was by the inhabitants hereof some injury done unto his Carovan , which he understanding of , dissembled till his returned from Mecca , and then caused it to be burned and destroyed in pitiful sort for revenge of the injury done unto the Carovan . The Carovan having rested and being refreshed as is abovesaid , the next day departeth on the way , and the first place they arrive at worthy mention is called Bedrihonem , in which place ( as is aforesaid ) grow those little shrubs whereout Balm issueth . And before the Carovan arriveth at this place , a mile from the city is a large and great field environed about with most high and huge mountains . And in this field , according to the Alcoran , their prophet Mahomet had a most fierce and cruel battle given by the Christians of the country and other people which set themselves against them , and withstood his opinion , so that he was overcome and vanquished of the Christians , and almost half of his people slain in the battle . Whereupon , the prophet seeing himself in such extremity , fell to his prayers , and they say , that God having compassion upon his deer friend and prophet , herd him , and sent him infinite thousands of angels , wherewith returning to the battle , they conquered and overcame the conqueror . And therefore in memory of this victory , the Carovan lodgeth every year one night in this place , making great bonfires with great mirth . And they say that as yet there is herd upon the mountains a little drum , which while the Carovan passes , never ceases sounding . And they say further , that the said drum is sounded by the angels in sign of that great victory granted of God to their prophet . Also the Mahometan writings affirm , that after the end of the said battle , the prophet commanded certain of his people to go and bury all the Mahometans which were dead in the fields , who going , knew not the one from the other , because as yet they used not circumcision , so they returned unto him , answering , that they had be to do his commandment , but they knew not the Musulmans from the 
 349 
 Christians . To whom the prophet answered , saying : Turn again , and all those which you shall find with their faces downward , leave them , because all they are misbelievers ; and the other which you shall find with their faces turned upward , them bury , for they are the true Musulmani , and so his commandment was done . 
 The next morning by Sun rising , the Carovan arriveth at Bedrihonem , in which place every man washes himself from top to toe , as well men as women , and leaving ofF their apparel , having each one a cloth about their privities , called in their tongue Photah , and another white one upon their shoulders , all which can go to Mecca in this habit , do so , and are thought to merit more then the other , but they which cannot do so make a vow to sacrifice a Ram at the mountain of pardons : and after they be washed , it is not lawful for any man or woman to kill either flay or louse with their hands , neither yet to take them with their nails , until they have accomplished their vowed orations in the mountain of pardons abovesaid : and therefore they carry with them certain sticks made of purpose in manner of a File , called in their language Area , Cassah Guch , with which they grate their shoulders . And so the Carovan marching , comes within two miles of Mecca where they rest that night . In the morning at the break of day , with all pomp possible they set forward towards Mecca , and drawing near thereunto , the Seripho issueth forth of the city with his guard , accompanied with and infinite number of people , shouting , and making great triumph . And being come out of the city a boweshoote into a fair field , where a great multitude of tents are pitched , and in the midst the pavilion of the captain , who meeting with the Serifo , after salutations on each side , they light from their horses and enter into the pavilion , where the king of Mecca depriveth himself of all authority and power , and committeth the same to the abovenamed captain , giving him full licence and authority to command , govern , and minister justice 
 350 
 during his abode in Mecca with his company , and on the other side the captain to requite this liberality used towards him by the Serifo gives him a garment of cloth of gold of great valve , with certain jewels and other like things . Arter this , sitting down together upon carpets and hides they eat together , and rising from thence with certain of the chiefest , and taking with them the garment and gate abovesaid , they go directly to the Mosquita , attended on but with a few , and being entered , they cause the old to be pulled down , and put the new coverture upon the house of Abraham , and the old vesture is the eunuchs which serve in the said Mosquita , who after fell it unto the pilgrimss at foure or five serafines the pike : and happy does that man think himself , which can get never so little a piece thereof , to conserve ever after as a most holy relic : and they say , that putting the same under the head of a man at the hour of his death , through virtue thereof all his sins are forgiven . Also they take away the old door , setting in the place the new door , and the old by custom they give unto the Serifo . After having made their prayers with certain ordinary and wonted ceremonies , the Serifo remains in the city , and the captain of the pilgrimage returns unto his pavilion . 
 Of the Serifo the king of Mecca . 
 THe Serifo is descended of the prophet Mahomet by Fatma daughter of that good prophet , and Alli husband to her , and son in law to Mahumet , who had no issue male , save this stock of the Serifo , to the eldest son whereof the realm comes by succession . This realm hath of revenues royal , every year half a million of gold , or little more : and all such as are of the prophets kindred , or descended of that blood ( which are almost innumerable ) are called Emyri , that is to say , lords . These all go clothed in green , or at the least have their turbant green , to be known from the other . Neither is it permitted that any of those Christians which 351 
 dwell or traffic in their Country go clothed in green , neither may they have any thing of green about them : for they say it is not lawful for misbeleevers-to wear that colour , wherein that great friend and prophet of God Mahomet was wont to be appareled . 
 Of the city of Mecca . 
 THe Ci tie of Mecca in the Arabian tongue is called Macca , that is to say , and habitation . This city is environed about with exceeding high and barren mountains , and in the plain between the said mountains . and the city are many pleasant gardens , where grows great abundance of figs , grapes , apples , and melons . There is also great abundance of good water and flesh , but not of bred . This city hath no walls about it , and containeth in circuit five miles . The houses are very handsome and commodious , and are built like to the houses in Italie . The palace of the Serifo is sumptuous and gorgeously adorned . The women of the place are courteous , jocund , and lovely , fair , with alluring eyes , being hight and libidinous , and the most of them naughty packs . The men of this place are given to that abominable , cursed , and opprobrious vice , whereof both men and women make but small account by reason of the pond Zun Zun , wherein having washed themselves , their opinion is , that although like the dog they return to their vomit , yet they are cleansed from all sin whatsoever , of which since we will hereafter more largely discourse . In the midst of the city is the great Mosquita , [ II i . 208. ] with the house of Abraham standing in the very midst thereof , which Mosquita was built in the time when their prophet lived . It is foure square , and so great , that it containeth two miles in circuit , that is to say , half a mile each side . Also it is made in manner of a cloister , for that in the midst thereof separate from the rest , is the abovesaid house of Abraham , also the galleries round about are in manner of 4. streets , and the partitions which divide the one street from the other are pillars , whereof 
 352 
 some are of marble , and others of lime and stone . This famous and sumptuous Mosquita hath 99. gates , and 5. steeples , from whence the Talismani call the people to the Mosquita . And the pilgrimss which are not provided of tents , resort hither , and for more devotion the men and women lie together aloft and beneath , one upon another , so that their house of prayer becomes worse sometime then a den of thieves . 
 Of the house of Abraham . 
 THe house of Abraham is also foure square , and made of speckled stone , 20. paces high , and 40 in circuit . 
 And upon one side of this house within the wall , there is a stone of a span long , and half a span broad , which stone ( as they say ) before this house was built , fell down from heaven , at the fallen whereof was herd a voice , that wheresoever this stone fell , there should be built the house of God , wherein God will hear sinners . Moreover , they say that when this stone fell from heaven , it was not black as now , but as white as the whitest snow , and by reason it hath be so oft kissed by sinners , it is therewith become black : for all the pilgrimss are bound to kiss this stone , otherwise they carry their sins home with them again . The entrance into this house is very small , made in manner of a window , and as high from the ground as a man can reach , so that it is painful to enter . This house hath without 31. pillars of brass , set upon cubike or square stones being read and green , the which pillars sustain not ought else save a thread of copper , which reaches from one to another , whereunto are fastened many burning lamps . These pillars of brass were caused to be made by Sultan Soliman grandfather to Sultan Amurath now Emperor . After this , having entered with the difficulty abovesaid , there stand at the entrance two pillars of marble , to wit , on each side one . In the midst there are three of Aloes-wood not very thick , and covered with tiles of India of 1000. colours which serve to underprop the Terratza . It is 
 v 353 z 
 so dark , that they can hardly see within for want of light , not without and evil smell . Without the gate five pases is the abovesaid pond Zun Zun , which is that blessed pond that the angel of the lord showed unto Agar while she went seeking water for her son Ismael to drink . 
 Of the ceremonies of the pilgrimss . 
 IN the beginning we have said how the Mahometans have two feasts in the year . The one they call 
 Pascha di Ramazatco , that is to say , The feast of fasting , and this feast of fasting is held thirtie days after the feast , wherein the Carovan travelleth to Mecca . The other is called the feast of the Ram , wherein all they which are of ability are bound to sacrifice a Ram , and this they call Bine Bairam , that is to say , The great feast . And as the Carovan departeth from Cairo thirtie days after the little feast , so likewise they come hither five or sixe days before the great feast , to the end the pilgrimss may have time before the feast to finish their rites and ceremonies , which are these . Departing from the Carovan , and being guided by such as are experienced in the way , they go unto the city twentie or thirtie in a company as they think good , walking through a street which ascendeth by little and little till they come unto a certain gate , whereupon is written on each side in marble stone , Babel Salema , which in the Arabian tongue signifies , the gate of health . And from this place is descried the great Mosquita , which environeth the house of Abraham , which being descried , they reverently salute twice , saying , Salem Alech Jara sul Alla , that is to say , Peace to thee , ambassador of God . This salutation being ended , proceeding on the way , they find and arch upon their right hand , whereon they ascend five steps , upon the which is a great void place made of stone : after , descending other five steps , and proceeding the space of a flight-shoot , they find another arch like unto the first , and this way from the one arch to the other 354 
 they go and come 7. times , saying always some of their prayers , which ( they say ) the afflicted Agar said , while she sought and found not water for her son Ismael to drink . This ceremony being ended , the pilgrimss enter into the Mosquita , and drawing near unto the house of Abraham , they go round about it other seven times , always saying : This is the house of God , and of his servant Abraham ; This done , they go to kiss that black stone abovesaid . After they go unto the pond Zun Zun , and in their apparel as they be , they wash [ II i . 209. ] themselves from head to foot , saying , Tobah Allah , Tobah Allah , that is to say , Pardon lord , Pardon lord , drinking also of that water , which is both muddy , filthy , and of and ill savour , and in this wise washed and watered , every one returns to his place of abided , and these ceremonies every one is bound to do once at the least . But those which have a mind to overgo their fellows , and to go into paradise before the rest , do the same once a day while the Carovan remains there . 
 What the Carovan doth after having rested at Mecca . 
 THe Carovan having abided within the city of Mecca five days , the night before the evening of their feast , the captain with all his company sets forward towards the mountain of pardons , which they call in the The mountain Arabian tongue , Jabel Arafata . This mountain is distant °f Pard°ns-from Mecca 15. miles , and in the mid way thereto is a place called Mina , that is to say , The haven , and a little from thence are 4. great pillars , of which hereafter we will speak . Now first touching the mountain of Pardons , which is rather to be called a little hill , then a mountain , for that it is low , little , delightful and pleasant , containing in circuit two miles , and environed round about with the goodliest plain that ever with men eye could be seen , and the plain likewise compassed with exceeding high mountains , in such sort , that this is one of the goodliest situations in the world : and it seems 
 355 
 verily , that nature hath therein showed all her cunning , in making this place under the mountain of pardons so broad and pleasant . Upon the side towards Mecca there are many pipes of water clear , fair , and fresh , and above all most wholesome , falling down into certain vessels made of purpose , where the people refresh and wash themselves , and water their cattle . And when Adam and Evah were cast out of paradise by the angel of the Lord , the Mahometans say , they came to inhabit this little mountain of pardons . Also they say , that they had lost one another , and were separated for the space of 40. years , and in the end met at this place with great joy & gladness , and built a little house upon the top of this mountain , the which at this day they call Beyt Adam , that is to say , the house of Adam . 
 Of the three Carovans . 
 THe same day that the Carovan of Cairo comes to this place , hither come 2. Carovans also , one of Damasco , the other of Arabia , and in like manner all the inhabitants for ten days journey round about , so that at one time there is to be seen above 200000. persons , and more then 300000. cattle . Now all this company meeting together in this place the night before the feast , the three hosts cast themselves into a triangle , setting the mountain in the midst of them : and all that night there is nothing to be herd nor seen , but gunshot and fireworks of sundry sorts , with such singing , sounding , shouting , hallowing , rumours , feasting , and triumphing , as is wonderful . After this , the day of the feast being come , they are all at rest and silence , and that day they attend on no other thing , then to sacrifice oblations and prayers unto God , and in the evening all they which have horses mount thereon , and approach as nigh unto the mountain as they can , and those which have no horses make the best shift they can on foot , giving ever unto the captain of Cairo the chief place , the second to the captain of Damasco , and the third to the captain 356 
 of Arabia , & being all approached as is abovesaid , there comes a square squire , one of the Santones , mounted on a camel well furnished , who at the other side of the mountain ascendeth five steps into a pulpit made for that purpose , and all being silent , turning his face towards the people , he makes a short sermon of the tenor following . 
 The sum of the Santones sermon . 
 THe sum of this double doctors sermon is thus much in brief . He shows them how many and how great benefits God hath given to the Mahometan people by the hand of his beloved friend and prophet Mahomet , having delivered them from the servitude of sin & from idolatry , in which before time they were drowned , and how he gave unto them the house of Abraham wherein they should be herd , and likewise the mountain of pardons , by means whereof they might obtain grace and remission of their sins : adding , that the merciful God , who is a liberali giver of all good things , commanded his secretary Abraham to built him and house in Mecca , where his successors might make their prayers unto him and be herd , at which time all the mountains in the world came together thither with sufficiency of stones for building hereof , except that little and low hill , which for poverty could not go to discharge this debt , for the which it became sorrowful , [ II i . 210. ] weeping beyond all measure for the space of thirtie years , at the end whereof the eternal God having pity and compassion upon this poor Mountain , said unto it : Weep no more ( my daughter ) for thy bitter plaints have ascended up into mine ears , therefore comfort thy self : for I will cause all those that shall go to visit the house of my friend Abraham , that they shall not be absolved from their sins , unless they first come to do thee reverence , and to keep in this place their holiest feast . 
 And this I have commanded unto my people by the mouth of my friend and prophet Mahumet . This said , 357 
 he exhorteth them unto the love of God , and to prayer and alms . The sermon being done at the Sunsetting they make 3. prayers , namely , the first for the Serifo , the second for the Grand Signior with his host , and the third for all the people : to which prayers all with one voice cry saying ; Amni Ja Alla , Amni Ja Alla , that is to say , Be it so Lord , be it so Lord . Thus having had the Santones blessing and saluted the Mountain of pardons , they return the way they came unto Mina , whereof we have made mention . In returning at the end of the plain are the abovesaid 4. pillars , to wit , two on each side of the way , through the midst whereof they say it is needful that every one pass , saying , that who so passes without loses all that merit which in his pilgrimage he had got . Also from the mountain of pardons until they be passed the said pillars none dare look backward , for fear least the sins which he hath left in the mountains return to him again . Being passed these pillars every one lights down , seeking in this sandy field 50. or 60. little stones , which being gathered , and bound in and handkerchief they carry to the abovesaid place of Mina , where they stay 5. days , because at that time there is a fair free and frank of all custom . And in this place are other 3. pillars , not together , but set in diverse places , where ( as their prophet says ) were the three apparitions which the devil made unto Abraham , and to Ismael his son ; for among them they make no mention of Isaac , as if he had never be born . So they say , that the blessed God having commanded Abraham his faithful servant to sacrifice his first begotten Ismael , the old Abraham went to do according to Gods will , and met with the infernal enemy in the shape of a man , and being of him demanded whither he went , he answered , that he went to sacrifice his son Ismael , as God had commanded him . Against whom the devil exclaiming said : O doting old man , sith God in thine old age hath marvelously given thee this son ( in whom all nations shall blessed ) wherefore giving credit unto 
 358 
 vain dreams , wilt thou kill him whom so much thou hast desired , and so entirely loved . But Abraham shaking him off proceeded on his way , whereupon the devil seeing his words could not prevail with the father attempted the son , saying ; Ismael , have regard unto thy self betimes in this thing which is so dangerous . Wherefore ? answered you child . Because ( says the devil ) thy doting father seeks to take away thy life . For what occasion , said Ismael ? Because ( says the enemy ) he says , that God hath commanded him . Which Ismael hearing he took up stones and threw at him , saying , Auzu billahi minal scia itanil ragini , which is to say , I defend me with God from the devil the offender , as who would say , we ought to obey the commandment of God and resist the devil with all our force . But to return to our purpose , the pilgrimss during their abode there go to visit these three pillars , throwing away the little stones which before they gathered , while they repeat the same words which they say , that Ismael said to the devil , when he withstood him . From hence half a mile is a mountain , whither Abraham went to sacrifice his son , as is abovesaid . In this mountain is a great den whither the pilgrim's resort to make their prayers , and there is a great stone naturally separated in the midst ; and they say , that Ismael , while his father Abraham was busy about the sacrifice , took the knife in hand to prove how it would cut , and making trial divided the stone into two parts . The five days being expired , the captain arises with all the Carovan , and returns again to Mecca , where they remain other five days . And while these rest , we will treat of the city and port of Grida upon the Read Sea. 
 Of Grida . 
 THereford we say that from Mecca to Grida they make two small days journey : and because in those places it is ill traveling in the daytime by reason of the great heat of the Sun , therefore they depart in the 359 
 Grida a port near Mecca . 
 evening from Mecca , and in the morning before Sunrising they are arrived half way , where there are certain habitations well furnished , and good Inns to lodge in , but especially women enough which voluntarily bestow their alms upon the poor pilgrim's : likewise departing the next evening , the morning after , they come unto Grida . This city is founded upon the Read Sea bank , environed with walls & towers to the landward , but through continuance of time almost consumed and wasted : on the side to seaward it stands unwalled . Grida hath three gates , one on eke side , and the thirde in the midst toward the land , which is called , The port of Mecca , near unto which are 6. or 7. Turks upon [ II i . 211. ] the old towers for guard thereof with foure falcons upon one of the corners of the city to the landward . Also to seaward where the wall joineth with the water , there is lately made a fort like unto a bulwark , where they have planted 25 pieces of the best ordinance that might be had , which are very well kept and guarded . More outward towards the sea upon the farthest old tower are other five good pieces with 30 men to guard them . On the other side of the city at the end of the wall there is lately built a bulwark strong and well guarded by a Sanjaccho with 150 Turks well provided with ordinance and all other necessaries and munition , and all these fortifyings are for none other cause then The Portugal ! for fear and suspicion of the Portugals . And if the 
 Port were g°°d all this were in vain : but the port cansea . not be worse nor more dangerous , being all full of rocks and sands , in such wise , that the ships cannot come near , but perforce ride at the least two miles off . At Forty or fifty this port arrive every year forty or fifty great ships rich ships laden with spices and other rich merchandise which yield 
 at Grida . in custom 150000 ducats , the half whereof goes unto 
 the Grand Signior , and the other half to the Serifo . And because there is none other thing worthy mention in Grida we will return to our Carovan which hath almost rested enough . 
 360 
 THe Carovan departeth for Medina returning the same way they came unto Bedrihonem abovesaid , where they leave their ordinance and other carriages , whereof they have no need , with the pilgrim's which have seen Medina aforetime , and desire not to see it again , but stay in that place , expecting the carovan , and resting until the carovan go from Bedrihonem to Medina , where they always find goodly habitations , with abundance of sweet waters , and dates enough , and being within fbureteene miles of Medina they come unto a great plain called by them Jabel el salema , that is to say , the mountain of health , from which they begin to descry the city and tomb of Mahomet , at which sighed they light from their horses in token of reverence . And being ascended up the said mountain with shouting which pierces the skies they say , Sala tuua salema Alaccha Jarah sul Allah . Sala tuua Salema Alaccha Janabi Allah , Sala tuua Salema Allaccha Jahabit Allah : which words in the Arabian tongue signify : Prayer and health be unto thee , o prophet of God : prayer and health be upon thee , o beloved of God . And having pronounced this salutation , they proceed •on their journey , so that they lodge that night within three miles of Medina : and the next morning the •captaine of the pilgrimage arises , & proceeding towards the city , and drawing near , there comes the governor under the Serifo , accompanied with his people to receive the Carovan , having pitched their tents in the midst of a goodly field where they lodge . 
 Of Medina . 
 MEdina is a little city of great antiquity , containing in circuit not above two miles , having therein but one castle , which is old and weak , guarded by and Agam with fifty pieces of artillery , but not very good . The houses thereof are fair and well situated , built of lime and stone , and in the midst of the city stands a foure-361 
 square Mosquita , not so great as that of Mecca , but more goodly , rich , and sumptuous in building . Within the same in a corner thereof is a tomb built upon foure pillars with a vault , as if it were under a pavement , which binds all the foure pillars together . The tomb is so high , that it far exceeds in height the Mosquita , being covered with led , and the top all enameled with gold , with and half moon upon the top : and within the pavement it is all very artificially wrought with gold . Below there , are round about very great stairs of iron ascending up until the midst of the pillars , and in the very midst thereof is buried the body of Mahomet , and not in a chest of iron cleaving to the adamant , as many affirm that know not the truth thereof . Moreover , over the body they have built a tomb of speckled stone | | Or , a a II brace and and half high , and over the same another of 
 fathom . Legmame foursquare in manner of a pyramid . After this , 
 round about the sepulture there hangs a curtain of silk , which lets the sighed of those without , that they cannot see the sepulture . Beyond this in the same Mosquita are other two sepulchres covered with green cloth , and in the one of them is buried Fatma the daughter of Mahomet , and Alli is buried in the other , who was the husband of the said Fatma . The attendants upon these sepulchres are fifty eunuchs white and tawny , neither is it granted to any of them to enter within the tomb , saving to three white eunuchs the oldest and best of credit ; unto whom it is lawful to enter but twice in the day , to light the lamps , and to do other services . All the other eunuchs attend without to the service of the Mosquita , and the other two sepulchres of Fatma , and Alli , where every one may go and touch at his pleasure , and take of the earth for devotion , as many doe . 
 [ II i . 212. ] Of things without the City . 
 Without the city and on every side are most fair gardens , with many fountains of most sweet water , infinite ponds , abundance of fruit , with much 362 
 honest living , so that this place is very pleasant and delightful . This city hath three gates , one of which is and hospitali caused to be built by Cassachi , called the Rose , who was wife to Sultan Soliman grandfather to this emperor . The said hospitali hath nought else worthy mention , save that it is fairly built , and hath large revenues belonging thereunto , and nourishes many poor people . A mile from the city are certain houses whereof they affirm one to be the same , where Mahumet in his lifetime dwelled . This house hath on every side very many fair date trees , among which there are two which grow out of one stock exceeding high , and these , they say , their Prophet graffed with his own hand : the fruit thereof is always sent to Constantinople , to be presented unto the Grand Signior , and is said to be that blessed fruit of the Prophet . Nere unto the date trees is a fair fountain of clear and sweet water , the which by a conduct pipe is brought into the city of Medina . Also there is a little Mosquita , wherein three places are counted holy , and greatly reverenced : the first they affirm , that their Prophet made his first prayer in , after he knew God : the second is that whither he went when he would see the holy house of Abraham , where when he sat down to that intent , they say the mountains opened from the top to the bottom to show him the house , and after closed again as before : the third holy place is in the midst of the said Mosquita , where is a tomb made of lime and stone foursquare , and full of sand , wherein , they say , was buried that blessed camel which Mahumet was always wont to ride upon . On the other side of the city are other tombs of holy Mahumetans , and every one of them hath a tomb built upon foure pillars , among which three were the companions of Mahumet , to wit , Abu-bacar , Ottoman , and Omar ; all which are visited of the pilgrim's as holy places . 
 363 
 [ The offering 
 The offering of the vestures unto the sepulchres . 
 THe Carovan being come to Medina two hours before day , and resting there till the evening , the captain then with his company and other pilgrim's sets forward , with the greatest pomp possible : and taking with him the vesture which is made in manner of a pyramid , with many other of gold and silk , departeth , going thorough the midst of the city , until he come to the Mosquita , where having prayed , he presents unto the tomb of his prophet ( where the eunuchs receiving hands , are ready ) the vesture for the said tomb : and certain eunuchs entering in take away the old vesture , and lay on the new , burning the old one , and dividing the gold thereof into equal portions . After this are presented other vestures for the ornament of the Mosquita . Also the people without deliver unto the eunuchs each man somewhat to touch the tomb therewith , which they keep as a relic with great devotion . This ceremony being ended , the captain rests in Medina two days , to the end the pilgrim's may finish their devotion and ceremonies : and after they depart to Jambor . A good days journey thence is a steep mountain , over which is no passage , saving by one narrow path called Demir Capi , which was in times past called the iron gate . Of this gate the Mahometans say , that Alley the companion and son in law of Mahumet , being here pursued by many Christians , and coming unto this mountain , not seeing any way whereby to flee , drew out his sword , and striking the said mountain , divided it in sunder , and passing thorough saved his life on the other side . Moreover , this Alli among the Persians is had in greater reverence then Mahumet , who affirm , that the said Alli hath done greater things and more miraculous then Mahumet , and therefore they esteem him for God almighty his fellow . But to return to our matter , the captain with the carovan within two days after returns for Cairo , and coming to Ezlem , finds there a captain with threescore horses 364 
 come thither to bring refreshments to the said captain of the pilgrimage , as also to fell unto the pilgrim's some victuals . From thence they set forward , and commi ng to Birca within two leagues of Cairo , there is the master of the house of the Bassha of Cairo with all his horsemen come thither to receive him , with a sumptuous and costly banquet made at the cost of the Basham for the captain and his retinue , who after he is well refreshed departeth towards the castle of Cairo to salute the Basham , who receiving him with great joy and gladness in token of good will presents him with a garment of cloth of gold very rich : and the captain taking the Alcaron out of the chest presents it to the Basham , who having kissed it , commands to lay it up again . Some there are which affirm , that being arrived at Cairo , they kill that goodly camel which carried the Alcaron , and eat him ; which is nothing so : for they are so superstitious to the contrary , that to gain all the world they would not kill him . [ II i . 213. ] But if by casualty he should die , in this case happy and blessed they think themselves , which can get a morsel to eat . And thus much concerning the voyage of the captain of the carovan of Cairo . 
 . 