The voyage and travel of M. Cassar Fredericke , Merchant of Venice , into the East India , and beyond the Indies . Wherein are contained the customs and rites of those countries , the merchandises and commodities , aswell of gold and silver , as spices , drug , pearls , and other jewels : translated out of Italian by M. Thomas Hickocke . 
 Cassar Fredericke to the Reader . 
 Having ( gentle Reader ) for the space of eighteene years continually coasted and traveled , as it were , all the East Indies , and many other countries' beyond the Indies , wherein I have had both good and ill success in my travels : and having seen & understood 365 
 Casar Fredericke traveled eighteene years in the East Indies . 
 many things worthy the noting , and to be known to all the world , the which were never as yet written of any : I thought it good ( seeing the Almighty had given me grace , after so long perils in passing such a long voyage to return into mine own country , the noble city of Venice ) I say , I thought it good , as briefly as I could , to write and set forth this voyage made by me , with the marvellous things I have seen in my travels in the Indies : The mighty Princes that govern those countries' , their religion and faith that they have , the rites and customs which they use , and live by , of the diverse success that happened unto me , and how many of these countries' are abounding with spices , drugs , and jewels , giving also profitable advertisement to all those that have a desire to make such a voyage . And because that the whole world may more commodiously rejoice at this my travel , 1 have caused it to be printed in this order : and now I present it unto you ( gentle & loving Readers ) to whom for the varieties of things herein contained , I hope that it shall be with great delight received . And thus God of his goodness keep you . 
 A voyage to the East Indies , and beyond the Indies , etc. 
 “ The authors going from Venice to Cyprus and Tripoly . 
 N the year of our Lord God 1563 , I Caesar Fredericke being in Venice , and very desirous to see the East parts of the world , shipped my self in a ship called the Gradaige of Venice , with certain merchandise , governed by M. Jacomo Vatica , which was bound to 
 Cyprus with his ship , with whom I went : and when we were arrived in Cyprus , I left that ship , and went in a lesser to Tripoly in Soria , where I stayed a while . Afterwards I took my journey to Alepo , and there I acquainted my self with merchants of Armenia , and Moors , that 366 
 were merchants , and consorted to go with them to Ormus , and we departed from Alepo , and in two days journey and a half , we came to a city called Bir. 
 Of the city called Bir. 
 Bir is a small city very scarce of all manner of victuals , and never unto the walls of the city runneth the river of Euphrates . In this city the merchants divide themselves into companies , according to their merchandise that they have , and there either they buy or make a boat to carry them and their goods to Babylon down the river Euphrates , with charge of a master and mariners to conduct the boat in the voyage : these boats are in Euphrates . a manner flat bottomed , yet they be very strong : and for all that they are so strong , they will serve but for one voyage . They are made according to the sholdnesse of the river , because that the river is in many places full of great stones , which greatly hinder and trouble those that go down the river . These boats serve but for one voyage down the river unto a village called Feluchia , because it is impossible to bring them up the river back again . At Feluchia the merchants pluck their boats in pieces , or else fell them for a small price , for that at Bir they cost the merchants forty or fifty chickens a ' piece , and they sei them at Feluchia for seven or Feluchia a eight chickens a piece , because that when the merchants on return from Babylon back again , if they have mar - ' chandise or goods that owes custom , then they make their return in forty days thorough the wilderness , passing that way with a great deal lesser charges then the other way . And if they have not merchandise that owes custom , then they go by the way of Mosul , Mosul . where it costeth them great charges both the Carovan and company . From Bir where the merchants embark [ II i . 214. ] themselves to Feluchia over against Babylon , if the river have good store of water , they shall make their voyage in fifteene or eighteene days down the river , and if the water be low , and it hath not reigned , then it is 
 367 
 much trouble , and it will be forty or fifty days journey down , because that when the barks strike on the stones that be in the river , then they must unladen them , which is great trouble , and then lade them again when they have mended them : therefore it is not necessary , neither do the merchants go with one boat alone , but with two or three , that if one boat split and be lost with striking on the sholdes , they may have another ready to take in their goods , until such time as they have mended the broken boat , and if they draw the broken boat on land to mend her , it is hard to defend her in the night from the great multitude of Arabians that will come down there to rob you : and in the rivers every night , when you make fast your boat to the banckeside , you must keep good watch against thee The Arabian Arabians which are thieves in number like to ants , yet thieves are in when they come to rob , they will not kill , but steal Ants & run away . Harquebusses are very good weapons against them , for that they stand greatly in fear of the shot . And as you pass the river Euphrates from Bir to Feluchia , there are certain places which you must pass by , where you pay custom certain medines upon a bale , which custom is belonging to the son of Aborise king of the Arabians and of the desert , who hath certain cities and villages on the river Euphrates . 
 Feluchia and Babylon . 
 The old Babylon hath great trade no* merchants still . 
 FEluchia is a village where they that come from Bir do unbark themselves and unladen their goods , and it is distant from Babylon a days journey and and half by land : Babylon is no great city , but it is very populous , and of great trade of strangers because it is a great thorowfare for Persia , Turkia , and Arabia : and very often times there go out from thence Carovans into diverse countries' : and the city is very copious of victuals , which comme out of Armenia down the river 
 of Tygris , on certain Zattares or Raffes made of blown hides or skins called Utrii . This river Tygris doth 
 368 
 wash the walls of the city . These Raffes are bound fist together , and then they lay boards on the aforesaid blown skins , and on the boards they lade the commodities , and so come they to Babylon , where they unladen them , and being unladen , they let out the wind out of the skins , and lade them on camels to make another voyage . This city of Babylon is situate in the kingdom of Persia , but now governed by the Turks . On the other side of the river towards Arabia , over against the city , there is a fair place or town , and in it a fair Bazarro for merchants , with very many lodgings , where the greatest part of the merchants strangers which come to Babylon do lie with their merchandise . The passing over Tygris from Babylon to this Borough is by a long bridge made of boats chained together with A bridge great chains : provided , that when the river waxes °fboats-great with the abundance of rain that falls , then they open the bridge in the middle , where the one half of the bridge falls to the walls of Babylon , and the other to the brinks of this Borough , on the other side of the river : and as long as the bridge is open , they pass the river in small boats with great danger , because of the smallness of the boats , and the overlading of them , that with the fierceness of the stream they be overthrown , or else the stream does carry them away , so that by this means , many people are lost and drowned : this thing by proof I have many times seen . 
 Of the tower of Babylon . 
 THe Tower of Nimrod or Babel is situate on that side of Tygris that Arabia is , and in a very great plain distant from Babylon seven or eight miles : which tower is ruinated on every side , and with the falling of it there is made a great mountain : so that it hath no form at all , yet there is a great part of it standing , which is compassed and almost covered with the aforesaid fallings : this Tower was built and made of 
 v 369 2 A 
 These bricks foursquare Bricks , which Bricks were made of earth , be In thickness anj dried in the Sun in manner and form following : stx or seven grst iayetj a lay of Bricks , then a Mat made of foot a half anes5 square as the Bricks , and in stead or lime , they square . daubed it with earth : these Mats of Canes are at this time so strong , that it is a thing wondered to behold , being of such great antiquity : I have gone round about it , and have not found any place where there hath be any door or entrance : it may be in my judgement in circuit about a mile , and rather less then more . 
 This Tower in effect is contrary to all other things which are seen afar ofF , for they seem small , & the more never a man comes to them the bigger they be : but this tower afar off seems a very great thing , and the nearer you come to it the lesser . My judgement & [ II i . 215. ] reason of this is , that because the Tower is set in a very great plain , and hath nothing more about to make any show saving the ruins of it which it hath made round about , and for this respect descrying it a far ofF , that piece of the Tower which yet stands with the mountain that is made of the substance that hath fallen from it , makes a greater show then you shall find coming near to it . 
 Babylon and Basora . 
 FRom Babylon I departed for Basora , shipping my self in one of the barks that use to go in the river 
 Tigris from Babylon to Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : which barks are made after the manner of Fusts or Galliots with a Speron and a covered poop : they have no pump in them because of the great abundance of pitch which they have to pitch them with all : which pitch they have in abundance two days journey from Babylon . Nere unto the river Euphrates , there is a city called Heit , never unto which city there is a great plain full of pitch , very marvellous to behold , and a thing almost incredible , that out of a hold in the earth , which continually throweth out pitch into the air with con - 
 370 
 tinuall smoke , this pitch is thrown with such force , that being hight it falls like as it were sprinkled over all the plain , in such abundance that the plain is always full of pitch : the Moors and the Arabians of that place say , that that hold is the mouth of hell : and in truth , it is a thing very notable to be marked : and by this pitch the whole people have great benefit to pitch their barks , which barks they call Daneck and Saffin . When the river of Tygris is well replenished with water , you may pass from Babylon to Basora in eight or nine days , and sometime more and sometime less : we were half so much more which is 14 or 15 days , because the waters were low : they may sail day & night , and there are some places in this way where you pay so many medins on a bail : if the waters be low , it is 18 days journey . 
 Basora . 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 This hold whereout comes this pitch is most true , and the coater pitch runneth into the valley or Hand where the pitch rests , y the water runneth into the river Euphrates , and it makes all the river to be as it were brackish with the smell of pitch and brimstone . 
 BAsora is a city of the Arabians , which of old time 
 was governed by those Arabians called Zizarii , but Zizarii , and now it is governed by the great Turke where he keepeth ancient People-an army to his great charges . 
 The Arabians called Zizarii have the possession of a great country , and cannot be overcome of the Turke , because that the sea hath divided their country into and Hand by channels with the ebbing and flowing of the sea , and for that cause the Turke cannot bring and army against them , neither by sea nor by land , and another reason is , the inhabitants of that Hand are very strong and warlike men . A days journey before you come to Basora , you shall have a little castle or fort , which is set on that point of the land where the rivers of Euphrates and Tygris meet together , and the castle At the castle is called Corna : at this point , the two rivers make a of Coma the monstrous great river , that runneth into the sea , which ^erEu ' , is called the gulf of Persia , which is towards the South : Tygris doe Basora is distant from the sea fifteene miles , and it is meet . a city of great trade of spices and drug which come 
 371 
 from Ormus . Also there is great store of corn , Rice , and Dates , which the country does yield . I shipped Ormus is the my self in Basora to go for Ormus , and so we sailed barrenest thorough the Persian sea six hundred miles , which is the the^arld^ distance , from Basora to Ormus , and we sailed in small e ’ ships made of boards , bound together with small cords or ropes , and in stead of calking they lay between every board certain straw which they have , and so they sow board and board together , with the straw between , wherethorow there comes much water , and they are very dangerous . Departing from Basora we passed 200 miles with the sea on our right hand , along the gulf , until at length we arrived at and Hand called Carichii and Carichii , from whence we sailed to Ormus in sighed of Hand in you the Persian shore on the left side , and on the right side gulfeofPersia . towards Arabia we discovered infinite Hands . 
 Ormus . 
 Ormus is / ARmus is and Hand in circuit five and twenty or thirty 
 always re - miles , and it is the barrenest and most dry Hand abun^nce^f * n a wor^ ’ because that in it there is nothing to victuali and and , but salt water , and wood , all other things neces-yet there is sary for men life are brought out of Persia twelve 
 none that . miles off , and out of other Hands near thereunto ad - 
 1^^^^ j°yn’nS ’ in suc^ abundance and quantity , that the city ’ is always replenished with all manner of store : there is standing near unto the waters side a very fair castle , in the which the captain of the king of Portugall is always resident with a good band of Portugalles , and before this castle is a very fair prospect : in the city dwell the married men , soldiers and merchants of every nation , among whom there are Moors and Great trade Gentiles . In this city there is very great trade for all OH ” ^ sorts spices > drug , silk , cloth of silk , brocardo , and diverse other sorts of merchandise come out of Persia : and among all other trades of merchandise , the trade of Horses is very great there , which they carry from thence into the Indies . This Hand hath a More 
 372 
 king of the raze of the Persians , who is created and made king by the Captain of the castle , ’in the name of the king of Portugal ! . At the creation of this king I was there , and saw the ceremonies that they use in it , which are as follows . The old King being dead , the Captain of the Portugals chooseth another of the blood royal , and makes this election in the castle with great ceremonies , and when he is elected , the Captain sweareth him to be true and faithful to the King of Portugall , as his Lord and Governor , and then he gives him the Sceptre regal . After this with great feasting & pomp , and with great company , he is brought into the royal palace in the city . This King keepeth a good train , and hath sufficient revenues to maintain himself without troubling of any , because the Captain of the castle doth maintain and defend his right , and when that the Captain and he ride together , he is honoured as a king , yet he cannot ride abroad with his train , without the consent of the Captain first had : it behooveth them to do this , and it is necessary , because of the great trade that is in the city : their proper language is the Persian tongue . There I shipped my self to go for Goa , a city in the Indies , in a ship that had fourescore horses in her . This is to advertise those Merchants that go from Ormus to Goa to ship themselves in those ships that carry horses , because every ship that carrieth twenty horses or upward is privileged , that all the merchandise whatsoever they carry shall pay no custom , whereas the ships that carry no horses are bound to pay eight per cento of all the goods they bring . 
 The election of the king of Ormus . 
 A privilege for Merchants . 
 Goa , Diu , and Cambaia . 
 GOa is the principali city that the Portugals have in the Indies , where is resident the Viceroy with his Court and ministers of the King of Portugall . From Ormus to Goa is nine hundred foure score and ten miles distance , in which passage the first city that you come to 373 
 in the Indies , is called Diu , and is situate in a little Hand in the kingdom of Cambaia , which is the greatest strength that the Portugals have in all the Indies , yet a small city , but of great trade , because there they lade very many great ships for the straights of Mecca and Ormus with merchandise , and these ships belong to the Moors and Christians , but thee . Moores can not trade neither sail into those seas without the licence of the Viceroy of the king of Portugall , otherwise they are taken and made good prizes . The merchandise that they lade these ships withal comes from Cambaietta a port in the kingdom of Cambaia , which they bring from thence in small barks , because there can no great ships come thither , by reason of the sholdnesse of the water thereabouts , and these sholds are and hundred or fourescore miles about in a straight or gulf , which they call Macareo , which is as much to say , as a raze of a tide , because the waters there run out of that place without measure , so that there is no place like to it , unless it be in the kingdom of Pegu , where there is another Macareo , where the waters run out with more force then these doe . The principali city in Cambaia is called Amadavar , it is a days journey and and half from Cambaietta , it is a very great city and very populous , and for a city of the Gentiles it is very well made and budded with fair houses and large streets , with a fair place in it with many ships , and in show like to Cairo , but not so great : also Cambaietta is situate on the seas side , and is a very fair city . The time that I was there , the city was in great calamity & scarsenesse , so that I have seen the men of the country that were Gentiles take their children , their sons and their daughters , and have desired the Portugals to buy them , and I have seen them sold for eight or ten larines a piece , which may be of our money x.s. or xiii . s . iiii . worser . For all this , if I had not seen it , I could not have believed that there should be such a trade at Cambaietta as there is : for in the time of every new Moon and every full Moon , the 
 374 
 small barks ( innumerable ) come in and out , for at those times of the Moon the tides and waters are higher then at other times they be . These barks be laden with all sorts of spices , with silk of China , with Sandals , with Elephants teeth , Velvets of Vercini , great quantity of Pannina , which comes from Mecca , Chickinos which be pieces of gold worth seven shillings a piece sterling , with money , and with diverse sorts of other merchandise . Also these barks lade out , as it were , and infinite quantity of cloth made of Bombast of all sorts , as white stamped and painted , with great quantity of Indico , dried ginger & conserved , Myrabolans dry and condite , Boraso in past , great store of sugar , great quantity of Cotton , abundance of Opium , Assa Fetida , Puchio , with many other sorts of drug , turbans made in Dui , great stones like to Corneolaes , Granats , Agats , Diaspry , Calcidonii , Hematists , and some kind of natural Diamonds . There is in the city of Cambaietta and order , but no man is bound to keep it , but they that will ; but all the [ II i . 217. ] Portugall merchants keep it , the which is this . There are in this city certain Brokers which are Gentiles and of great authority , and have every one of them fifteene or twenty servants , and the Merchants that use that country have their Brokers , with which they be served : and they that have not be there are informed by their friends of the order , and of what broker they shall be served . Now every fifteene days ( as abovesaid ) that the fleet of small ships entereth into the port , the Brokers come to the water side , and these Merchants assoon as they are come on land , do give the cargason of all their goods to that Broker that they will have to do their business for them , with the marks of all the farthels and packs they have : and the merchant having 
 taken on land all his furniture for his house , because it that traveU to is needful that the Merchants that trade to the Indies thelndiesmust carry provision of household with them , because that in carry theirpro-every place where they come they must have a new house , the Broker that hath received his cargason , come - them . 
 375 
 mandeth his servants to carry the Merchants furniture for his house home , and load it on some cart , and carry it into the city , where the Brokers have diverse empty houses meet for the lodging of Merchants , furnished only with bedsteds , tables , chairs , and empty jars for water : then the Broker say to the Merchant , Go and repose your self , and take your rest in the city . The Broker tarrieth at the water side with the cargason , and causeth all his goods to be discharged out of the ship , and payeth the custom , and causeth it to be brought into the house where the merchant lies , the Merchant not knowing any thing thereof , neither custom , nor charges . These goods being brought to this pass into the house of the Merchant , the Broker demandeth of the Merchant if he have any desire to fell his goods or merchandise , at the prizes that such wares are worth at that present time ? And if he hath a desire to fell his goods presently , then at that instant the Broker selleth them away . After this the Broker say to the Merchant , you have so much of every sort of merchandise neat and clear of every charge , and so much ready money . And if the Merchant will employ his money in other commodities , then the Broker telleth him that such and such commodities will cost so much , put aboard without any manner of charges . The Merchant understanding the effect , makes his account ; and if he think to buy or fell at the princes currant , he gives order to make his merchandise away : and if he hath commodity for 20000 dukets , all shall bartered or sold away in fifteene days without any care or trouble : and when as the Merchant thinketh that he cannot fell his goods at the prize currant , he may tarry as long as he will , but they cannot be sold by any man but by that Broker that hath taken them on land and paid the custom : and perchance tarrying sometime for sale of their commodity , they make good profit , and sometime loss : but those merchandise that come not ordinarily every fifteene days , in tarrying for the sale of them , there is great profit . The barks 
 376 
 Steerage with * Stem Gallery Pilot’s or Maste Windlass Capstan 
 that lade in Cambaietta go for Diu to ade the ships that go from thence for the straights of Mecca and Ormus , and some go to Chaul and Goa : and these ships be very well appointed , or else are guarded by the Armada of the Portugals , for that there are many Corsaries or Pirates Great store of which go coursing alongst that coast , robbing and spoil - of^arre mg : and tor tear of these thieves there is no sat tfie coast sailing in those seas , but with ships very well appointed Cambaia . and armed , or else with the fleet of the Portugals , as is aforesaid . In fine , the kingdom of Cambaia is a place of great trade , and hath much doings and traffic with all men , although hitherto it hath be in the hands of tyrants , because that at 75 years of age the true king being at the assault of Diu , was there slain ; whose name Sultan Badu . At that time foure or five captains of the army divided the kingdom among themselves , and every one of them showed in his country what tyranny he could : but twelve years ago the great Mogul a More king of Agra and Delly , forty days journey within the land of Amadavar , became the governor of all the kingdom of Cambaia without any resistance , because he being of great power and force , devising which way to enter the land with his people , there was not any man that would make him any resistance , although they were tyrants and a beastly people , they were soon brought under obedience . During the time I dwelled in A marvellous Cambaietta I saw very marvellous things : there were and infinite number of artificers that made bracelets called m women-Mannii , or bracelets of elephants teeth , of diverse colours , for the women of the Gentiles , which have their arms full decked with them . And in this occupation there are spent every year many thousands of crowns : the reason whereof is this , that when there dieth any whatsoever of their kindred , then in sign and token of mourning and sorrow , they break all their bracelets from their arms , and presently they go and buy new again , because that they had rather be without their meat then without their bracelets . 
 377 
 HAving passed Diu , I came to the second city that the Portugals have , called Daman , situate in the territory of Cambaia , distant from Diu and hundred and [ II i . 218. J twenty miles : it is no town of merchandise , save Rice and corn , and hath many villages under it , where in time of peace the Portugals take their pleasure , but in time of war the enemies have the spoil of them ; in such wise that the Portugals have little benefit by them . Next unto Daman you shall have Basan , which is a filthy place in respect of Daman : in this place is Rice , Corn , and Timber to make ships and galleys . And a small distance beyond Basan is a little Hand called Tana and Tana , a place very populous with Portugals , Moors , Hand whereof and J Gentiles : these have nothing but Rice , there are tO > a manY makers of Armesine , and weavers of girdles of 4i . ’ ’ wool and bombast black and red like to Moocharies . 
 Of the cities of Chaul , and of the Palmer tree . 
 BEyond this Hand you shall find Chaul in the firm land ; and they are two cities , one of the Portugals , and the other of the Moors : that city which the Portugals have is situate lower then the other , and governeth the mouth of the harbour , and is very strongly walled : and as it were a mile and and half distant from this is the city of Moores , governed by their king Zamalluco . In the time of wars there cannot any great ships come to the city of the Moors , because the Portugals with their ordinance will sink them , for that they must perforce pass by the castles of the Portugals : both the cities are ports of the sea , and are great cities , and have unto them great traffic and trade of merchandise , of all sorts of spices , drug , silk , cloth of silk , Sandals , Marsine , Versine , Porcelane of China , Velvets and Scarlets that come from Portugall , and from Meca : with many other sorts of merchandise . There come every year from Cochin , and from Cananor tenne or fifteene great ships 378 
 laden with great Nuts cured , and with Sugar made of the self same Nuts called Giagra : the tree whereon these Nuts do grow is called the Palmer tree : and throughout all the Indies , and especially from this place to Goa there is great abundance of them , and it is like to the Date tree . In the whole world there is not a tree more profitable and of more goodness then this tree is , neither do men reap so much benefit of any other tree as they do of this , there is not any part of it but serves for some use , and none of it is worthy to be burned . With the timber of this tree they make ships without the mixture of any other tree , and with the leaves thereof they make sails , and with the fruit thereof , which be a kind of Nuts , they make wine , and of the wine they make Sugar and Placetto , which wine they gather in the spring of the year : out of the middle of the tree where continually there goes or runneth out white liquour like unto water , in that time of the year they put a vessel under every tree , and every evening and morning they take it away full , and then distilling it with fire it makes a very strong liquour : and then they put it into buts , with a quantity of Zibibbo , white or black and in short time it is made a perfect wine . After this they make of the Nuts great store of oil : of the tree they make great quantity of boards and quarters for buildings . Of the bark of this tree they make cables , ropes , and other furniture for ships , and , as they say , these ropes be better then they that are made of Hemp . They make of the bows , bedsteds , after the Indies fashion , and Scavasches for merchandise . The leaves they cut very small , and weave them , and so make sails of them , for all manner of shipping , or else very fine mats . And then the first rind of the Nut they stamp , and make thereof perfect Ockam to calk ships , gr^at and small : and of the hard bark thereof they make spoons and other vessels for meat , in such wise that there is no part thereof thrown away or cast to the fire . When these Mats be green they are full 
 379 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 Great ordinance made in pieces , and yet serviceable . 
 [ II i . 219. ] 
 The chief place the Portugals have in the Indies . 
 of and excellent sweet water to drink : and if a man be thirsty , with the liquour of one of the Mats he may satisfy himself : and as this Nut ripeneth , the liquour thereof turns all to kernel . There goes out of Chaul for Mallaca , for the Indies , for Macao , for Portugall , for the coasts of Melinde , for Ormus , as it were and infinite number and quantity of goods and merchandise that come out of the kingdom of Cambaia , as cloth of bombast white , painted , printed , great quantity of Indico , Opium , Cotton , Silk of every sort , great store of Boraso in Past , great store of Fetida , great store of iron , corn , and other merchandise . The More king Zamalluco is of great power , as one that at need may command , & hath in his camp , two hundred thousand men of war , and hath great store of artillery , some of them made in pieces , which for their greatness can not be carried to and from ; yet although they be made in pieces , they are so commodious that they work with them marvellous well , whose shot is of stone , and there hath be of that shot sent unto the king of Portugall for the rareness of the thing . The city where the king Zamalluco hath his being , is within the land of Chaul seven or eight days journey , which city is called Abneger . Threescore and tenne miles from Chaul , towards the Indies , is the port of Dabul , and haven of the king Zamalluco : from thence to Goa is and hundred and fifty miles . 
 Goa . 
 GOa is the principali city that the Portugals have in the Indies , wherein the Viceroy with his royal 
 Court is resident , and is in and Hand which may be in circuit five and twenty or thirty miles : and the city with the boroughs is reasonable big , and for a city of the Indies it is reasonable fair , but the Hand is far more fairer : for it is as it were full of goodly gardens , replenished with diverse trees and with the Palmer trees as is aforesaid . This city is of great traffic for all 380 
 sorts of merchandise which they trade withal in those parts : and the fleet which comes every year from Portugall , which are five or sixe great ships that come directly for Goa , arrive there ordinarily the sixth or tenth of September , and there they remain forty or fifty days , and from thence they go to Cochin , where they lade for Portugall , and often times they lade one ship at Goa and the other at Cochin for Portugall . Cochin is distant from Goa three hundred miles . The city of Goa is situate in the kingdom of Dialcan a king of the Moors , whose chief city is up in the country eight days journey , and is called Bisapor : this king is of great power , for when I was in Goa in the year of our Lord 1570 , this king came to give assault to Goa , being encamped near unto it by a river side with and army of two hundred thousand men of war , and he lay at this siege foureteene months : in which time there was peace concluded , and as report went among his people , there was great calamity and mortality which bred among them in the time of Winter , and also killed very many elephants . Then in the year of our Lord 1567 , I went from Goa to Bezeneger the chief city of the kingdom of Narsinga eight days journey from Goa , within the land , in the company of two other merchant's which carried with them three hundred Arabian horses to that king : because the horses of that country are of a small stature , and they pay well for the Arabian horses : and it is requisite that the merchant's fell them well , for that they stand them in great charges to bring them out of Persia to Ormus , and from Ormus to Goa , where the ship that brings twenty horses and upward payeth no custom , neither ship nor goods whatsoever ; whereas if they bring no horses , they pay 8 per cento of all their goods : and at the going out of Goa the horses pay custom , two and forty pagodies for every horse , which pagody may be of sterling money sixe shillings eight pence , they be pieces of gold of that valve . So that the Arabian horses are 
 A most unkind y wicked treason against their prince : this they have for giving credit to strangers , rather then to their own native people . 
 of great valve in those countries' , as 300 , 400 , 500 ducats a horse , and to 1000 ducats a horse . 
 Bezeneger . 
 THe city of Bezeneger was sacked in the year 1565 , by foure kings of the Moors , which were of great power and might : the names of these foure kings were these following , the first was called Dialcan , the second Zamaluc , the third Cotamaluc , and the fourth Viridy : and yet these foure kings were not able to overcome this city and the king of Bezeneger , but by treason . This king of Bezeneger was a Gentile , and had , among all other of his captains , two which were notable , and they were Moors : and these two captains had either of them in charge threescore and ten or fourescore thousand men . These two captains being of one religion with the foure kings which were Moors , wrought means with them to betray their own king into their hands . The king of Bezeneger esteemed not the force of the foure kings his enemies , but went out of his city to wage battle with them in the fields ; and when the armies were joined , the battle lasted but a while not the space of foure hours , because the two traitorous captains , in the chiefest of the fight , with their companies turned their faces against their king , and made such disorder in his army , that as astonished they set themselves to flight . Thirty years was this kingdom governed by three brothers which were tyrants , the which keeping the rightful king in prison , it was their use every year once to show him to the people , and they at their pleasures ruled as they listed . These brothers were three captains belonging to the father of the king they kept in prison , which when he died , left his son very young , and then they took the government to themselves . The chiefest of these three was called Ramaragio , and sat in the royal throne , and was called the king : the second was called Temiragio , and he took the government on him : the third was called Bengatre , and he was 382 
 captain general of the army . These three brothers were in this battle , in the which the chiefest and the last were never herd of quick nor dead . Only Temiragio fled in the battle , having lost one of his eyes : when the news came to the city of the overthrow in the battle , the wives and children of these three tyrants , with their lawful king ( kept prisoner ) fled away , spoiled as they were , & the foure kings of the Moors entered The sacking of the city Bezeneger with great triumph , & there they the ntJ ' remained sixe months , searching under houses & in all places for money & other things that were hidden , and then they departed to their own kingdoms , [ II i . 220. J because they were not able to maintain such a kingdom as that was , so far distant from their own country . 
 When the kings were departed from Bezeneger , this Temiragio returned to the city , and then began for to repopulate it , and sent word to Goa to the Merchant's , if they had any horses , to bring them to him , and he would pay well for them , and for this cause the aforesaid two Merchant's that I went in company withal , carried those horses that they had to Bezeneger . Also this Tyrant made and order or law , that if any -4 » excellent Merchant had any of the horses that were taken in the t0 
 aforesaid battle or wars , although they were of his mtra ? men ' own mark , that he would give as much for them as they would : and beside he gave generail safe conduct to all that should bring them . When by this means he saw that there were great store of horses brought thither unto him , he gave the Merchant's fair words , until such time as he saw they could bring no more . Then he licenced the Merchant's to depart , without giving them any thing for their horses , which when the poor men saw , they were desperate , and as it were mad with sorrow and grief . 
 I rested in Bezeneger seven months , although in one month I might have discharged all my business , for it was necessary to rest there until the ways were 383 
 A description of the burning place . 
 Feasting and dancing when they should mourn . 
 clear of thieves , which at that time ranged up and down . And in the time I rested there , I saw manystrange and beastly deeds done by the Gentiles . First , when there is any Noble man or woman dead , they burn their bodies : and if a married man die , his wife must burn herself alive , for the love of her husband , and with the body of her husband : so that when any man dieth , his wife will take a months leave , two or three , or as she will , to burn her self in , and that day being come , wherein she ought to be burned , that morning she goes out of her house very early , either on horseback or on and eliphant , or else is born by eight men on a small stage : in one of these order she goes , being appareled like to a Bride , carried round about the City , with her hair down about her shoulders , garnished with jewels and flowers , according to the estate of the party , and they go with as great joy as Brides do in Venice to their nuptials : she carrieth in her left hand a looking glass , and in her right hand and arrow , and sings thorough the City as she passes , and say , that she goes to sleep with her deer spouse and husband . She is accompanied with her kindred and friends until it be one or two of the clock in the afternoon , then they go out of the City , and going along the rivers side called Nigondin , which runneth under the walls of the City , until they come unto a. place where they use to make this burning of women , being widow's , there is prepared in this place a great square cave , with a little pinnacle hard by it , foure or five steps up : the foresaid cave is full of dried wood . The woman being come thither , accompanied with a great number of people which come to see the thing , then they make ready a great banquet , and she that shall be burned eateth with as great joy and gladness , as though it were her wedding day : and the feast being ended , then they go to dancing and singing a certain time , according as she will . After this , the woman of her own accord , comma ndeth them to make the fire 
 384 
 in the square cave where the dry wood is , and when it is kindled , they come and certify her thereof , then presently she leaveth the feast , and takes the nearest kinsman of her husband by the hand , and they both go together to the bank of the foresaid river , where she putteth off all her jewels and all her clothes , and gives them to her parents or kinsfolk , and covering herself with a cloth , because she will not be seen of the people being naked , she throweth herself into the river , saying : Oh wretches , wash away your sins . Coming out of the water , she rolleth herself into a yellow cloth of foureteene braces long : and again she takes her husbands kinsman by the hand , and they go both together up to the pinnacle of the square cave wherein the fire is made . When she is on the pinnacle , she talketh and reasoneth with the people , recommending unto them her children and kindred . Before the pinnacle they use to set a mat , because they shall not see the fierceness of the fire , yet there are many that will have them plucked away , showing therein and heart not fearful , and that they are not afraid of that sighed . When this silly woman hath reasoned with the people a good while to her content , there is another woman that takes a pot with oil , and sprinkleth it over her head , and with the same she anointeth all her body , and afterwards throweth the pot into the furnace , and both the woman and the pot go together into the fire , and presently the people that are round about the furnace throw after her into the cave great pieces of wood , so by this means , with the fire and with the blows that she hath with the wood thrown after her , she is quickly dead , and after this there grows such sorrow and such lamentation among the people , that all their mirth is turned into howling and weeping , in such wise , that a man could scarce bear the hearing of it . I have seen many burned in this manner , because my house was near to the gate where they go out to the place of burning : and when there dieth any 
 v 385 2 B 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 Mourning when they should rejoice . 
 The cause why the women do so burn themselves . 
 Penegonde . 
 great man , his wife with all his slaves with whom he hath had carnali copulation , burn themselves together with him . Also in this kingdom I have seen among the base sort of people this use and order , that the man being dead , he is carried to the place where they will make his sepulchre , and setting him as it were upright , then comes his wife before him on her knees , casting her arms about his neck , with embracing and clasping him , until such time as the Masons have made a wall round about them , and when the wall is as high as their necks , there comes a man behind the woman and strangleth her : then when she is dead , the workmen finish the wall over their heads , and so they lie buried both together . Beside these , there are and infinite number of beastly qualities among them , of which I have no desire to write . I was desirous to know the cause why these women would so wilfully burn themselves against nature and law , and it was told me that this law was of and ancient time , to make provision against the slaughters which women made of their husbands . For in those days before this law was made , the women for every little displeasure that their husbands had done unto them , would presently poison their husbands , and take other men , and now by reason of this law they are more faithful unto their husbands , and count their lives as deer as their own , because that after his death her own follows presently . 
 In the year of our Lord God 1567 , for the ill success that the people of Bezeneger had , in that their City was sacked by the foure kings , the king with his Court went to dwell in a castle eight days journey up in the land from Bezeneger , called Penegonde . Also sixe days journey from Bezeneger , is the place where they get Diamonds : I was not there , but it was told me that it is a great place , compassed with a wall , and that they fell the earth within the wall , for so much a squadron , and the limits are set how deep or how low they shall dig . Those Diamonds that are of a certain 386 
 size and bigger then that size , are all for the king , it is many years ago , since they god any there , for the troubles that have been in that kingdom . The first cause of this trouble was , because the son of this Temeragio had put to death the lawful king which he had in prison , for which cause the Barons and Noblemen in that kingdom would not acknowledge him to be their King , and by this means there are many kings , and great division in that kingdom , and the city of Bezeneger is not altogether destroyed , yet the houses stand still , but empty , and there is dwelling in them nothing , as is reported , but Tigers and other wild beasts . The circuit of this city is foure & twentie miles about , and within the walls are certain mountains . The houses stand walled with earth , and plain , all saving the three palaces of the three tyrant brothers , and the Pagodas which are idol houses : these are made with lime and fine marble . I have seen many kings Courts , and yet have I seen none in greatness like to this of Bezeneger , I say , for the order of his palace , for it hath nine gates or ports . First when you go into the place where the king did lodge , there are five great ports or gates : these are kept with Captains and soldiers : then within these there are foure lesser gates : which are kept with Porters . Without the first gate there is a little porch , where there is a Captain with five and twentie soldiers , that keepeth watch and ward night and day : and within that another with the like guard , wherethorow they come to a very fair Court , and at the end of that Court there is another porch as the first , with the like guard , and within that another Court . And in this wise are the first five gates guarded and kept with those Captains : and then the lesser gates within are kept with a guard of Porters : which gates stand open the greatest part of the night , because the custom of the Gentiles is to do their business , and make their feasts in the night , rather then by day . The city is very safe from thieves , for the Portugall merchant's sleep in the streets , or under 387 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 porches , for the great heat which is there , and yet they never had any harm in the night . At the end of two months , I determined to go for Goa in the company of two other Portugall Merchants , which were making ready to depart , with two palanchines or little litters , which are very commodious for the way , with eight Falchines which are men hired to carry the palanchines , eight for a palanchine , foure at a time : they carry them Men ride m as we use to carry barrows . And I bought me two bulhcks , and buHocks , one of them to ride on , and the other to carry hem on Vie my victua^s and provision , for in that country they ride way . on bullocks with panneis , as we term them , girts and 
 bridles , and they have a very good commodious pace . From Bezeneger to Goa in Summer it is eight days journey , but we went in the midst of Winter , in the month of July , and were fifteene days coming to Ancola on the sea coast , so in eight days I had lost my two bullocks : for he that carried my victuals , was weak and could not go , the other when I came unto a river where was a little bridge to pass over , I put my bullock to swimming , and in the midst of the river there was a little Hand , unto the which my bullock went , and finding pasture , there he remained still , and in no wise we could come to him : and so perforce , I was forced to leave him , and at that time there was much rain , and I was [ II i . 222. ] forced to go seven days a foot with great pains : and by great chance I met with Falchines by the way , whom I hired to carry my clothes and victuals . We had great trouble in our journey , for that every day we were taken prisoners , by reason of the great dissension in that kingdom : and every morning at our departure we must pay reseat foure or five pagies a man . And another trouble we had as bad as this , that when as we came into a new governors country , as every day we did , although they were all tributary to the king of Bezeneger , yet every one of them stamped a several coin of Copper , so that the money that we took this day would not serve the next : at length , by the help of God , we came 388 
 safe to Ancola , which is a country of the queen of Gargopam , tributary to the king of Bezeneger . The Themarchan-marchandise that went every year from Goa to Bezeneger were Arabian Horses , Velvets , Damasks , and Sattens , Bezeneger Armesine of Portugall , and pieces of China , Saffron , and every year . Scarlets : and from Bezeneger they had in Turky for their commodities , jewels , and Pagodies which be ducats of gold : the apparel that they use in Bezeneger is The Velvet , Satin , Damask , Scarlet , or white Bombast cloth , according to the estate of the person with long hats on their heads , called Colae , made of Velvet , Satin , Damask , or Scarlet , girding themselves in stead of girdles with some fine white bombast cloth : they have breeches after the order of the Turks : they wear on their feet plain high things called of them Aspergh , and at their ears they have hanging great plenty of gold . 
 Returning to my voyage , when we were together in Ancola , one of my companions that had nothing to loose , took a guide , and went to Goa , whither they go in foure days , the other Portugall . not being disposed to go , tarried in Ancola for that Winter . The Winter in Their Wint^r those parts of the Indies begins the fifteenth of May , u om Summer-and lasteth unto the end of October : and as we were in Ancola , there came another Merchant of horses in a palanchine , and two Portugall soldiers which came from Zeilan , and two carriers of letters , which were Christians born in the Indies ; all these consorted to go to Goa together , and I determined to go with them , and caused a pallanchine to be made for me very poorly of Canes ; and in one of them Canes I hid privily all the jewels I had , and according to the order , I took eight Falchines to carry me : and one day about eleven of the clock we set forward on our journey , and about two of the clock in the afternoon , as we passed a mountain which divides the territory of Ancola and Dialcan , I being a little behind my company , was assaulted by eight thieves , foure of them had swords and targets , and the other foure had bows and arrows . 
 389 
 Foure small forts of the Portugals . 
 When the Falchines that carried me understood the noise of the assault , they let the pallanchine and me fallen to the ground , and ran away and left me alone , with my clothes wrapped about me : presently the thieves were on my neck and rifling me , they stripped me stark naked , and I feigned my self sick , because I would not leave the pallanchine , and I had made me a little bed of my clothes ; the thieves sought it very narrowly and subtly , and found two purses that I had , well bound up together , wherein I had put my Copper money which I had changed for foure pagodies in Ancola . The thieves thinking it had been so many ducats of gold , searched no further : then they threw all my clothes in a bush , and hied them away , and as God would have it , at their departure there fell from them and handkerchief , and when I saw it , I rose from my pallanchine or couch , and took it up , and wrapped it together within my pallanchine . Then these my Falchines were of so good condition , that they returned to seek me , whereas I thought I should not have found so much goodness in them : because they were paid their money aforehand , as is the use , I had thought to have seen them no more . Before their coming I was determined to pluck the Cane wherein my jewels were hidden , out of my couch , and to have mad6 me a walking stafFe to carry in my hand to Goa , thinking that I should have gone thither on foot , but by the faithfulness of my Falchines , I was rid of that trouble , and so in foure days they carried me to Goa , in which time I made hard fare , for the thieves left me neither money , gold , nor silver , and that which I did eat was given me of my men for Gods sake : and after at my coming to Goa I paid them for every thing royally that I had of them . From Goa I departed for Cochin , which is a voyage of three hundred miles , and between these two cities are many holds of the Portugals , as Onor , Mangalor , Barzelor , and Cananor . The Hold or Fort that you shall have from Goa to Cochin that belongeth to the Portugals , is called Onor , which 
 390 
 is in the kingdom of the queen of Battacella , which is tributary to the king of Bezeneger : there is no trade there , but only a charge with the Captain and company he keepeth there . And passing this place , you shall come to another small castle of the Portugals called Mangalor , and there is very small trade but only for a little Rice : and from thence you go to a little fort called Barzelor , there they have good store of Rice which is carried to Goa : and from thence you shall go to a city called Cananor , which is a harquebus shot distant from the chiefest city that you king of Cananor hath in his kingdom being a king of the Gentiles : and he & his are very naughty & malicious people , always having delight to be in wars with the Portugales , and [ II i . 223. ] when they are in peace , it is for their interest to let their merchandise pass : there goes out of this kingdom of Cananor , all the Cardamomum , great store of Pepper , Ginger , Honey , ships laden with great Nuts , great quantity of Archa , which is a fruit of the bigness of Nutmegs , which fruit they eat in all those parts of the Indies and beyond the Indies , with the leaf of and Herb which they call Bettell , the which is like unto our Ivy leaf , BetteUisa but a little lesser and thinner : they eat it made in plasters with the lime made of Oistershels , and thorough country . the Indies they spend great quantity of money in this composition , and it is used daily , which thing I would not have believed , if I had not seen it . The customers get great profit by these Herbs , for that they have custom for them . When this people eat and chew this in their mouths , it makes their spittle to be read like unto blood , and they say , that it makes a man to have a very good stomach and a sweet breath , but sure in my judgement they eat it rather to fulfil their filthy lusts , and of a knavery , for this Herb is moist and hight , & makes a very strong expulsion . From Cananor you go to Cranganor , which is another small Fort of the Portugales in the land of the king of Cranganor , which is another king of the Gentiles , and a country of small 
 391 
 Within Cochin is the kingdom of Pepper . 
 The Pepper that the Portugals bring , is not so good as that which goes por Mecca , which is brought hither by you straights . 
 importance , and of and hundreth and twentie miles , full of thieves , being under the king of Calicut , a king also of the Gentiles , and a great enemy to the Portugales , which when he is always in wars , he and his country is the nest and resting for stranger thieves , and those be called Moors of Carposa , because they wear on their heads long read hats , and these thieves part the spoils that they take on the Sea with the king of Calicut , for he gives leave unto all that will go a roving , liberally to go , in such wise , that all along that coast there is such a number of thieves , that there is no sailing in those Seas but with great ships and very well armed , or else they must go in company with the army of the Portugals . From Cranganor to Cochin is 15 miles . 
 Cochin . 
 COchin is , next unto Goa , the chiefest place that the Portugales have in the Indies , and there is great trade of Spices , drug , and all other sorts of merchandise for the kingdom of Portugale , and there within the land is the kingdom of Pepper , which Pepper the Portugales lade in their ships by bulk , and not in sacks : the Pepper that goes for Portugale is not so good as that which goes for Mecca , because that in times passed the officers of the king of Portugale made a contract with the king of Cochin , in the name of the king of Portugale , for the prizes of Pepper , and by reason of that agreement between them at that time made , the price can neither rise nor fallen , which is a very low and base price , and for this cause the villains bring it to the Portugales , green and full of filth . The Moors of Mecca that give a better price , have it clean and ' dry , and better conditioned . All the Spices and drugs that are brought to Mecca , are stolen from thence as Contrabanda . Cochin is two cities , one of the Portugales , and another of the king of Cochin : that of the Portugales is situate nearest unto the Sea , and that of the king of 
 392 
 Cochin is a mile and a half up higher in the land , but they are both set on the banks of one river which is very great and of a good depth of water which river comes out of the mountains of the king of the Pepper , which is a king of the Gentiles , in whose kingdom are many Christians of saint Thomas order : the king of Cochin is also a king of the Gentiles and a great faithful friend to the king of Portugale , and to those Portugales which are married , and are Citizens in the City Cochin of the Portugales . And by this name of Portugales throughout all the Indies , they call all the Christians that come out of the West , whither they be Italians , Frenchmen , or Almains , and all they that marry in Cochin do get and office according to the trade he is of : this they have by the great privileges which the Citizens have of that city , because there are two principal commodities that they deal withal in that Great privi-place , which are these . The great store of Silk that comes from China , and the great store of Sugar have which comes from Bengala : the married Citizens pay not any custom for these two commodities : for all other commodities they pay 4. per cento custom to the king of Cochin , rating their goods at their own pleasure . Those which are not married and strangers , pay in Cochin to the king of Portugale eight per cento of all manner of merchandise . I was in Cochin when the Viceroy of the king of Portugale wrought what he could to break the privilege of the Citizens , and to make them to pay custom as other did : at which time the Citizens were glad to weigh their Pepper in the night that they jaded the ships withal that went to Portugale and stole the custom in the night . The king of Cochin having understanding of this , would not suffer any more Pepper to be weighed . Then presently after this , the merchants were licensed to do as they did before , and there was no more speech of this matter , nor any wrong done . This king of Cochin [ II i . 224. . ] is of a small power in respect of the other kings of 
 393 
 A very strange thing hardly to be believed . 
 the Indies , for he can make but seventie thousand men of arms in his camp : he hath a great number of Gentlemen which he calls Amochi , and some are called Nairi : these two sorts of men esteem not their lives any thing , so that it may be for the honour of their king , they will thrust themselves forward in every danger , although they know they shall die . These men go naked from the girdle upwards , with a cloth rolled about their thighs , going barefooted , and having their hair very long and rolled up together on the top of their heads , and always they carry their Bucklers or Targets with them and their swords naked , these Nairi have their wives common among themselves , and when any of them go into the house of any of these women , he leaveth his sword and target at the door , and the time that he is there , there dare not any be so hardy as to come into that house . The kings children ’ shall not inherit the kingdom after their father , because they hold this opinion , that perchance they were not begotten of the king their father , but of some other man , therefore they accept for their king , one of the sons of the kings sisters , or of some other woman of the blood royal , for that they be sure they are of the blood royal . 
 The Nairi and their wives use for a bravery to make great holes in their ears , and so big and wide , that it is incredible , holding this opinion , that the greater the holes be , the more noble they esteem themselves . I had leave of one of them to measure the circumference of one of them with a thread , and within that circumference I put my arm up to the shoulder , clothed as it was , so that in effect they are monstrous great . Thus they do make them when they be little , for then they open the ear , & hang a piece of gold or led thereat , & within the opening , in the hold they put a certain leaf that they have for that purpose , which makes the hold so great . They lade ships in Cochin for Portugale and for Ormus , but they that go for 394 
 1563-81-Ormus carry no Pepper but by Contrabanda , as for Sinamome they easily get leave to carry that away , for all other Spices and drugs they may liberally carry them to Ormus or Cambaia , and so all other merchandise which come from other places , but out of the kingdom of Cochin properly they carry away with them into Portugale great abundance of Pepper , great quantity of Ginger dried and conserved , wild Sinamom , good quantity of Arecca , great store of Cordage of Cairo , made of the bark of the tree of the great Nut , and better then that of Hemp , of which they carry great store into Portugale . 
 The ships every year depart from Cochin to go Note the de-for Portugall , on the fift day of December , or the fift day of January . Now to follow my voyage for the Indies : from Cochin I went to Coulam , distant from Cochin seventie and two miles , which Coulam is a small Fort of the king of Portugales , situate in the kingdom of Coulam , which is a king of the Gentiles , and of small trade : at that place they lade only half a ship of Pepper , and then she goes to Cochin to take in the rest , and from thence to Cao Comori is seventie and two miles , and there endeth the coast of the Indies : and alongst this coast , near to the water side , and also to Cao Comori , down to the low land of Chialo , which is about two hundred miles , the people there are as it were all turned to the Christian faith : there are also Churches of the Friars of S. Pauls order , which Friars do very much good in those places in turning the people , and in converting them , and take great pains in instructing them in the law of Christ . 
 The fishing for Pearls . 
 THe Sea that lies between the coast which de - The order how scendeth from Cao Comori , to the low land of t^yfithfir Chilao , and the Hand Zeilan , they call the fishing of fearles-Pearles , which fishing they make every year , beginning in March or Aprill , and it lasteth fiftie days , but they 
 395 
 do not fish every year in one place , but one year in one place , and another year in another place of the same sea . When the time of this fishing draws near , then they send very good Diverse , that go to discover where the greatest heaps of Oysters be under water , and right against that place where greatest store of Oysters be , there they make or plant a village with houses and a Bazaro , all of stone , which stands as long as the fishing time lasteth , and it is furnished with all things necessary , and now and then it is near unto places that are inhabited , and other times far off , according to the place where they fish . The Fishermen are all Christians of the country , and who so will may go to fishing , paying a certain duty to the king of Portugall , and to the Churches of the Friars of Saint Paule , which are in that coast . All the while that they are fishing , there are three or foure Fustes armed to defend the Fishermen from Rovers . It was my chance to be there one time in my passage , and I saw the [ II i . 225. ] order that they used in fishing , which is this . There are three or foure Barks that make consort together , which are like to our little Pilot boats , and a little less , there go seven or eight men in a boat : and I have seen in a morning a great number of them go out , and anchor in fifteene or eighteene fathom of water , which is the Ordinary depth of all that coast . When they are at anchor , they cast a rope into the Sea , and at the end of the rope , they make fast a great stone , and then there is ready a man that hath his nose and his ears well stopped , and anointed with oil , and a basket about his neck , or under his left arm , then he goes down by the rope to the bottom of the Sea , and as fast as he can he fills the basket , and When it is full , he shakes the rope , and his fellows that are in the Bark hale him up with the basket : and in such wise they go one by one until they have laden their bark with oysters , and at evening they come to the village , and then every company makes their mountain or 396 
 heap of oysters one distant from another , in such wise that you shall see a great long row of mountains or heaps of oysters , and they are not touched until such time as the fishing be ended , and at the end of the fishing every company sitteth round about their mountain or heap of oysters , and fallen to opening of them , which they may easily do because they be dead , dry and brittle : and if every oyster had pearls in them , it would be a very good purchase , but there are very many that have no pearls in them : when the fishing is ended , then they see whither it be a good gathering or a bad : there are certain expert in the pearls paries whom they call Chitini , which set and make the price arePiseil mor pearls according to their carracts , beauty , and good - carac°s which ness , making foure sorts of them . The first sort they weigh , be the round pearls , and they be called Aia of Portu - every car act gale , because the Portugales do buy them . The second is atnes ’ sort which are not round , are called Aia of Bengala . that prize them The third sort which are not so good as the second , have and in-they call Aia of Canara , that is to say , the kingdom strument of of Bezeneger . The fourth and last sort , which are the 
 least and worst sort , are called Aia of Cambaia . Thus which be made the price being set , there are merchant's of every country by degrees for which are ready with their money in their hands , to sort you so that in a few days all is bought up at the prizes set according to the goodness and caracts of the pearls . 
 In this Sea of the fishing of pearls is and Hand called Manar , which is inhabited by Christians of the country which first were Gentiles , and have a small hold of the Portugales being situate over against Zeilan : and between these two Hands there is a channel , but not 
 very big , and hath but a small depth therein : by reason whereof there cannot any great ship pass that way , but small ships , and with the increase of the water which is at the change or the full of the Moon , and yet for all this they must unladen them and put their goods into small vessels to lighten them before they can pass that 
 397 
 way for fear of Sholdes that lie in the channel , and after lade them into their ships to go for the Indies , and this do all small ships that pass that way , but those ships that go for the Indies Eastwardes , pass by the coast of Coromandel , on the other side by the land of Chilao which is between the firm land and the Hand Manor : and going from the Indies to the coast of Coromandel , they lose some ships , but they be empty , because that the ships that pass that way discharge their goods at and Hand called Peripatane , and there land their goods into small flat bottomed boats which draw little water , and are called Taken , and can run over every Should without either danger or loss of any thing , for that they tarry in Peripatane until such time as it be fair weather . Before they depart to pass the Sholdes , the small ships and flat bottomed boats go together in company , and when they have sailed sixe and thirtie miles , they arrive at the place where the Sholdes are , and at that place the winds blow so forcibly , that they are forced to go thorough , not having any other refuge to save themselves . The flat bottomed boats go safe thorough , where as the small ships if they miss the aforesaid channel , stick fast on the Sholdes , and by this means many are lost : and coming back from the Indies , they go not that way , but pass by the channel of Manar as is abovesaid , whose channel is Oazy , and if the ships stick fast , it is great chance if there be any danger at all . The reason why this channel is not more sure to go thither , is , because the winds that reign or blow between Zeilan and Manar , make the channel so shallow with water , that almost there is not any passage . From Cao Comori to the Hand of Zeilan is 120. miles overthwart . 
 Zeilan . 
 ZEilan is and Hand , in my judgement , a great deal bigger then Cyprus : on that side towards the Indies lying Westward is the city called Columba , which is a 398 
 1563-81 . hold of the Portugales , but without walls or enemies . 
 It hath towards the Sea a free port , the lawful king of [ II i . 226. ] that Hand is in Columbo , and is turned Christian and maintained by the king of Portugall , being deprived of his kingdom . The king of the Gentiles , to whom this kingdom did belong , was called Madoni , which had two sons , the first nam Barbinas the prince ; and the second Ragine . This king by the policy of his younger son , was deprived of his kingdom , who because he had enticed and done that which pleased the army and soldiers , in despite of his father and brother being prince , usurped the kingdom , and became a great warrior . First , this Hand had three kings ; the king of Cotta with his conquered prisoners : the king of Candia , which is a part of that Hand , and is so called by the name of Candia , which had a reasonable power , and was a great friend to the Portugals , which said that he lived secretly a Christian ; the third was the king of Gianifampatan . In thirteene years that this Ragine governed this Hand , he became a great tyrant . 
 In this Hand there grows fine Sinamom , great store of Pepper , great store of Nuts and Arochoe : there they make great store of Cairo to make Cordage : it Cair0 is a brings forth great store of Crystal Cats eyes , or stuU^t , iatt^ Ochi de Gati , and they say that they find there some fa Rubies , but I have sold Rubies well there that I brought which is the with me from Pegu. I was desirous to see how they a gather the Sinamom , or take it from the tree that it tree‘ grows on , and so much the rather , because the time that I was there , was the season which they gather it in , which was in the month of Aprill , at which time the Portugals were in arms , and in the field , with the king of the country ; yet I to satisfy my desire , although in great danger , took a guide with me and went into a wood three miles from the City , in which wood was great store of Sinamome trees growing together among other wild trees ; and this Sinamome tree is a small tree , and not very high , and hath leaves like to our Bay tree . 
 399 
 The cutting y gathering of Sinamom . 
 A rare thing . 
 In the month of March or Aprill , when the sap goes up to the top of the tree , then they take the Sinamom from that tree in this wise . They cut the bark of the tree round about in length from knot to knot , or from joint to joint , above and below , and then easily with their hands they take it away , laying it in the Sun to dry , and in this wise it is gathered , and yet for all this the tree dieth not , but against the next year it will have a new bark , and that which is gathered every year is the best Sinamome : for that which grows two or three years is great , and not so good as the other is ; and in these woods grows much Pepper . 
 Negapatan . 
 FRom the Hand of Zeilan men use to go with small ships to Negapatan , within the firm land , and seventie two miles ofF is a very great City , and very populous of Portugals and Christians of the country , and part Gentiles : it is a country of small trade , neither have they any trade there , save a good quantity of Rice , and cloth of Bombast which they carry into diverse parts : it was a very plentiful country of victuals , but now it hath a great deal less ; and that abundance of victuals caused many Portugales to go thither and built houses , and dwell there with small charge . 
 This City belongeth to a noble man of the kingdom of Bezeneger being a Gentile , nevertheless the Portugales and other Christians are well entreated there , and have their Churches there with a monastery of Saint Francis order , with great devotion and very well accommodated , with houses round about : yet for all this , they are among tyrants , which always at their pleasure may do them some harm , as it happened in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred , sixtie and five : for I remember very well , how that the Nayer , that is to say , the lord of the city , sent to the citizens to demand of them certain Arabian horses , and they having denied them unto him , and gainsaid his de - 
 400 
 1563-81 . maund , it came to pass that this lord had a desire to see the Sea , which when the poor citizens understood , they doubted some evil , to hear a thing which was not wont to be , they thought that this ' man would come AfioRshfeare to sack the City , and presently they embarked them - ofp°rtugal5-selves the best they could with their movables , merchandise , jewels , money , and all that they had , and caused the ships to put from the shore . When this was done , as their evil chance would have it , the next night following , there came such a great storm that it put all the ships on land perforce , and brake them to pieces , and all the goods that came on land and were saved , were taken from them by the soldiers and army of this lord which came down with him to see the Sea , and were attendant at the Sea side , not thinking that any such thing would have happened . 
 Saint Thomas or San Tome . [ II » > • 227 ] 
 FRom Negapatan following my voyage towards the East and hundred and fiftie miles , I found the house of blessed Saint Thomas , which is a Church of great s - 7^®^ Ms devotion , and greatly regarded of the Gentiles for the great miracles they have herd to have be done by that blessed Apostle : near unto this Church the Portugals have built them a Ci tie in the country subject to the king of Bezeneger , which city although it be not very great , yet in my judgement it is the fairest in all that part of the Indies : and it hath very fair houses and fair gardens in vacant places very well accommodated : it hath streets large and straight , with many Churches of great devotion , their houses be set close one unto another , with little doors , every house hath his defence , so that by that means it is of force sufficient to defend you Portugals against the people of that country . The Portugals there have no other possession but their gardens and houses that are within the city : the customs belong to the king of Bezeneger , which are very small and easy , for that it is a country of great riches 
 v 401 2 c 
 A fainted kind of cloth died of diverse colours which those feofle delight much in , and esteem them of great frice . 
 and great trade : there come every year two or three great ships very rich , beside many other small ships : one of the two great ships goes for Pegu , and the other for Malacca , laden with fine Bombast cloth of every sort , painted , which is a rare thing , because those kind of clothes show as they were gilded with diverse colours , and the more they be washed , the livelier the colours will show . Also there is other cloth of Bombast which is woven with diverse colours , and is of great valve : also they make in Sant Tome great store of read Yarn , which they die with a root called Saia , and this colour will never waste , but the more it is washed , the more redder it will show : they lade this yarn the greatest part of it for Pegu , because that there they work and weave it to make cloth according to their own fashion , and with lesser charges . It is a marvelous thing to them which have not seen the lading and unlading of men and merchandise in S. Tome as they do : it is a place so dangerous , that a man cannot be served with small barks , neither can they do their business with the boats of the ships , because they would be beaten in a thousand pieces , but they make certain barks ( of purpose ) high , which they call Masadie , they be made of little boards ; one board being sowed to another with small cords , and in this order are they made . And-when they are thus made , and the owners will embark any thing in them , either men or goods , they lade them on land , and when they are laden , the Barkmen thrust the boat with her lading into the stream , and with great speed they make haste all that they are able to row out against the huge waves of the sea that are on that shore , until that they carry them to the ships : and in like manner they lade these Masadies at the ships with merchandise and men . When they come near the shore , the Barkmen leap out of the Bark into the Sea to keep the Bark right that she cast not thwart the shore , and being kept right , the Suff of the Sea sets her lading dry on land without any hurt or danger , and 
 402 
 i5$3-81-sometimes there are some of them that are overthrown , but there can be no great loss , because they lade but a Title at a time . All the merchandise they lade outward , they emball it well with Ox hides , so that if it take wet , it can have no great harm . 
 In my voyage , returning in the year of our Lord God one thousand , five hundred , sixtie and sixe , I went from Goa unto Malacca , in a ship or Gallion of the king of Portugal , which went unto Banda for to lade In the Hand oj Nutmegs & Maces : from Goa to Malacca are one thousand eight hundred miles , we passed without the jor ^g t£y Hand Zeilan , and went through the channel of Nicubar , grow . or else through the channel of Sombrero , which is by the middle of the Hand of Sumatra , called in old time Taprobana : and from Nicubar to Pegu is as it were a row or chain of and infinite number of Hands , of which many are inhabited with wild people , and they call those 
 Hands the Hands of Andemaon , and they call their people I ” the Hands savage or wild , because they eat one another : also these Hands have war one with another , for they have a „ other . small Barks , and with them they take one another , and so eat one another : and if by evil chance any ship be lost on those Hands , as many have be , there is not one man of those ships lost there that escapeth uneaten or unslain . These people have not any acquaintance with any other people , neither have they trade with any , but live only of such fruits as those Hands yield : and if any ship come near unto that place or coast as they pass that way , as in my voyage it happened as I came from Malacca through the channel of Sombrero , there came two of their Barks near unto our ship laden with fruit , as with Mouces which we call Adams apples , with fresh Nuts , and with a fruit called Inani , which fruit is like to our Turnips , but is very sweet and good to eat : they would not come into the ship for any thing that we could do : neither would they take any money for their fruit , but they would truck for old shirts or pieces of old linen breeches , these 
 403 
 rags they let down with a rope into their Bark unto [ IL i . 228. ] them , and look what they thought those things to be ’ worth , so much fruit they would make fast to the 
 rope and let us hale it in : and it was told me that at sometime a man shall have for and old shirt a good piece of Amber . 
 The commodities that grow in the kingdom of As si . 
 The great trade that is at Malacca . 
 Sumatra . 
 THis Hand of Sumatra is a great Hand and divided and governed by many kings , and divided into many channels , where through there is passage : upon the headland towards the West is the kingdom of Assi governed by a More king : this king is of great force and strength , as he that beside his great kingdom , hath many Foists and Galleys . In his kingdom grows great store of Pepper , Ginger , Benjamin : he is and utter enemy to the Portugals , and hath diverse times be at Malacca to fight against it , and hath done great harm to the boroughs thereof , but the city always withstood him valiantly , and with their ordinance did great spoil to his camp . At length I came to the city of Malacca . 
 The City Malacca . 
 MAlacca is a City of marvellous great trade of all kind of merchandise , which come from diverse parts , because that all the ships that sail in these seas , both great and small , are bound to touch at Malacca to pay their custom there , although they unladen nothing at all , as we do at Elsinor : and if by night they escape away , and pay not their custom , then they fallen into a greater danger after : for if they come into the Indies and have not the seal of Malacca , they pay double custom . I have not passed further then Malacca towards the East , but that which I will speak of here is by good information of them that have be there . The sailing from Malacca towards the East is not common for all men , as to China and Japan , and so 
 404 
 forward to go who will , but only for the king of Portugall and his nobles , with leave granted unto them of the king to make such voyages , or to the jurisdiction of the captain of Malacca , where he expecteth to know what voyages they make from Malacca thither , & these are the kings voyages , that every year there de-parteth from Malacca 2. galleons of the kings , one of them goes to you Moluccos to lade Cloves , and the At theMoluc-other goes to Banda to lade Nutmegs and Maces , These two galleons are laden for the king , neither doe ' they carry any particular men goods , saving the portage of the Mariners and soldiers , and for this cause they are not voyages for merchants , because that going thither , they shall not have where to lade their goods of return ; and beside this , the captain will not carry any merchant for either of these two places . There go small ships of the Moors thither , which come from the coast of Java , and change or guild their commodities in the king - 
 dom of Assa , and these be the Maces , Cloves , and The kingdom Nutmegs , which go for the straights of Mecca . The of Assa . voyages that the king of Portugall grants to his nobles are these , of China and Japan , from China to Japan , and from Japan to China , and from China to the Indies , and the voyage of Bengala , Maluco , and Sonda , with the lading of fine cloth , and every sort of Bombast cloth . 
 Sonda is and Hand of the Moors near to the coast of 
 Java , and there they lade Pepper for China . The ship The ship of that goes every year from the Indies to China , is called the ship of Drugs , because she carrieth diverse drugs of e 
 Cambaia , but the greatest part of her lading is silver . 
 From Malacca to China is eighteene hundred miles : and from China to Japan goes every year a ship of great importance laden with Silk , which for return of their Silk brings bars of silver which they truck in China . The distance between China and Japan is foure and twentie hundred miles , and in this way there are diverse Hands not very big , in which the Friars of saint Paul , by the help of God , make many Christians 405 
 A.D. 1563-81 . Hands not discovered . 
 Chinais under the gsvem-ment of the great Tartar . 
 [ II i . 2x9 . ] 
 A yearly Caravan from Persia to China . 
 there like to themselves . From these Hands hitherward the place is not yet discovered for the great sholdnesse of Sands that they find . The Portugals have made a small city near unto the coast of China called Macao , whose church and houses are of wood , and it hath a bishopric , but the customs belong to the king of China , and they go and pay the same at a city called Canton , which is a city of great importance and very beautiful two days journey and a half from Macao . The people of China are Gentiles , and are so jealous and fearful , that they would not have a stranger to put his foot within their land : so that when the Portugals go thither to pay their custom , and to buy their merchandise , they will not consent that they shall lie or lodge within the city , but send them forth into the suburbs . The country of China is near the kingdom of great Tartaria , and is a very great country of the Gentiles and of great importance , which may be judged by the rich and precious merchandise that come from thence , then which I believe there are not better nor in greater quantity in the whole world beside . 
 First , great store of gold , which they carry to the Indies , made in plataeae like to little ships , and in valve three and twentie caracts a piece , very great abundance of fine silk , cloth of damask and taffeta , great quantity of musk , great quantity of Occam in bars , great quantity of quicksilver and of Cinaper , great store of Camfora , and infinite quantity of Porcellane , made in vessels of diverse sorts , great quantity of painted cloth and squares , infinite store of the roots of China : and every year there comes from China to the Indies , two or three great ships , laden with most rich and precious merchandise . The Rubarbe comes from thence over land , by the way of Persia , because that every year there goes a great Carovan from Persia to China , which is in going thither sixe months . The Carovan arriveth at a City called Lanchin , the place where the king is resident with his Court . I spoke with 
 406 
 a Persian that was three years in that city of Lanchin , and he told me that it was a great City and of great importance . The voyages of Malacca which are in the jurisdiction of the Captain of the castle , are these : Every year he sends a small ship to Timor to lade white Sandals , for all the best comes from this Hand : there comes some also from Solor , but that is not so good : also he sends another small ship every year to Cauchin China , to lade there wood of Aloes , for that all the wood of Aloes comes from this place , which is in the firm land near unto China , and in that kingdom I could not know how that wood grows by any means . For that the people of the country will not suffer the Portugales to come within the land , but only for wood and water , and as for all other things that they wanted , as victuals or merchandise , the people bring that a board the ship in small barks , so that every day there is a mars kept in the ship , until such time as she market kept be laden : also there goes another ship for the said °ft , K Captain of Malacca to Sion , to lade Verzino : all these z ‘ voyages are for the Captain of the castle of Malacca , and when he is not disposed to make these voyages , he selleth them to another . 
 The city of Sion , or Siam . 
 Sion was the imperiali seat , and a great City , but in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred sixtie and seven , it was taken by the king of Pegu , which king made a voyage or came by land foure months journey with and army of men through his land , and the number of his army was a million and foure hundreth thousand men of war : when he came to the City , he gave assault to it , and besieged it one and twentie months before he could win it , with great loss . of his people , this I know , for that I was in Pegu sixe months after his departure , and saw when that his officers that were in Pegu , sent five hundreth thousand men of war to furnish the places of them 
 407 
 A prince of marvellous strength and power . 
 that were slain and lost in that assault : yet for all this , if there had not been treason against the city , it had not been lost : for on a night there was one of the gates set open , through the which with great trouble the king gate into the city , and became governor of Sion : and when the Emperor saw that he was betrayed , and that his enemy was in the city , he poisoned himself : and his wives and children , friends and noblemen , that were not slain in the first affront of the entrance into the city , were all carried captives into Pegu , where I was at the coming home of the king with his triumphs and victory , which coming home & returning from the wars was a goodly sighed to behold , to see the Elephants come home in a square , laden with gold , silver , jewels , and with Noble men and women that were taken prisoners in that city . 
 Now to return to my voyage : I departed from Malacca in a great ship which went for Saint Tome , being a City situate on the coast of Coromandel : and because the Captain of the castles of Malacca had understanding by advice that the king of * Assi would come with a great army and power of men against them , therefore upon this he would not give licence that any ships should depart : Wherefore in this ship we departed from thence in the night , without making any provision of our water : and we were in that ship foure hundreth and odd men : we departed from thence with intention to go to and Hand to take in water , but the winds were so contrary , that they would not suffer us to fetch it , so that by this means we were two and fortie days in the sea as it were lost , and we were driven too and from , so that the first land that we discovered , was beyond Saint Tome , more then five hundreth miles which were the mountains of Zerzerline , near unto the kingdom of Orisa , and so we came to Orisa with many sick , and more that were dead for want of water : and they that were sick in foure days died : and I for the space of a year after had my throat so soar and hoarse , 408 
 that I could never satisfy my thirst in drinking of water : 
 I judge the reason of my hoarseness to be with sops that I wet in vinegar and oil , wherewith I sustained my self many days . There was not any want of bred nor of wine : but the wines of that country are so hight [ II i . 230. ] that being drunk without water they will kill a man : neither are they able to drink them : when we began to want water , I saw certain Moors that were officers in the ship , that sold a small dish full for a ducat , after this I saw one that would have given a bar of Pepper , which is two quintalies and a half , for a little measure of water , and he could not have it . Truly I believe that I had died with my slave , whom then I had to serve me , which cost me very deer : but to provide for the danger at hand , I sold my slave for half that he was worth , because that I would save his drink that he drunk , to serve my own purpose , and to save my life . 
 Of the kingdom of Orisa , and the river Ganges . ORisa was a fair kingdom and trusty , through the which a man might have gone with gold in his hand without any danger at all , as long as the lawful King reigned which was a Gentile , who continued in the city called Catecha , which was within the land sixe days journey . This king loved strangers marvelous well , especially merchants which had traffic in and out of his kingdom , in such wise that he would take no custom of them , neither any other grievous thing . Only the ship that came thither paid a small thing according to her portage , and every year in the port of Orisa were laden five and twentie or thirtie ships great and small , with rice and diverse sorts of fine white bombast cloth , oil of Zerzeline which they make of a seed , and it is very good to eat and to fry fish withal , great store of butter , Lacca , long pepper , Ginger , Mirabolans dry and condite , great store of cloth of herbs , which is a kind of silk which grows among the 
 409 
 The commodities that go out of Orisa . 
 This cloth we call Hettle cloth . 
 woods without any labour of man , and when the bole thereof is grown round as big as and Orange , then they take care only to gather them . About sixteene years past , this king with his kingdom were destroyed by the king of Patten , which was also king of the greatest part of Bengala , and when he had god the kingdom , he set custom there twenty pro cento , as Merchants paid in his kingdom : but this tyrant enjoyed his kingdom but a small time , but was conquered by another tyrant , which was the great Mogul king of Agra , Delly , and of all Cambaia , without any resistance . I departed from Orisa to Bengala , to the harbour Piqueno , which is distant from Orisa towards the East a hundred and seventie miles . They go as it were rowing alongst the coast fiftie and foure miles , and then we enter into thee The river of riVer Ganges : from the mouth of this river , to a city Ganges . ' called Satagan , where the merchants gather themselves together with their trade , are a hundred miles , which they row in eighteene hours with the increase of the water : in which river it flows and ebbeth as it does in the Thamis , and when the ebbing water is come , they are not able to row against it , by reason of the swiftness of the water , yet their barks be light and armed with oars , like to Foists , yet they cannot prevail against that stream , but for refuge must make them fast to the bank of the river until the next flowing water , and they call these barks Bazaras and Patvas : they row as well as a Galliot , or as well as ever I have seen any . A good tides rowing before you come to Satagan , you shall have a place which is called Buttor , and from thence upward the ships do not go , because that upwards the river is very shallow , and little water . Every year at Buttor they make and unmake a Village , with houses and shops made of straw , and with all things necessary to their uses , and this village stands as long as the ships ride there , and till they depart for the Indies , and when they are departed , every man goes to his plot of houses , and there sets fire on them , which thing made 
 410 
 me to marvel . For as I passed up to Satagan , I saw this village standing with a great number of people , with and infinite number of ships and Bazars , and at my return coming down with my Captain of the last ship , for whom I tarried , I was all amazed to see such a place so soon razed and burned , & nothing left but the sign of the burned houses . The small ships go to Satagan , and there they lade . 
 Of the city of Satagan . 
 IN the port of Satagan every year lade thirtie or five and thirtie ships great and small , with rice , cloth of Bombast of diverse sorts , Lacca , great abundance of sugar , Mirabolans dried and preserved , long pepper , oil of Zerzeline , and many other sorts of merchandise . The city of Satagan is a reasonable fair city for a city of the Moors , abounding with all things , and was governed by the king of Patten , and now is subject to the great Mogul . I was in this kingdom foure months , whereas many merchants did buy or fraught boats for their benefits , and with these barks they go up and down the river of Ganges to fairs , buying their commodity with a great advantage , because that every day in the week they have a fair , now in one place , and now in another , and I also hired a bark and went up and down the river and did my business , and so in the night I saw many strange things . The kingdom of Bengala in times passed hath be as it were in the power of Moores , nevertheless there is great store of Gentiles among them ; always whereas I have spoken of Gentiles , is to be understood Idolaters , and whereas I speak of Moors I mean Mahomets sect . Those people especially that be within the land do greatly worship the river of Ganges : for when any is sick , he is brought out of the country to the bank of the river , and there they make him a small cottage of straw , and every day they wet him with that water , whereof there are many that die , and when they are dead , they make 
 The commodities that are laden in Satagan . 
 [ II i . 231 - ] 
 Moors are of the sect of Mahomet . 
 411 
 A ceremony of a heap of sticks and boughs and lay the dead body the gentiles thereon , and putting fire thereunto , they let the body are alone until it be half roasted , and then they take it off from the fire , and make and empty jar fast about his neck , and so throw him into the river . These things every night as I passed up and down the river I saw for the space of two months , as I passed to the fairs to buy my commodities with the merchants . And this is the cause that the Portugales will not drink of the water of the river Ganges , yet to the sighed it is more perfect and clearer then the water of Nilus is . From the port Piqueno I went to Cochin , and from Cochin to Malacca , from whence I departed for Pegu being eight hundred miles distant . That voyage is wont to be made in five and twentie or thirtie days , but we were foure months , and at the end of three months our ship was without victuals . The Pilot told us that we were by his altitude not far from a city called Tanasary , in the kingdom of Pegu , and these his words were not true , but we were ( as it were ) in the middle of many Hands , and many uninhabited rocks , and there were also some Portugales that affirmed that they knew the land , and knew also where the city of Tanasari was . 
 This city of right belongeth to the kingdom of Sion , which is situate on a great rivers side , which comes out of the kingdom of Sion : and where this river runneth into the sea , there is a village called Mirgim , Merchandise jn whose harbour every year there lade some ships with Xtrivaa . , Nypa , and Benjamin , a few cloves , nutmegs and maces which come from the coast of Sion , but the greatest merchandise there is Verzin and Nypa , which is and excellent wine , which is made of the flower of a tree called Nyper . Whose liquour they distil , and so make and excellent drink clear as crystal , good to the mouth , and better to the stomach , and it hath and excellent gentle virtue , that if one were rotten with the french pocks , drinking good store of this , he shall be 412 
 whole again , and I have seen it proved , because that when I was in Cochin , there was a friend of mine , whose nose began to drop away with that disease , and he was counseled of the doctors of physic , that he should go to Tanasary at the time of the new wines , and that he should drink of the nyper wine , night and day , as much as he could before it was distilled , which at that time is most delicate , but after that it is distilled , it is more strong , and if you drink much of it , it will fume into the head with drunkenness . This man went thither , and did so , and I have seen him after with a good colour and found . This wine is very much esteemed in the Indies , and for that it is brought so far off , it is very deer : in Pegu ordinarily it is good cheap , because it is nearer to the place where they make it , and there is every year great quantity made thereof . And returning to my purpose , I say , being among these rocks , and far from the land which is over against Tanasary , with great scarcity of victuals , and that by the saying of the Pilot and two Portugales , holding then firm that we were in front of the aforesaid harbour , we determined to go thither with our boat and fetch victuals , and that the ship should stay for us in a place assigned . We were twentie and eight persons in the boat that went for victuals , and on a day about twelve of the clock we went from the ship , assuring our selves to be in the harbour before night in the aforesaid port , we rowed all that day , and a great part of the next night , and all the next day without finding harbour , or any sign of good landing , and this came to pass through the evil counsel of the two Portugales that were with us . 
 For we had overshot the harbour and left it behind us , in such wise that we had lost the land inhabited , together with the shippe^ and we eight and twentie men had no manner of victuali with us in the boat , but it was the Lords will that one of the Mariners had brought a little rice with him in the boat to barter away for 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 taper wine good to cure the French disease . 
 413 
 [ II i . 232. ] 
 Tavay under the king of Pegu. 
 some other thing , and it was not so much but that three or foure men would have eaten it at a meal : I took the government of this Rice , promising that by the help of God that Rice should be nourishment for us until it pleased God to send us to some place that was inhabited : & when I slept I put the rice into my bosom because they should not rob it from me : we were nine days rowing alongst the coast , without finding any thing but countries' uninhabited , & desert Hands , where if we had found but grass it would have seemed sugar unto us , but we could not find any , yet we found a few leaves of a tree , and they were so hard that we could not chew them , we had water and wood sufficient , and as we rowed , we Could go but by flowing water , for when it was ebbing water , we made fast our boat to the bank of one of those Islands , and in these nine days that we rowed , we found a cave or nest of Tortoises eggs , wherein were one hundred fortie and foure eggs , the which was a great help unto us : these eggs are as big as a hens egg , and have no shell about them but a tender skin , every day we sod a kettle full of those eggs , with and handful of rice in the broth thereof : it pleased God that at the end of nine days we discovered certain fisher men , a fishing with small barks , and we rowed towards them , with a good cheer , for I think there were never men more glad then we were , for we were so soar afflicted with penury , that we could scarce stand on our legs . Yet according to the order that we set for our rice , when we saw those fisher men , there was left sufficient for foure days . The first village that we came to was in the gulf of Tavay , under the king of Pegu , whereas we found great store of victuals : then for two or three days after our arrival there , we would eat but little meat any of us , and yet for all this , we were at the point of death the most part of us . From Tavay to Martavan , in the kingdom of Pegu , are seventie two miles . We jaded our boat with victuals 
 414 
 1563-81-which were abundantly sufficient for sixe months , from whence we departed for the port and City of Martavan , where in short time we arrived , but we found not our ship there as we had thought we should , from whence presently we made out two barks to go to look for her . And they found her in great calamity , and need of water , being at and anchor with a contrary wind , which came very ill to pass , because that she wanted her boat a month , which should have made her provision of wood and water , the ship also by the grace of God arrived safely in the aforesaid port of Martavan . 
 The City of Martavan . 
 WE found in the City of Martavan ninetie Portugales of Merchants and other base men , which had fallen at difference with the Retor or governor of the city , and all for this cause , that certain vagabonds of the Portugales had slain five falchines of the king of Pegu , which chanced about a month after the king of Pegu was gone with a million and foure hundred thousand men to conquer the kingdom of Sion . They have for custom in this Country and kingdom , the king being wheresoever his pleasure is to be out of his kingdom , that every fifteene days there goes from Pegu a Carovan of Falchines , with every one a basket on his head full of some fruits or other deli - 
 Martavan a title under the king of Pegu. 
 A custom that these people have when the king is in the tvarres . 
 cates of refreshings , and with clean clothes : it chanced that this Carovan passing by Martavan , and resting themselves there a night , there happened between the Portugales and them words of despite , and from words to blows , and because it was thought that the Portugales had the worse , the night following , when the Falchines were a sleep with their company , the Portugales went and cut off five of their heads . Now AlawlnPegu there is a law in Pegu , that whosoever kills a man , ktlltns he shall buy the shed blood with his money , according ' to the estate of the person that is slain , but these 
 415 
 Falchines being the servants of the king , the Retors durst not do any thing in the matter , without the consent of the king , because it was necessary that the king should know of such a matter . When the king had knowledge thereof , he gave commandment that the malefactors should be kept until his coming home , and then he would duly minister justice , but the Captain of the Portugales would not deliver those men , but rather set himself with all the rest in arms , and went every day through the City marching with his Drum and ensigns displayed . For at that time the City was empty of men , by reason they were gone all to the wars and in business of the king : in the midst of this rumour we came thither , and I thought Great pride of it a strange thing to see the Portugales use such in-the Portugales . soiencie ; n another men City . And I stood in doubt of that which came to pass , and would not unladen my goods because that they were more sure in the ship then on the land , the greatest part of the lading was the owners of the ship , who was in Malacca , yet there were diverse merchants there , but their goods were of small importance , all those merchants told me that they would not unladen any of their goods there , unless I would unladen first , yet after they left my counsel and followed their own , and put their goods a land and lost every whit . The Rector with the customer sent for me , and demanded why I put not my goods a land , and paid my custom as other men did ? To whom I answered , that I was a merchant that was newly come thither , and seeing such disorder among the Portugales , I doubted the loss of my goods which cost me very deer , with the sweat of my face , and for this cause I [ II i . 233. ] was determined not to put my goods on land , until such time as his honour would assure me in the name of the king , that I should have no loss , and although there came harm to the Portugales , that neither I nor my goods should have any hurt , because I had neither part nor any difference with them in this tumult : my 416 
 reason sounded well in the Retors ears , and so presently he sent for the Bargits , which are as Counsellers of the City , and there they promised me on the kings head or in the behalf of the king , that neither I nor my goods should have any harm , but that we should be safe and sure : of which promise there were made public notes . And then I sent for my goods and had them on land , and paid my custom , which is in that country ten in the hundreth of the same goods , and for my more security I took a house right against the Retors house . The Captain of the Portugales , and all the Portugall merchants were put out of the City , and I with twentie and two poor men which were officers in the ship , had my dwelling in the City . After this , the Gentiles devised to be revenged of the Portugales ; but they would not put it in execution until such time as our small ship had discharged all her goods , and then the next night following came from Pegu foure thousand soldiers with some Elephants of war ; and remp ° ” before that they made any tumult in the city , the tkePortuSf > les-Retor sent , and gave commandment to all Portugales that were in the City , when they herd any rumour or noise , that for any thing they should not go out of their houses , as they tendered their own health . Then foure hours within night I herd a great rumour and noise of men of war , with Elephants which threw down the doors of the warehouses of the Portugales , and their houses of wood and straw , in the which tumult there were some Portugales wounded , and one of them slain ; and others without making proof of their manhood , which the day before did so brag , at that time put themselves to flight most shamefully , and saved themselves a board of little ships , that were at and anchor in the harbour , and some that were in their beds fled away naked , and that night they carried away all the Portugalles goods out of the suburbs into the City , and those Portugales that had their goods in the suburbs also . After this the Portugales that were 
 V 417 2D 
 fled into the ships to save themselves , took a new courage to themselves , and came on land and set fire on the houses in the suburbs , which houses being made of board and straw , and the wind blowing fresh , in small time were burned and consumed , with which fire half the City had like to have been burned ; when the Portugales had done this , they were without all hope to recover any part of their goods again , which goods might amount to the sum of sixteene thousand ducats , which , if they had not set fire to the town , they might have had again without any loss at all . Then the Portugales understanding that this thing was not done by the consent of the king , but by his Lieutenant and the Retor of the city were very ill content , knowing that they had made a great fault , yet the next morning following , the Portugales began to bend and shoot their ordinance against the Ci tie , which battery of theirs continued foure days , but all was in vain , for the shot never hit the City , but lighted on the top of a small hill near unto it , so that the city had and harm . When the Retor perceived that the Portugales made battery against the City , he took one and twentie Portugales that were there in the City , and sent them foure miles into the Country , there to tarry until such time as the other Portugales were departed , that made the battery , who after their departure let them go at their own liberty without any harm done unto them . I my self was always in my house with a good guard appointed me by the Retor , that no man should do me injury , nor harm me nor my goods ; in such wise that he performed all that he had promised me in the name of the king , but he would not let me depart before the coming of the king , which was greatly to my hindrance , because I was twenty and one months sequestered , that I could not buy nor fell any kind of merchandise . Those commodities that I brought thither , were peper , sandals , and Porcellan of China : so when the king was come home , I made my 
 418 
 supplication unto him , and I was licenced to depart when I would . 
 From Martavan I departed to go to the chiefest City in the kingdom of Pegu , which is also called after the name of the kingdom , which voyage is made by sea in three or foure days ; they may go also by land , but it is better for him that hath merchandise to go by sea and lesser charge . And in this voyage you shall have a Macareo , which is one of the most marvellous things in the world that nature hath wrought , and I never saw any thing so hard to be believed as this , to wit , the great increasing & diminishing of the water thingmost there at one push or instant , and the horrible earthquake and great noise that the said Macareo makes where c0mming0f a it comes . We departed from Martavan in barks , tide the earth which are like to our Pilot boats , with the increase should quake . of the water , and they go as swift as and arrow out of a bow , so long as the tide runneth with them , and when the water is at the highest , then they draw themselves out of the Channel towards some bank , and there they come to anchor , and when the water is diminished , then they rest on dry land : and when the [ II i . 2 34-1 barks rest dry , they are as high from the bottom of the Channel , as any house top is high from the ground . They let their barks lie so high for this respect , that if there should any ship rest or ride in the Channel , with such force comes in the water , that it would u overthrow ship or bark : yet for all this , that the barks be so far out of the Channel , and though Severne . the water hath lost her greatest strength and fury before it come so high , yet they make fast their prow to the stream , and oftentimes it makes them very fearful , and if the anchor did not hold her prow up by strength , she would be overthrown and lost with men and goods . When the water begins to increase , it makes such a noise and so great that you would think it and earthquake , and presently at the first it makes three waves . 
 So that the first washes over the bark , from stem 
 419 
 These tides make their just course as ours do . 
 This Macareo is a tide or a currant . 
 Houses made of canes y covered with leaves of trees . Godon is a place or house for merchants to lay their goods in . 
 The form of the building oj the new city of Pegu. 
 to stern , the second is not so furious as the first , and the thirde raises the Anchor , and then for the space of sixe hours while the water increases , they row with such swiftness that you would think they did fly : in these tides there must be lost no jot of time , for if you arrive not at the stagions before the tIED be spent , you must turn back from whence you came . For there is no staying at any place , but at these stagions , and there is more danger at one of these places then at another , as they be higher and lower one then another . When as you return from Pegu to Martavan , they go but half the tide at a time , because they will lay their barks up aloft on the banks , for the reason aforesaid . I could never gather any reason of the noise that this water makes in the increase of the tide , and in diminishing of the water . There is another Macareo in Cambaya , but that is nothing in comparison of this . By the help of God we came safe to Pegu , which are two cities , the old and the new , in the old city are the Merchant strangers , and merchants of the Country , for there are the greatest doings and the greatest trade . This city is not very great , but it hath very great suburbs . Their houses be made with canes , and covered with leaves , or with straw , but the merchants have all one house or Magason , which house they call Godon which is made of bricks , and there they put all their goods of any valour , to save them from the often mischances that there happen to houses made of such stufle . In the new city is the palace of the king , and his abiding place with all his barons and nobles , and other gentlemen ; and in the time that I was there , they finished the building of the new city : it is a great city , very plain and flat , and foure square , walled round about and with ditches that compass the walls about with water , in which ditches are many crocodiles , it hath no draw bridges , yet it hath twentie gates , five for every square on the walls , there are many places made for centinels to watch , made of wood and covered or gilded with gold , the streets 
 420 
 thereof are the fairest that I have seen , they are as straight as a line from one gate to another , and standing at the one gate you may discover to the other , and they are as broad as 10 or 12 men may ride a breast in them : and those streets that be thwart are fair and large , these streets , both on the one side and on the other , are planted at the doors of the houses , with nut trees of India , which make a very commodious shadow , the houses be made of wood and covered with a kind of tiles in form of cups , very necessary for their use , the kings palace is in the middle of the city , made in form A rich and of a walled castle , with ditches full of water round about stoteh Palace . it , the lodgings within are made of wood all over gilded , with fine pinnacles , and very costly work , covered with plataeae of gold . Truly it may be a kings house : within the gate there is a fair large court , from the one side to the other , wherein there are made places for the strongest and stoutest Eliphants appointed for the service of the kings person , and among all other Eliphants , he hath foure that be white , a thing so rare that a man shall Foure item hardly find another king that hath any such , and if this ^P11^-king know any other that hath white Eliphantes , he sends for them as for a gift . The time that I was there , there were two brought out of a far Country , and that cost me something the sighed of them , for they command the merchants to go to see them , and then is a they must give somewhat ' to the men that bring them : ducat which the brokers of the merchants give for every man half may be three a ducat , which they call a Tansa , which amounteth to a great sum , for the number of merchant's that are in Jou , e Pence-that city ; and when they have paid the aforesaid Tansa , they make choose whither they will see them at that time or no , because that when they are in the kings stall , every man may see them that will : but at that time they must go and see them , for it is the kings pleasure it should be so . This King among all other his titles , is called the King of the white Eliphants , and it is reported that if this king knew any other king that had any of these 
 421 
 And excellent devise to hunt and take wild Eliphants . 
 white Eliphantes , and would not send them unto him , that he would hazard his whole kingdom to conquer them , he esteems these white Eliphants very dearly , and they are had in great regard , and kept with very meet service , every one of them is in a house , all guilded over , and they have their meat given them in vessels of silver and gold , there is one black Eliphant the greatest that hath be seen , and he is kept according to his bigness , he is nine cubits high , which is a marvelous thing . It is reported that this king hath foure thousand Elephants of war , and all have their teeth , and they use to put on their two uppermost teeth sharp pikes of iron , and make them fast with rings , because these beasts fight , and make battle with their teeth ; he hath also very many young Eliphants that have not their teeth sprowted forth : also this king hath a brave devise in hunting to take these Eliphants when he will , two miles from the City . He hath built a fair palace all guilded , and within it a fair Court , and within it and round about there are made and infinite number of places for men to stand to see this hunting : near unto this Palace is a mighty great wood , through the which the huntsmen of the king ride continually on the backs of the feminine Eliphants , teaching them in this business . Every hunter carrieth out with him five or sixe of these feminines , and they say that they anoint the secret place with a certain composition that they have , that when the wild Eliphant doth smell thereunto , they follow the feminines and cannot leave them : when the huntsmen have made provision , & the Eliphant is so entangled , they guide the feminines towards the Palace which is called Tambell , and this Palace hath a door which does open and shut with engines , before which door there is a long straight way with trees on both the sides , which covereth the way in such wise as it is like darkness in a corner : the wild Eliphant when he comes to this way , thinketh that he is in the woods . At end of this dark way there is a great field , when the hunter's have 
 422 
 got this pray , when they first come to this field , they send presently to give knowledge thereof to the City , and with all speed there go out fiftie or sixtie men on horseback , and do beset the field round about : in the great field then the females which are taught in this business go directly to the mouth of the dark way , and when as the wild Eliphant is entered in there , the hunter's shout and make a great noise , as as is possible , to make the wild Eliphant enter in at the gate of that Palace , which is then open , and assoon as he is in , the gate is shut without any noise , and so the hunter's with the female Eliphants and the wild one are all in the Court together , and then within a small time the females withdraw themselves away one by one out of the Court , leaving the wild Eliphant alone : and when And excellent he perceives that he is left alone , he is so mad that for two or three hours to see him , it is the greatest ’ pleasure in the world : he weeps , he flingeth , he runneth , he justleth , he thrusts under the places where the people stand to see him , thinking to kill some of them , but the posts and timber is so strong and great , that he cannot hurt any body , yet he oftentimes breaks his teeth in the grates ; at length when he is weary and hath laboured his body that he is all wet with sweat , then he plucketh in his trunk into his mouth , and then he throweth out so much water out of his 
 belly , that he sprinkleth it over the heads of the lookers on , to the uttermost of them , although it be very high : and then when they see him very weary , there go certain officers into the Court with long sharp canes in their hands , and prick him that they make him to go into one of the houses that is made alongst the Court for the same purpose : as there are many which are made long and narrow , that when the Eliphant is in , he cannot turn himself to go back again . And it is requisite that these men should be very wary and swift , for although their canes be long , yet the Eliphant would kill them if they were not swift to save themselves : at length when 
 423 
 These canes are like to them in Spaine which they call Joco de tore . 
 they have got him into one of those houses , they stand over him in a loft and get ropes under his belly and about his neck , and about his legs , and bind him fast , and so let him stand foure or five days , and A strange give him neither meat nor drink . At the end of 
 ^lut ^Id th686 f°ure or five days , they unloose him and put one 
 should in so the females unto bim > and give them meat and drink , 
 short time be and in eight days he is become tame . In my judgement 
 made tame . there is not a beast so intellective as are these Eliphants , 
 nor of more understanding in all the world : for he will do all things that his keeper says , so that he lacketh nothing but human speech . 
 The greatest It is reported that the greatest strength that the king strength that of pegU hath is in these Eliphants , for when they go tpegu‘hath to battle , they set on their backs a Castle of wood 
 bound thereto , with bans under their bellies : and in every Castle foure men very commodiously set to fight with harquebusses , with bows and arrows , with darts and pikes , and other lancing weapons : and they say that the skin of this Eliphant is so hard , that and harquebus will not pierce it , unless it be in the eye , 
 A goodly order temples , or some other tender place of his body . And in a barbarous beside this , they are of great strength , and have a very peope . excellent order in their battle , as I have seen at their feasts which they make in the year , in which feasts the king makes triumphs , which is a rare thing and worthy memory , that in so barbarous a people there 
 The order of should be such goodly order as they have in their thetr weapons arm ; es which be distinct in squares of Eliphants , of hl$ men . horsemen , or harquebusiers and pikemen , that truly the number of them are infinite : but their armour and weapons are very nought and weak as well the one as the other : they have very bad pikes , their swords are worse made , like long knives without points , his harquebusses are most excellent , and always in his wars he hath eightie thousand harquebusses , and the number of them increases daily . Because the king will have 
 [ II i . 236. ] them shoot every day at the Plank , and so by con-424 
 tinuall exercise they become most excellent shot : also he hath great Ordinance made of very good mettle ; to conclude there is not a King on the earth that hath more power or strength then this king of Pegu , because he hath twentie and sixe crowned kings at his command . He can make in his Camp a million and and half of men of war in the field against his enemies . The state of his kingdom and maintenance of his army , is a thing incredible to consider , & the victuals that should maintain such a number of people in the wars . : but he that knoweth the nature and quality of that people , will easily believe it . I have seen with mine eyes , that those people and soldiers have eaten •of all sorts of wild beasts that are on the earth , whither it be very filthy or otherwise all serves for their mouths : yea , I have seen them eat Scorpions and Serpents , also they feed of all kind of herbs and grass . So that if such a great army want not water and salt , they will maintain themselves a long time in a bush with roots , flowers and leaves of trees , they carry rice with them for their voyage , & that serves them in stead of comfits , it is so dainty unto them . This king of Pegu hath not any army or power by sea , but in the land , for people , dominions , gold and silver , he far exceeds the power of the great Turke in treasure and strength . This king hath diverse Magasons full of treasure , as gold , & silver , and every day he increases it more and more , and it is never diminished . Also he is Lord of the Mines of Rubies , Satires & Spinels . Near unto his royal palace there is and inestimable treasure whereof he makes no account , for that it stands in such a place that every one may see it , and the place where this treasure is , is a great Court walled round about with walls of stone , with two gates which stand open every day . And within this place or Court are foure gilded houses covered with led , & in every one of these are certain heathenish idols of a very great valour . In the first house there is a stature of the 
 425 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 26. Crowned kings at his command . Fifteene hundreth thousand men in one Camp . 
 Fating open serpents . 
 The riches open the king open Pegu. 
 image of a man of gold very great , & on his head a crown of gold beset with most rare Rubies and Safires , and round about him are 4. little children of gold . In the second house there is the stature of a man of silver , that is set as it were sitting on heaps of money : whose stature in height , as he sitteth , is so high , that his highness exceeds the height of any one roof of and house ; I measured his feet , and found that they were as long as all my body was in height , with a crown on his head like to the first . And in the thirde house , there is a stature of brass of the same bigness , with a like crown on his head . In the 4. and last house there is a stature of a man as big as the other , which is made of Gansa , which is the metal they make their money of , & this metal is made of copper & lead mingled together . This stature also hath a crown on his head like the first : this treasure being of such a valve as it is , stands in and open place that every man at his pleasure may go & see it : for the keepers thereof never forbid any man the sighed thereof . I say as I have said before , that this king every year in his feasts triumpheth : & because it is worthy of the noting , I think it meet to write thereof , which is as followeth . The king rides on a triumphant cart or wagon all gilded , which is drawn by 16. goodly horses : and this cart is very high with a goodly canopy over it , behind the cart go 20. of his Lords & nobles , with every one a rope in his hand made fast to the cart for to hold it upright that it fall not . The king sitteth in the middle of the cart ; & upon the same cart about the king stand 4. of his nobles most favoured of him , and before this cart wherein the king is , goes all his army as aforesaid , and in the middle of his army goes all his nobility , round about the cart , there are in his dominions , a marvellous thing it is to see so many people , such riches & such good order in a people so barbarous as they be . This king of Pegu hath one principal wife which is kept in a Seralio , he hath 300 concubines , of whom it is reported that he hath 426 
 90. children . This king sitteth every day in person to hear the suits of his subject's , but he nor they never speak one to another , but by supplications made in this order . The king sitteth up aloft in a great hall , on The order of a tribunali seat , and lower under him fit all his Barons Justiceround about , then those that demand audience enter into a great Court before the king , and there set them down on the ground 40. paces distant from the kings person , and among those people there is no difference No difference in matters of audience before the king , but all alike , and there they fit with their supplications in their hands , - in cmtrWer-which are made of long leaves of a tree , these leaves siet or in are 3. quarters of a yard long , & two fingers broad , which justice . are written with a sharp iron made for y‘ purpose , & in those leaves are their supplications written , & with their supplications , they have in their hands a present or gift , according to the weightiness of their matter . Then come you secretary's down to read these supplications , taking them & reading them before the king , & if the king think it good to do to them that favour or justice that they demand , then he commands to take the presents out of their hands : but if he think their demand be not just or according to right , he commands them away without taking of their gifts or presents . In the Indies there is not any merchandise that is good to bring to Pegu , unless it be at some times by chance to bring Opium of Cambaia , and if he bring money he shall loose by it . Now the commodities that come from 
 S. Tome are the only merchandise for that place , which [ II i . 257. ] is the great quantity of cloth made there , which they commodi-use in Pegu ; which cloth is made of bombast woven and painted , so that the more that kind of cloth is pegU . washed , the more lively they show their colours , which is a rare thing , and there is made such account of this kind of cloth which is of so great importance , that a small bale of it will cost a thousand or two thousand ducats . Also from S. Tome they laid great store of read yarn , of bombast died with a root which they call 
 427 
 Note the departure of the ships from S. Tome to Pegu. 
 Commodities brought into Pegu. 
 The Chikinos are pieces of gold worth sterling 7. shillings . 
 Saia , as aforesaid , which colour will never out . With which merchandise every year there goes a great ship from S. Tome to Pegu , of great importance , and they usually depart from S. Tome to Pegu the 11. or 12. of September , & if she stay until the twelfth , it is a great hap if she return not without making of her voyage . Their use was to depart the sixt of September , and then they made sure voyages , and now because there is a great labour about that kind of cloth to bring it to perfection , and that it be well dried , as also the greediness of the Captain that would make and extraordinary gain of his fraught , thinking to have the wind always to serve their turn , they stay so long , that at sometime the wind turns . For in those parts the winds blow firmly for certain times , with the which they go to Pegu with the wind in poop , and if they arrive not there before the wind change , and get ground to anchor , perforce they must return back again : for that the gales of the wind blow there for three or foure months together in one place with great force . But if they get the coast & anchor there , then with great labour they may save their voyage . Also there goes another great ship from Bengala every year , laden with fine cloth of bombast of all sorts , which arriveth in the harbour of Pegu , when the ship that comes from S. Tome departeth . The harbour where these two ships arrive is called Cosmin . From Malaca to Martavan , which is a port in Pegu , there come many small ships , and great , laden with pepper , Sandolo , Porcellan of China , Camfora , Bruneo and other merchandise . The ships that come from Mecca enter into the port of Pegu and Cirion , and those ships bring cloth of Wool , Scarlets , Velvets , Opium , and Chickinos , by the which they loose , and they bring them because they have no other thing that is good for Pegu : but they esteem not the loss of them , for that they make such great gain of their commodities that they carry from thence out of that kingdom . Also the king of Assi his ships come thither 428 
 into the same port laden with peper ; from the coast of S. Tome of Bengala out of the Sea of Bara to Pegu are three hundreth miles , and they go it up the river in foure days , with the increasing water , or with the flood , to a City called Cosmin , and there they discharge their ships , whither the Customers of Pegu come to take the note and marks of all the goods of every man , & take the charge of the goods on them , and convey them to Pegu , into the kings house , wherein they make the custom of the merchandise . When the Customers have taken the charge of the goods & put them into barks , the Retor of the City gives licence to the Merchants to take bark , and go up to Pegu with their merchandise ; and so three or foure of them take a bark and go up to Pegu in company . God deliver every man that he give Great rigour not a wrong note , and entry , or think to steal any firthesteahng custom : for if they do , for the least trifle that is , he is w10 ™ * - utterly undone , for the king doth take it for a most great affront to be deceived of his custom ; and therefore they make diligent searches , three times at the lading and unlading of the goods , and at the taking of them a land . In Pegu this search they make when they go out of the ship for Diamonds , Pearls , and fine cloth which takes little room : for because that all the jewels that come into Pegu , and are not found of that country , pay custom , but Rubies , Safyres and Spinels pay no custom in nor out : because they are found growing in that Country . I have spoken before , how that all Merchants that mean to go thorough the Indies , must carry all manner of household stuff with them which is necessary for a house , because that there is not any lodging nor Inns nor hosts , nor chamber room in that Country , but the first thing a man does when he comes to any City is to hire a house , either by the year or by the month , or as he means to stay in those parts . 
 In Pegu their order is to hire their houses for sixe months . Now from Cosmin to the City of Pegu 
 429 
 they go in sixe hours with the flood , and if it be ebbing water , then they make fast their boat to the river side , and there tarry until the water flow again . Description of It is a very commodious and pleasant voyage , having on the fruitful - sides of the rivers many great villages , which they 
 call Cities : in the which hens , pigeons , eggs , milk , rice , and other things be very good cheap . It is all plain , and a goodly Country , and in eight days you may make your voyage up to Macceo , distant from Pegu twelve miles , & there they discharge their goods , & lade them in Carts or wains drawn with oxen , and the Merchants are carried in a closet which they call Dealing is a Dealing , in the which a man shall be very well accommo-smallRtter dated , with cushions under his head , and covered for the defence of the Sun and rain , and there he may aforesaid . sleep if he have will thereunto : and his foure Falchines carry him running away , changing two at one time and two at another . The custom of Pegu and fraught thither , may amount unto twentie or twentie two per cento , and 23. according as he hath more or less stolen from him that day they custom the goods . It is requisite that a man have his eyes watchful , and to be [ II i . 238. ] careful , and to have many friends , for when they custom in the great hall of the king , there come many gentlemen accompanied with a number of their slaves , and these gentlemen have no shame that their slaves rob strangers : whither it be cloth in showing of it or any other thing , they laugh at it . And although the Merchants help one another to keep watch , & look to their goods , they cannot look thereto so narrowly but one or other will rob something , either more or less , according as their merchandise is more or less : and yet on this day there is a worse thing then this : although you have set so many eyes to look there for your benefit , that you escape unrobbed of the slaves , a man cannot choose but that he must be robbed of the officers of the custom house . For paying the custom with the same goods oftentimes they take the best that 
 43° 
 1563-81 . you have , & not by rate of every sort as they ought to do , by which means a man payeth more then his duty . 
 At length when the goods be dispatched out of the custom house in this order , the Merchant causeth them to be carried to his house , and may do with them at his pleasure . 
 There are in Pegu 8. brokers of the kings , which are called Tareghe , who are bound to fell all the merchandise which come to Pegu , at the common or the currant price : then if the merchants will fell their goods at that price , they sei them away , and the brokers have two in the hundreth of every sort of merchandise , and they are bound to make good the debts of those goods , because they be sold by their hands or means , & on their words , and oftentimes the merchant knoweth not to whom he gives his goods , yet he cannot loose any thing thereby , for that the broker is bound in any wise to pay him , and if the merchant sei his goods without the consent of the broker , yet nevertheless he must pay him two per cento , and be in danger of his money : but this is very seldom seen , because the wife , children , and slaves of the debtor are bound to the creditor , and when his time is expired and payment not made , the creditor may take the debtor and carry him home to his house , and shut him up in a Magasin , whereby presently he hath his money , and not being able to pay the creditor , he may take the wife , children , and slaves of law fir 
 the debtor , and sei them , for so is the law of that king - Bankrupts . dome . The currant money that is in this city , and throughout all this kingdom is called Gansa or Ganza , which is made of Copper and lead : It is not the money Every man of the king , but every man may stamp it that will , because may stamp it hath his just partition or valve : but they make many tmoneyhe of them false , by putting overmuch led into them , and those will not pass , neither will any take them . With this money Ganza , you may buy gold or silver , Rubies and Musk , and other things . For there is no other money currant among them . And Gold , silver and 
 431 
 other merchandise are at one time dearer then another , as all other things be . 
 This Ganza goes by weight of Byze , & this name of Byza goes for you account of the weight , and commonly a Byza of a Ganza is worth ( after our account ) half a ducat , little more or less : and albeit that Gold and silver is more or less in price , yet the Byza never changes : every Byza makes a hundreth Ganza of weight , and so the number of the money is Byza . He that goes to Pegu to buy Jewels , if he will do well , it behooveth him to be a whole year there to do his busi-How a man ness . For if so be that he would return with the ship may dispose came jn he cannot Jo any thing so conveniently for the trade in the brevity or the time , because that when they custom Pegu. their goods in Pegu that come from S. Tome in their 
 ships , it is as it were about Christmas : and when they have customed their goods , then must they fell them for their credits sake for a month or two : and then at the beginning of March the ships depart . The Merchants that come from S. Tome take for the payment of their goods , gold , and silver , which is never wanting Good instrue - there . And 8. or 10. days before their departure they t* ™ 1 ' are all satisfied : also they may have Rubies in payment , but they make no account of them : and they that will winter there for another year , it is needful that they be advertized , that in the sale of their goods , they specific in their bargain , the term of two or 3. months payment , & that their payment shall in so many Ganza , and neither gold nor silver : because that with the Ganza they may buy & sei every thing with great advantage . And how needful is it to be advertized , when they will recover their payments , in what order they shall receive their Ganza ? Because he that is not experienced may do himself great wrong in the weight of the Gansa , as also in the falseness of them : in the weight he may be greatly deceived , because that from place to place it does rise and fallen greatly : and therefore when any will receive money or make payment , he must take a public 
 432 
 wayer of money , a day or two before he go about his business , and give him in payment for his labour two Byzaes a month , and for this he is bound to make good all your money , & to maintain it for good , for that he receives it and seals the bags with his seal : and when he hath received any store , then he causeth it to be brought into the Magason of the Merchant , that is the owner of it . 
 That money is very weighty , for fourtie Byza is a strong Porters burden ; and also where the Merchant hath any payment to be made for those goods which he buyeth , the Common wayer of money that receives his money must make the payment thereof . So that by this means , the Merchant with the charges of two Byzes a month , receives and payeth out his money without loss or trouble . The Merchandizes that go out of Pegu are Gold , Silver , Rubies , Sapphires , Spinelies , great store of Benjamin , long peper , Lead , Lacca , rice , wine , some sugar , yet there might be great store of sugar made in the Country , for that they have abundance of Canes , but they give them to Eliphants to eat , and the people consume great store of them for food , and many more do they consume in vain things , as these following . In that kingdom they spend many of these Sugar canes in making of houses and tents which they call Varely for their idols , which they call Pagodes , whereof there are great abundance , great and small , and these houses are made in form of little hills , like to Sugar loaves or to Bells' , and some of these houses are as high as a reasonable steeple , at the foot they are very large , some of them be in circuit a quarter of a mile . The said houses within are full of earth , and walled round about with bricks and dirt in stead of lime , and without form , from the top to the foot they make a covering for them with Sugar canes , and plaster it with lime all over , for otherwise they would be spoiled , by the great abundance of rain that falls in those Countries' . Also they consume about these Varely or idol houses 
 v 433 2 e 
 A.D. 
 I563-81 . 
 [ II i . 239. ] 
 The Merchandizes that go out of Pegu. 
 I563-81 . Idol houses covered with gold . 
 Rubies exceeding cheap in Pfgu - 
 great store of leaf-gold , for that they overlay all the tops of the houses with gold , and some of them are covered with gold from the top to the foot : in covering whereof there is great store of gold spent , for that every 10. years they new overlay them with gold , from the top to the foot , so that with this vanity they spend great abundance of gold . For every 10. years the rain doth consume the gold from these houses . And by this means they make gold dearer in Pegu then it would be , if they consumed not so much in this vanity . Also it is a thing to be noted in the buying of jewels in Pegu , that he that hath no knowledge shall have as good jewels , and as good cheap , as he that hath be practised there a long time , which is a good order , and it is in this wise . There are in Pegu foure men of good reputation , which are called Tareghe , or brokers of Jewels . These foure men have all the Jewels or Rubies in their hands , and the Merchant that will buy comes to one of these Tareghe and telleth him , that he hath so much money to employ in Rubies . For through the hands of these foure men pass all the Rubies : for they have such quantity , that they know not what to do with them , but fell them at most vile and base princes . When the Merchant hath broken his mind to one of these brokers or Tareghe , they carry him home to one of their Shops , although he hath no knowledge in Jewels : and when the Jewellers perceive that he will employ a good round sum , they will make a bargain , and if not , they let him alone . The use generally of this City is this ; that when any Merchant hath bought any great quantity of Rubies , and hath agreed for them , he carrieth them home to his house , let them be of what valve they will , he shall have space to look on them and peruse them two or three days : and if he hath no knowledge in them , he shall always have many Merchants in that City that have very good knowledge in Jewels ; with whom he may always confer and take counsel , and may show 
 434 
 them unto whom he will ; and if he find that he hath not employed his money well , he may return his Jewels back to them whom he had them of , without any loss at all . Which thing is such a shame to the Tareghe to have his Jewels return , that he had rather bear a blow on the face then that it should be thought that he sold them so deer to have them returned . For these men have always great care that they afford good pennyworth , especially to those that have no knowledge . This they do , because they would not lose their credit : and when those Mar - 
 And honest care of heathen people . 
 chants that have knowledge in Jewels buy any , if they buy them deer , it is their own faults and not the brokers : yet it is good to have knowledge in Jewels , by reason that it may somewhat ease the price . There is also a very good order which they have in buying of Jewels , which is this ; There are many Merchants that stand by at the making of the bargain , and because they shall not understand how the Jewels be sold , the Broker and the Merchants have their hands under a cloth , and by touching of fingers and nipping the joints they know what is done , what is bidden , and what is asked . So that the standers by know ffgersUndera not what is demanded for them , although it be for a cloth . 
 Bargainee made with the nipping of 
 thousand or 10. thousand ducats . For every joint and every finger hath his signification . For if the Merchants that stand by should understand the bargain , it would breed great controversy among them . And at my being in Pegu in the month of August , in Anno 1569. having got well by my endeavour , I was desirous to see mine own Country , and I thought it good to go by the way of S. Tome , but then I should tarry until March . 
 In which journey I was counseled , yea , and fully resolved to go by the way of Bengala , with a ship there ready to depart for that voyage . And then we departed from Pegu to Chatigan a great harbour or port , from whence there go small ships to Cochin , 435 
 before the fleet depart for Portugall , in which ships I was fully determined to go to Lisbon , and so to Venice . When I had thus resolved my self , I went a 
 board of the ship of Bengala , at which time it was 
 This Touffon the year of ToufFon : concerning which Touffon you 
 m 4 » extra - are to understand , that in the East Indies often times , 
 °stormPat Sea. are not storms as in other countries' ; but every [ II i . 240. ] 10. or 12. years there are such tempests and storms , that it is a thing incredible , but to those that have seen it , neither do they know certainly what year they will come . 
 The Toufim Unfortunate are they that are at sea in that year and comes but tjme of the Touffon , because few there are that escape that danger . In this year it was our chance to be at sea with the like storm , but it happened well unto us , for that our ship was newly over-plancked , and had not any thing in her save victuali and balasts , Silver and gold , which from Pegu they carry to Bengala , and no other kind of Merchandise . This Touffon or cruel storm endured three days and three nights : in which time it carried away our sails , yards , and rudder ; and because the ship laboured in the Sea , we cut our mast over board : which when we had done she laboured a great deal more then before , in such wise , that she was almost full with water that came over the highest part of her and so went down : and for the space of three days and three nights sixtie men did nothing but hale water out of her in this wise , twentie men in one place , and twentie men in another place , and twentie in a thirde place : and for all this storm , the ship was so good , that she took not one jot of water below through her sides , but all ran down through the hatches , so that those sixtie men did nothing but cast the Sea into the Sea. And thus driving too and from as the wind and Sea would , we were in a dark night about foure of the clock cast on a should : yet when it was day , we could neither see land on one side nor other , and knew not where we were . And as it pleased 436 
 the divine power , there came a great wave of the Sea , which drave us beyond the should . And when we felt the ship aflote , we rose up as men revived , because manifest the Sea was calm and smooth water , and then sounding we found twelve fathom water , and within a while after filing ™ we had but sixe fathom , and then presently we came those Coun-to anchor with a small anchor that was left us at the stern , for all our other were lost in the storm : and by and by the ship struck a ground , and then we did prop her that she should not overthrow . 
 When it was day the ship was all dry , and we found her a good mile from the Sea on dry land . This Touffon being ended , we discovered and Island not far This Island is from us , and we went from the ship on the sands to caUedSondiva . see what Island it was : and we found it a place inhabited , and , to my judgement , the fertilest Island in all the world , the which is divided into two parts by a channel which passes between it , & with great trouble we brought our ship into the same channel , which parts the Island at flowing water , and there we determined to stay 40. days to refresh us . And when the people of the Island saw the ship , and that we were coming a land : presently they made a place of bazar or a market , with shops right over against the ship with all manner of provision of victuals to eat , which they brought down in great abundance , and sold it so good cheap , that we were amazed at the cheapness thereof . I bought many salted kine there , for the provision of the ship , for half a Larine a piece , which Larine may be 12. shillings sixe pence , being very good and fat ; and 4. wild hogs ready dressed for a Larine ; great fat hens for a Bizze a piece , which is at the most a penny : and the people told us that we were deceived the half of our money , because we bought things so deer . Also a sack of fine rice for a thing of nothing , and consequently all other things for human sustenance were there in such abundance , that it is a thing incredible but to them that have seen it . 
 437 
 Zondwa is the fruitfullest Country in all the world . 
 Chatigan is a port in Bengala , whither the Portugales go with their ships . 
 The King of Pachim , or Aracam , neighbour to Bengala . 
 [ II i . 241. ] 
 This Island is called Sondiva belonging to the kingdom of Bengala , distant 120. miles from Chatigan , to which place we were bound . The people are Moors , and the king a very good man of a More king , for if he had been a tyrant as others be , he might have robbed us of all , because the Portugall captain of Chatigan was in arms against the Retor of that place , & every day there were some slain , at which news . we rested there with no small fear , keeping good watch and ward aboard every night as the use is , but the governor of the town did comfort us , and bade us that we should fear nothing , but that we should repose our selves securely without any danger , although the Portugales of Chatigan had slain the governor of that City , and said that we were not culpable in that fact : and moreover he did us every day what pleasure he could , which was a thing contrary to our expectations , considering that they & the people of Chatigan were both subject's to one king . We departed from Sondiva , & came to Chatigan the great port of Bengala , at the same time when the Portugales had made peace and taken a truce with the governors of the town , with this condition that the chief Captain of the Portugales with his ship should depart without any lading : for there were then at that time 18. ships of Portugales great and small . This Captain being a Gentleman and of good courage , was notwithstanding contented to . depart to his greatest hindrance , rather then he would seek to hinder so many of his friends as were there , as also because the time of the year was spent to go to the Indies . The night before he departed , every ship that had any lading therein , put it aboard of the Captain to help to ease his charge and to recompense his courtesies . In this time there came a messenger from the king of Rachim to this Portugal Captain , who said in the behalf of his king , that he had herd of the courage and valour of him , desiring him gently that , he would vouchsafe to come with the ship into his port , 438 
 i5&3-81-and coming thither he should be very well entreated . 
 This Portugal went thither and was very well satisfied of this King . 
 This Kling of Rachim hath his seat in the middle coast between Bengala and Pegu , and the greatest enemy he hath is the king of Pegu : which king of Pegu devises night and day how to make this king of Rachim his subject , but by no means he is able to do it : because the king of Pegu hath no power nor army by Sea. And this king of * Rachim may Or , Aracam . arm two hundreth Galleys or Fusts by Sea , and by land he hath certain sluses with the which when the king of Pegu pretendeth any harm towards him , he may at his pleasure drown a great part of the Country . 
 So that by this means he cutteth ofF the way whereby the king of Pegu should come with his power to hurt him . 
 From the great port of Chatigan they carry for the Indies great store of rice , very great quantity of Bombast cloth of every sort , Sugar , corn , and money , with other merchandise . And by reason of the wars in Chatigan , the Portugall ships tarried there so long , that they arrived not at Cochin so soon as they were wont to do other years . For which cause the fleet that was at Cochin was departed for Portugal before they arrived there , and I being in one of the small ships before the fleet , in discovering of Cochin , we also discovered the last ship of the Fleet that went from Cochin to Portugall , where she made sail , for which I was marvellously discomforted , because that all the year following , there was no going for Portugale , and when we arrived at Cochin I was fully determined to go for Venice by the way of Ormus , and at that time the City of Goa was besieged by the people of Dialcan , but the Citizens forced not this assault , because they supposed that it would not continue long . For all this I embarked my self in a Galley that went for Goa , meaning there to ship my self for Ormus : but when we came to Goa , the Viceroy 
 The commodities that go from Chatigan to the Indies . 
 The Portugal ships depart towards Portugall out of the harbour of Cochin . 
 Goa was besieged . 
 439 
 would not suffer any Portugal to depart , by reason of the wars . And being in Goa but a small time , I fell sick of and infirmity that held me foure months : which with physic and diet cost me eight hundreth ducats , and there I was constrained to fell a small quantity of Rubies to sustain my need : and I sold that for five hundreth ducats , that was worth a thousand . And when I began to wax well of my disease , I had but little of that money left , every thing was so scarce : For every chicken ( and yet not good ) cost me seven or eight Livers , which is sixe shillings , or sixe shillings eight pence . Beside this great charges , the Apothecaries with their medicines were no small charge to me . At the end of sixe months they raised the siege , and then I began to work , for Jewels were risen in their princes : for , whereas before I sold a few of refused Rubies , I determined then to fell the rest of all my Jewels that I had there , and to make and other voyage to Pegu. And for because that at my departure from Pegu , Opium was in great request , I went then to Cambaya to employ a good round sum of money in Opium , and there I bought 60. percels of Opium , which cost me two thousand & a hundreth ducats , every ducat at foure shillings two pence . Moreover I bought three bales of Bombast cloth , which cost me eight hundred ducats , which was a good commodity for Pegu : when I had bought these things , the Viceroy commanded that the custom of the Opium should be paid in Goa , and paying custom there I might carry it whither I would . I shipped my 3. bales of cloth at Chaul in a ship that went for Cochin , and I went to Goa to pay the aforesaid custom for my Opium , and from Goa I departed to Cochin in a ship that was for the voyage of Pegu , and went to winter then at S. Tome . When I came to Cochin , I understood that the ship that had my three bales of cloth was cast away and lost , so that I lost my 800. Serafins or ducats : and departing from Cochin to go for S. Tome , in casting about for 
 440 
 the Island of Zeilan the Pilot was deceived , for that the Cape of the Island of Zeilan lies far out into the sea , and the Pilot thinking that he might have passed hard aboard the Cape , and paying roomer in the night ; when it was morning we were far within the Cape , and passed all remedy to go out , by reason the winds blew so fiercely against us . So that by this means we lost our voyage for that year , and we went to Manar with the ship to winter there , the ship having lost her masts , and with great diligence we hardly saved her , with great losses to the Captain of the ship , because he was forced to fraught another ship in S. Tome for Pegu with great losses and interest , and I with my friends agreed together in Manar to take a bark to carry us to S. Tome ; which thing we did with all the rest of the merchants ; and arriving at S. Tome I had news through or by the way of Bengala , that in Pegu Opium was very deer , and I knew that in S. Tome there was no Opium but mine to go for Pegu that year , so that I was held of all the merchants there to be very rich : and so it would have proved , if my adverse fortune had not been contrary to my hope , which was this . At that time there went a great ship from Cambaya , to the king of Assi , with great quantity of Opium , & there to lade peper : in which voyage there came such a storm , that the ship was forced with weather to go roomer 800. miles , and [ II i . 242. ] by this means came to Pegu , whereas they arrived a day before me ; so that Opium which was before very deer , was now at a base price : so that which was sold for fiftie Bizze before , was sold for 2. Bizze & and half , there was such quantity came in that ship ; so that I was glad to stay two years in Pegu unless I would have given away my commodity : and at the end of two years of my 2100. ducats which I bestowed in Cambaya , I made but a thousand ducats . Then I departed again from Pegu to go for the Indies and for Ormus with great quantity of Lacca , and from Ormus I returned into the Indies for Chaul , and from Chaul to Cochin , 
 441 
 Cloves . 
 Nutmegs and Maces . 
 White Sandal . 
 Canfora . 
 and from Cochin to Pegu. Once more I lost occasion to make me rich , for whereas I might have brought good store of Opium again , I brought but a little , being fearful of my other voyage before . In this small quantity I made good profit . And now again I determined to go for my Country , and departing from Pegu , I tarried and wintered in Cochin , and then I left the Indies and came for Ormus . 
 I think it very necessary before I end my voyage , to reason somewhat , and to show what fruits the Indies do yield and bring forth . First , in the Indies and other East parts of India there is Peper and ginger , which grows in all parts of India . And in some parts of the Indies , the greatest quantity of peper grows among wild bushes , without any manner of labour : saving , that when it is ripe they go and gather it . The tree that the peper grows on is like to our Ivy , which runneth up to the tops of trees wheresoever it grows : and if it should not take hold of some tree , it would lie flat and rot on the ground . This peper tree hath his flower and berry like in all parts to our Ivy berry , and those berries be grains of peper : so that when they gather them they be green , and then they lay them in the Sun , and they become black . 
 The Ginger grows in this wise : the land is tilled and sown , and the herb is like to Panizzo , and the root is the ginger . These two spices grow in diverse places . 
 The Cloves come all from the Moluccas , which Moluccas are two Islands , not very great , and the tree that they grow on is like to our Laurel tree . 
 The Nutmegs and Maces , which grow both together , are brought from the Island of Banda , whose tree is like to our walnut tree , but not so big . 
 All the good white Sandol is brought from the Island of Timor . Canfora being compound comes all from China , and all that which grows in canes comes from Borneo , & I think that this Canfora comes 
 442 
 not into these parts : for that in India they consume 
 great store , and that is very deer . The good Lignum Lignum Aloes . Aloes comes from Cauchinchina . 
 The Benjamin comes from the kingdom of Assi Benjamin . and Sion . 
 Long peper grows in Bengala , Pegu , and Java . Longpeper . 
 Musk comes from Tartaria , which they make in 7^ / Musk this order , as by good information I have be told . 
 There is a certain beast in Tartaria , which is wild and 0Jut ha^e as big as a wolf , which beast they take alive , & beatrice the good musk him to death with small staves y‘ his blood may be and beatrice the spread through his whole body , then they cut it in °fan . ass , e pieces , & take out all the bones , & beatrice the flesh with ng^e ofit ' the blood in a mortar very small , and dry it , and make purses to put it in of the skin , and these be the cods of musk . 
 Truly I know not whereof the Amber is made , and there are diverse opinions of it , but this is most certain , it is cast out of the Sea , and thrown on land , and found upon the sea banks . 
 The Rubies , Sapphires , and the Spinels be got in Rubies , Sa-the kingdom of Pegu. The Diamonds come from phyres , and diverse places ; and I know but three sorts of them . 
 That sort of Diamonds that is called Chiappe , comes from Bezeneger . Those that be pointed naturally come from the land of Delly , and from Java , but the Diamonds of Java are more weighty then the other . I could never understand from whence they that are called Balassi come . The Balassi 
 Pearls they fish in diverse places , as before in this in , , • i _ t^eilan . 
 book is shown . 
 From Cambaza comes the Spodiom which congeleth 
 in certain canes , whereof 1 found many in Pegu , when - tn I made my house there , because that ( as I have said Ethiopia , in before ) they make their houses there of woven canes the land of like to mats . From Chaul they trade alongst the coast Cafr11 ™ 1 , the of Melinde in Ethiopia , within the land of Cafraria : on hatthepor-that coast are many good harbors kept by the Moors , tugals have . 
 443 
 Buying and selling without words one to another . 
 [ II i . 243. ] 
 Golden trades that the Portugals have . 
 Thither the Portugals bring a kind of Bombast cloth of a low price , and great store of Paternosters or beads made of paltry glass , which they make in Chaul according to the use of the Country : and from thence they carry Elephants teeth for India , slaves called Cafari , and some Amber and Gold . On this coast the king of Portugall hath his castle called Mozambique , which is of as great importance as any castle that he hath in all his Indies under his protection , and the Captain of this castle hath certain voyages to this Cafraria , to which places no Merchants may go , but by the Agent of this Captain : and ' they use to go in small ships , and trade with the Cafars , and their trade in buying and selling is without any speech one to the other . In this wise the Portugals bring their goods by little and little alongst the Sea coast , and lay them down : and so depart , and the Cafar Merchants come and see the goods , & there they put down as much gold as they think the goods are worth , and so go their way and leave their gold and the goods together , then comes the Portugal , and finding the gold to his content , he takes it and goes his way into his ship , and then comes the Cafar and takes the goods and carrieth them away : and if he find the gold there still , it is a sign that the Portugals are not contented , and if the Cafar think he hath put too little , he adds more , as he thinketh the thing is worth : and the Portugales must not stand with them too strict ; for if they do , then they will have no more trade with them : For they disdain to be refused , when they think that they have offered enough , for they be a peevish people , and have dealt so of a long time : and by this trade the Portugals change their commodities into gold , and carry it to the Castle of Mozambique , which is in and Island not far distant from the firm land of Cafraria on the coast of Ethiopia , and is distant from India 2800. miles . Now to return to my voyage , when I came to Ormus , I found there Master Francis Berettin of Venice , and we 
 444 
 freighted a bark together to go for Basora for 70. ducats , and with us there went other Merchants , which 
 did ease our fraught , and very commodiously we came to Basora and there we stayed 40. days for providing a Carovan of barks to go to Babylon , because they use 
 not to go two or 3. barks at once , but 25. or 30. because in the night they cannot go , but must make them fast to the banks of the river , and then we must make a very good & strong guard , and be well provided of armour , for respect & safeguard of our goods , because the number of thieves is great that come to spoil and rob the merchants . And when we depart for Babylon we go a little with our sail , and the voyage is 38. or 40. days long , but we were 50. days on it . When we came to Babylon we stayed there 4. months , until the Carovan was ready to go over the wilderness , or desert for Alepo ; in this city we were 6. Merchants that accompanied together , five Venetians and a Portugal ; whose names were as follows , Messer Florinasa with one of his kinsmen , Messer Andrea de Polo , the Portugal & M. Francis Berettin and I , and so we furnished our selves with victuals and beans for our horses for 40. days ; and we bought horses and mules , for that they be very good cheap there , I my self bought a horse there for 11. akens , and sold him after in Alepo for 30. ducats . Also we bought a Tent which did us very great pleasure : we had also among us 32. Camels laden with merchandise : for the which we paid 2. ducats for every camels lading , and for every 10. camels they made 11 , for so is their use and custom . We take also with us 3. men to serve us in the voyage , which are used to go in those voyages for five WORSER worser . a man , and are bound to serve us to Alepo : so that we passed very well without any trouble : when the camels cried out to rest , our pavilion was the first that was erected . The Carovan makes but small journeis about 20. miles a day , & they set forward every morning before day two hours , and about two in the afternoon they fit down . 
 445 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 And order how to provide to go over the Desert from Babylon to Alepo . 
 $6. Days journey over thewildernes . 
 And order how to provide for the going to Jerusalem , 
 We had great good hap in our voyage , for that it reigned : For which cause we never wanted water , but every day found good water , so that we could not take any hurt for want of water . Yet we carried a camel laden always with water for every good respect that might chance in the desert , so that we had no want neither of one thing , nor other that was to be had in the country . For we came very well furnished of every thing , and every day we eat fresh mutton , because there came many shepherds with us with their flocks , who kept those sheep that we bought in Babylon , and every merchant marked his sheep with his own mark , and we gave the shepherds a Medin , which is two pence of our money , for the keeping and feeding our sheep on the way , and for killing of them . And beside the Medin they have the heads , the skins , and the entrails of every sheep they kill . We sixe bought 20. sheep , and when we came to Alepo we had 7. alive of them . And in the Carovan they use this ofder , that the merchants do lend flesh one to another , because they will not carry raw flesh with them , but pleasure one another by lending one one day , and another another day . 
 From Babylon to Alepo is 40. days journey , of the which they make 36. days over the wilderness , in which 36. days they neither see house , trees , nor people that inhabit it , but only a plain , and no sign of any way in the world . The Pilots go before , and the Carovan follows after . And when they fit down all the Carovan unladeth and sitteth down , for they know the stations where the wells are . I say , in 36. days we pass over the wilderness . For when we depart from Babylon two days we pass by villages inhabited until we have passed the river Euphrates . And then within two days of Alepo we have villages inhabited . In this Carovan there goes always a Captain that does Justice unto all men : and every night they keep watch about the Carovan , and coming to Alepo we went to Tripoli , whereas Master Florin , and Master Andrea Polo , 446 
 and I , with a Friar , went and hired a bark to go with us to Jerusalem . Departing from Tripolie , we arrived at Jaffa : from which place in a day and half we went to Jerusalem , and we gave order to our bark to tarry for us until our return . we stayed in Jerusalem 14. days , to visit those holy places : from whence we returned to Jaffa , and from Jaffa to Tripolie , and there we shipped our selves in a ship of Venice called the Bagazzana : And by the help of the divine power , we arrived safely in Venice the fift of November 1581. If there be any that hath any desire to go into those parts of India , let him not be astonished at the troubles that I have passed : because I was entangled in many things : for that I went very poor from Venice with 1200. ducats employed in merchandise , and when I came to Tripolie , I fell sick in the house of Master Regaly Oratio , and this man sent away my goods with a small Carovan that went from Tripolie to Alepo , and the Carovan was robbed , and all my goods lost saving foure chests of glasses which cost me 200. ducats , of which glasses I found many broken : because the thieves thinking it had be other merchandise , brake them up , and seeing they were glasses they let them all alone . And with this only stock I adventured to go into the Indies : And thus with change and rechange , and by diligence in my voyage , God did bless and help me , so that I god a good stock . I will not be unmindful to put them in remembrance , that have a desire to go into those parts , how they shall keep their goods , and give them to their heirs at the time of their death , and how this may be done very securely . In all the cities that the Portugales have in the Indies , there is a house called the school of Sancta misericordia comissaria : the governors whereof , if you give them for their paine§ , will take a copy of your will and Testament , which you must always carry about you ; and chiefly when you go into the Indies . In the country of the Moors and Gentiles , in those voyages always there 
 447 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 [ II i . 244. ] The author returns to Venice 1581. 
 A very good order that they have in those Countries' for the recovering of the goods of the dead . 
 goes a Captain to administer Justice to all Christians of the Portugales . Also this captain hath authority to recover the goods of those Merchants that by chance die in those voyages , and they that have not made their Wills and registered them in the aforesaid schools , the Captains will consume their goods in such wise , that little or nothing will be left for their heirs and friends . Also there goes in these same voyages some merchants that are commissaries of the school of Sancta misericordia , that if any Merchant die and have his Will made , and hath given order that the school of Misericordia shall have his goods and fell them , then they send the money by exchange to the school of Misericordia in Lisbone , with that copy of his Testament , then from Lisbon they give intelligence thereof , into what part of Christendome soever it be , and the heirs of such a one coming thither , with testimoniali that they be heirs , they shall receive there the valve of his goods : in such wise that they shall not lose any thing . But they that die in the kingdom of Pegu lose the thirde part of their goods by ancient custom of the Country , that if any Christian dieth in the kingdom of Pegu , the king and his officers rest heirs of a thirde of his goods , and there hath never be any deceit or fraud used in this matter . I have known many rich men that have dwelled in Pegu , and in their age they have desired to go into their own Country to die there , , and have departed with all their goods and substance without let or trouble . 
 In Pegu the fashion of their apparel is all one , as well the Noble man , as the simple : the only difference is in the fineness of the cloth , which is cloth of Bombast one finer then another , and they wear their apparel in this wise : First , a white Bombast cloth which serves for a shirt , then they gird another painted bombast cloth of foureteene brases , which they bind up betwixt their legs , and on their heads they wear a small tock of three braces , made in guise of a mitre , 448 
 and some go without tocks , and carry ( as it were ) a hive on their heads , which doth not pass the lower part of his ear , when it is lifted up : they go all bore footed , but the Noble men never go on foot , but are carried by men in a seat with great reputation , with a hat made of the leaves of a tree to keep him from the rain and Sun , or otherwise they ride on horseback with their feet bore in the stirrups . All sorts of women order of 
 whatsoever they be , wear a smock down to the girdle , women's 
 and from the girdle downwards to the foot they wear a cloth of three brases , open before ; so strait that they cannot go , but they must show their secret as it were aloft , and in their going they feign to hide it with their hand , but they cannot by reason of the straitness of their cloth . They say that this use was invented by a Queen to be and occasion that the sighed thereof might remove from men the vices against nature , which they are greatly given unto : which sighed should cause them to regard women the more . Also the women go bore footed , their arms laden with hoops of gold and Jewels : And their fingers full of precious rings , with their hair rolled up about their heads , . Many of them wear a cloth about their shoulders in stead of a cloak . 
 Now to finish that which I have begun to write , I say , that those parts of the Indies are very good , because that a man that hath little , shall make a great deal thereof ; always they must govern themselves that they be taken for honest men . For why ? to such there shall never want help to do well , but he that is vicious , let him tarry at home and not go thither , because he shall always be a beggar , and die a poor man . 
 . 