A letter of M. John Newbery , written from Alepo , to M. Richard Hakluit of Oxford , the 28. of May , Anno 1583. 
 Right well-beloved , and my assured good friend , I heartily commend me unto you , hoping of your good health , etc. After we set sail from Graves 
 end , which was the 13. day of February last , we remained upon our coast until the 11. day of March , and that day we set sail from Falmouth , and never anchored till we arrived in the road of Tripolie in Syria , which was the last day of Aprill last passed , where we stayed 14. days : and the twentie of this present we came hither to Alepo , and with Gods help , within five or sixe days go from hence towards the Indies . Since my coming to Tripolis I have made very earnest inquiry both there and here , for the book of Cosmography of Abilfada Ismael , but by no means can hear of it . Some say that possibly it may be had in Persia , but notwithstanding I will not fade tp make inquiry for it , both in Babylon , and in Balsara , and if I can find it in any of these places , I will send it you from thence . The letter which you delivered me for to copy out , that came from M. Thomas Stevens in Goa , as also the note you gave me of Francis Fernandes the Portugal , I brought thence with me among other writings unawares , the which I have sent you here enclosed . Here is great preparation for the wars in 
 452 
 Persia , and from hence is gone the Bassa of a town called Rahemet , and shortly after goes the Bassa of Tripolis , and the Bassa of Damasco , but they have not all with them above 6000. men from hence , and they go to a town called Asmerome , which is three days journey from Trapezunde , where they shall meet with diverse captains and soldiers that come from Constantinople and other places thereabouts , which go altogether into Persia . This year many men go into the wars , and so hath there every year since the beginning thereof , which is eight years or thereabouts , but very few of them return again . Notwithstanding , they get of the Persians , and make castles and holds in their country . I pray you make my hearty commendations to master Peter Guillame , and master Philip Jones , and to M. Walter Warner , and to all the rest of our friends . Master Fitch hath him heartily commended unto you : and so I commit you to the tuition of the Almighty , who bless and keep you , and send us a joyful meeting . From Alepo , the 28. of May 1583. 
 Your loving friend to command in all that I may . John Newberie . 
 . 