His third Letter to Master Leonard Poor , written from Goa . 
 Michael Stropene and Italian accused our men to be spies . 
 Y last 1 sent you was from Ormuz , whereby I certified you what had happened there unto me , and the rest of my company , which was , that foure days after our arrival there , we were all committed to prison , except one Italian which came with me from 
 Aleppo , whom the Captain never examined , only demanded what countryman he was , but I make account Michael Stropene , who accused us , had informed the Captain of him . The first day we arrived there , this Stropene accused us that we were spies sent from DONE Antonio , beside diverse other lies : notwithstanding 458 
 if we had been of any other country then of England , we might freely have traded with them . And although we be Englishmen , I know no reason to the contrary , but that we may trade hither and thither as well as other nations , for all nations do , and may come freely to Ormuz , as Frenchmen , Flemmings , Almains , Hungarians , Italians , Greeks , Armenians , Nazaranies , Turkes and Moors , Jewes 8c Gentiles , Persians , Moscovites , and there is no nation that they seek for to trouble , except ours : wherefore it were contrary to all justice and reason that they should suffer all nations to trade with them , and to forbid us . But now I have as great liberty as any other nation , except it be to go out of the country , which thing as yet I desire not . But I think hereafter , and before it be long , if I shall be desirous to go from hence , that they will not deny me licence . Before we might be suffered to come out of prison , I was forced to put in sureties for 2000 pardaus , not to depart from hence without licence of the viceroy : otherwise except this , we have as much liberty as any other nation , for I have our goods again , 8c have taken and house in the chiefest street in the town , called the Rue drette , where we fell our goods . 
 There were two causes which moved the captain of Two causes of Ormus to imprison us , 8c afterwards to send us hither . oar . mens im The first was , because Michael Stropene had accused us at 
 of many matters , which were most false . And the second was for that M. Drake at his being at Maluco , caused two pieces of his ordinance to be shot at a gallion of the kings of Portugall , as they say . But of these things I did not know at Ormus : and in the ship that we were sent in came the chiefest justice in Ormus , who was called Aveador general of that place , he had been there three years , so that now his time was expired : which Aveador is a great friend to the captain of Ormus , who , certain days after our coming from thence , sent for me into his chamber , and 
 459 
 there began to demand of me many things , to the which I answered : and among the rest , he said , that Master Drake was sent out of England with many ships , and came to Maluco , and there jaded cloves , and finding a gallion there of the kings of Portugall , he caused two pieces of his greatest ordinance to be shot at the same : and so perceiving that this did greatly grieve them , I asked , if they would be revenged of me for that which M. Drake had done ? To the which he answered , No : although his meaning was to the contrary . 
 [ II i . 249. ] He said moreover , that the cause why the captain of Ormus did send me for Goa , was , for that the Viceroy would understand of me , what news there was of DONE Antonio , and whither he were in England , yea or no , and that it might be all for the best that I was sent hither , the which I trust in God will so fallen out , although contrary to his expectation : for had it not pleased God to put into the minds of the archbishop and other two Padres or Jesuits of S. Pauls coiledge to stand our friends , we might have rotted in prison . The archbishop is a very good man , who hath two young men to his servants , the one of them was born at Hamborough , and is called Bernard Borgers : and the other was born at Enchuysen , whose name is The author of John Linscot , who did us great pleasure : for by them the book of the ^g archbishop was many times put in mind of us . ast n tes , And the two good father's of S. Paul , who traveled very much for us , the one of them is called Padre Mark , who was born in Bruges in Flanders , and the | | This is he other was born in Wiltshire in England , and is called whose letters to „ padre Thomas Stevens . 
 his father .. TO , , , 
 from Goa are Also 1 chanced to hnde here a young man , who was before put born in Antwerpe , but the most part of his bringing down , andhe up hath been in London , his name is Francis de Rea , ^fPlew6^5 and w^h him it was my hap to be acquainted in ledge in Aleppo , who also hath done me great pleasure here . 
 Oxford . In the prison at Ormus we remained many days , 460 
 also we lay a long time at sea coming hither , and forthwith at our arrival here were carried to prison , and the next day after were sent for before the Aveador , who is the chiefest justice , to be examined : and when we were examined , he presently sent us back again to prison . 
 And after our being here in prison 13 days , James James Stone Story went into the monastery of S. Paul , where he t^r painter . remains , and is made one of the company , which life he liketh very well . 
 And upon S. Thomas day ( which was 22 days arrived after our arrival here ) I came out of prison , and the atJ^a the,20 next day after came out Ralph Fitch , and William Bets , 
 If these troubles had not chanced , I had been in possibility to have made as good a voyage as ever any man made with so much money . Many of our things I have sold very well , both here and at Ormus in prison , notwithstanding the captain willed me ( if I would ) to fell what I could before we embarked : & so with officers I went diverse times out of the castle in the morning , and sold things , and at night returned again to the prison , and all things that I sold they did write , and at our embarking from thence , the captain gave order that I should deliver all my money with the goods into the hands of the scrivano , or purser of the ship , which I did , and the scrivano made a remembrance , which he left there with the captain , that my self and the rest with money & goods he should deliver into the hands of the Aveador general of India : but at our arrival here , the Aveador would neither meddle with goods nor money , for that he could not prove any thing against us : wherefore the goods remained in the ship 9 or 10 days after our arrival , and then , for that the ship was to sail from thence , the scrivano sent the gpods on shore , and here they remained a day and a night , and no body to receive them . In the end they suffered this bringer to receive them , who came with me from Ormus , and put them into and house 461 
 which he had hired for me , where they remained foure or five days . But afterwards when they should deliver the money , it was concluded by the justice , that both the money and goods should be delivered into the positors hands , where they remained fourteene days after my coming out of prison . At my being in Aleppo , I bought a fountain of silver and gilded , sixe knives , sixe spoons , and one fork trimmed with coral for five and twentie chekins , which the captain of Ormus did take , and paid for the same twentie pardaos , which is one hundred larines , and was worth there or here one hundred chekins . Also he had five emrauds set in gold , which were worth five hundred or sixe hundred crowns , and paid for the same and hundred pardaos . Also he had nineteene and a half pikes of cloth , which cost in London twenty shillings the pike , and was worth 9 or 10 crowns the pike , and he paid for the same twelve larines a pike . Also he had two pieces of green Kersies , which were worth foure and twentie pardaos the piece , and paid for them sixteene pardaos a piece : beside diverse other trifles , that the officers and others had in the like order , and some for nothing at all . But the cause of all this was Michael Stropene , which came to Ormus not worth a penny , and now hath thirtie or fortie thousand crowns , and he grieveth that any other stranger should trade thither but himself . But that shall not skill , for I trust in God to go both thither and hither , and to buy and fell as freely as he or any other . Here is very great good to be done in diverse of our commodities , and in like manner there is great profit to be made with commodities of this country , to be carried to Aleppo . 
 It were long for me to write , and tedious for you to read of all things that have passed since my parting from you . But of all the troubles that have chanced since mine arrival in Ormus , this bringer is able to certify you . I mind to stay here : wherefore if you will write 462 
 1584-unto me , you may send your letters to some friend at Lisbone , & from thence by the ships they may be conveyed hither . Let the direction of your letters be either [ II i . 250. ] in Portuguise or Spanish , whereby they may come the better to my hands . From Goa this 20 day of Januarie . 1584. 
 . 