Master Newberie his letter from Ormus , to M. John Eldred and William Shals at Balsara . 
 Right well-beloved and my assured good friends , I heartily commend me unto you , hoping of your good healths , etc. To certify you of my voyage , after I departed from you , time will not permit : but the 4 of this present we arrived here , & the 10 day I with the rest were 
 committed to prison , and about the middle of the next month , the Captain will send us all in his ship for Goa . The cause why we are taken , as they say , is , for that I brought letters from DONE Antonio . But the truth is , Michael Stropene was the only cause , upon letters that his brother wrote him from Aleppo . God knoweth how we shall be dealt withal in Goa , and therefore if you can procure our master's to send the king of Spaine his letters for our releasement , you should do us great good : for they cannot with justice put us to death . It may be that they will cut our throats , or keep us long in prison : Gods will be done . All those commodities that I brought hither , had been very well sold , if this trouble had not chanced . You shall do well to send with all speed a messenger by land from Balsara to Aleppo , for to certify of this mischance , although it cost thirtie or forty crowns , for that we may be the sooner released , and I shall the better able to recover this again which is now like to be lost : I pray you make my hearty commendations , etc. From out of the prison in Ormuz , this 21 of September , 1583. 
 [ II i . 248. ] 
 [ His second 
 457 
 His second Letter to the foresaid Master John Eldred and William Shales . 
 He bark two days 
 of the Jewes is arrived here 
 past , by whom I know you did write , but your letters are not like to come to my hands . This bringer 
 hath showed me here very great courtesy , wherefore I pray that > u show him what favour you may . About the middle of the next month I think we shall depart from hence , 
 God be our guide . I think Andrew will go by land to Aleppo , wherein I pray you further him what you may : but if he should not go , then I pray you dispatch away a messenger with as much speed as possible you may . I can say no more , but do for me as you would I should do for you in the like cause , and so with my very hearty commendations , etc. From out of the prison in Ormuz , this 24 day of September , t583 - 
 Yours , John Newberie . 
 . 