The voyage of M. Ralph Fitch merchant of London by the way of Tripolis in Syria , to Ormus , and so to Goa in the East India , to Cambaia , and all the kingdom of Zelabdim Echebar the great Mogor , to the mighty river Ganges , and down to Bengala , to Bacola , and Chonderi , to Pegu , to Imahay in the kingdom of Siam , and back to Pegu , and from thence to Malacca , Zeilan , Cochin , and all the coast of the East India : begun in the year of our Lord 1583 , and ended 1591 , wherein the strange rites , manners , and customs of those people , and the exceeding rich trade and commodities of those countries are faithfully set down and diligently described , by the aforesaid M. Ralph Fitch . 
 N the year of our Lord 1583 , I Ralph Fitch of London merchant being desirous to see the countries' of the East India , in the company of M. John Newberie merchant ( which had been at Ormus once before ) of William Leedes Jeweller , and James Story Painter , being chiefly set [ II i . 251. ] 
 forth by the right worshipful Sir Edward Osborne knight , and M. Richard _ Staper citizens and merchants of London , did ship my self in a ship of London called the Tiger , wherein we went for Tripolis in Syria : & from thence we took the way for Aleppo , which we went in seven days with the Caro van . Being in Aleppo , and finding good company , we went from thence to Birra , which is two days and and half travail with Camels . 
 Birra is a little town , but very plentiful of victuals : Birra . and near to the wall of the town runneth the river of Euphrates . Here we bought a boat and agreed with a master and bargemen , for to go to Babylon . These boats be but for one voyage ; for the stream does run 
 v 465 2 G 
 so fast downwards that they cannot return . They carry you to a town which they call Felugia , and there you fell the boat for a little money , for that which cost you fiftie at Birra you fell there for seven or eight . From Birra to Felugia is sixteene days journey , it is not good that one boat go alone , for if it should chance to break , you should have much a do to save your goods from the Arabians , which be always there about robbing : and in the night when your boats be made fast , it is necessary that you keep good watch . For the Arabians that be thieves , will come swimming and steal your goods and flee away , against which a gun is very good , for they do fear it very much . In the river of Euphrates from Birra to Felugia there be certain places where you pay custom , so many Medines for a some or Camels lading , and certain raisons and soap , which is for the sons of Aborise , which is Lord of the Arabians and all that great desert , and hath some villages upon Beluga . the river . Felugia where you unladen your goods which come from Birra is a little village : from whence you go to Babylon in a day . 
 Babylon . Babylon is a town not very great but very populous , and of great traffic of strangers , for that it is the way to Persia , Turkia and Arabia : and from thence do go Carovans for these and other places . Here are great store of victuals , which come from Armenia down the river of Tygris . They are brought upon rafts made of goats skins blown full of wind and boards laid upon them : and thereupon they lade their goods which are brought down to Babylon , which being discharged they open their skins , and carry them back by Camels , to serve another time . Babylon in times past did belong to the kingdom of Persia , but now is subject to the Turke . Over against Babylon there is a very fair village from whence you pass to Babylon upon a long bridge made of boats , and tied to a great chain of iron , which is made fast on either side of the river . When any boats are to pass up or down the river , 466 
 they take away certain of the boats until they be past . 
 The Tower of Babel is built on this side the river Tygris , towards Arabia from the town about seven or eight miles , which tower is ruinated on all sides , and with the fallen thereof hath made as it were a little mountain , so that it hath no shape at all : it was made of bricks dried in the son , and certain canes and leaves of the palm tree laid betwixt the bricks . There is no entrance to be seen to go into it . It does stand upon a great plain betwixt the rivers of Euphrates and Tygris . 
 By the river Euphrates two days journey from Babylon at a place called Ait , in a field near unto it , is a strange thing to see : a mouth that does continually throw forth against the air boiling pitch with a filthy smoke : which pitch does run abroad into a great field which is always full thereof . The Moors say that it is the mouth of hell . By reason of the great quantity of it , the men of that country do pitch their boats two or three inches thick on the out side , so that no water does enter into them . Their boats be called Danec . 
 A.D. 
 I583-9I . 
 The tower of Babel . 
 Boiling pitch continually issuing out of the earth . 
 When there is great store of water in Tygris you may go from Babylon to Basora in 8 or 9 days : if there be small store it will cost you the more days . 
 Basora in times past was under the Arabians , but now is subject to the Turke . But some of them the Turke cannot subdue , for that they hold certain Islands in the river Euphrates which the Turke cannot win of them . They be thieves all and have no settled dwelling , but remove from place to place with their Camels , goats , and horses , wives and children and all . They have large blue gowns , their wives ears and noses are ringed very full of rings of copper and silver , and they wear rings of copper about their legs . 
 Basora stands near the gulf of Persia , and is a town of great trade of spices and drug which come from Ormus . Also there is great store of wheat , rice , 467 
 and dates growing thereabouts , wherewith they serve Babylon and all the country , Ormus , and all the parts of India . I went from Basora to Ormus down the gulf of Persia in a certain ship made of boards , and sowed together with cayro , which is thread made of the husk of Cocoes , and certain canes or straw leaves sowed upon the seams of the hordes which is the cause that they leak very much . And so having Persia always on the left hand , and the coast of Arabia on the right hand we passed many Islands , and among others the famous Hand Baharim from whence come the best pearls which be round and Orient . 
 Ormus is and Island in circuit about five and twentie or thirtie miles , and is the driest Island in the world : for there is nothing growing in it but only salt ; for their water , wood , or victuals , and all things necessary come out of Persia , which is about twelve miles from thence . All the Hands thereabouts be very fruitful , from whence all kind of victuals are sent unto Ormus . The Portugals have a castle here which stands near unto the sea , wherein there is a Captain for the king of Portugale having under him a convenient number of soldiers , whereof some part remain in the castle , and some in the town . In this town are merchants of all Nations , and many Moors and Gentiles . Here is very great trade of all sorts of spices , drugs , silk , cloth of silk , fine tapestry of Persia , great store of pearls which come from the Isle of Baharim , and are the best pearls of all others , and many horses of Persia , which serve all India . They have a More to their king , which is chosen and governed by the Portugales . Their women are very strangely attired , wearing on their noses , ears , necks , arms and legs many rings set with jewels , and locks of silver and gold in their ears , and a long bar of gold upon the side of their noses . Their ears with the weight of their jewels be worn so wide , that a man may thrust three of his fingers into them . Here very shortly after our arrival we were put in prison , and had part of our goods taken 468 
 from us by the Captain of the castle , whose name was DONE Mathias de Albuquerque ; and from hence the eleventh of October he shipped us and sent us for Goa unto the Viceroy , which at that time was DONE Francisco de Mascarenhas . The ship wherein we were embarked for Goa belonged to the Captain , and carried one hundred twentie and foure horses in it . All merchandise carried to Goa in a ship wherein are horses pay no custom in Goa . The horses pay custom , the goods pay nothing ; but if you come in a ship which brings no horses , you are then to pay eight in the hundred for your goods . The first city of India that we arrived at upon the fift of November , after we had passed the coast of Zindi , is called Diu , which stands in and Hand in the kingdom Diu. of Cambaia , and is the strongest town that the Portugales have in those parts . It is but little , but well stored with merchandise ; for here they lade many great ships with diverse commodities for the streits of Mecca , for Ormus , and other places , and these be ships of the Moors and of Christians . But the Moors cannot pass , except they have a passport from the Portugales . Cambaietta is the chief city of that province , which is great and very populous , and fairly built for a town of the Gentiles : but if there happen any famine , the people will fell their children for very little . The last king of Cambaia was Sultan Badu , which was killed at the siege of Diu , and shortly after his city was taken by the great Mogor , which is the king of Agra and of Delli , which are fortie days journey from the country of Cambaia . Here the women wear upon their arms infinite numbers of rings made of Elephants teeth , wherein they take so much delight , that they had rather be without their meat then without their bracelets . Going from Diu we come to Daman the second town of the Portugales in the country Daman . of Cambaia which is distant from Diu fortie leagues . 
 Here is no trade but of corn and rice . They have many villages under them which they quietly possess in time of peace , but in time of war the enemy is master of 469 
 Basaim . them . From thence we passed by Basaim , and from 
 Tana . Basaim to Tana , at both which places is small trade but 
 only of corn and rice . The tenth of November we 
 Chaul . arrived at Chaul which stands in the firm land . There be two towns , the one belonging to the Portugales , and the other to the Moors . That of the Portugales is nearest to the sea , and commandeth the bay , and is walled round about . A little above that is the town of the Moors which is governed by a More king called Xa-Maluco . Here is great traffic for all sorts of spices and drug , silk , and cloth of silk , sandals , Elephants teeth , and much China work , and much sugar which is made of the nut called Gagara : the tree is called the palmer : which is the profitablest tree in the world : it does always bear fruit , and does yield wine , oil , sugar , vinegar , cords , coals , of the leaves are made thatch for the houses , sails for ships , mats to fit or lie on : of the branches they make their houses , and brooms to sweep , of the tree wood for ships . The wine doth issue out of the top of the tree . They cut a branch of a bow and bind it hard , and hang and earthen pot upon it , which they empty every morning and every evening , and still it and put in certain dried raisins , and it becomes very strong wine in short time . Hither many ships come from all parts of India , Ormus , and many from Mecca : here be many Moors and Gentiles . They have a very strange order among them , they worship a cow , and esteem much of the cows dung to paint the walls of their houses . They will kill nothing not so much as a louse : for they hold it a sin to kill any thing . They eat no flesh , but live by roots , and rice , and milk . And when the husband dieth his wife is burned with him , if she be alive : if she will not , her 
 [ II i . 253. ] head is shaved , and then is never any account made of her after . They say if they should be buried , it were a great sin , for of their bodies there would come many worms and other vermin , and when their bodies were consumed , those worms would lack sustenance , which 
 470 
 1583-9 ! • were a sin , therefore they will be burned . In Cambaia they will kill nothing , nor have any thing killed : in the town they have hospitals to keep lame dogs and cats , and for birds . They will give meat to the Ants. 
 Goa is the most principal city which the Portugals Goa . have in • India , wherein the Viceroy remains with his court . It stands in and Hand , which may be 25. or 30. miles about . It is a fine city , and for and Indian town very fair . The Hand is very fair , full of orchards and gardens , and many palmer trees , and hath some villages . Here be many merchants of all nations . And the Fleet which comes every year from Portugal , which be foure , five , or sixe great ships , comes first hither . And they come for the most part in September , and remain there fortie or fiftie days ; and then go to Cochin , where they lade their Pepper for Portugall . Oftentimes they lade one in Goa , the rest go to Cochin which is from Goa and hundred leagues southward . Goa stands in the country of Hidalcan , who lies in the country sixe or seven days journey . His chief city is called Bisapor . At our coming we were cast into thee was th* prison , and examined before the Justice and demanded for letters , and were charged to be spies , but they could ’ prove nothing by us . We continued in prison until the two and twentie of December , and then we were set at liberty , putting in sureties for two thousand ducats not to depart the town ; which sureties father Stevens and English Jesuite which we found there , 8c another religious man a friend of his procured for us . Our sureties name was Andreas Taborer , to whom we paid 2150. ducats , and still he demanded more : whereupon we made suit to the Viceroy and Justice to have our money again , considering that they had had it in their hands near five months and could prove nothing against us . The Viceroy made us a very sharp answer , and said we should be better sifted before it were long , and that they had further matter against us . Whereupon we presently determined rather to seek our liberties , then 
 471 
 to be in danger for ever to be slaves in the country , for it was told us we should have you strapado . Whereupon presently , the fift day of April 1585. in the morning we ran from thence . And being set over the river , we went two days on foot not without fear , not knowing the way nor having any guide , for we durst trust none . One of the first towns which we came unto , is called Bellergan a Bellergan , where there is a great market kept of town . Diamonds , Rubies , Saphires , and many other soft stones . 
 Bitapor . From Bellergan we went to Bisapor which is a very great town where the king doth keep his court . He hath many Gentiles in his court and they be great idolaters . And they have their idols standing in the Woods , which they fallen Pagodes . Some be like a Cow , some like a Monkey , some like Buffles , some like peacocks , and some like the devil . Here be very many elephants which they go to war withal . Here they have good store of gold and silver : their houses are of stone very Gulconda . fair and high . From hence we went for Gulconda , the king whereof is called Cutup de lashach . Here and in the kingdom of Hidalcan , and in the country of the king of Decan be the Diamonds found of the old water . It is a very fair town , pleasant , with fair houses of brick and timber , it aboundeth with great store of fruits and fresh water . Here the men and the women do go with a cloth bound about their middles without any more apparel . We found it here very hight . 
 The winter begins here about the last of May . In Masulipatan . these parts is a port or haven called Masulipatan , which stands eight days journey from hence towards the gulf of Bengala , whither come many ships out of India , Pegu , and Sumatra , very richly laden with Pepper , spices , and other commodities . The country is very Servidore . good and fruitful . From thence I went to Servidore which is a fine country , and the king is called , the king of Bred . The houses here be all thatched and made of loom . Here be many Moors and Gentiles , but there is small religion among them . From thence I went to 
 472 
 Bellapore , and so to Barrampore , which is in the country Bellapore . of Zelabdim Echebar . In this place their money is made of a kind of silver round and thick , to the valve of twentie pence , which is very good silver . It is marvellous great and a , populous country . In their winter which is in June , July , and August , there is no passing in the streets but with horses , the waters be so high . The houses are made of loom and thatched . Here is great store of cotton cloth made , and painted clothes of cotton wool : here grows great store of corn and Rice . We found marriages great store both in towns Strange and villages in many places where we passed , of boys mariaSes-of eight or ten years , and girls of five or six years old . They both do ride upon one horse very trimly decked , and are carried through the town with great piping and playing , and so return home and eat of a banquet made of Rice and fruits , and there they dance the most part of the night and so make and end of the marriage . They lie not together until they be ten years old . They say they marry their children so young , because it is and order that when the man dieth , the woman must be burned with him : so that if the father [ II i . 254. ] die , yet they may have a father in law to help to bring up the children which be married : and also that they will not leave their sons without wives , nor their daughters without husbands . From thence we went to Mandoway , which is a very strong town . It was Mandoway a besieged twelve years by Zelabdim Echebar before he strong could win it . It stands upon a very great high rock ' as the most part of their castles do , and was of a very great circuit . From hence we went to Ugini and Ugini . 
 Serringe , where we overtook the ambassador of Zelabdim Echebar with a marvelous great company of men , elephants , and camels . Here is great trade of cotton and cloth made of cotton , and great store of drugs . From thence we went to Agra passing many rivers , which by reason of the rain were so swollen , that we waded Agra a & . eat and swam oftentimes for our lives . Agra is a very city . 
 473 
 The like is reported of the cities of China . 
 great city and populous , built with stone , having fair and large streets , with a fair river running by it , which falls into the gulf of Bengala . It hath a fair castle and a strong with a very fair ditch . Here be many Moors and Gentiles , the king is called Zelabdim Echebar : the people for the most part call him The great Mogor . From thence we went for Fatepore , which is the place where the king kept his court . The town is greater then Agra , but the houses and streets be not so fair . Here dwell many people both Moors and Gentiles . The king hath in Agra and Fatepore as they do credibly report 1000. elephants , thirtie thousand horses , 1400. tame Dear , 800. concubines : such store of Ounces , Tigers , Buffies , Cocks & Hawks , that is very strange to see . He keepeth a great court , which they call Dericcan . Agra and Fatepore are two very great cities , either of them much greater then London and very populous . Between Agra and Fatepore are 12. miles , and all the way is a market of victuals & other things , as full as though a man were still in a town , and so many people as if a man were in a market . They have many fine carts , and many of them carved and gilded with gold , with two wheels which be drawn with two little Buis about the bigness of our great dogs in England , and they will run with any horse , and carry two or three men in one of these carts : they are covered with silk or very fine cloth , and be used here as our Coaches be in England . Hither is great resort of merchants from Persia and out of India , and very much merchandise of silk and cloth , and of precious stones , both Rubies , Diamonds , and Pearls . The king is appareled in a white Cabie made like a shirt tied with strings on the one side , and a little cloth on his head coloured oftentimes with read or yellow . None come into his house but his eunuchs which keep his women . Here in Fatepore we stayed all three until the 28. of September 1585. and then master John Newberie took his journey towards the city of Lahor , determining from 
 474 
 thence to go for Persia and then for Aleppo or Constantinople , whither he could get soonest passage unto , and directed me to go for Bengala and for Pegu , and did promise me , if it pleased God , to meet me in Bengala within two years with a ship out of England . I left William Leads the jeweller in service with the king Zelabdim Echebar in Fatepore , who did entertain him very well , and gave him and house and five slaves , and horse , and every day sixe S. S. in money . I went from Agra to Satagam in Bengala , in the company of one hundred and fourescore boats laden with Salt , Opium , Hinge , Led , Carpets , and diverse other commodities down the river Jemena . The chief merchants are Moors and Gentiles . In these countries they have many strange ceremonies . The Bramanes which are their priests , come to the water and have a string about their necks made with great ceremonies , and lade up water with both their hands , and turn the string first with both their hands within , and then one arm after the other out . Though it be never so cold , they will wash themselves in cold water or in warm . These Gentiles will eat no flesh nor kill any thing . They live with rice , butter , milk , and fruits . They pray in the water naked , and dress their meat & eat it naked , and for their penance they lie flat upon the earth , and rise up and turn themselves about 30. or 40. times , and use to heave up their hands to the sun , & to kiss the earth , with their arms and legs stretched along out , and their right leg always before the left . Every time they lie down , they make a score on the ground with their finger to know when their stint is finished . The Bramanes mark themselves in the foreheads , ears and throats with a kind of yellow gear which they grind , & every morning they do it . And they have some old men which go in the streets with a box of yellow powder , and mark men on their heads & necks as they meet them . And their wives do come by 10. 20. & 30. together to the water side singing , & there 
 475 
 A.D. 
 1583-91 - 
 Wil. Leades served the king of Cambaia . 
 The superstitious ceremonies of the Bramanes . 
 do wash themselves , & then use their ceremonies , & mark themselves in their foreheads and faces , and carry some with them , and so depart singing . Their daughters be married , at , or before the age of io . years . The men may have 7. wives . They be a kind of crafty people , worse then the Jewes . When they salute one another , they heave up their hands to their heads , and say Rame , Rame . From Agra I came to Prage , where the river 
 Ganges . Jemena entereth into the mighty river Ganges , and Jemena loses his name . Ganges comes out of the 
 [ II i . 255. ] Northwest , & runneth East into the gulf of Bengala . In those parts there are many Tigers and many partridges 8c turtle-doves , and much other foul . Here be many beggars in these countries which go naked , and the people make great account of them : they call them Schesche . Here I saw one which was a monster among the rest . He would have nothing upon him , his beard was very long , and with the hair of his head he covered his privities . The nails of some of his fingers were two inches long , for he would cut nothing from him , neither would he speak . He was accompanied with eight or tenne , and they spoke for him . When any man spoke to him , he would lay his hand upon his breast and bow himself , but would not speak . He would not speak to the king . We went from Prage down Ganges , the which is here very broad . Here is great store of fish of sundry sorts , 8c of wild foul , as of swans , geese , cranes , and many other things . The country is very fruitful and populous . The men for the most part have their faces shaved , and their heads very long , except some which bee all shaved save the crown : and some of them are as though a man should set a dish on their heads , and shave them round , all but the crown . In this river of Ganges are many Hands . His water is very sweet and pleasant , and the country adjoining 
 Bannaras . very fruitful . From thence we went to Bannaras which is a great town , and great store of cloth is made there of cotton , and Shashes for the Moors . In this place 476 
 I583-91-they be all Gentiles , and be the greatest idolaters that ever I saw . To this town come the Gentiles on pil - pilgrimage grimage out of far countries' . Here alongst the waters °ftheGentiles-side be very many fair houses , and in all of them , or for the most part they have their images standing , which be evil favoured , made of stone and wood , some like lions , leopards , and monkeis , some like men & women , and peacocks , and some like the devil with foure arms and 4. hands . They fit cross legged , some with one thing in their hands , & some another , & by break of day and before , there are men & women which come out of the town and wash themselves in Ganges . And there are diverse old men which upon places of earth made for the purpose , fit praying , and they give the people three or foure straws , which they take & hold them between their fingers when they wash themselves : and some fit to mark them in the foreheads , and they have in a cloth a little Rice , Barley , or money , which , when they have washed themselves , they give to the old men which fit there praying . Afterwards they go to diverse of their images , & give them of their sacrifices . And when they give , the old men say certain prayers , and then is all holy . And in diverse places there stands a kind of image which in their language they call Ada . And they have diverse great stones carved , whereon they pour water , & throw thereupon some rice , wheat , barley , and some other things . This Ada hath foure hands with claws . Moreover , they have a great place made of stone like to a well with steps to go down ; wherein the water stands very foul and stinketh : for the great quantity of flowers , which continually they throw into it , do make it stink . There be always many people in it : for they say when they wash themselves in it , that their sins be forgiven them , because God , as they say , did wash himself in that place . They gather up the sand in the bottom of it , and say it is holy . They never pray but in the water , and they wash themselves overhead , 
 477 
 and lade up water with both their hands , and turn themselves about , and then they drink a little of the water three times , and so go to their gods which stand in those houses . Some of them will wash a place which is their length , and then will pray upon the earth with their arms and legs at length out , and will rise up and lie down , and kiss the ground twentie or thirtie times , but they will not stir their right foot . And some of them will make their ceremonies with fifteene or sixteene pots little and great , and ring a little bel when they make their mixtures tenne or twelve times : and they make a circle of water round about their pots and pray , and diverse fit by them , and one that reaches them their pots : and they say diverse things over their pots many times , and when they have done , they go to their gods , and strow their sacrifices which they think are very holy , and mark many of them which fit by , in the foreheads , which they take as a great gift . There come fiftie and sometime and hundred together , to wash them in this well , and to offer to these idols . 
 They have in some of these houses their idols standing , and one sitteth by them in warm weather with a fan to blow wind upon them . And when they see any company coming , they ring a little bell which hangs by them , and many give them their alms , but especially those which come out of the country . Many of them are black and have claws of brass with long nails , and some ride upon peacocks and other fowls which be evil favoured , with long hawks bills , and some like one thing and some another , but none with a good face . Among the rest there is one which they make great account of : for they say he gives them all things both food and apparel , and one sitteth always by him with a fan to make wind towards him . Here some be burned to ashes , some scorched in the fire and thrown into the water , and dogs and foxes do presently eat them . The wives here do burn 478 
 with their husbands when they die , if they will not , their heads be shaved , and never any account is made of them afterwards . The people go all naked save a little cloth [ II i . 256. ] bound about their middle . Their women have their necks , arms and ears decked with rings of silver , copper , tin , and with round hoops made of Ivory , adorned with amber stones , and with many agats , and they are marked with a great spot of read in their foreheads , and a stroke of read up to the crown , and so it runneth three manner of ways . In their Winter , which is our May , the men wear quilted gowns of cotton like to our mattraces and quilted caps like to our great Grocers mortars , with a slit to look out at , and so tied down beneath their ears . If a man or woman be sick and like to die , they will lay him before their idols all night , and that shall help him or make and end of him . And if he do not mend that night , his friends will come and fit with him a little and cry , and afterwards will carry him to the waters side and set him upon a little raft made of reeds , and so let him go down the river . When they be married the man and the woman come to the water side , and there is and old man which they call a Bramane , that is , a priest , a cow , and a calf , or a cow with calf . Then the man and the woman , cow and calf , and the old man go into the water together , and they give the old man a white cloth of foure yards long , and a basket cross bound with diverse things in it : the cloth he layeth upon the back of the cow , and then he takes the cow by the end of the tail , and sayeth certain words : and she hath a copper or a brass pot full of water , and the man doth hold his hand by the old men hand , and the ? wives hand by her husbands , and all have the cow by ne^ varied the tail , and they pour water out of the pot upon the folks together cows tail , and it runneth through all their hands , and h they lade up water with their hands , and then the old man doth tie him and her together by their clothes . “ Mexican ™ Which done , they go round about the cow and calf , old time . 
 479 
 and then they give somewhat to the poor which be always there , and to the Bramane or priest they give the cow and calf , and afterwards go to diverse of their idols and offer money , and lie down flat upon the ground and kiss it diverse times , and then go their way . Their chief idols be black and evil favoured , their mouths monstrous , their ears gilded , and full of jewels , their teeth and eyes of gold , silver , and glass , some having one thing in their hands , and some another . You may not come into the houses where they stand , with your shoes on . They have continually lamps Patenaw . burning before them . From Bannaras I went to Patenaw down the river of Ganges : where in the way we passed many fair towns , and a country very fruitful : and many very great rivers do enter into Ganges , and some of them as great as Ganges , which cause Ganges to be of a great breadth , and so broad that in the time of rain you cannot see from one side to the other . These Indians when they be scorched and thrown into the water , the men swim with their faces downwards , the women with their faces upward , I thought they tied something to them to cause them to do so : but they say no . There be very many thieves in this country , which be like to the Arabians : for they have no certain abided , but are sometime in one place and sometime in another . Here the women be so decked with silver and copper , that it is strange to see , they use no shoes by reason of the rings of silver and copper which they Gold found , wear on their toes . Here at Patanaw they find gold in this manner . They dig deep pits in the earth , and wash the earth in great bolls , and therein they find the gold , and they make the pits round about with brick , that the earth fallen not in . Patenaw is a very long and a great town . In times passed it was a kingdom , but now it is under Zelabdim Echebar the great Mogor . The men are tall and slender , and have many old folks among them : the houses are simple , made of earth and covered with straw , the streets are very large . 
 480 
 In this town there is a trade of cotton , & cloth of cotton , much sugar , which they carry from hence to Bengala and India , very much Opium & other commodities . He that is chief here under the king is called Tipper-das , and j is of great account among the people . Here in Patenau I saw a dissembling prophet which sat upon and horse in the market place , and made as though he slept , and many of the people came and touched his feet with their hands , and then kissed their hands . They took him for a great man , but sure he was a lazy lubber . I left him there sleeping . The people of these countries be much given to such prating and dissembling hypocrites . 
 From Patanaw I went to Tanda which is in the land Tanda in of Gouren . It hath in times passed be a kingdom , but Gouren-now is subdued by Zelabdim Echebar . Great trade and traffic is here of cotton , and of cloth of cotton . The people go naked with a little cloth bound about their waste . It stands in the country of Bengala . Here be many Tigers , wild Bufs , and great store of wild foul : they are very great idolaters . Tanda stands from the river Ganges a league , because in times passed the river flowing over the banks , in time of rain did drown the country and many villages , and so they do remain . And the old way which the river Ganges was wont to run , remains dry , which is the occasion that the city doth stand so far from the water . From Agra down the river Jemena , and down the river Ganges , I was five months coming to Bengala , but it may be sailed in much shorter time . 
 I went from Bengala into the country of Couch , L11 - * • 257-J which lies 25. days journey Northwards from Tanda . 
 The king is a Gentile , his name is Suckel Counse : his Quicheu , country is great , and lies not far from Cauchin China : accounted by for they say they have pepper from thence . The port some among is called Cacchegate . All the country is set with Bambos tO , l^^inces or Canes made sharp at both the ends & driven into the earth , and they can let in the water & drown the 
 v 481 2 H 
 In Mexico they use likewise for small money the fruit Cacao , which ate like almonds . Hugely . 
 Porto Angeli . 
 The like cloth may be made of the long grass in Virginia . 
 ground above knee deep , so that men nor horses can pass . They poison all the waters if any wars be . Here they have much silk & musk , and cloth made of cotton . The people have ears which be marvelous great of a span long , which they draw out in length by devises when they be young . Here they be all Gentiles , and they will kill nothing . They have hospitals for sheep , goats , dogs , cats , birds , & for all other living creatures . When they be old & lame , they keep them until they die . If a man catch or buy any quick thing in other places & bring it thither , they will give him money for it or other victuals , & keep it in their hospitals or let it go . They will give meat to the Ants. Their small money is almonds , which oftentimes they use to eat . From thence I returned to Hugeli , which is the place where the Portugals keep in the country of Bengala which stands in 23. degrees of Northerly latitude , and stands a league from Satagan : they call it Porto Piqueno . We went through the wilderness , because the right way was full of thieves , where we passed the country of Gouren , where we found but few villages , but almost all wilderness , & saw many buffs , swine & deer , grass longer then a man , and very many Tigers . Not far from Porto Piqueno southwestward , stands and haven which is called Angeli , in the country of Orixa . It was a kingdom of it self , & the king was a great friend to strangers . Afterwards it was taken by the king of Patan which was their neighbour , but he did not enjoy it long , but was taken by Zelabdim Echebar , which is king of Agra , Belli , & Cambaia . Orixa stands 6. days journey from Satagan , southwestward . In this place is very much Rice , and cloth made of cotton , & great store of cloth which is made of grass , which they call Yerva , it is like a silk . They make good cloth of it which they send for India 8c diverse other places . To this haven of Angeli come every year many ships out of India , Negapatan , Sumatra , Malacca , and diverse other places ; 8c lade from thence great store of Rice , 8c much cloth 
 482 
 I583-9I-of cotton wool , much sugar , & long pepper , great store of butter & other victuals for India . Satagam is a fair Satagam . city for a city of the Moors , and very plentiful of all things . Here in Bengala they have every day in one place or other a great market which they call Chandeau , and they have many great boats which they call pericose , wherewithal ! they go from place to place and buy Rice and many other things : these boats have 24. or 26. oars to row them , they be great of burden , but have no coverture . Here the Gentiles have the 
 water of Ganges in great estimation , for having good water near them , yet they will fetch the water of Ganges a great way off , and if they have not sufficient to drink , they will sprinkle a little on them , and then they think themselves well . From Satagam I traveled by the country of the king of Tippara or porto Grande , with whom the Mogores or Mogen have almost continual wars . The Mogen which be of the kingdom of Recon and Rame , be stronger then the king of Tippara , so that Chatigan or porto Grande is oftentimes under the king of Recon . 
 There is a country 4. days journey from Couch or Quicheu before mentioned , which is called Bottanter and the city Bottia , the king is called Dermain ; the people whereof are very tall and strong , and there are merchants which come out of China , & they say out of Muscovia or Tartarie . And they come to buy musk , cambals , agats , silk , pepper and saffron like the saffron of Persia . The country is very great , 3. months journey . There are very high mountains in this country , & one of them so steep that when a man is 6. days journey off it , he may see it perfectly . Upon these mountains are people which have ears of a span long : if their ears be not long , they call them apes . They say that when they be upon the mountains , they see ships in the Sea sailing to and from ; but they know not from whence they come , nor whither they go . There are merchants which come out of the East , they say , 483 
 Tippara or porto Grande . 
 Bottanter a greatNorthren country . 
 Merchants of China , Moscovy and Tartarie . 
 These seem to be the mountains of Imaus called by the people Cumao . 
 from under the sun , which is from China , which have no beards , and they say there it is something warm .. But those which come from the other side of the mountains which is from the North , say there it is very cold .. The apparel These Northern merchant's are appareled with woollen . of the Tar - does anj hats , white hosen close , and boots which be 
 chants . °* Moscovia or Tartane . They report that in their 
 country they have very good horses , but they be little : some men have foure , five , or sixe hundred horses and kine : they live with milk and flesh . They cut the Come tails in tails of their kine , and fell them very deer , for they great request . bee jn great request anj much esteemed in those parts . 
 The hair of them is a yard long , the rumpe is above a span long : they use to hang them for bravery upon the heads of their Elephants : they be much used in Pegu and China : they buy and fell by scores upon the ground . The people be very swift on foot . 
 Bacola . From Chatigan in Bengala , I came to Bacola ; the king whereof is a Gentile , a man very well disposed and delights much to shoot in a gun . His country is very great and fruitful , and hath store of Rice , much , cotton cloth , and cloth of silk . The houses be very fair and high built , the streets large , the people naked , except a little cloth about their waste . The women wear great store of silver hoops about their necks and arms , and their legs are ringed with silver and copper , and rings made of elephants teeth . 
 Serrepore . From Bacola I went to Serrepore which stands upon the river of Ganges , the king is called Chondery . They be all hereabout rebels against their king Zelabdim Echebar : for here are so many rivers & Hands , that they flee from one to another , whereby his horse ’ men cannot prevail against them . Great store of cotton cloth is made here . 
 Sinnergan . Sinnergan is a town sixe leagues from Serrepore , where there is the best and finest cloth made of cotton that is in all India . The chief king of all these 484 
 countries is called Isacan , and he is chief of all the other kings , and is a great friend to all Christians . The houses here , as they be in the most part of India , are very little , and covered with straw , and have a few mats round about the walls , and the door to keep out the Tigers and the Foxes . Many of the people are very rich . Here they will eat no flesh , nor kill no beast : they live of Rice , milk , and fruits . They go with a little cloth before them , and all the rest of their bodies is naked . Great store of Cotton cloth goes from hence , and much Rice , wherewith they serve all India , Ceilon , Pegu , Malacca , Sumatra , and many other places . 
 I went from Serrepore the 28. of November 1586. for Pegu in a small ship or foist of one Albert Caravallos , and so passing down Ganges , and passing by the Island Sundiva of Sundiva , porto Grande , or the country of Tippera , sland-the kingdom of Recon and Mogen , leaving them on our left side with a fair wind at Northwest : our course was South & by East , which brought us to the bar of Negrais in Pegu : if any contrary wind had come , we had thrown many of our things overboard : for we were so pestered with people & goods , that there was scant place to lie in . From Bengala to Pegu is 90. leagues . We entered the bar of Negrais , which is a brave bar Negrais . & hath 4. fathoms water where it hath least . Three days after we came to Cosmin , which is a very - pretty Cosmin . town , and stands very pleasantly , very well furnished with all things . The people be very tall & well disposed ; the women white , round faced , with little eyes : the houses are high built , set upon great high posts , & they go up to them with long ladders for fear of the Ladders used Tigers which be very many . The country is very fruitful of all things . Here are very great Figs , Oranges , beastSt Cocoes , and other fruits . The land is very high that we fallen withal , but after we be entered the bar , it is very low and full of rivers , for they go all too and Dwelling m from in boats , which they call paroes , and keep their bMts ' houses with wife and children in them . 
 485 
 Dela . 
 Cirion . 
 Macao . 
 Coaches carted on men's shoulders . 
 Pegu. 
 From the bar of Nigrais to the city of Pegu is ten days journey by the rivers . we went from Cosmin to Pegu in Faroes or boats , and passing up the rivers we came to Medon , which is a pretty town , where there be a wonderful number of Paroes , for they keep their houses and their markets in them all upon the water . They row too and from , and have all their merchandizes in their boats with a great Sombrero or shadow over their heads to keep the sun from them , which is as broad as a great cart wheel made of the leaves of the Coco trees and fig trees , and is very light . 
 From Medon we went to Dela , which is a very fair town , and hath a fair port into the sea , from whence go many ships to Malacca , Mecca , and many other places . Here are 18. or 20. very great and long houses , where they tame and keep many elephants of the kings : for there about in the wilderness they catch the wild elephants . It is a very fruitful country . From Dela we went to Cirion , which is a good town , and hath a fair port into the sea , whither come many ships from Mecca , Malacca , Sumatra , and from diverse other places . And there the ships stay and discharge , & send up their goods in Paroes to Pegu. From Cirion we went to Macao , which is a pretty town , where we left our boats or Paroes , & in the morning taking Delingeges , which are a kind of Coaches made of cords & cloth quilted , & carried upon a stang between 3. or 4. men : we came to Pegu the same day . Pegu is a city very great , strong , and very fair , with walls of stone , and great ditches round about it . There are two towns , the old town and the new . In the old town are all the merchants strangers , and very many merchants of the country . All the goods are sold in the old town which is very great , and hath many suburbs round about it , and all the houses are made of Canes which they call Bambos , and be covered with straw . In your house you have a Warehouse 486 
 which they call Godon , which is made of brick to put your goods in , for oftentimes they take fire and burn in and hour foure or five hundred houses : so that if the Godon were not , you should be in danger to have all burned , if any wind should rise , at a trice . In the new town is the king , and all his Nobility and Gentry . It is a city very great and populous , and is made square and with very fair walls , and a great ditch round about it full of water , with many crocodiles in it : it hath twenty gates , and they be made [ II i . 259. ] of stone , for every square five gates . There are also many Turrets for Centinels to watch , made of wood , and gilded with gold very fair . The streets are the fairest that ever I saw , as straight as a line from one gate to the other , and so broad that tenne or twelve men may ride a front thorough them . On both sides of them at every men door is set a palmer tree which is the nut tree : which make a very fair show and a very commodious shadow , so that a man may walk in the shade all day . The houses be made of wood , and covered with tiles . The kings house is in the middle of the city , and is walled and ditched round about : and the buildings within are made of wood very sumptuously gilded , and great workmanship is upon the forefront , which is likewise very costly gilded . And the house wherein his Pagode or idol stands is covered with tiles of silver , and all the walls are gilded with gold . Within the first gate of the kings house is a great large room , on both sides whereof are houses made for the kings elephants , which be marvellous great and fair , and are brought up to wars and in service of the king . And among the rest he hath foure white white elephants , which are very strange and rare : for there is elePhants-none other king which hath them but he : if any other king hath one , he will send unto him for it . When any of these white elephants is brought unto the king , all the merchant's in the city are commanded to see them , and to give him a present of half a ducat , which does 
 come to a great sum : for that there are many merchant's in the city . After that you have given your present you may come and see them at your pleasure , although they stand in the kings house . This king in his title is called the king of the white elephants . If any other king have one , and will not send it him , he will make war with him for it : for he had rather loose a great part of his kingdom , then not to conquer him . They do very great service unto these white elephants ; every one of them stands in and house gilded with gold , and they do feed in vessels of silver and gilded . One of them when he does go to the river to be washed , as every day they do , goes under a canopy of cloth of gold or of silk carried over him by sixe or eight men , and eight or ten men go before him playing on drums , shawmes , or other instruments : and when he is washed and comes out of the river , there is a gentleman which does wash his feet in a silver basin : which is his office given him by the king . There is no such account made of any black elephant , be he never so great . And surely there be woonderfoll fair and great , and some be nine cubits in height . And they do report that the king hath above five thousand elephants of war , beside many other which be not taught to fight . This king hath a very large place wherein he takes the wild elephants . It stands about a mile from Pegu , built with a fair court within , and is in a great grove or wood : and there be many huntsmen , which go into the wilderness with she elephants : for without the she they are not to be taken . And they be taught for that purpose : and every hunter hath five or sixe of them : and they say that they anoint thee she elephants with a certain ointment , which when the wild elephant does smell , he will not leave her . When they have brought the wild elephant near unto the place , they send word unto the town , and many horsemen and footmen come out and cause the she elephant to enter into a strait 
 488 
 way which doth go to the palace , and the she and Jie do run in : for it is like a wood : and when they be in , the gate does shut . Afterwards they get out the female : and when the male sees that he is left alone , he weeps and cries , and runneth against the walls , which be made of so strong trees , that some of them do break their teeth with running against them . Then they prick him with sharp canes , & cause him to go into a strait house , and there they put a rope about his middle and about his feet , and let him stand there three or foure days without eating or drinking : and then they bring a female to him , with meat and drink , and within few days he becomes tame . The chief force of the king is in these elephants . And when they go into the wars they set a frame of wood upon their backs , bound with great cords , wherein fit foure or sixe men , which fight with guns , bows and arrows , darts and other weapons . And they say that their skins are so thick that a pellet of and harquebus will scarce pierce them , except it be in some tender place . Their weapons be very bad . They have guns , but shoot very badly in them , darts and swords short without points . The king keepeth a very great state : when he sitteth abroad as he does every day twice , all his noble men which they call Shemines fit on each side , a good distance off , and a great guard without them . The Court yard is very great . If any man will speak with the king , he is to kneel down , to heave up his hands to his head , and to put his head to the ground three times , when he entereth , in the middle way , and when he comes near to the king : and then he sitteth down and talketh with the king : if the king like well of him , he sitteth near him within three or foure paces : if he think not well of him , he sitteth further off . When he goes to war , he goes very strong . At my being there he went to Odia in the country of Siam with three hundred thousand men , and five thousand elephants . Thirty thousand men were 489 
 A.D. 
 1583-91 . 
 Odia a city in Siam . 
 his guard . These people do eat roots , herbs , leaves , dogs , cats , rats , serpents , and snakes ; they refuse almost nothing . When the king rides abroad , he rides with a great guard , and many noblemen , oftentimes upon and elephant with a fine castle upon him very fairly gilded with gold ; and sometime upon a great frame like and horsliter , which hath a little house upon it covered 
 over head , but open on the sides , which is all gilded with gold , & set with many rubies & saphires , whereof he hath infinite store in his country , and is carried upon This manner of sixteene or eighteene men's shoulders . This coach in cartage on < - kP : r lanmiaorp i « railed Sprrinn . Verv oreat feastinv 
 their language is called Serrion . Very great feasting and triumphing is many times before the king both of men and women . This king hath little force by Sea , 
 men's shoulders is sued in Peru , and in Florida . 
 because he hath but very few ships . He hath houses full of gold and silver , and brings in often , but spendeth very little , and hath the mines of rubies and saphires , and spinelies . Near unto the palace of the king , there is a treasure wondered rich ; the which because it is so near , he does not account of it : and it stands open for all men to see in a great walled court with two gates , which be always open . There are foure houses gilded very richly , and covered with lead : in every one of them are Pagodas or images of huge stature and great valve . In the first is the picture of a king in gold with a crown of gold on his head full of great rubies and saphires , and about him there stand foure children of gold . In the second house is the picture of a man in silver wondered great , as high as and house ; his foot is as long as a man , and he is made sitting , with in crown on his head very rich with stones . In the third house is the picture of a man greater then the other , made of brass , with a rich crown on his head . In the fourth and last house does stand another , made of brass , greater then the other , with a crown also on his head very rich with stones . In another court not far from this stand foure other Pagodas or idols , marvellous great , of copper , made in 49° 
 the same place where they do stand ; for they be so great that they be not to be removed : they stand in foure houses gilded very fair , and . are themselves gilded all over save their heads , and they show like a black Morian . Their expenses in gild of their images are wonderful . The king hath one wife and above three hundred concubines , by which they say he hath foure-score or fourescore and ten children . He sitteth in judgement almost every day . They use no speech , but give up their supplications written in the leaves of a tree of 
 with the point of and iron bigger then a bodkin . These leaves are and elle long , and about two inches broad ; they ‘ are also double . He which gives in his supplication , does stand in a place a little distance off with a present . 
 If his matter be liked of , the king accepteth of his present , and grants his request : if his suit be not liked of , he returns with his present ; for the king will not take it . 
 In India there are few commodities which serve for 
 Pegu , except Opium of Cambaia , painted cloth of S. Thome , or of Masulipatan , and white cloth of Bengala , which is spent there in great quantity . They bring thither also much cottont yarn read coloured with a root 
 And excellent colour with a root called 
 which they called Saia , which will never loose his colour : Saia . it is very well sold here , and very much of it comes yearly to Pegu. By your money you loose much . The ships which come from Bengala , S. Thome , and Masulipatan , come to the bar of Nigrais and to Cosmin . To Martavan a port of the sea in the kingdom of Pegu come many ships from Malacca laden with Sandall , Porcelains , and other wares of China , and with Camphora of Borneo , and Pepper from Achen in Sumatra . To Cirion a port of Pegu come ships from Mecca with in Pesu woollen cloth , Scarlets , Velvets , Opium , and such like . 
 There are in Pegu eight Brokers , whom they call Tareghe , which are bound to fell your goods at the price which they be worth , and you give them for their labour two in the hundred : and they be bound to make 
 491 
 The several ! merchandises of Pegu. 
 The form of their Temples or Varellaes . 
 [ II i . 261. ] 
 The Tallipaies or Priests of Pegu. 
 your debt good , because you fell your merchandises upon their word . If the Broker pay you not at his day , you may take him home , and keep him in your house : which is a great shame for him . And if he pay you not presently , you may take his wife and children and his slaves , and bind them at your door , and set them in the Sun ; for that is the law of the country . Their current money in these parts is a kind of brass which they call Gansa , wherewith you may buy gold , silver , rubies , musk , and all other things . The gold and silver is merchandise , and is worth sometime more , and sometime less , as other wares be . This brazen money doth go by a weight which they call a biza ; and commonly this biza after our account is worth about half a crown or somewhat less . The merchandise which be in Pegu , are gold , silver , rubies , saphires , spinelles , musk , benjamin or frankincense , long pepper , tin , lead , copper , lacca whereof they make hard wax , rice , and wine made of rice , and some sugar . The elephants do eat the sugar canes , or else they would make very much . And they consume many canes likewise in making of their Varellaes or Idol temples , which are in great number both great and small . They be made round like a sugar loaf , some are as high as a Church , very broad beneath , some a quarter of a mile in compass : within they be all earth done about with stone . They consume in these Varellaes great quantity of gold ; for that they be all gilded aloft : and many of them from the top to the bottom : and every ten or twelve years they must be new gilded , because the rain consumeth off the gold : for they stand open abroad . If they did not consume their gold in these vanities , it would be very plentiful and good cheap in Pegu. About two days journey from Pegu there is a Varelle or Pagode , which is the pilgrimage of the Pegues : it is called Dogonne , and is of a wondered bigness , and all gilded from the foot to the top . And there is and house by it wherein the Tallipoies which are their Priests do 
 492 
 preach . This house is five and fifty paces in length , and hath three pawns or walks in it , and forty great pillars gilded , which stand between the walks ; and it is open on all sides with a number of small pillars , which be likewise gilded : it is gilded with gold within and without . There are houses very fair round about for the pilgrim's to lie in : and many goodly houses for the Tallipoies to preach in , which are full of images both of men and women , which are all gilded over with gold . It is the fairest place , as I suppose , that is in the world : it stands very high , and there are foure ways to it , which all along are set with trees of fruits , in such wise that a man may go in the shade above two miles in length . And when their feast day is , a man can hardly pass by water or by land for the great press of people ; for they come from all places of the kingdom of Pegu thither at their feast . In Pegu they have many Tallipoies or priests , which preach against all abuses . Many men resort unto them . When they enter into their kiack , that is to say , their holy place or temple , at the door there is a great jar of water with a cock or a ladle in it , and there they wash their feet ; and then they enter in , and lift up their hands to their heads first to their preacher , and then to the Sun , and so fit down . The Tallipoies go very strangely appareled with The apparel one camboline or thin cloth next to their body of a °ft } ie'trfnests-browne colour , another of yellow doubled many times upon their shoulder : and those two be girded to them with a broad girdle : and they have a skin of leather hanging on a string about their necks , whereupon they fit , bore headed 8c bore footed : for none of them weareth shoes ; with their right arms bore and a great broad sombrero or shadow in their hands to defend them in the Summer from the Sun , and in the Winter from the rain . When the Tallipoies or priests take their Order , first they go to school until they be twenty years old or more , and then they come before a Tallipoie appointed for that purpose , whom they call Rowli : 
 493 
 he is of the chiefest and most learned , and he opposeth them , and afterwards examineth them many times , whither they will leave their friends , and the company of all women , and take upon them the habit of a Tallipoie . If any be content , then he rides upon and horse about the streets very richly appareled , with drums and pipes , to show that he leaveth the riches of the world to be a Tallipoie . In few days after , he is carried upon a thing like and horsliter , which they call a serion , upon ten or twelve men's shoulders in the apparel of a Tallipoie , with pipes and drums , and many Tallipoies with him , and all his friends , and so they go with him to his house which stands without the town , and there they leave him . Every one of them hath his house , which is very little , set upon six or eight posts , and they go up to them with a ladder of twelve or foureteene staves . Their houses be for the most part by the high ways side , and among the trees , and in the woods . And they go with a great pot made of wood or fine earth , and covered , tied with a broad girdle upon their shoulder , which comes under their arm , wherewith they go to beg their victuals which they eat , which is rice , fish , and herbs . They demand nothing , but come to the door , and the people presently do give them , some one thing , and some another : and they put all together in their pot : for they say they must eat of their alms , Observation of and therewith content themselves . They keep their new moons . feaSfS by the Moon : and when it is new Moon they keep their greatest feast : and then the people send rice and other things to that kiack or church of which they be ; and there all the Tallipoies do meet which be of that Church , and eat the victuals which are sent them . When the Tallipoies do preach , many of the people carry them gifts into the pulpit where they fit and preach . And there is one which sitteth by them to take that which the people bring . It is divided among them . They have none other ceremonies nor service that I could see , but only preaching . 
 494 
 I went from Pegu to Jamahey , which is in the Jamahey five country of the Langeiannes , whom we call Jangomes ; it is five and twenty days journey Northeast from Pegu. 
 In which journey I passed many fruitful and pleasant wardfrom countries' . The country is very low , and hath many Pegu. fair rivers . The houses are very bad , made of canes , and covered with straw . Here are many wild buffs and elephants . Jamahey is a very fair and great town , with fair houses of stone , well peopled , the streets are very - large , the men very well set and strong , with a cloth about them , bore headed and bore footed : for in all these countries' they wear no shoes . The women be much fairer then those of Pegu. Here in all these countries' they have no wheat . They make some cakes of rice . Hither to Jamahey come many merchants out of China , and bring great store of musk , gold , silver , and many other things of China work . Here is great store of victuals : they have such plenty that they will not milk the buffles , as they do in all other places . [ II i . 262. ] Here is great store of copper and benjamin . In these countries' when the people be sick they make a vow to offer meat unto the devil , if they escape : and when they be recovered they make a banquet with many pipes & drums and other instruments , and dancing all the night , and their friends come and bring gifts , cocos , figs , arrecaes , and other fruits , and with great dancing and . rejoicing they offer to the devil , and say , they give the devil to eat , and drive him out . When they be dancing and playing they will cry & hallow very loud ; and in this sort they say they drive him away . And when they be sick a Tallipoy or two every night does fit by them & sing , to please the devil that he should not hurt them . And if any die he is carried upon a They bune great frame made like a tower , with a covering all gilded thetr dead-with gold made of canes carried with foureteene or sixteene men , with drums and pipes and other instruments playing before him to a place out of the town and there is burned . He is accompanied with all his 
 495 
 Caplan is tke place where the rubies and other precious stones are found . 
 Anthony Gal-vano writeth of these bals . 
 friends and neighbours , all men : and they give to the tallipoies or priests many mats and cloth : and then they return to the house and there make a feast for two days : and then the wife with all the neighbours wives & her friends go to the place where he was burned , and there they fit a certain time and cry and gather the pieces of bones which be left unburned and bury them , and then return to their houses and make and end of all mourning . And the men and women which be near of kin do shave their heads , which they do not use except it be for the death of a friend : for they much esteem of their hair . 
 Caplan is the place where they find the rubies , saphires , and spinelles : it stands sixe days journey from Ava in the kingdom of Pegu. There are many great high hills out of which they dig them . None may go to the pits but only those which dig them . 
 In Pegu , and in all the countries' of Ava , Langeiannes , Siam , and the Bramas , the men wear bunches or little round balls in their privy members : some of them wear two and some three . They cut the skin and so put them in , one into one side and another into the other side ; which they do when they be 25 or 30 years old , and at their pleasure they take one or more of them out as they think good . When they be married the husband is for every child which his wife hath , to put in one until he come to three and then no more : for they say the women do desire them . They were invented because they should not abuse the male sex . For in times passed all those countries were so given to that villainy , that they were very scarce of people . It was also ordained that the women should not have passed three cubits of cloth in their neither clothes , which they bind about them ; which are so strait , that when they go in the streets , they show one side of the leg bore above the knee . The bunches aforesaid be of diverse sorts : the least be as big as a little walnut , and very round : the greatest are as big as a little hens egg : 
 496 
 1583-91 ' some are of brass and some of silver : but those of silver be for the king and his noble men . These are gilded and made with great cunning , and ring like a little bell . There are some made of lead , which they call Selwy because they ring but little : and these be of lesser price for the poorer sort . The king sometime takes his out , and gives them to his noblemen as a great gift : and because he hath used them , they esteem them greatly . They will put one in , and heal up the place in seven or eight days . 
 The Bramas which be of the kings country ( for the king is a Brama ) have their legs or bellies , or some part of their body , as they think good themselves , made black with certain things which they have : they use to prick the skin , and to put on it a kind of anile or blacking , which does continue always . And this is counted and honour among them : but none may have it but the Bramas which are of the kings kindred . 
 These people wear no beards : they pull out the The people of hair on their faces with little pinsons made for that Pegu wear no purpose . Some of them will let 16 or 20 hairs grow together , some in one place of his face and some in another , and pulls out all the rest : for he carrieth his pinsons always with him to pull the hairs out assoon as they appear . If they see a man with a beard they wonder at him . They have their teeth blacked both men and women , for they say a dog hath his teeth white , therefore they will black theirs . 
 The Pegues if they have a suit in the law which is so doubtful that they cannot well determine it , put two long canes into the water where it is very deep : and both the parties go into the water by the poles , and there fit men to judge , and they both do dive under the water , and he which remains longest under the water does win the suit . 
 The 10 of January I went from Pegu to Malacca , passing by many of the ports of Pegu , as Martavan , the Hand of Tavi , from whence comes great store of 
 v 497 21 
 tin which serves all India , the Hands of Tanaseri , Junsalaon , and many others ; and so came to Malacca the 8 of February , where the Portugals have a castle which stands never the sea . And the country fast without the town belongeth to the Malayos , which is a kind of proud people . They go naked with a cloth about their middle , and a little roll of cloth about their heads . Hither come many ships from China & from the Malucos , Banda ; Timor , and from many other Hands 
 [ II i . 263. ] of the Javas , which bring great store of spices and drugs , and diamonds and other jewels . The voyages into many of these Hands belong unto the captain of Malacca : so that none may go thither without his licence : which yield him great sums of money every year . The Portugals here have often times wars with the king of Achem which stands in the Hand of Sumatra : from whence comes great store of pepper and other spices every year to Pegu and Mecca within the Read sea , and other places . 
 The voyage to When the Portugals go from Macao in China to Jafan ' Japan , they carry much white silk , gold , musk , and porcelains : and they bring from thence nothing but silver . They have a great carrack which goes thither . every year , and she brings from thence every year 
 ab°ve ®ixe hundred thousand crusadoes : and all this sadoe^indher s’lver of JaPan , and two hundred thousand crusadoes implied more in silver which they bring yearly out of India , yearly by thee they employ to their great advantage in China : and they ^Ch^a^ m bring from thence gold , musk , silk , copper , porcelains , ’ and many other things very costly and gilded . When the Portugals come to Canton in China to traffic , they must remain there but certain days : and when they come in at the gate of the city , they must enter their names in a book , and when they go out at night they must put out their names . They may not lie in the town all night , but must lie in their boats without the town . And their days being expired , if any man remain there , they are evil used and imprisoned . The 498 
 Chinians are very suspicious , and do not trust strangers . 
 It is thought that the king does not know that any strangers come into his country . And further it is credibly reported that the common people see their king very seidome or not at all , nor may not look up to that place where he sitteth . And when he rides abroad he is carried upon a great chair or serrion gilded very fair , wherein there is made a little house with a latise to look out at : so that he may see them , but they may not look up at him : and all the time that he passes by them , they heave up their hands to their heads , & lay their heads on the ground , and look not up until he be passed . The order of China is when they mourn , that they wear white thread shoes , and hats of straw . The man does mourn for his wife two years , the wife for her husband three years : the son for his father a year , and for his mother two years . And all the time which they mourn they keep the dead in the house , the bowels being taken out and filled with chownam or lime , and coffined : and when the time is expired they carry them out playing and piping , and burn them . And when they return they pull off their mourning weeds , and marry at their pleasure . A man may keep as many concubines as he will , but one wife only . All the Chineans , Japonians , and Cauchin writing Chineans do write right downwards , and they do write with a fine pencil made of dogs or cats hair . ’ 
 Laban is and Hand among the Javas from whence come Laban . the diamonds of the New water . And they find them Diamonds . in the rivers : for the king will not suffer them to dig the rock . 
 Jamba is and Hand among the Javas also , from whence come diamonds . And the king hath a mass of earth which is gold ; it grows in the middle of a river : and when the king does lack gold , they cut part of the earth and melt it , whereof comes gold . This mass of earth does appear but once in a year ; which is when the water is low : and this is in the month of April . 
 499 
 Bima . Bima is another Hand among the Javas , where the 
 women travel and labour as our men do in England , and the men keep house and go where they will . 
 He returns The 29 of March 1588 , I returned from Malacca to from Malacca . Martavan , and so to Pegu , where I remained the second time until the 17 of September , and then I went to Cosmin , and there took shipping ; and passing many dangers by reason of contrary winds , it pleased God 
 Bengala . that we arrived in Bengala in November following : where I stayed for want of passage until the third of February 1589 , and then I shipped my self for Cochin . In which voyage we endured great extremity for lack of fresh water : for the weather was extreme hight , and we were many merchants and passengers , and we had very many calms , and hight weather . Yet it 
 Ceyhn . pleased God that we arrived in Ceylon the sixth of March , where we stayed five days to water , and to furnish our selves with other necessary provision . This Ceylon is a brave Hand , very fruitful & fair ; but by reason of continual wars with the king thereof , all things are very deer : for he will not suffer any thing to be brought to the castle where the Portugals be : wherefore often times they have great want of victuals . Their provision of victuals comes out of Bengala every year . The king is called Raia , and is of great force : for he comes to Columbo , which is the place where the Portugals have their fort , with and hundred thousand men , and many elephants . But they be naked people all of them ; yet many of them be good with their pieces which be muskets . When the king talketh with any man , he stands upon one leg , and sets the other foot upon his knee with his sword in his hand : it is not their order for the king to fit but to stand . His apparel is a fine painted cloth made of cotton wool about his middle : his hair is long and bound • up with a little fine cloth about his head : all [ II i . 264. ] the rest of his body is naked . His guard are a thousand men , which stand round about him , and he in the 500 
 middle ; and when he marches , many of them go before him , and the rest come after him . They are of the raze of the Chingalayes , which they say are the best kind of all the Malabars . Their ears are very large ; for the greater they are , the more honourable they are accounted . Some of them are a span long . The wood which they burn is Cinamom wood , and it smelleth very sweet . There is great store of rubies , saphires , and spinelies in this Hand : the best kind of all be here ; but the king will not suffer the inhabitants to dig for them , lest his enemies should know of them , and make wars against him , and so drive him out of his country for them . They have no horses in all the country . The elephants be not so great as those of Pegu , which be monstrous huge : but they say all other elephants do fear them , and none dare fight with them , though they be very small . Their women have a cloth bound about them from 
 their middle to their knee : and all the rest is bore . All of them be black and but little , both men and Blanch people . women . Their houses are very little , made of the branches of the palmer or cocoa-tree , and covered with the leaves of the same tree . 
 The eleventh of March we sailed from Ceylon , and so doubled the cape of Comori . Not far from thence , Cape de between Ceylon and the main land of Negapatan , Comori . they fish for pearls . And there is fished every year very much ; which does serve all India , Cambaia , and Bengala , it is not so orient as the pearl of Baharim in the gulf of Persia . From cape de Comori we passed by Coulam , which is a fort of the Portugals : from Coulam . whence comes great store of pepper , which comes for Portugall : for oftentimes there ladeth one of the carracks of Portugall . Thus passing the coast we arrived in Cochin the 22 of March , where we found the Cochin . weather warm , but scarcity of victuals : for here grows neither corn nor rice : and the greatest part comes from Bengala . They have here very bad water , 
 5O1 
 People with swollen legs mentioned also by J o . Huygen . 
 How pepper grows . 
 Black people 
 y Or Calicut , or Cananor . 
 for the river is far off . This bad water causeth many of the people to be like lepers , and many of them have their legs swollen as big as a man in the waste , & many of them are scant able to go . These people here be Malabars , ,and of the raze of the Naires of Calicut : and they differ much from the other Malabars . These have their heads very full of hair , and bound up with a string : and there does appear a bush without the band wherewith it is bound . The men be tall and strong , and good archers with a long bow and a long arrow , which is their best weapon : yet there be some calivers among them , but they handle them badly . 
 Here grows the pepper ; and it springs up by a tree or a pole , and is like our ivy berry , but something longer like the wheat ear : and at the first the bunches are green , and as they wax ripe they cut them off and dry them . The leaf is much lesser then the ivy leaf and thinner . All the inhabitants here have very little houses covered with the leaves of the coco-trees . The men be of a reasonable stature ; the women little ; all black , with a cloth bound about their middle hanging down to their hammes ; all the rest of their bodies be naked : they have horrible great ears with many rings set with pearls and stones in them . The king goes incached , as they do all ; he does not remain in a place above five or sixe days : he hath many houses , but they be but little : his guard is but small : he removeth from one house to another according to their order . All the pepper of Calicut and course cinamom grows here in this country . The best cinamom does come from Ceylon , and is peeled from fine young trees . Here are very many palmer or coco trees , which is their chief food : for it is their meat and drink : and yields many other necessary things , as I have declared before . 
 The Naires which be under the king of II Samorin , which be Malabars , have always wars with the Portugals . The king hath always peace with them ; but his 
 502 
 people go to the sea to rob & steal . Their chief captain is called Cogi Alli ; he hath three castles under him . When the Portugals complain to the king , he say he does not send them out : but he consenteth that they go . They range all the coast from Ceylon to Goa , and go by foure or five parowes or boats together ; and have in every one of them fifty or threescore men , and board presently . They do much harm on that coast , and take every year many foists and boats of the Portugals . Many of these people be Moors . This kings country begins twelve leagues from Cochin , and reaches near unto Goa . I remained in Cochin until the second of November , which was eight months ; for that there was no passage that went away in all that time : if I had come two days sooner I had found a passage presently . From Cochin I went to Goa , where I remained three days . From Cochin to Goa is and hundred leagues . From Goa I went to Chaul , which is threescore leagues , where I remained three and twenty days : and there making my provision of things necessary for the ship , from thence I departed to Ormus ; where I stayed for a passage to Balsara fifty days . From Goa to Ormus is foure hundred leagues . 
 Here I thought good , before I make and end of this my book , to declare some things which India and the country farther Eastward do bring forth . 
 The pepper grows in many parts of India , especially about Cochin : and much of it doth grow in the fields among the bushes without any labour : and when it is ripe they go and gather it . The shrub is like unto our ivy tree : and if it did not run about some tree or pole , it would fallen down and rot . When they first gather it , it is green ; and then they lay it in the Sun , and it becomes black . 
 The ginger grows like unto our garlic , and the root is the ginger : it is to be found in many parts of India . 
 A.D. 
 I583-9I . 
 Goa . 
 Chaul . 
 Ormus . 
 [ II i . 265. ] The pepper tree . 
 Ginger . 
 503 
 Cloves . The doves do come from the Isles of the Moluccoes , which be diverse Hands : their tree is like to our bay tree . 
 Nutmegs y The nutmegs and maces grow together , and come maces . from the He of Banda : the tree is like to our walnut tree , but somewhat lesser . 
 The white sandol is wood very sweet & in great request among the Indians ; for they grind it with a little water , and anoint their bodies therewith : it comes from the Isle of Timor . 
 Camphora . Camphora is a precious thing among the Indians , and is sold dearer then gold . I think none of it comes for Christendome . That which is compounded comes from China : but that which grows in canes and is the best , comes from the great Isle of Borneo . 
 Lignum Aloes . Lignum Aloes comes from Cauchinchina . 
 The benjamin comes out of the countries' of Siam and Jangomes . 
 The long pepper grows in Bengala , in Pegu , and in the Hands of the Javas . 
 The musk comes out of Tartarie , and is made after this order , by report of the merchants which bring it to Pegu to fell ; In Tartarie there is a little beast like unto a young roe , which they take in snares , and beatrice him to death with the blood : after that they cut out the bones , and beatrice the flesh with the blood very small , and fill the skin with it : and hereof comes the musk . 
 Of the amber they hold diverse opinions ; but most men say it comes out of the sea , and that they find it upon the shores side . 
 The rubies , saphires , and spinelles are found in Pegu. 
 The diamonds are found in diverse places , as in Bisnagar , in Agra , in Delli , and in the Hands of the Javas . 
 The best pearls come from the Hand of Baharim in the Persian sea , the worser from the Piscaria near the Isle of Ceylon , and from Aynam a great Hand on the Southermost coast of China . 
 504 
 Amber . 
 Rubies , saphires and spinels . 
 Diamonds . 
 Spodium and many other kinds of drugs come from podium . Cambaia . 
 Now to return to my voyage ; from Ormus I went to Balsara or Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : and Basora . we passed the most part of the way by the strength of Ba ° ” ' men by hailing the boat up the river with a long cord . From Babylon I came by land to Mosul , which stands Mosul . never to Ninive , which is all ruinated and destroyed ; it stands fast by the river of Tigris . From Mosul I went to Merdin , which is in the country of the Merdin . Armenians ; but now there dwell in that place a people which they call Cordies , or Curdi . From Merdin I went to Orfa , which is a very fair town , and it hath a goodly Orfa . fountain full of fish ; where the Moors hold many great ceremonies and opinions concerning Abraham : for they say he did once dwell there . From thence I went to Bir , & so passed the river of Euphrates . From Bir I Bir. went to Aleppo , where I stayed certain months for Aleppo . company ; and then I went to Tripolis ; where finding Tripolis . English shipping , I came with a prosperous voyage to London , where by Gods assistance I safely arrived the 29 of April 1591 , having be eight years out of my native country . 
 . 