A true report of a worthy fight , performed in the voyage from Turkic , by five Ships of London , against 11. Galleys , and two Frigates of the King of Spaines , at Pantalarea within the Straights , Anno , 1586. Written by Philip Jones . 
 He Merchants of London , being of the incorporation of the Turky trade , having received intelligences , and advertisements , from time to time , that the King of Spaine grudging at the prosperity of this kingdom , had not only of late arrested all English ships , bodies , 
 and goods , in Spaine , but also maligning the quiet traffic which they used to and in the dominions , and provinces , under the obedience of the Great Turke had given order to the Captains of his galleys in the 46 
 Levant , to hinder the passage of all English ships , and to endeavour by their best means , to intercept , take , and spoil them , their persons , and goods : they hereupon thought it their best course to set out their fleet for Turkey , in such strength and ability for their defence , that the purpose of their Spanish enemy might the better be prevented , and the voyage accomplished with greater securi tie to the men and ships . For which cause , five tall , and stout ships , appertaining to London , and intending only a Merchants voyage , were provided and furnished with all things belonging to the Seas ; the names whereof were these : 
 i . The Merchant Royal , a very brave and good ship , and of great report . 
 2. The Tobie . 
 3. The Edward Bonaventure . 
 4. The William , and John. 
 5. The Susan . 
 These five departing from the coast of England , in the month of November 1585. kept together as One fleet , till they came as high as the Isle of Sicile , within the Levant . And there , according to the order and direction of the voyage , each ship began to take leave of the rest , and to separate himself , setting his course for the particular port , whereunto he was bound : one for Tripolie in Syria , another for Constantinople , the chief City of the Turkes Empire , situated upon the coast of Romania , called of old , Thracia , and the rest to those places , whereunto they were privately appointed . But before they divided themselves , they altogether consulted , of and about a certain and speciali place for their meeting again after the lading of their goods at their several ports . And in conclusion , the general agreement was to meet at Zante , and Island near to the main continent of the West part of Morea , well known of all the Pilots , & thought to be the fittest place of their Rendezvous . Concerning which meeting , it was also covenanted on 
 eke side , and promised , that whatsoever ship of these 5. should first arrive at Zante , should there stay and expect the coming of the rest of the fleet , for the space of twentie days . This being done , each man made his best haste according as wind and weather would serve him to fulfil his course , and to dispatch his business ; and no need was there to admonish or encourage any man , seeing no time was ill spent , nor opportunity omitted on any side , in the performance of each men duty , according to his place . 
 It fell out that the Tobie which was bound for Constantinople had made such good speed , and got such good weather , that she first of all the rest came back to the appointed place of Zante , and not forgetting the former conclusion , did there cast anchor , attending the arrival of the rest of the fleet , which accordingly ( their business first performed ) failed not to keep promise . The first next after the Tobie was the Royal Merchant , which together with the William and John came from Tripolie in Syria , and arrived at Zante within the compass of the foresaid time limited . These ships in token of the joy on all parts conceived for their happy meeting , spared not the discharging of their Ordinance , the sounding of drums & trumpets , the spreading of Ensigns with other warlike and joyful behaviours , expressing by these outward signs , the inward gladness of their minds , being all as ready to join together in mutual consent to resist the cruel enemy , as now in sporting manner they made mirth and pastime among themselves . These three had not be long in the haven , but the Edward Bonaventure also , together with the Susan her consort , were come from Venice with their lading , the sighed of whom increased the joy of the rest , and they no less glad of the presence of the others , saluted them in most friendly and kind sort , according to the manner of the Seas : and whereas some of these ships stood at that instant in some want of victuals , they were all content 
 to stay in the port , till the necessities of each ship were supplied , and nothing wanted to set out for their return . 
 In this port of Zante , the news was fresh and currant , of two several armies and fleets provided by the king of Spaine , and lying in wait to intercept them : the one consisting of 30. strong Galleys , so well appointed in all respects for the war , that no necessary thing wanted : and this fleet hovered about the Straights of Gibraltar . The other army had in it 20. Galleys , whereof some were of Sicilie , and some of the Island of Malta , under the charge and government of John Andrea Dorea , a Captain of name serving the king of Spaine . These two diverse and strong fleets waited and attended in the Seas for none , but the English ships , and no doubt made their account and sure reckoning that not a ship should escape their fury . And the opinion also of the inhabitants of the Isle of Zante was , that in respect of the number of Galleys in both these armies , having received such straight commandment from the king , our ships and men being but few , and little in comparison of them , it was a thing in humane reason impossible , that we should pass either without spoiling , if we resisted , or without composition at the least , and acknowledgement of duty to the Spanish king . 
 But it was neither the report of the attendance of these armies , nor the opinions of the people , nor any thing else , that could daunt or dismay the courages of our men , who grounding themselves upon the goodness of their cause , and the promise of God , to be delivered from such as without reason sought their destruction , carried resolute minds , notwithstanding all impediments to adventure through the Seas , and to finish their Navigation , maugre the beards of the Spanish soldiers . But lest they should seem too careless , and too secure of their estate , and by laying the whole and entire burden of their safety upon Gods providence , should foolishly presume altogether of his help , and neglect the means 
 vi 49 WORSER 
 which was put into their hands , they failed not to enter into counsel among themselves , and to deliberate advisedly for their best defence . And in the end with generail consent , the Merchant Royal was appointed Admiral ! of the fleet , and the Tobie Viceadmiral , by whose order the rest promised to be directed , and each ship vowed not to break from another , whatsoever extremity should fallen out , but to stand to it to the death , for the honour of their Country , and the frustrating of the hope of the ambitious and proud enemy . 
 Thus in good order they left Zante and the Castle of Graecia , and committed themselves again to the Seas , and proceeded in their course and voyage in quietness , without sighed of any enemy , till they came near to Pantalarea , and Island so called , betwixt Sicilie , and the coast of Africke : into sighed whereof they came the 13. day of July 1586. And the same day in the morning about 7. of the clock they descried 13. sails in number , which were of the Galleys , lying in wait of purpose for them , in and about that place . As soon as the English ships had spied them , they by and by according to a common order , made themselves ready for a fight , laid out their Ordinance , scoured , charged , and primed them , displayed their ensigns , and left nothing undone to arm themselves thoroughly . In the mean time , the Galleys more and more approached the ships , and in their banners there appeared the arms of the Isles of Sicilia , and Malta , being all as then in the service and pay of the Spaniard . Immediately , both the Admirals of the Galleys sent from each of them a frigate , to the Admiral of our English ships , which being come near them , the Sicilian frigate first hailed them , and demanded of them whence they were ? They answered that they were of England , the arms whereof appeared in their colours . Whereupon the said frigate expostulated with them , and asked why they delayed to send or come with their Captains and pursers to DONE Pedro de Leiva their general , to 
 acknowledge their duty and obedience to him in the name [ II i . 287. ] of the Spanish king , Lord of those seas ? Our men replied , and said , that they owed no such duty nor obedience to him , and therefore would acknowledge none , but commanded the frigate to depart with that answer , and not to stay longer a brabbling , upon her peril . With that away she went , and up comes towards them the other frigate of Malta , and she in like sort hailed the Admiral , and would needs know whence they were , and where they had be . Our Englishmen in the Admiral , not disdaining and answer , told them that they were of England , Merchants of London , had be at Turkey , and were now returning home : and to be requited in this case , they also demanded of the ffigat whence she and the rest of the galleys were : the messenger answered , we are . e of Malta , and for mine own part my name is Cavallero . These Galleys are in service and pay to the king of Spaine , under the conduct of DONE Pedro de Leiva a noble man of Spaine , who hath be commanded hither by the King with this present force and army , of purpose to intercept you . You shall therefore ( quoth he ) do well to repair to him to know his pleasure , he is a noble man of good behaviour and courtesy , and means you no ill . The Captain of the English Admiral , whose name was M. Edward Wilkin - , son , replied and said . We purpose not at this time to make trial of DONE Pedro his courtesy , whereof we are suspicious and doubtful , and not without good cause : using withal good words to the messenger , and willing him to come aboard him , promising security and good usage , that thereby he might the better know the Spaniards mind : whereupon he in deed left his frigate , and came aboard him , whom he entertained in friendly sort , and caused a cup of wine to be drawn for him , which he took and began , with his cap in his hand , and with reverend terms to drink to the health of the Queen of England , speaking very honourably of her Majesty , and giving good speeches of the courteous 
 usage and entertainment that he himself had received in London , at the time that the duke of Alenson , brother to the late French king was last in England : and after he had well drunk , he took his leave , speaking well of the sufficiende and goodness of our ships , and especially of the Merchant Royal , which he confessed to have seen before , riding in the Thames near London . He was no sooner come to DONE Pedro de Leiva the Spanish general , but he was sent off again , and returned to the English Admiral , saying that the pleasure of the general was this , that either their Captains , Master's and Pursers should come to him with speed , or else he would set upon them , and either take them or sink them . The reply was made by M. Wilkinson aforesaid , that not a man should come to him : and for the brag and threat of DONE Pedro , it was not that Spanish bravado that should make them yield a jot to their hindrance , but they were as ready to make resistance , as he to offer and injury . Whereupon Cavallero the messenger left bragging , and began to persuade them in quiet sort , and with many words , but all his labour was to no purpose , and as his threat did nothing terrify them , so his persuasion did nothing move them to do that which he required . At the last he entreated to have the Merchant of the Admiral carried by him as a messenger to the general , that so he might be satisfied , and assured of their minds by one of their own company . But M. Wilkinson would agree to no such thing , although Richard Rowit the merchant himself seemed willing to be employed in that message , and laboured by reasonable persuasions to induce M. Wilkinson to grant it , as hoping to be and occasion by his presence and discreet answers to satisfy the general , and thereby to save the effusion of Christian blood , if it should grow to a battle . And he seemed so much the more willing to be sent , by how much deeper the oaths and protestations of this Cavallero were , that he would ( as he was a true knight and a soldier ) deliver him back 
 again in safety to his company . Albeit , M. Wilkinson , which by his long experience had received sufficient trial of Spanish inconstancy and perjury , wished him in no case to put his life and liberty in hazard upon a Spaniards other . But at last , upon much intreaty , he yielded to let him go to the General , thinking in deed , that good speeches and answers of reason would have contented him , whereas otherwise refusal to do so , might peradventure have provoked the more discontentment . 
 M. Rowit therefore passing to the Spanish general , the rest of the Galleys having espied him , thought in deed that the English were rather determined to yield , then to fight , and therefore came flocking about the frigate , every man crying out , Que nuevas , que nuevas , Have these English men yielded ? the frigate answered , Not so , they neither have , nor purpose to yield , only they have sent a man of their company to speak with our general : and being come to the Galley wherein he was , he showed himself to M. Rowit in his armour , his guard of soldiers attending upon him in armour also , and began to speak very proudly in this sort : Thou Englishman , from whence is your fleet , why stand you aloof off " , know you not your duty to the Catholic King , whose person I here represent ? Where are your bills of lading , your letters , passports , and the chief of your men ? Think you my attendance in these seas to be in vain , or my person to no purpose ? Let all these things be done out of hand as I command , upon pain of my further displeasure and the spoil of you all : These [ II i . 288. ] words of the Spanish general were not so outrageously pronounced as they were mildly answered by M. Rowit , who told him that they were all Marchantmen , using traffic in honest sort , and seeking to pass quietly , if they were not urged further then reason . As for the king of Spaine , he thought ( for his part ) that there was amity betwixt him and his sovereign the Queen of England , so that neither he nor his officers should go 
 about to offer any such injury to English Merchants , who as they were far from giving offence to any man , so they would be loath to take and abuse at the hands of any , or fit down to their loss , where their ability was able to make defence . And as touching his commandment aforesaid , for the acknowledging of duty , in such particular sort , he told him , that where there was no duty owing , there none should be performed , assuring him that their whole company and ships in general , stood resolutely upon the negative , and would not yield to any such unreasonable demand , joined with such imperious and absolute manner of commanding . Why then , said he , if they will neither come to yield , nor show obedience to me in the name of my king , I will either sink them or bring them to harbour , and so tell them from me . With that the frigate came away with M. Rowit , and brought him aboard the English Admiral again according to promise : who was no sooner entered in , but by and by defiance was sounded on both sides : the Spaniards hewed off the noses of the Galleys , that nothing might hinder the level of the shot , and the English on the other side courageously prepared themselves to the combat , every man according to his room , bent to perform his office with alacrity and diligence . In the mean time a Cannon was discharged from the Admiral of the galleys , which being the onset of the fight , was presently answered by the English Admiral with a culverin : so the skirmish began , and grew hoit and terrible , there was no powder nor shot spared : each English ship matched it self in good order against two Spanish Galleys , beside the inequality of the ffigats on the Spaniards side : and although our men performed their parts with singular valour , according to their strength , insomuch that the enemy as amazed therewith would oftentimes pause and stay , and consult what was best to be done , yet they ceased not in the midst of their business to make prayer to Almighty God the revenger of all evils , and the giver of victories , that it 
 A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT a.d. 15% . 
 would please him to assist them in that good quarrel of theirs , in defending themselves against so proud a tyrant , to teach their hands to war , and their fingers to fight , that the glory of the victory might redound to his Name , and to the honour of true Religion which the insolent enemy sought so much to overthrow . Contrarily , the foolish Spaniardes cried out according to their manner , not to God , but to our Lady ( as they term the virgin Marry ) saying , Oh Lady help , Oh blessed Lady give us the victory , and the honour thereof shall thine . Thus with blows & prayers on both sides the fight continued furious and sharp , and doubtful a long time to which part the victory would incline : till at the last the Admiral of the Galleys of Sicilie began to warp from the fight , and to hold up her side for fear of sinking , and after her went also two others in like case , whom all the sort of them enclosed , labouring by all their means to keep them above water , being ready by the force of English shot which they had received to perish in the seas : & what slaughter was done among the Spaniards themselves , the English were uncertain , but by a probable conjecture apparent afar ofF , they supposed their loss was so great , that they wanted men to continue the charging of their pieces : whereupon with A fight of five shame and dishonour , after 5. hours spent in the battle , houres-they withdrew themselves : and the English contented in respect of their deep lading , rather to continue their voyage then to follow the chase , ceased from further blows , with the loss only of two men slain among them all , and another hurt in his arm , whom M. 
 Wilkinson with his good words and friendly promises did so comfort , that he nothing esteemed the smart of his wound in respect of the honour of the victory , and the shameful repulse of the enemy . 
 Thus with dutiful thanks to the mercy of God for his gracious assistance in that danger , the English ships proceeded in their Navigation , and coming as high as Alger , a port town upon the coast of Barbary , they fell 55 
 with it , of purpose to refresh themselves after their weariness , and to take in such supply of fresh water & victuals , as they needed : they were no sooner entered into the port , but immediately the king thereof sent a messenger to the ships to know what they were , with which messenger the chief master of each ship repaired to the king , and acquainted him not only with the state of their ships , in respect of merchandise , but with the late fight which they had passed with the Spanish Galleys , reporting every particular circumstance in word as it fell out in actium : whereof the said king showed himself marvelous glad , entertaining them in the best sort , and promising abundant relief of all their wants , making general proclamation in the city upon pain of death , that no man of what degree or state soever he were , should presume either to hinder them in their affairs , or to offer them any manner of injury in body or goods . By virtue whereof they dispatched all things in excellent good sort , with all favour & peaceableness : only such prisoners and captives of the Spaniards as were in the City , seeing the good usage which they received , and hearing also what service they had performed against the foresaid Galleys , grudged exceedingly against them , and sought as much as they could to practise some mischief against them : and one among the rest seeing and Englishman alone in a certain lane of the City , came upon him suddenly , and with his knife thrust him in the side , yet made no such great wound , but that it was easily recovered . The English company hearing of it , acquainted the king with the fact , who immediately sent both for the party that had received the wound , and the offender also , and caused and executioner in the presence of himself and the English , to chastise the slave even to death , which was performed to the end that no man should presume to commit the like part , or to do any thing in contempt of his royal commandment . 
 The English having received this good justice at the kings hands , and all other things that they wanted , or 56 
 could crave for the furnishing of their ships , took their leave of him , and of the rest of their friends , that were resident in Alger , and put out to Sea , looking to meet with the second army of the Spanish king , which waited for them about the mouth of the Straights of Gibraltar , which they were of necessity to pass . But coming near to the said Straight , it pleased God to raise at that instant a very dark and misty fog , so that one ship could not discern another , if it were 40. paces off : by means whereof , together with the notable fair Eastern winds that then blew most fit for their course , they passed with great speed through the Straight , and might have passed with that good gale , had there be 500. Galleys to withstand them , and the air never so clear for every ship to be seen . But yet the Spanish The second Galleys had a sighed of them when they were come within 3. English miles of the town , and made after them in all possible haste , and although they saw that they were English . far out of their reach , yet in a vain fury and foolish pride , they shot off their Ordinance , and made a stir in the Sea as if they had be in the midst of them , which vanity of theirs ministered to our men notable matter of pleasure and mirth , seeing men to fight with shadows , and to take so great pains to so small purpose . 
 But thus it pleased God to deride , and delude all the forces of that proud Spanish king , which he had provided of purpose to distress the English , who notwithstanding passed through both his Armies , in the one , little hurt , and in the other nothing touched , ' to the glory of his immortali Name , the honour of our Prince and Country , and the just commendation of each men service performed in that voyage . 
 . 