The times or seasonable winds called Monsons , wherein the ships depart from place to place in the East Indies . 
 NOte , that the City of Goa is the principali place of all the Orientali India , and the winter there begins the 15 of May with very great rain , and so continueth till the first of August , so that during that space , no ship can pass over the bar of Goa , because through the continual showers of rain all the sands join together near unto a mountain called Oghane , and all these sands being joined together , run into the shoals of the bar and port of Goa , and can have no other issue , but to remain in that port , and therefore it is shut up until the first of August , but at the 10 of August it openeth by reason of the rain which ceases , and the sea doth then scour the sands away again . The monson from Goa to the Northward , to say , for 
 Chaul , Diu , Cambaia , Daman , Basaim , and other places . 
 The ships depart betwixt the tenth and 24 of August , for the Northward places abovesaid , and to these places they may sail all times of the year , except in the winter , which begins and endeth at the times abovesaid . 
 The monson from the North parts , for Goa . 
 The ships depart from Chaul , Diu , Cambaia , and other places Northwards for Goa , betwixt the 8 and 15 of Januarie , and come to Goa about the end of Februarie . The first monson from Diu for the straight of Mecca . 
 The ships depart from Diu about the 15 of Januarie , and return from the straights to Diu in the month of August . 
 The second monson from Diu for the straight of Mecca . 
 The ships depart betwixt the 2 5 and first of September , and return from the straights to Diu , the first and 15 of May . 
 1584. The monson from Secutra for Ormus . 
 The ships depart about the tenth of August for Ormus : albeit Secutra is and Island and hath but few ships , which depart as abovesaid . 
 The monson wherein the Moors of the firm land come to Goa . 
 About the fifteenth of September the Moors of the firm land begin to come to Goa , and they come from all parts , as well from Balagvate , Bezenegar , as also from Sudalcan , and other places . 
 The monson wherein the Moors of the firm land depart from Goa . 
 They depart from Goa betwixt the 10 and 15 day of November . Note that by going for the North is meant the departing from Goa , for Chaul , Diu , Cambaia , Daman , Basaim , Ghassain , and other places unto Zindi : and by the South is understood , departing from Goa , for Cochin , and all that coast unto Cape Comori . 
 The first monson from Goa for Ormus . 
 The ships depart in the month of October from Goa , for Ormus , passing with Easterly winds along the coast of Persia . 
 The second monson from Goa to Ormus . 
 The ships depart about the 20 of Januarie passing by the like navigation and winds as in the first monson , and this is called of the Portugals and Indians Entre-monson . 
 The third monson from Goa to Ormus . 
 The ships depart betwixt the 25 of March , and 6 of Aprill , having Easterly winds , till they pass Secutra , and then they find Westerly winds , and therefore they set their course over for the coast of Arabia , till they come to Cape Rasalgate and the Straight of Ormus , and this monson is most troublesome of all : for they make [ II i . 279. ] two navigations in the heighth of Seylan , which is 6 degrees and somewhat lower . 
 The first monson from Ormus for Chaul and Goa . 
 The ships depart from Ormus for Chaul , and Goa in the month of September , with North and Northeast winds . 
 The second monson from Ormus for Chaul and Goa . 
 The second monson is betwixt the five and twentie and last of December , with like winds as the former monson . 
 The third monson from Ormus for Chaul , and Goa . 
 The third monson the ships depart from Ormus , for Chaul and Goa , betwixt the first and 15 of April , and they sail with Southeast winds , East and Northeast winds , coasting upon the Arabia side from Cape Mos-andon unto Cape Rasalgate , and having lost the sighed of Cape Rasalgate , they have Westerly winds , and so come for Chaul and Goa , and if the said ships depart not before the 25 of April , they are not then to depart that monson , but to winter in Ormus because of the winter . 
 The first monson from Ormus for Zindi . 
 The ships depart for Ormus betwixt the 15 and 20 of Aprill . 
 The second monson from Ormus for Zindi . 
 The ships depart betwixt the 10 and 20 of October for Zindi from Ormus . 
 The monson from Ormus for the read sea . 
 The ships depart from Ormus betwixt the first and last of Januarie . 
 Hitherto I have noted the monsons of the ships departing from Goa to the Northward : Now follow the monsons wherein the ships depart from Goa to the Southward . 
 The monson from Goa for Calicut , Cochin , Seilan , and all that coast . 
 THe ships depart from those places betwixt the 1 and 15 of August , and there they find it navigable all the year except in the winter , which continueth as is aforesaid , from the 15 of May till the 10 of August . In like manner the ships come from these places for Goa at every time in the year except in the winter , but of all other the best time is to come in November , December and January . 
 The first monson from Goa , for Pegu. 
 The ships depart from Goa , betwixt the 15 and 20 of April , and winter at S. Thomas , and after the 5 of August , they depart from S. Thomas for Pegu. 
 The second monson from Goa for Pegu. 
 The ships depart from Goa betwixt the 8 and 24 of August , going straight for Pegu , and if they pass the 24 of August , they cannot pass that monson , neither is there any more monsons till April as is aforesaid . Note that the chiefest trade is , to take money of S. Thomas rials , and patechoni , and to go to S. Thomas , and there to buy Tellami , which is fine cloth of India , whereof there is great quantity made in Coromandel , and brought thither , and other merchandise are not good for that place except some dozen of very fair Emeralds orientali . For of gold , silver , and Rubies , there is sufficient store in Pegu. 
 The monson from Pegu for the Indies . 
 The ships depart from Pegu betwixt the 15 and 2 5 of Januarie , and come to Goa about the 25 of March , or in the beginning of April . Note , that if it pass the 10 of May before the said ships be arrived in Goa , 
 Note . 
 Merchandise good for Pegu. 
 they cannot come thither that monson , and if they have not then fetched the coast of India , they shall with great peril fetch S. Thomas . 
 The first monson from Goa for Malacca . 
 The ships depart betwixt the 15 and last of September , and arrive in Malacca about the end of October . 
 The second monson from Goa to Malacca . 
 The ships depart about the 5 of May from Goa , and arrive in Malacca about the 15 of June . 
 The first monson from Malacca to Goa . 
 The ships depart about the 10 of September , and come to Goa about the end of October . 
 The second monson from Malacca to Goa . 
 The ships depart from Malacca about the 10 of February , and come to Goa about the end of March . But if the said ships should stay till the 10 of May , [ II i . 280. ] they cannot enter into Goa , and if at that time also they should not be arrived at Cochin , they are forced to return to Malacca , because the winter and contrary winds then come upon them . 
 The monson from Goa for China . 
 The ships depart from Goa in the month of April . 
 The monson from China for Goa . 
 The ships depart to be the 10 of May in Goa , and being not then arrived , they turn back to Cochin , and if they cannot fetch Cochin , they return to Malacca . 
 The monson from Goa to the Molucca's . 
 The ships depart about the 10 or 15 of May , which time being passed , the ships can not pass over the bar of Goa for the cause abovesaid . 
 The monson of the ships of the Moluccaes arrival in Goa . 
 The ships which come from the Molucca's arrive upon the bar of Goa about the 15 of April . 
 . 