The money and measures of Babylon , Balsara , and the Indies , with the customs , etc. written from Aleppo in Syria , An. 1584. by M. Will . Barret . 
 BABYLON : 
 The weight , measure , and money currant there , and the customs of merchandise . 
 Mana of Babylon is of Aleppo 1 rove 5 ounces and a half : and 68 manas and three seventh parts , make a quintali of Aleppo , which is 494 li . 8 ounces of London : and too manas is a quintali of Babylon , which makes in Aleppo 146 roves , and of London 722 li . and so 
 much is the said quintail : but the merchants accord is by so much the mana , and in the said place they bore the tear in all sorts of commodities , according to the order of Aleppo touching thee tear . 
 The measure of Babylon is greater then that of Aleppo 21 in you 100. For bringing 100 pikes of any measurable ware from Aleppo thither , there is found but 82 pikes in Babylon , so that the 100 pikes of Babylon is of Aleppo 121 pikes , very little less . 
 The currant money of Babylon are Says , which Say is 5 medines , as in Aleppo , and 40 medines being 8 Says make a ducat currant , and 47 medines pass in valve as the ducat of gold of Venice , and the dollars of the best sort are worth 33 medines . The royals of plate are sold by the 100 drams at prize , according as they be in request : but among the merchants they bargain by the 100 metrals , which are 150 drams of Aleppo , which 150 drams are 135 single royals of plate : but in the mint or castle , they take them by the 100 drams , which is 90 royals of plate , and those of the mint give 5 medines less in each 100 drams then they are worth to be sold 
 among the merchants , and make payment at the term of 40 days in Says . 
 The custom in Babylon , as well inward as outward , is in this manner : Small wares at 6 per 100 , Coral and amber at 5 and a half per 100 , Venice cloth , English cloth , Kersies , Mockairs , Chamblets , Silks , Velvets , Damasks , Satins & such like at 5 per 100 : & they rate the goods without reason as they lust themselves . The Toafo , Boabo , and other exactions 6 medines per bale , all which they pay presently in ready money , according to the custom and use of the emperor . 
 To the Ermine of the mint you ordinary use is to give 30 Says in courtesy , otherwise he would by authority of his office come aboard , & for despite make such search in the bark , that he would turn all things topsy turvie . 
 BALS are A : 
 The weight , measure , and money in the city of Balsara . 
 A Mana of Balsara answereth 5 roves 2 ounces & a half of Aleppo weight , & 19 manas and one 4 part of Balsara , answereth the quintali of Aleppo , which is 494 roves , 8 ounces English , and 20 manas is the quintail of Balsara , which is 104 Alepine , and of London 514 li . 8. ounces , and so much is the said quintali , but the merchants bargain at so much the mana or wolsene ( which is all one ) and they abate the tear in every mana , as the sort of spice is , and the order taken therefore in that place . 
 The measure of Balsara is called a pike , which is just as the measure of Babylon , to say , 100 pikes of Balsara make of Aleppo 121 pikes , ut supra in the rate of Babylon . 
 The currant money of Balsara is as followeth . There is a sort of flusses of copper called Estivi , whereof 12 make a mamedine , which is the valve of one medine Aleppine , the said mamedine is of silver , having the 11 
 [ II i . 272 ] 
 Moresco stamp on both sides , and two of these make a danine , which is 2 medines Aleppine . 
 The said danine is of silver , having the Turkesco stamp on both sides , & 2 and a half of these make a Say , which is in valve as the Say of Aleppo . 
 The said Say is of the similitude and stamp of Aleppo , being ( as appears ) 60 estives . Also one Say and 20 estives make a larine , which is of Aleppo money 6 medines and a half . 
 The said larine is a strange piece of money , not being round as all other currant money in Christianitie , but is a small rod of silver of the greatness of the pen of a goose feather , wherewith we use to write , and in length about one eight part thereof , which is wrested , so that the two ends meet at the just half part , and in the head thereof is a stamp Turkesco , and these be the best currant money in all the Indias , and 6 of these larines make a ducat , which is 40 medines or eight Says of Aleppo . 
 The ducat of gold is worth there 7 larines , and one danine , which is of Aleppo money 48 medines and a half . 
 The Venetian money is worth larines 88 per 100 meticals , which is 150 drams of Aleppo , ut supra . 
 The royals of plate are worth 88 larines by the 100 meticals , & albeit among the merchants they sei by the 100 meticals , yet in the mint or castle , they sei by the too drams , having there less then the worth 5 medines in each hundred drams , and have their payment in 40 days made them in Says or larines . 
 The custom of the said places , aswell inward as outward , are alike of all sorts of goods , to say 6 by the 100 , and Toafo , Boabo , & scrivan medines 6 by the bale inward & outward , to say , 3 inward , and as much outward : but who so leaveth his goods in the custom house payeth nothing , where otherwise at the taking thereof away , he should pay 3 med . by the bale , and of the said goods there is no other duty to pay , 12 
 and this comes to pass when the customers esteem the goods too high . For in such a case they may be driven to take so much commodity as the custom amounteth to , and not to pay them in money , for such is the order from the Grand Signior . 
 Having paid the custom , it behooveth to have a quittance or cocket sealed and firmed with the customers hand , in confirmation of the dispatch and clearing , and before departure thence , to cause the said customer to cause search to be made , to the end that at the voyages return there be no cavillation made , as it oftentimes happeneth . 
 Note that zoo meticals of Balsara weigh 17 ounces and a half sottile Venetian , and of Aleppo drams 150 , ut supra . 
 The fraught of the barks from Ormuz to Balsara , I would say from Balsara to Ormuz , they pay according to the greatness thereof . To say , for carriage of 10 cares 180 larines , those of 15 cares 270 larines , those of 20 cares 360 larines , those of 30 cares 540 Urines . Note that a cara is 4 quintals of Balsara . They pay also to the pilot of the bark for his own carriage one care , and to all the rest of the mariners among them 3 cares fraught , which is in thee . whole 4 cares , and paying the abovesaid prizes and freights , they are at no charges of victuals with them , but it is requisite that the same be declared in the charter party , with the condition that they lade not aboard one rotilo more then the fraught , under pains that finding more in Ormuz , it is forfeit , and beside that to pay the fraught of that which they have laden . 
 And in this accord it behooveth to deal warily , and in the presence of the Ermine or some other honest man ( whereof there are but few ) for they are the worst people in all Arabia . And this diligence must be put in execution , to the end the barks may not be overladen , because they are to pass many sands betwixt Balsara and Ormuz . 
 The weight , measure , and money currant in the kingdom of Ormuz : 
 SPices and drugs they weigh by the bar , and of every sort of goods the weight is different . To say , of some drugs 3 quintals , and 3 erubi or roves , and other some 4 quintals 25 rotiloes , and yet both is called a bar , which bar , as well great as little , is 20 frasoli , and every frasoli is 10 manas , and every mana 23 chiansi , and every chianso 10 meticals and a half . Note that every quintail makes 4 erubi or roves , and every What antilo rove 32 rotiloes , & every rotilo 16 ounces , and every u - ounce 7 meticals , so that the quintali comes to be 
 128 rotiloes , which is Aleppine 26 rotiloes and one third part , which is 132 li . english weight . And contrariwise you quintal of Aleppo ( which is 494 rotiloes 8 ounces english ) makes 477 rotiloes and a half of Ormuz , which is 3 quintals 2 roves , 29 rotiloes and a half . 
 Note that there are bars of diverse weights , ut supra , of which they bargain simply , according to the sort of commodity , but if they bargain of the great bar , the same is 7 quintals and 24 rotiloes , which is 958 li . 9 ounces of London weight , and of Aleppo 193 rotiloes and a half . 
 Touching the money of Ormuz , they bargain in merchandise at so many leches by the bar , which lech is 100 Asaries , and makes larines 100 & a half , which makes pardaos 38 , & larines one half , at larines 5 by the pardao . One asarie is sadines 10 , and every sadine is 100. danarie . 
 The larine is worth 5 sadines and one fourth part , so that the sadine is worth of Aleppo money 1 medine and 1 fourth part , & the larine as in Balsara worth of Aleppo money 6 medines & a half . 
 The pardao is 5 larines of Balsara . 
 There is also stamped in Ormuz a seraphine of gold , 14 
 THE MONEY OF ORMUZ which is Iide and round , and is worth 24 sadines , which makes 30 medines of Aleppo . 
 The Venetian money is worth in Ormuz larines 88 per too meticals , & the royals are worth larines 86 less one sadine , which is every thousand meticals , 382 assures : but those that will not sei them , use to melt them , and make them so many larines in the king of Ormuz his mint , whereby they clear 2 per 100 , and somewhat more : and this they do because neither Venetian money nor royals run as currant in Ormuz , per advice . 
 The measure of Ormuz is of 2 sorts , the one called codo which increases upon the measure of Aleppo 3 per 100 , for bringing 100 pikes of any measurable wares from Aleppo to Ormuz , it is found in Ormuz to be 103 codes . Also these measures of Ormuz increase upon those of Balsara and Babylon 25 and two third parts per 100 : for bringing 100 pikes of any measurable wares from Balsara or Babylon , there is found in Ormuz 125 codes and two third parts . 
 The other measure is called a vare , which was sent from the king of Portugall to the India , by which they fell things of small valve , which measure is of 5 palms or spans , and is one code and two third parts , so that buying 100 codes of any measurable wares , and returning to measure it by the said vare , there are found but 60 vares , contrary wise 100 vares make 166 codes and two third parts . 
 Note that all such ships as lade horses in Ormuz for Goa or any other place of India , lading 10 horses or upward , in what places soever the said horses be taken a shore in the India , the merchandise which is to be discharged out of that ship wherein the said horses come , are bound to pay no custom at all , but if they lade one horse less then ten , then the goods are bound to pay the whole custom . And this law was made by DONE Emanuel king of Portugall , but it is to be diligently foreseen , whither all those horses laden be bound r5 
 to pay the king his custom : for many times by the king of Portugall his commandment , there is favour showed to the king of Cochin his brother in arms , so that his horses that come in the same ship , are not to answer custom . As for example : If there were 4 horses laden in one ship , all which were to pay custom to the king , and one other of the king of Cochins which were not to pay any custom , the same causeth all the merchandise of that ship to be subject to pay custom , per advice . But if they lade ten horses upon purpose to pay the king his custom in Goa , and in the voyage any of them should die in that case , if they bring the tail of the dead horse to the custom in Goa , then the merchandise is free from all custom , because they were laden in Ormuz to pay custom in Goa . Moreover , if the horses should die before the midst of the voyage , they pay no custom at all , and if they die in the mids of the voyage , then they pay half custom , but if any horse die after the mid voyage , they pay custom no less then if they arrive safe . Notwithstanding , the merchandise ( whither the said horses die before or in the mid voyage or after the mid voyage ) are free from all custom . 
 The custom of Ormuz is eleven in the 100 , to say , 10 for the king , and 1 for the arming of the foists : but for small wares as glasses , and looking glasses of all sorts , and such like , made for apparel , pay no custom . But cloth of Wool , Karsies , Mockaires , Chamlets , and all sorts of Silk , Saffron , and such like , pay custom , being esteemed reasonably . 
 There is also another custom , which they call caida , which is , that one bringing his goods into Ormuz , with purpose to send you same further into India , the same are bound to pay 3 by the 100 , but none other are bound to pay this custom , except the Armenians , Moores , and Jewes : for the Portugals and Venetians pay nothing thereof . 
 Note y‘ in Ormuz they abate tear of all sorts of commodities , by and order observed of custom . 
 The fraught from Ormuz to Chaul , Goa , and Cochin , is as followeth : Mokaires larines 6 per table of 60 pikes . Aquariosa 8 larines by ordinary chist , raisins io by chist , which is a quintail of roves 128. Ruvia of Chalangi larines 10 per quintali , glasses larines 8 per chist , of 4 foot and a half , glasses in gr^at chists 14 & 15 larines by chist . Small wares larines 12 by chist of five foot . Tamari for Maschat sadines 2 and a half , and 3 by the farthel . Tamarie for Diu and Chaul 4 sadines , and 4 and a half by bale . Other drugs and things which come from Persia pay according to the greatness of the bales . 
 The fraught mentioned , they pay as appears , when they ship the said goods in ships where horses go : otherwise not having horses , they pay somewhat less , because of the custom which they are to pay . 
 The use of the India ships is , that the patroness thereof are not at any charge neither with any passenger , nor yet with any mariner in the ship , but that every one at the beginning of the voyage do furnish to maintain his own table ( if he will eat ) and for drink they have a great jar of water , which is guarded with great custody . 
 GOA . 
 The weight , measure , and money currant in Goa . 
 THe quintail of Goa is 5 manas , and 8 larines , & the mana is 24 rotilos , so that the quintal of Goa is 128 rot . and every rot . is 16 ounces , which is of Venice weight 1 li . and a half , so that the quintal of Goa is 192 li . sotile Venice , which is 26 rotiloes 8 ounces Aleppine , and of London weight 132 li . English , as the weight of Ormuz . 
 All the merchandise , spices and drugs , are sold by this quintal , except some drugs , as lignum de China , Galanga , & others , whereof they bargain at so much per candill , 
 vi 17 B 
 Musk ofTar-tarie by you way of China . 
 advertising that there be two sorts of candill , one of 16 manas , the other of 20 manas , that of 16 manas comes to be just 3 quintals , and that of 20 manas , 3 quintals , 3 roves . Note that 4 roves make a quintail , and the rove is 32 rotiloes , as in Ormuz . 
 There is also another weight which they call Marco , which is eight ounces or half a rotilo of Goa , & 9 ounces of Venice sotile : with this they weigh amber , corail , musk , ambracan , civet , and other fine wares . 
 There is also another sort of weight called Man-giallino , which is 5 grains of Venice weight and therewith they weigh diamonds and other jewels . 
 Note that in Goa they use not to abate any tear of any goods , except of sacks or wraps , & therefore it requires great advisement in buying of the goods , especially in the musk of Tartaria which comes by way of China in bladders , and so weigh it without any tear rebating . 
 The measure of Goa is called a toad , which increases upon the measure of Babylon & Balsara after the rate of 17 & one eight part by the 100 , so that bringing 100 pikes of any measurable ware from thence to Goa , it is found 117 pikes 7 eight parts , and bringing 100 codes from Ormuz to Goa , there is found but 93 codes and one fourth part . 
 There is also the vare in Goa , which is just as the vare of Ormuz , and therewith they measure only things that are of small valve . 
 For the money of Goa , there is a kind of money made of led and tin mingled , being thick and round , and stamped on the one side with the sphere or globe of the world , and on the other side two arrows & 5 rounds : and this kind of money is called Basaruchi , and 15 of these make a vinton of naughty money , and 5 vintons make a tangam , and 4 vintenas make a tangam of base money : so that the tangam of base money is 60 basaruchies , and the tangam of good money 75 basaruchies , & 5 tangas make a seraphine of gold , which in merchandise is worth 5 tangas good money : but if one would 18 
 1584. change them into basaruchies , he may have 5 tangas , and 16 basaruchies , which overplus they call cerafagio , & when they bargain of the pardaw of gold , each pardaw is meant to be 6 tangas good money , but in merchandise they use not to demand pardawes of gold in Goa , except it be for jewels and horses , for all the rest they take of seraphins of silver , per adviso . 
 The royals of plate , I say , the royal of 8 are worth per custom & commandment of the king of Portugall 400 reies , and every rey is one basaruchie & one fourth part , which makes tangas 6 , and 53 basaruchies as their just [ II i . 275. ] valve , but for that the said royals are excellent silver and currant in diverse places of the India , and chiefly in Malacca , when the ships are to depart at their due times ( called Monsons ) every one to have the said royals pay more then they are worth , & the overplus , as is abovesaid they call serafagio . And first they give you just valve of the 100 royals of 8 , and 5 tangas 50 basaruchies a piece , which done , they give seraphins 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 15 , until 22 by the 100 , according as they are in request . 
 The ducat of gold is worth 9 tangas and a half good money , and yet not stable in price , for that when the ships depart from Goa to Cochin , they pay them at 9 tangas and 3 fourth parts , and 10 tangas , and that is the most that they are worth . 
 The larines are worth by just valve basaruchies 93 and 3 fourth parts , and 4 larines make a seraphine of silver , which is 5 tangas of good money , and these also have serafagion of 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , until 16 , by the 100 , for when the ships depart for the North , to say , for Chaul , Diu , Cambaia , or Bassaim , all carry of the same , because it is money more currant then any other . 
 There is also a sort of seraphins of gold of the Stamp of Ormuz , whereof there are but few in Goa , but being there , they'are worth five larines and somewhat more , according as they are in request . 
 There is also another Iide sort of money , round , having 
 on the one side a cross , and on the other side a crown , which is worth one half a tangam of good money , and another of the same stamp less then that which they call Imitivo de buona moneda , which is worth 18 basaruches 3 fourth parts a piece . 
 Note that if a man bargain in merchandise , it behoo-veth to demand tangas of good money : for by nominating tangas only , is understood to be base money of 60 basaruches , which wants of the good money ut supra . 
 The custom of Goa is 8 in the 100 inward , and as much outward , and the goods are esteemed justly rather to the merchants advantage then the kings . The custom they pay in this order . Coming with a ship from Ormuz to Goa without horses , they pay 8 in the 100 whither they fell part or all , but if they would carry of the said merchandise to any other place , they pay none other custom , except others buy it and carry it forth of the country , and then they pay it 8 in the 100. And if one having paid the custom should fell to another with composition to pass it forth as for his proper accounts to save the custom , this may not be , because the seller is put to his oath , whither he send the goods for his own account , or for the account of any others that have bought the same , and being found to the contrary , they pay custom as abovesaid . And in this order the merchants pay pf all the goods which come from any part of the Indies . But if they come from Ormuz to Goa with horses , they are not subject to pay any custom inward , notwithstanding if they send all or any part thereof for any other place , or return it to Ormuz , they pay the custom outward , although they could not fell . 
 They use also in Goa among the common sort to bargain for coals , wood , lime & such like , at so many braganines , accounting 24 basaruches for one braganine , albeit there is no such money stamped . The custom of the Portugals is , that any More or Gentile , of what 20 
 1584. condition or state soever he be , may not depart from Goa to go within the land , without licence of certain deputies deputed for that office , who ( if they be Moors or Gentiles ) do set a seal upon the arm , having thereon the arms of Portugal , to be known of the porters of the city , whither they have the said licence or no . 
 COCHIN . 
 The weight , measure , and money , currant in Cochin . 
 A LI the merchandise which they fell or buy within the said city , they bargain for it at so many serafines per quintal , which is 128. rotilos of just weight with you quintal & rotilo of Goa and Ormuz : advertising that there are diverse sorts of bars according to the sorts of commodities , and in trafficking , they reason at so much the bar . Note that there are bars of 3 quintals & 3 quintals and half , and 4 quintals . They abate a used tear of all merchandise , according to the sort of goods , and order taken for the same . 
 The measure of Goa and Cochin are all one . 
 The money of Cochin are all the same sorts which are currant in Goa , but the ducat of gold in valve is 10 tangas of good money . 
 The custom of Cochin as well inward as outward for all strangers , is eight in the hundred , but those that have be married foure year in the country pay but foure in the hundred , per adviso . 
 MALACCA . [ li . i . 276. ] 
 The weight , measure , and money of Malacca . 
 FOr the merchandise bought and sold in the city they reckon at so much the bar , which bar is of diverse sorts , great and small , according to the ancient custom of the said city , & diversity of the goods . But for the cloves they bargain at so much the bar , which bar is 3 quintals , 2 roves and 10 rotilos . As I have abovesaid , all kind of drugs have their sorts of 21 
 bars limited . Note that every quintal is 4 roves , and every rove 32 rotilos , which is 128 rotilos the quintali , the which answereth to Aleppo 95 rotilos , and to London 472 li . per quintal . 
 The measures of Malacca are as the measures of Goa . In Malacca they abate tear according to their distinction and agreement , for that there is no just tear limited .. 
 For the money of Malacca , the least money currant is of tin stamped with the arms of Portugall , and 12 of these make a Chazza . 
 The Chazza is also of tin with the said arms , and 2 of these make a challaine . 
 The Challaine is of tin with the said arms , and 40 of these make a tangam of Goa good money , but not stamped in Malacca . 
 There is also a sort of silver money which they call Patachines , and is worth 6 tangas of good money , which is 360 reyes , and is stamped with two letters , S. T. which is S. Thomas on the one side , and the arms of Portugall on the other side . 
 There is also a kind of money called cruzados stamped with the arms of Portugall , & is worth 6 tangas good money , the larines are every 9 of them worth 2 cruzados , which is 12 tangas good money , and these larines be of those which are stamped in Balsara and Ormuz . 
 The royals of 8 they call Pardaos de Reales , and are worth 7 tangas of good money . 
 The custom of Malacca is 10 in the 100 as well inward as outward , and those which pay the custom inward , if in case they send the same goods for any other place within term of a year and a day , pay no custom for the same . 
 . 