The Ambassage which king John the second , king of Portugall , sent to Edward the fourth king of England , which in part was to stay one John Tintam , and one William Fabian English men , from proceeding in a voyage which they were preparing for Guinea , 1481 , taken out of the book of the works of Gracias de Resend , which intreateth of the life and acts of DONE John the second , king of Portugall . Chap. 33. 
 Nd afterwards the king sent as Ambassadors from the town of Monte major to king Edward the fourth of England , Ruy de Sousa , a principali person , and a man of great wisdom and estimation , and in whom the king reposed great trust , with doctor John d’Elvas , and Fer - 
 dinand de Pina , as secretary . And they made their voyage by sea very honourably , being very well accompanied . These men were sent on the behalf of their king , to confirm the ancient leagues with England , wherein it was conditioned that the new king of the one and of the other kingdom , should be bound to send to confirm the old leagues . And likewise they had order to show and make him acquainted with the title which the king held in the segneury of Ginnee , to the intent that after the king of England had seen the same , he should give charge thorough all his kingdoms , that no man should arm or set forth ships to Ginnee : and also to request him , that it would please him to give commandment to dissolve a certain fleet , which one John Tintam and one William Fabian , English men , were making , by commandment of the duke of Medina Sidonia , to go to the aforesaid parts of Ginnee . With 123 
 The first cause of this ambassage . 
 The second cause . 
 The third cause . 
 which ambassage the king of England seemed to be very well pleased , and they were received of him with very great honour , and he condescended unto all that the ambassadors required of him , at whose hands they received authentical writings of the diligence which they had performed , with publication thereof by the heralds : and also provisoes of those confirmations which were necessary . And having dispatched all things well , and with the kings good will , they returned home into their country . 
 . 