A description of the fortunate Hands , otherwise called the Hands of Canaria , with their strange fruits and commodities : composed by Thomas Nicols English man , who remained there the space of seven years together . 
 Ine intent is particularly to speak of the Canaria Hands , which are seven in number , wherein I dwelled the space of seven years and more , because I find such variety in sundry writers , and especially great untruths , in a book called The New found world Antarctike , 
 set out by a French man called Andrew Thevet , the which his book he dedicated to the Cardinali of Sens , keeper of the great seal of France . 
 It appears by the said book that he had read the works . of sundry Philosophers , Astronomers , and Cosmographers , whose opinions he gathered together . But 125 
 touching his own travel , which he affirmeth , I refer to the judgement of the expert in our days , and therefore for mine own part 1 writ of these Canaria Hands , as time hath taught me in many years . 
 The Hand of Canaria . 
 THe Hand of Canaria is almost equal in length and breadth , containing 12 leagues in length , touching thee which as principali and the residue , the Spanyards hold opinion , that they discovered the same in their navigation towards America , but the Portugals say , that their nation first found the said Hands in their navigation towards Aethiopia and the East Indies . 
 English men But truth it is that the Spanyards first conquered these 
 at the first conquest of the 
 Hands , with diverse English gentlemen in their company , 
 Canaries . whose posterity this present day enjoyeth them . Some 
 write that this Hand was nam Canaria by mean of the number of dogs which there were found : as for example , Andrew Thevet say , that one Juba carried two dogs from thence : but that opinion could I never learn by any of the natural people of the country , although I have talked with many in my time , and with many of their children . For truth it is , that there were dogs , but such as are in all the Northwest lands , and some part of the West India , which served the people in stead of sheep for victuali . But of some of the conquerors of those Hands I have herd say that the reason why they were called the Canaria Islands is , because there grow generally in them all foursquare canes in great multitude together , which being touched will cast out a liquour as 
 [ II ii . 4. ] white as milk , which liquour is rank poison , and at 
 the first entry into these Hands some of the discoverers were therewith poisoned : for many years after that conquest the inhabitants began to plant both wine and sugar , so that Canaria was not so called by sugar canes . 
 The people which first inhabited this land were called Canaries by the conquerors , they were clothed in goat skins made like unto a lose cassock , they dwelled in 
 126 
 caves in the rocks , in great amity and brotherly love . They spoke all one language : their chief feeding was gelded dogs , goats , and goats milk , their bred was made of barley meal and goats milk , called Gofia , which they use at this day , and thereof I have eaten diverse times , for it is accounted exceeding wholesome . 
 Touching the originali of these people some hold opinion , that the Roman which dwelled in Africa exiled them thither , aswell men as women , their tongues being cut out of their heads , for blasphemy against the Roman gods . But howsoever it were , their language was speciali , and not mixed with Roman speech or Arabian . 
 This Hand is now the principallest of all the rest , not in fertility , but by reason it is the seat of justice and government of all the residue . This Hand hath a speciali Governor for the Hand only , yet notwithstanding there are three Judges called Audi tours , who are superior Judges , and all in one jointly proceed as the Lord Chanceller of any realm . 
 To this city from all the other Hands come all such by appeal , as have sustained any wrong , and these good Judges do remedy the same . The city is called Civitas Palmarum , it hath a beautiful Cathedral church , with all dignities thereunto pertaining . For the public weal of the Hand there are sundry Aidermen of great authority , who have a council house by themselves . The city is not only beautiful , but the citizens curious and gallant in apparel . And after any rain or foul weather a man may go clean in Velvet slippers , because the ground is sandy , the air very temperate , without extreme heat or cold . 
 They reap wheat in February , and again in May , which is excellent good , and makes bred as white as snow . This Hand hath in it other three towns , the one called Telde , the second Galder , and the third Guia . It hath also twelve sugar houses called Ingenios , in which they make great quantity of good sugar . 
 127 
 Civitas Palmarum , 
 The planting The manner of the growth of sugar is in this sort , a and growth of good ground gives forth fruit nine times in 18 year : sugar canes .. g first is pianta > which is laid 
 along in a furrow , so that the water of a sluice may come over every root being covered with earth : this root brings forth sundry canes , and so consequently all the rest . It grows two years before the yielding of profit , and not sixe months , as Andrew Thevet the French man writeth . 
 The making Then are they cut even with the ground , and the tops of sugar . & ieaves called Coholia cut off , and the canes bound into bundles like faggots , and so are carried to the sugar house called Ingenio , where they are ground in a mill , and the juice thereof conveyed by a conduct to a great vessel made for the purpose , where it is boiled till it wax thick , and then is it put into a furnace of earthen pots of the mould of a sugar loaf , and then is it carried to another house , called a purging house where it is placed to purge the blackness with a certain clay that is laid thereon . Of the remainder in the cauldron is made a second sort called Escumas , and of the purging liquour that drops from the white sugar is made a third sort , and the remainder is called Panela or Netas , the refuse of all the purging is called Remiel or Malasses : and thereof is made another sort called Refinado . 
 When this first fruit is in this sort gathered , called Planta , then the Cane-field where it grew is burned over with sugar straw to the stumps of the first canes , and being husbanded , watered and trimmed , at the end of other two years it yields the second fruit called Zoea . The third fruit is called Tertia Zoea , the fourth Quarta Zoea , and so orderly the rest , till age causeth the old Canes to be planted again . 
 Wine . This Hand hath singular good wine , especially in the 
 town of Telde , and sundry sorts of good fruits , as Batatas , Mellons , Pears , Apples , Oranges , Limons , Pomgranates , Figs , Peaches of diverse sorts , and many other fruits : but especially the Plantano which grows 128 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv 
 c . 1550. near brook sides , it is a tree that hath no timber in it , but grows directly upward with the body , having marvelous thick leaves , and every leaf at the top of two yards long and almost half a yard broad . The tree never yields fruit but once , and then is cut down ; in whose place springs another , and so still continueth . The fruit grows on a branch , and every tree yields two or three of those branches , which bear some more and some less , as some forty and some thirty , the fruit is like a Cucumber , and when it is ripe it is black , and in eating more delicate then any conserve . 
 This Hand is sufficiently provided of Oxen , Kine , Camels , Goats , Sheep , Capons , Hens , Ducks , and Pigeons , and great Partridges . Wood is the thing that most wants : and because I have particularly to [ II ii . 5. ] entreat of the other sixe Hands , I leave further enlarging of Canaria , which stands in 27 degrees distant from the Equator . 
 The He of Tenerif . 
 THe Hand of Tenerif stands in 27 degrees and a half from the equator , and is distant from Canaria 12 leagues Northward . This Hand containeth 17 leagues in length , and the land lies high in form of a ridge of sown land in some part of England , and in the midst of the said place stands a round hill called Pico Deteithe , situated in this sort . The top of this pike containeth of heighth directly upward 15 leagues & more , which is 45 English miles , out of the which often times proceedeth fire and brimstone , and it may be about half a mile in compass : the said top is in form or likeness of a caldron . But within two miles of the top is nothing but ashes & pumish stones : yet beneath that two miles is the cold region covered all the year with snow , and somewhat lower are mighty huge trees growing , called Vinatico , which are exceeding heavy , and will not rot in any water , although they lie a thousand vi 129 1 
 years therein . Also there is a wood called Barbusano , of like virtue , with many Savine trees and Pine trees . And beneath these sorts of trees are woods of Bay trees of 10 & 12 miles long , which is a pleasant thing to travel thorough , among the which are great numbers of small birds , which sing exceeding sweet , but especially one sort that are very Title , and of colour in all respects like a Swallow , saving that he hath a little black spot on his breast as broad as a penny . He sings more sweetly then all the rest , but if he be taken and imprisoned in a cage , he lives but a small while . This Hand brings forth all sorts of fruits , as Canaria does : and also all the other Hands in general bring forth shrubs or bushes , out of the which issueth a juice as white as milk , which after a while that it hath come out Lime . waxes thick , and is exceeding good birdlime , the bush is called Taybayba . This Hand also brings forth another tree called Dragon , which grows on high among rocks , and by incision at the foot of the tree issueth out a liquour like blood , which is a common drug among Apothecaries . Of the wood of this tree are made targets greatly esteemed , because if any sword or dagger hit thereon , they stick so fast that it is hard plucking them out . 
 This is the most fruitful Hand of all the rest for corn , and in that respect is a mother or nurse to all the others in time of need . There grows also a Orchel good certain moss upon the high rocks called Orchel , for dying . which 
 is bought for Diars to die withal . There are 12 sugar houses called Ingenios , which make great quantity of sugar . There is also one league of ground which stands between two towns , the one called Larotava , and the other Rialeio , and it is thought that the like plot of ground is not in all the world . The reason is , that this one league of ground produceth sweet water out of the cliffs or rocky mountains , corn of all sorts , fruits of all sorts , and excellent good silk , flax , wax , and honey , and very good wines in abundance , with great 130 
 A DESCRIPTION OF THE CANARIES a.d. 
 c . 1550. store of sugar and firewood . Out of this Hand is laden great quantity of wines for the West India , and other countries' . The best grows on a hill side called the Ramble . 
 There is in that Hand a fair city , standing three leagues from the sea , never unto a lake called Laguna , wherein are two fair parish churches , there dwells the governor who ruleth all that Hand with justice . There are also aidermen for the public weal , who buy their offices of the king : the most of the whole inhabitants of this city are gentlemen , merchant's , and husband men . 
 There are other foure towns called Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz. Larotava , Rialeio , and Garachico . 
 In this Hand before the conquest dwelled seven kings , who with all their people dwelled in caves , and were clothed in goat skins , as the Canaria people were , and used such like order of diet as they had . Their order of burial was , that when any died , he was carried naked to a great cave , where he was propped up against the wall standing on his feet . But if he were of any authority among them , then had he a staff in his hand , and a vessel of milk standing by him . I have seen caves of 300 of these corpses together , the flesh being dried up , the body remained as light as parchment . These people were called Guanches , naturally they spoke another language clean contrary to the Canarians , and so consequently every Hand spoke a several language . 
 Note ( gentle reader ) that the Hand of Canaria , the He of Tenerif , and the He of Palma appertain to the king of Spaine , unto whom they pay fifty thousand ducats yearly for custom and other profits . All these Hands jointly are one bishopric , which pay to the bishop twelve thousand ducats yearly . And thus I conclude of thee He of Tenerif , which stands in 27 degrees and a half , as I have before declared . 
 [ Gomera 
 131 
 THe Hand of Gomera stands Westward from Tenerif , in distance sixe leagues : this is but a small Hand containing eight leagues in length . It is and [ II ii . 6. ] Earldom , & the Lord thereof is called the earl of Gomera . But in case of any controversy the vassals may appeal to the kings superior Judges which reside in Canaria . 
 This Hand hath one proper town called Gomera , which hath and excellent good port or harbour for ships , where often times the Indian fleet take refreshing for their voyage . 
 There is also sufficient grain and fruit for the maintenance of themselves . 
 There is one Ingenio or Sugar-house , with great plenty of wine and other sorts of fruits , as Canaria and Tenerif hath . 
 This Hand yields no other commodity but only orchell ; it stands in 27 degrees distant from the Equator towards the pole Arcticke . 
 The He of Palma . 
 THe He of Palma stands twelve leagues distant from the lie of Gomera Northwestward . This Hand is fruitful of wine and sugar : it hath a proper city called the city of Palma , where is great contraction for wines , which are laden for the West India & other places . This city hath one fair church , and a govern our , and aidermen to maintain and execute justice . It hath also another pretty town , called S. Andrewes . It hath also foure Ingenios which make excellent sugar , two of the which are called Zauzes , and the other two , Tassacort . 
 This Hand yields but little breadcorn ; but rather is thereof provided from Tenerif and other places . 
 Their best wines grow in a soil called the Brenia , where yearly is gathered twelve thousand buts of wine 132 
 like unto Malmsies . This Hand stands round , and containeth in circuit near five and twenty leagues . It hath plenty of all sorts of fruits , as Canaria and Tenerif have , it stands in twenty seven degrees and a half . 
 The Hand of Iron , called Hierro . 
 THis Hand stands ten leagues distant from the Hand of Palma Westward : it is but a little Hand , which containeth sixe leagues in circuit , and hath but small extension . It appertaineth to the earl of Gomera . The chiefest commodity of this Hand is goats flesh and orchell . There is no wine in all that Hand , but only one vineyard that and English man of Taunton in the West country planted among rocks , his name was John Hill. 
 This Hand hath no kind of fresh water , but only in the middle of the Hand grows a great tree with leaves like and Olive tree , which hath a great cistern at the foot of the said tree . This tree continually is covered with clouds , and by means thereof the leaves of the said tree continually drop water , very sweet , into the said cistern , which comes to the said tree from the clouds by attraction . And this water suffices the Hand for all necessities , aswell for the cattle , as for the inhabitants . It stands in 27 degrees . 
 The only vineyard in Hierro planted by Joh. Hill of Taunton . 
 The Hand of Lanzarota . 
 THe Hand of Lanzarota stands eighteene leagues distant from grand Canaria Southeastward . The only commodity of this Hand is goats flesh and orchell . It is and earldom , and does appertain to DONE Augustine de Herrera , with title of earl of Fortaventura and Lanzarota . But the vassals of these earldoms may in any cause of wrong appeal to the Kings Judges , which reside in Canaria , as I have said before : because although the king hath reserved to himself but only the three fruitful Hands , called Canaria , Tenerif , and Palma , yet he also reserved the rod of justice to him-133 
 self , because otherwise the vassals might be evil entreated of their Lords . 
 From this Hand do weekly resort to Canaria , Tenerifj & Palma , boats laden with dried goats flesh , called Tussmetta , which serves in stead of bacon , and is very good meat . This Hand stands in 26 degrees , and is in length twelve leagues . 
 The lie of Forteventura . 
 THe He of Forteventura stands fifty leagues from the promontory of Cabo de Guer , in the firm land of Africa , and foure & twenty leagues distant from Canaria Eastward . This Hand does appertain to the lord of Lanzarota . It is reasonable fruitful of wheat and barley , and also of kine , goats , and orchel : this He is fifteene leagues long and ten leagues broad . On the North side it hath a little Hand about one league distant from the main Hand , between both of the which it is navigable for any ships , and is called Graciosa . 
 Both Forteventura and Lanzarota have very little wine of the growth of those Hands . It stands in 27 degrees . 
 [ II ii . 7. ] Thus much have I written of these seven Hands by experience , because I was a dweller there , as I have said before , the space of seven years in the affairs of master Thomas Lock , master Anthonie Hickman , and master Edward Castelin , who in those days were worthy merchant's , and of great credit in the city of London . 
 A description of the Hand of Madera . 
 THe Hand of Madera stands in 32 degrees distant from the equinoctinall line , and seventie leagues from the He of Tenerif Northeastward and Southwest from Hercules pillars . This Hand was first discovered by one Macham and Englishman , and was after conquered and inhabited by the Portugall nation . It was first called the Hand of Madera , by reason of the great wilderness of sundry sorts of trees that there did 134 
 grow , and yet do , as Cedars , Cypress , Vinatico , Bar-buzano , Pine trees , and diverse others , and therefore the said Hand continueth still with the same name . Howbeit they hold opinion , that between the said Hand and the He of Palma is and Hand not yet discovered , which is the true Hand Madera called saint Brandon . This Hand yields a great sum of money to the king of Portugall yearly : it hath one fair city called Fouchall , which hath one fair port or harbour for ships , and a strong bulwark , and a fair Cathedral church , with a bishop and other dignities thereunto appertaining . There is also justice and government according to the Portugall use . But causes of appellation are remitted to the city of Lisbone in Portugall to the kings superior judges there . This Hand hath another town called Machico , which hath likewise a good road for ships , which town and road were so called after the name of Macham the Englishman , who first discovered the same . There are also sixteene sugar houses called Ingenios , which make excellent good sugar . 
 There is beside the goodly timber before declared , great store of diverse sorts of fruits , as Pears , Apples , Plums , wild Dates , Peaches of diverse sorts , Mellons , Batatas , Oranges , Lemons , Pomgranates , Citrons , Figs , and all manner of garden herbs . There are many Dragon trees , such as grow in the Canary Hands , but chiefly this land produceth great quantity of singular good wines which are laden for many places . On the North side of this land three leagues distant from the main Hand stands another little Hand called Porto santo : the people thereof lives by husbandry , for the Hand of Madera yields but little corn , but rather is thereof provided out of France and from the Hand of Tenerif . On the East side of the He of Madera sixe leagues distant stands another little Hand called the Desert , which produceth only Orchell , and nourishes a great number of Goats , for the provision of the main Hand , which may be thirtie leagues in circuit : and the land is of great 
 135 
 A.D. 
 c . 1550. 
 heighth where the foresaid trees grow . It is wonder to see the conveyance of the water to the Ingenios by Mines through the mountains . 
 In the mid way between Tenerif and the Hand of Madera stands a little solitary Hand called the Salvages , which may be about one league in compass , which hath neither tree nor fruit , but is only food for Goats . 
 . 