The second voyage to Guinea set out by Sir George Bairn , Sir John Yorke , Thomas Lok , Anthonie Hickman and Edward Castelin , in the year 1554. The Captain whereof was M. John Lok . 
 S in the first voyage I have declared rather the order of the history , then the course of the navigation , whereof at that time I could have no perfect information : so in the description of this second voyage , my chief intent hath been to show the course of the same , according to the 
 observation and ordinary custom of the mariners , and as I received it at the hands of and expert Pilot , being one of the chief in this voyage , who also with his own 
 * 54 
 hands wrote a brief declaration of the same , as he found and tried all things , not by conjecture , but by the art of sailing , and instruments pertaining to the mariners faculty . Not therefore assuming to my self the commendations due unto other , neither so bold as in any part to change or otherwise dispose the order of this voyage so well •observed by art and experience , I have thought good to set forth the same , in such sort and phrase of speech as is commonly used among them , and as 1 received it of the said Pilot , as I have said . Take it therefore as follows . 
 In the year of our Lord 1554 the eleventh day of 
 October , we departed the river of Thames with three [ II ii . 15. ] goodly ships , the one called the Trinitie , a ship of the burden of sevenscore tun , the other called the Bartholomew , a ship of the burden of ninetie , the third was the 
 John Evangelist , a ship of seven score tun . With RobertGainsh the said ships and two pinnaces ( whereof the one was drowned on the coast of England ) we went forward on n van ' our voyage , and stayed at Dover fourteene days . We stayed also at Rye three or foure days . Moreover last of all we touched at Dartmouth . 
 The first day of November at nine of the clock at night , departing from the coast of England , we set off the Start , bearing Southwest all that night in the sea , and the next day all day , and the next night after , until the third day of the said month about noon , making our way good , did run threescore leagues . 
 The 17 day in the morning we had sighed of thee He The lie of of Madera , which does rise to him that comes in the Madera . Northnortheast part upright land in the west part of it , and very high : and to the Southsoutheast a low long land , and a long point , with a saddle thorough the midst of it , standing in two and thirtie degrees : and in the West part , many springs of water running down from the mountain , and many white fields like unto corn fields , & some white houses to the Southeast part of it : and the top of the mountain shows very ragged , 
 155 
 From Madera to the Isk of Palms . 
 Gran Canaria . Forteventura . The Hand of Gomera . 
 Teneriffa . 
 Snow . 
 The coast of Barbarie . Cape Blank . 
 if you may see it , and in the Northeast part there is a bite or bay as though it were a harbour : Also in the said part , there is a rock a little distance from the shore , and over the said bite you shall see a great gap in the mountain . 
 The 19 day at twelve of the clock we had sighed of the isle of Palms and Teneriffa and the Canaries . The He of Palm riseth round , & lies Southeast and Northwest , and the Northwest part is lowest . In the South is a round hill over the head land , and another round hill above that in the land . There are between the Southeast part of thee He of Madera & the Northwest part of thee He of Palm seven and fifty leagues . This Isle of Palm lies in eight and twenty degrees . And our course from Madera to the lie of Palm was South and South and by West , so that we had sighed of Teneriffa and of the Canaries . The Southeast part of the lie of the Palm , & the Northnortheast of Teneriffa lie Southeast and Northwest , and between them are 20 leagues . Teneriffa and the great Canary called Gran Canaria , and the West part of Forteventura stand in seven and twenty degrees and a half . Gomera is a fair Island but very ragged , & lies Westsouthwest off7 Teneriffa . And whosoever will come between them two Hands must come South and by East , and in the South part of Gomera is a town and a good road in the said part of the Hand : and it stands in seven and twentie degrees and three terces . Teneriffa is and high land , with a great high pike like a sugar loaf , and upon the said pike is snow throughout all the whole year . And by reason of that pike it may be known above all other Hands , and there we were becalmed the twentieth day of November , from sixe of the clock in the morning , until foure of the clock at afternoon . 
 The two and twentieth day of November , under the Tropike of Cancer the Sun goes down West and by South . Upon the coast of Barbarie five and twentie leagues by North Cape blank , at three leagues off the i56 
 main , there are fifteene fathoms and good shelly ground , and sand among and no streams , and two small Hands standing in two and twentie degrees and a terce . 
 From Gomera to Cape de las Barbas is and hundred leagues , and our course was South and by East . The said Cape stands in two and twentie and a half : and all that coast is flat , sixteene or seventeene fathom deep . Seven , or eight leagues off from the river deal The river del Oro to Cape de las Barbas , there use many Spaniardes Qro-and Portugals to trade for fishing , during the month of November : and all that coast is very low lands . Also we went from Cape de las Barbas Southsouthwest , and Southwest and by South , till we brought our selves in twentie degrees and a half , reckoning our selves seven leagues off : and there were the least shoal of Cape Blank . 
 Then we went South until we brought our selves in 13 degrees , reckoning our selves five and twentie leagues off . And in 15 degrees we did rear the Cros - The crossiers siers , and we might have reared them sooner if we had or cnsse stars ' looked for them . They are not right a cross in the month of November , by reason that the nights are short there . Nevertheless we had the sighed of them the 29 day of the said month at night . 
 The first of December , being in 13 degrees we set our course South and by East , until the fourth day of December at 12 of the clock the same day . Then we were in nine degrees and a terce , reckoning our selves 30 leagues off the shoal of the river called Rio Grande , Rio Grande . being Westsouthwest off them , the which shoal be 30 leagues long . 
 The fourth of December we began to set our course Southeast , we being in sixe degrees and a half . 
 The ninth day of December we set our course East - [ II ii . 16. ] southeast : the fourteenth day of the said month we set our course East , we being in five degrees and a half , reckoning our selves thirty and sixe leagues from the coast of Guinea . 
 157 
 The river of Sesto . 
 The river of Sesto . 
 Rio Dulce . 
 Cape de Monte . 
 Cave de las Palmas . 
 The nineteenth of the said month we set our course East and by North , reckoning our selves seventeene leagues distant from Cape Mensurado , the said Cape being Eastnortheast of us , and the river of Sesto being East . 
 The one and twentieth day of the said month , we fell with Cape Mensurado to the Southeast , about tfao leagues off . This Cape may be easily known , by reason y* the rising of it is like a Porpose-head . Also towards the Southeast there are three trees , whereof the Eastermost tree is the highest , and the middlemost is like a high stack , & the Southermost like unto a gibbet : and upon the main are foure or five high hills rising one after another like round hommocks or hillocks . And the Southeast of the three trees , brandiernwise : and all the coast along is white sand . The said Cape stands within a little in sixe degrees . 
 The two and twentieth of December we came to the river of Sesto , & remained there until the nine and twentieth day of the said month . Here we thought it best to send before us the pinnace to the river Dulce , called Rio Dulce , that they might have the beginning of the market before the coming of the John Evangelist . 
 At the river of Sesto we had a tun of grains . This river stands in sixe degrees , lacking a terce . From the river of Sesto to Rio Dulce are five and twentie leagues . Rio Dulce stands in five degrees and a half . The river of Sesto is easy to be known , by reason there is a ledge of rocks on the Southeast part of the Road . And at the entering into the haven are five or sixe trees that bear no leaves . This is a good harbour , but very narrow at you entrance into the river . There is also a rock in the havens mouth right as you enter . And all that coast between Cape de Monte , and cape de las Palmas , lies Southeast & by East , Northwest & by West , being three leagues off the shore . And you shall have in some places rocks two leagues off : and that , between the river of Sesto and cape de las Palmas . 
 158 
 I555 ’ Between the river of Sesto and the river Dulce are five and twentie leagued : & the high land that is between them both , is called Cakeado , being eight leagues from of the river of Sesto . And to the Southeastward of it is Cakead < 1-a place called Shawgro , and and other called Shyawe or Shauo , where you may get fresh water . Off this Shyawe Shauo . lies a ledge of rocks : and to the Southeastward lies a headland called Croke . Between Cakeado and Croke Croke . are nine or ten leagues . To the Southeastward off , is a harbour called S. Vincent : Right over against S. 
 Vincent , is a rock under the water , two leagues & a * ' 
 half off the shore . To the Southeastward of that rock you shall see and island about three or foure leagues off : this island is not passed a league off the shore . To the Eastsoutheast of the island is a rock that lies above the water , and by that rock goes in the river Dulce , eriver which you shall know by the said river and rock . The ‘ Northwest side of the haven is flat sand , and the Southeast side thereof is like and Island , and a bore plot without any trees , and so is it not in any other place . 
 In the Road you shall ride in thirteene or foureteene fathoms , good oaze and sand , being the marks of the Road to bring the Island and the Northeast land together , and here we anchored the last of December . 
 The third day of Januarie , we came from the river Dulce . 
 Note that Cape de las Palmas is a fair high land , Cape de las but some low places thereof by the water side look like Palmas . read cliffs with white strikes like high ways , a cable length a piece , and this is the East part of the cape . 
 This cape is the Southermost land in all the coast of The coast of Guinea , and stands in foure degrees and a terce . Guinea . 
 The coast from Cape de las Palmas to Cape Trepointes , or de Tres Puntas , is fair & clear without rock or other danger . 
 Twentie and five leagues from Cape de las Palmas , the land is higher then in any place , until we come to Cape Trepointes : And about ten leagues before you r59 
 The town of Samma . 
 The pledge was sir John 
 Yorke his Nephew . 
 Cape Corea . 
 The castle of Mina pertaining to the king of Portugall . 
 come to Cape Trepointes , the land riseth still higher and higher , until you come to Cape Trepointes , Also before you come to the said Cape , after other 5 leagues to the Northwest part of it , there is certain broken ground , with two great rocks , and within them in the bite of a bay , is a castle called Arra , pertaining to the king of Portugall . You shall know it by the said rocks that lie off it : for there is none such from Cape de las Palmas to Cape Trepointes . This coast lies East and by North , West and by South . From Cape de las Palmas to the said castle is fourescore and fifteene leagues . And the coast lies from the said castle to the Westermost point of Trepoyntes , Southeast and by South , Northwest and by North . Also the Westermost point of Trepoyntes is a low land , lying half a mile out in the sea : and upon the innermost neck , to the landward , is a tuft of trees , and there we arrived the eleventh day of January . 
 The 12 day of January we came to a town called Samma or Samva , being 8 leagues from Cape Trepointes towards Eastnortheast . Between Cape Trepointes and the town of Samva is a great ledge of rocks a great way out in the sea . We continued foure days at that Town , and the Captain thereof would needs have a pledge a shore . But when they received the pledge , they kept him still , and would traffic no more , but shot off their ordinance at us . They have two or three pieces of ordinance and no more . 
 The sixteenth day of the said month we made reckoning to come to a place called Cape Corea , where captain DONE John dwells , whose men entertained us friendly . This Cape Corea is foure leagues Eastward of the castle of Mina , otherwise called La mina , or Castello de mina , where we arrived the 18 day of the month . Here we made sale of all our cloth , saving two or three packs . 
 The 26 day of the same month we weighed anchor , and departed from thence to the Trini tie , which was seven leagues Eastward of us , where she sold her wares . 
 160 
 Then they of the Trinitie willed us to go Eastward of that eight or nine leagues , to fell part of their wares , in a place called Perecow , and another place nam Perecow Grande , being the Eastermost place of both these , which you shall know by a great round hill near unto it , nam Monte Rodondo , lying Westward from it , and by the water side are many high palm trees . From hence did we set forth homeward the thirteenth day of February , 8c plied up alongst till we came within seven or eight leagues to Cape Trepointes . About eight of the clock the 15 day at afternoon , we did cast about to seaward : and beware of the currants , for they will deceive you soar . Whosoever shall come from the coast of Mina homeward , let him be sure to make his way good West , until he reckon himself as far as Cape de las Palmas , where the currant sets always to the Eastward . And within twentie leagues Eastward of Cape de las Palmas is a river called De los Potos , where you may have fresh water and ballast enough , and plenty of 
 ivory or Elephants teeth . This river stands in foure Ivory . degrees , and almost two terces . And when you reckon your self as far shot as Cape de las Palmas , being in a degree , or a degree and a half , you may go West , and Palmas-West by North , until you come in three degrees : and then you may go Westnorthwest , and Northwest and by West , until you come in five degrees , and then Northwest . And in sixe degrees , we met Northerly winds , and great ruffling of tides . And as we could judge , the currants went to the Northnorthwest . Furthermore between Cape de Monte , and Cape Verde , go great currants , which deceive many men . Currants . 
 The 22 day of Aprill , we were in 8 degrees and two terces : and so we ran to the Northwest , having the wind at Northeast and Eastnortheast , and sometime at East , until we were at 18 degrees and a terce , which was on May day . And so from 18 and two terces , we had the wind at East and Eastnortheast , and sometime at Eastsoutheast : and then we reckoned the Islands of 
 vi 161 L 
 Perecow . Perecow grand . 
 Monte Rodondo . 
 The currants . 
 From Mina homeward . 
 Rio de los Potos . 
 Where they lost the sighed oj the North star . 
 How the compass doth vary . 
 [ II ii . 18. ] 
 Cape verde Eastsoutheast of us , we judging our selves to be 48 leagues off . And in 20 and 21 degrees , we had the wind more Easterly to the Southward then before . And so we ran to the Northwest and Northnorthwest , and sometime North and by West and North , until we came into 31 degrees , where we reckoned our selves a hundred and fourescore leagues Southwest and by South of the Island de los Flores , and there we met with the wind at Southsoutheast , and set our course Northeast . 
 In 23 degrees we had the wind at the South and Southwest , and then we set our course Northnortheast , and so we ran to 40 degrees , and then we set our course Northeast , the wind being at the Southwest , and having the Isle de Flores East of us , and 17 leagues off . 
 In the 41 degrees we met with the wind at Northeast , and so we ran Northwestward , then we met with the wind Westnorthwest , and at the West within 6 leagues , running towards the Northwest , and then we cast about , and lay Northeast , until we came in 42 degrees , where we set our course Eastnortheast , judging the He of Corvo South and by West of us , and sixe and thirtie leagues distant from us . 
 A remembrance , that the 21 day of May we communed with John Rafe , and he thought it best to go Northeast , and judged himself 25 leagues Eastward to the Isle de Flores , and in 39 degrees and a half . 
 Note , that on the fourth day of September , under nine degrees , we lost the sighed of the North star . 
 Note also , that in 45 degrees , the compass is varied 8 degrees to the West . 
 Item , in 40 degrees the compass did vary 15 degrees in the whole . 
 Item , in 30 degrees and a half , the compass is varied 5 degrees to the West . 
 Be it also in memory that two or three days before we came to Cape de 3 puntas , the pinnace went alongst the shore , thinking to fell some of our wares , and so j 1&2 
 * 555-we came to anchor three or foure leagues West and by South of the Cape the 3 puntas , where we left the Trini tie . 
 Then our pinnace came aboard with all our men , the pinnace also took in more wares . They told me moreover that they would go to a place where the Primrose was , and had received much gold at the first The Primrose . voyage to these parties , and told me furthermore that it was a good place : but I fearing a brigantine that was then upon the coast , did weigh and follow them , and left the Trinitie about foure leagues off from us , and there we road against that town foure days : so that Martine by his own desire , and assent of some of the Commissioners that were in the pinnace , went a shore to the town , and there John Berin went to traffic from us , being three miles off trafficking at and other town . 
 The town is called Samma or Samva , for Samma and to ™ ™ of Sammaterra , are the names of the two first towns , where Samma-we did traffic for gold , to the Northeast of Cape the 3 Gold . puntas . 
 Hitherto continueth the course of the voyage , as it was described by the said Pilot. Now therefore I will speak somewhat of the country and people , and of such things as are brought from thence , r 
 They brought from thence at the last voyage foure Golifonre hundred pound weight and odd of gold , of two and twentie carrats and one grain in fineness : also sixe and * ' thirtie buts of grains , & about two hundred and fifty Grains . Elephants teeth of all quantities . Of these I saw & Elephants measured some of nine spans in length , as they were crooked . Some of them were as big as a men thigh above the knee , and weighed about fourescore and ten pound weight a piece . They say that some one hath been seen of and hundred and five & twentie pound weight . Other there were which they call the teeth of calves , of one or two or three years , whereof some were a foot and a half , some two foot , and some 3 or more , according to you age of the beast . These great teeth or 
 163 
 tusks grow in the upper jaw downward , and not in the neither jaw upward , wherein the Painters and Arras workers are deceived . At this last voyage was brought The head of from Guinea the head of and Elephant , of such huge and Elephant . bigness , that only the bones or cranew thereof , beside the neither jaw & great tusks , weighed about two hundred weight , and was as much as I could well lift from the ground : insomuch that considering also herewith the weight of two such great teeth , the neither jaw with the less teeth , the tongue , the great hanging ears , the big & long snout or troonke , with all the flesh , brains , and skin , with all other parts belonging to the whole head , in my judgement it could weigh little less then five hundred weight . This head diverse have seen in & ir Andrew the house of the worthy merchant sir Andrew Judde , Jf^dde . where also I saw it , and beheld it , not only with my 
 plations of bodily eyes , but much more with the eyes of my mind 
 Gods works , and spirit , considering by the work , the cunning and wisdom of the workemaister : without which consideration , the sighed of such strange and wonderful things may rather seem curiosities , then profitable contemplations . 
 The descrip - The Elephant ( which some call and Oliphant ) is the non andpn - biggest of all foure footed beasts , his forelegs are longer ‘ then his hinder , he hath ankles in the lower part of his hinder legs , and five toes on his feet undivided , his snout or trunk is so long , and in such form , that it is to him in the stead of a hand : for he neither eateth nor drinketh but by bringing his trunk to his mouth , therewith he helpeth up his Master or keeper , therewith he overthroweth trees . Beside his two great tusks , he hath on every side of his mouth foure teeth , wherewith he eateth and grindeth his meat : either of these teeth are almost a span in length , as they grow along in the jaw , and are about two inches in height , and almost as much in thickness . The tusks of the male are greater then of the female : his tongue is very little , and so far in his mouth , that it cannot be seen : of all beasts they are most gentle and tractable , for by many sundry ways 164 
 they are taught , and do understand : insomuch that 
 they learn to do due honour to a king , and are of quick sense and sharpness of wit . When the male hath once seasoned the female , he never after touches her . The male Elephant lives two hundreth years , or at the least one hundred and twentie : the female almost as long , but the flower of their age is but threescore years , as some write . They cannot suffer winter or cold : they love rivers , and will often go into them up to the snout , wherewith they blow and snufFe , and play in the water : but swim they cannot , for the weight of their bodies . Plinie and Soline write , that they use none adultery . If they happen to meet with a man in wilderness being out of the way , gently they will go before him , & bring him into the plain way . Joined in battle , they have no small respect unto them that be wounded : for they bring them that are hurt or weary into the middle of the army to be defended : they are made tame by drinking the juise of barley . They have Debate continual war against Dragons , which desire their between fa blood , because it is very cold : and therefore the Dragon fa^agin lying await as the Elephant passes by , windeth his tail ( being of exceeding length ) about the hinder legs of the Elephant , & so staying him , thrusts his head into his trunk and exhausteth his breath , or else bites him in the ear , whereunto he cannot reach with his trunk , and when the Elephant waxes faint , he falls down on [ H. ii . 19. ] the serpent , being now full of blood , and with the poise of his body breaks him : so that his own blood with the blood of the Elephant runneth out of him mingled together , which being cold , is congealed into that substance which the Apothecaries call Sanguis Draconis , Sanguis Dram - ( that is ) Dragons blood , otherwise called Cinnabaris , conis-although there be and other kind of Cinnabaris , come - Cinnabaris . monly called Cinoper or Vermilion , which the Painters use in certain colours . 
 They are also of three kinds , as of the Marshes , the Three kinds plains , and the mountains , no less differing in con - °f^bant$ . 
 165 
 ditions . Philostratus writeth , that as much as the Elephant of Libya in bigness passes the horse of Nysea , so much do the Elephants of India exceed them of Libya : for the Elephants of India , some have be seen of the height of nine cubits : the other do so greatly fear these , that they dare not abide the sighed of them . Of the Indian Elephants only the males have tusks , but of them of Ethiopia and Libya both kinds are tusked : they are of diverse heights , as of twelve , thirteene , and fourteene dodrants , every dodrant being a measure of nine inches . Some write that and Elephant is bigger then three wild Oxen or Buffs . They of India are black , or of the colour of a mouse , but they of Ethiope or Guinea are brown : the hide or skin of them all is very hard , and without hair or bristles : their ears are two dodrants broad , and their eyes very little . Our men saw one drinking at a river in Guinea , as they sailed into the land . 
 Of other properties & conditions of the Elephant , as of their marvelous docility , of their fight and use in the wars , of their generation and chastity , when they were first seen in the Theaters and triumphs of the Romans , how they are taken & tamed , and when they cast their tusks , with the use of the same in medicine , who so desires to know , let him read Plinie , in the eight book of his natural history . He also writeth in his twelft book , that in old time they made many goodly works of ivory or Elephants teeth : as tables , tressels , posts of houses , rails , lattesses for windows , images of their gods , and diverse other things of ivory , both coloured and uncoloured , and intermixed with sundry kinds of precious woods , as at this day are made certain chairs , lutes , and virginals . They had such plenty thereof in old time , that ( as far as I remember ) Josephus writeth , that one of the gates of Hierusalem was called Porta Eburnea , ( that is ) the Ivory gate . The whiteness thereof was so much esteemed , that it was thought to represent the natural fairness of men skin : insomuch that such as 166 
 1555-went about to set forth ( or rather corrupt ) natural beauty with colours and painting , were reproved by this proverb , Ebur atramento candefacere , that is , To make ivory white with ink . The Poets also describing the fair necks of beautiful virgins , call them Eburnea colla , that is , Ivory necks . And to have said thus much of Elephants and Ivory , it may suffice . 
 Now therefore I will speak somewhat of the people The people of and their manners , and manner of living , with and other brief description of Africa also . It is to be understood , that the people which now inhabit the regions of the coast of Guinea , and the middle parts of Africa , as Libya the inner , and Nubia , with diverse other great & large regions about the same , were in old time called TEthiopes and Nigritae , which we now call Moors , Moorens , or Negroes , a people of beastly living , without a God , law , religion , or common wealth , and so scorched and vexed with the heat of the sun , that in many places they curse it when it riseth . Of the regions and people about the inner Libya ( called Libya interior ) Gemma Phrysius Libyainterior . writeth thus . 
 Libya interior is very large and desolate , in the which are many horrible wildernesses & mountains , replenished with diverse kinds of wild and monstrous beasts and serpents . First from Mauritania or Barbary towards the South is Getulia , a rough and savage region , whose in - GetuSa . habitants are wild and wandering people . After these follow the people called Melanogetuli and Pharusii , which wander in the wilderness , carrying with them great gourds of water . The Ethiopians called Nigritae occupy JE Mopes . a great part of Africa , and are extended to the West Ocean . Southward also they reach to the river Nigritis , The river whose nature agreeth with the river of Nilus , forasmuch Nigritistr as it is increased and diminished at the same time , and e ” Sa ' brings forth the like beasts as the Crocodile . By reason whereof , I think this to be the same river which the Portugals call Senega : For this river is also of the same strange nature . It is furthermore marvelous and very strange thing . 
 167 
 that is said of this river : And this is , that on the one side thereof , the inhabitants are of high stature and black , and on the other side , of brown or tawny colour , and low stature , which thing also our men confirm to be true . 
 Garamantes . There are also other people of Libya called Garamantes , whose women are common : for they contract no matrimony , neither have respect to chastity . After these People of are the nations of the people called Pyrei , Sathiodaphnitae , Odrangi , Mimaces , Lynxamatae , Dolopes , Aganginae , Leuci Ethiopes , Xilicei Ethiopes , Calcei Ethiopes , and Nubi . These have the same situation in Ptolome that they now give to the kingdom of Nubia . Here are [ II ii . 20. ] certain Christians under the dominion of the great Prester John. Emperor of . / Ethiopia , called Prester John. From these towards the West is a great nation of people called Aphricerones , whose region ( as far as may be gathered Regnum by conjecture ) is the same that is now called Regnum 
 Orguene . Orguene , confining upon the East parts of Guinea . 
 From hence Westward , and somewhat towards the North , Gambra . are the kingdoms of Gambra and Budomel , not far from the river of Senega . And from hence towards the inland regions , and along by the sea coast , are the regions Guinea . of Ginoia or Guinea , which we commonly call Ginnee . 
 On the Westside of these regions towards the Ocean , is Cabo Verde . the cape or point called Cabo verde , or Caput viride , The Portugals ( that is ) the green cape , to the which the Portugals Kf'9 ” i0 first direct their course when they sail to America , or ‘ the land of Brasile . Then departing from hence , they turn to the right hand towards the quarter of the wind called Garbino , which is between the West and the South . But to speak somewhat more of . / Ethiopia : although there are many nations of people so nam , yet Aethiopia . is Aethiopia chiefly divided into two parts , whereof the one is called Aethiopia under Aegypt , a great & rich The Island of region . To this pertaineth the Island Meroe , embraced round about with the streams of the river Nilus . In this Island women reigned in old time . Josephus writeth , 168 
 that it was sometime called Sabea : and that the Queen The Queen of Saba came from thence to Jerusalem , to hear the wisdom of Salomon . From hence towards the East reigneth the said Christian Emperor Prester John , whom Prester John some call Papam Johannes , & other say that he is called Pean Juan ( that is ) great John , whose Empire reaches ' far beyond Nilus , and is extended to the coasts of the Read sea & Indian sea . The middle of the region is almost in 66. degrees of longitude , and 12. degrees of latitude . About this region inhabit the people called People of the Clodi , Risophagi , Babylonii , Axiunitae , Molili , and Molibse . After these is the region called Troglodytica , ' whose inhabitants dwell in caves and dens : for these are their houses , & the flesh of serpents their meat , as writeth Plinie , and Diodorus Siculus . They have no speech , but rather a grinning and chattering . There are also people without heads , called Blemines , having their People without eyes and mouth in their breast . Likewise Strucophagi , and naked Ganphasantes : Satyrs also , which have nothing of men but only shape . Moreover Oripei , great hunter's . Mennones also , and the region of Smyrnophora , which brings forth myrrh . After these is the region of Myrrh . Azania , in the which many Elephants are found . A great Alania . part of the other regions of Africke that are beyond the Aequinoctiali line , are now ascribed to the kingdom of Melinde , whose inhabitants are accustomed to traffic Regnum with the nations of Arabia , and their king is joined in Meltnde . friendship with the king of Portugal , and payeth tribute to Prester John. 
 The other Ethiope , called Ethiopia interior ( that is ) Aethiopia the inner Ethiope , is not yet known for the greatness tnterwr-thereof , but only by the sea coasts : yet is it described in this manner . First from the Aequinoctiali towards the South , is a great region of Aethiopians , which brings forth white Elephants , Tigers , and the beasts called White Rhinocerotes . Also a region that brings forth plenty Elephants . of cynamome , lying between the branches of Nilus . 
 Also the kingdom of Habech or Habasia , a region of Habasia . 
 169 
 Montes Luna . 
 Gazatia . 
 Cap. bona Spei . 
 Africa without cold . 
 The winter of Africa . 
 Flames of fire and noise in the air . 
 The middle region of the air is cold . 
 Christian men , lying both on this side and beyond Nilus . Here are also the Aethiopians , called Ichthiophagi ( that is ) such as live only by fish , and were sometime subdued by the wars of great Alexander . Furthermore the Aethiopians called Rhapsii , & Anthropophagi , y‘ are accustomed to eat men flesh , inhabit the regions near unto the mountains called Montes Lunae ( that is ) the mountains of the Moon . Gazatia is under the Tropike of Capricorne . After this follows the front of Afrike , the Cape of Buena Speranza , or Caput Bonae Spei , that is , the Cape of good hope , by the which they pass that sail from Lisbon to Calicut . But by what names the Capes and gulfs are called , forasmuch as the same are in every globe and carded , it were here superfluous to rehearse them . 
 Some write that Africa was so nam by the Grecians , because it is without cold . For the Greek letter Alpha or A signifies privation , void , or without : and Phrice signifies cold . For in deed although in the stead of Winter they have a cloudy and tempestuous season , yet is it not cold , but rather smothering hight , with hight showers of rain also , and somewhere such scorching winds , that what by one means and other , they seem at certain times to live as it were in furnaces , and in manner already half way in Purgatory or hell . Gemma Phrisius writeth , that in certain parts of Africa , as in Atlas the greater , the air in the night season is seen shining , with many strange fires and flames rising in manner as high as the Moon : and that in the element are sometime herd as it were the found of pipes , trumpets and drums : which noises may perhaps be caused by the vehement and sundry motions of such firy exhalations in the air , as we see the like in many experiences wrought by fire , air and wind . The hollowness also , and diverse reflexions and breaking of the clouds may be great causes hereof , beside the vehement cold of the middle region of the air , whereby the said fiery exhalations , ascending thither , are suddenly stricken back with 17° 
 great force : for even common and daily experience teaches us , by the whissing of a burning torch , what noise fire makes in the air , and much more where it striveth when it is enclosed with air , as appears in [ II ii . 21. ] guns , and as the like is seen in only air enclosed , as strtfe 9f in Organ pipes , and such other instruments that go by ments ' wind . For wind ( as say the Philosophers ) is none wind . other then air vehemently moved , as we see in a pair of bellows , and such other . 
 Some of our men of good credit that were in this last voyage to Guinea , affirm earnestly that in the night season they felt a sensible heat to come from the beams The heat of of the moon . The which thing , although it be strange fa Moon . and insensible to us that inhabit cold regions , yet doth it stand with good reason that it may so be , forasmuch as the nature of stars and planets ( as writeth Plinie ) con - The nature of sisteth of fire , and containeth in it a spirit of life , which the starres-cannot be without heat . 
 And , that the Moon gives heat upon the earth the Prophet David seems to confirm in his 121. Psalm , where speaking of such men as are defended from evils by Gods protection , he says thus : Per diem Sol non exuret te , nec Luna per noctem . That is to say , In the day the Sun shall not burn thee , nor the Moon by night . 
 They say furthermore , that in certain places of the Spouts of sea they saw certain streams of water , which they call teattrfdkng spouts , falling out of the air into the sea , & that some of these are as big as the great pillars of Churches : insomuch that sometime they fallen into ships , and put them in great danger of drowning . Some feign that these should be the Cataracts of heaven , which were Cataracts oj all opened at Noes flood . But I think them rather to aven . be such fluxions and eruptions as Aristotle in his book de Mundo says , to chance in the sea . For speaking of such strange things as are seen often times in the sea , he writeth thus . Oftentimes also even in the sea are seen evaporations of fire , and such eruptions and break - 
 171 
 ing forth of springs , that the mouths of rivers are opened . Whirlpools , and fluxions are caused of such Vthement other vehement motions , not only in the midst of the 
 motums in the sea > but also in creeks & straights . At certain times ea‘ also , a great quantity of water is suddenly lifted up and carried about with the Moon , etc. By which words of Aristotle it does appear that such waters be lifted up in one place at one time , and suddenly fallen down in and other place at another time . And hereunto perhaps pertaineth it that Richard Chanceller told me that he A strange herd Sebastian Cabot report , that ( as far as I remember ) either about the coasts of Brasile or Rio de Plata , his ship or pinnace was suddenly lifted from the sea , The power of anJ cast upon land , I wot not how far . The which nature . thing , and such other like wonderful and strange works 
 of nature while I consider , and call to remembrance the narrowness of men understanding and knowledge , in comparison of her mighty power , I can but cease to marvel and confess with Plinie , that nothing is to her impossible , the least part of whose power is not yet known to men . Many things more our men saw and considered in this voyage , worthy to be noted , whereof I have thought good to put some in memory , that the reader may aswell take pleasure in the variety of things , as knowledge of the historic . Among other things therefore , touching the manners and nature of the people , this may seem strange , that their princes & noble men They raze use to pounce and raze their skins with pretty knots in thetr skins . diverse forms , as it were branched damask , thinking that 
 to be a decent ornament . And albeit they go in manner all naked , yet are many of them , & especially their women , Tine jewels , in manner laden with collars , bracelets , hoops , and chains , either of gold , copper , or ivory . I my self have one A bracelet . of their braslets of Ivory , weighing two pound and sixe 
 ounces of Troy weight , which make eight and thirtie ounces : this one of their women did wear upon her arm . It is made of one whole piece of the biggest part of the tooth , turned and somewhat carved , with a hold in 
 172 
 the midst , wherein they put their hands to wear it on their arm . Some have on every arm one , and as many on their legs , wherewith some of them are so galled , that although they are in manner made lame thereby , yet will they by no means leave them off . Some wear also on their legs great shackles of bright copper , which Shackles . they think to be no less comely . They wear also collars , bracelets , garlands , and girdles , of certain blue stones like beads . Likewise some of their women wear on their bore arms certain foresleeves made of the plataeae of beaten gold . On their fingers also they wear rings , made of golden wires , with a knot or wreathe , like Rings . unto that which children make in a ring of a rush . Among other things of gold that our men bought of them for exchange of their wares , were certain dog - Dogschaines chains and collers . of glide . 
 They are very wary people in their bargaining , and will not loose one spark of gold of any valve , use weights and measures , and are very circumspect in occupying the same . They that shall have to do with them , must use them gently : for they will not traffic or bring in any wares if they be evil used . At the first voyage that our men had into these parties , it so chanced , that at their departure from the first place where they did traffic , one of them either stole a musk Cat , or A musk cat . took her away by force , not mistrusting that that should have hindered their bargaining in another place whither they intended to go . But for all the haste they could make with full sails , the fame of their misusage so prevented them , that the people of that place also , offended thereby , would bring in no wares : insomuch that they were enforced either to restore the Cat , or pay for her [ II ii . 22. ] at their price , before they could traffic there . 
 Their houses are made of foure posts or trees , and Their houses . covered with boughs . 
 Their common feeding is of roots , & such fish as Theirfeeding . they take , whereof they have great plenty . 
 There are also such flying fish as are seen in the Flying fish . 
 * 73 
 * 555 - sea of the West Indies . Our men salted of their fish , hoping to provide store thereof : but they would take no salt , and must therefore be eaten forthwith as some say . Howbeit other affirm , that if they be salted immediady after they be taken , they will last uncor - 
 A strange thing . rupted ten or twelve days . But this is more strange , that part of such flesh as they carried with them out of England , which putrified there , became sweet again at their return to the climb of temperate regions . 
 Their bred . They use also a strange making of bred , in this manner . They grind between two stones with their hands as much corn as they think may suffice their family , and when they have thus brought it to flower , they put thereto a certain quantity of water , and make thereof very thin dough , which they stick upon some post of their houses , where it is baked by the heat of the Sun : so that when the master of the house or any of his family will eat thereof they take it down and eat it . 
 Their wheat . They have very fair wheat , the ear whereof is two handfuls in length , and as big as a great Bulrush , and almost foure inches about where it is biggest . The stem or straw seems to be almost as big as the Iide finger of a men hand , or Iide less . The grains of this wheat are as big as our peason , round also , and very white , and somewhat shining , like pearls that have lost their colour . Almost all the substance of them turns into flower , & makes Iide bran or none . I told in one ear two hundred & threescore grains . The ear is enclosed in three blades longer then it self , & of two inches broad a piece . And by this fruitfulness 
 The Sun . the Sun seems pardy to recompense such griefs and molestations as they otherwise receive by the fervent heat thereof . It is doubdesse a worthy contemplation to consider the contrary effects of the sun : or rather the contrary passion of such things as receive the influence of his beams , either to their hurt or benefit . Their 
 Their drink . drink is either water , or the juise that drops from 174 
 1555-the cut branches of the barren Date trees , called Palmitos . 
 For either they hang great gourds at the said branches every evening , and let them so hang all night , or else they set them on the ground under the trees , that the drops may fallen therein . They say that this kind of drink is in taste much like unto whey , but somewhat sweeter , and more pleasant . They cut the branches every evening , because they are seared up in the day by the heat of the Sun . They have also great beans as big as chestnuts , and very hard , with a shell in the stead of a husk . 
 Many things more might be said of the manners of the people , and of the wonders and monstrous things that are engendered in Africke . But it shall suffice to have said thus much of such things as our men partly saw , and partly brought with them . 
 And whereas before speaking of the fruit of grains , Grains I described the same to have holes by the side ( as in deed it hath , as it is brought hither ) yet was I afterwards informed , that those holes were made to put strings or twigs through the fruit , thereby to hang them up to dry at the Sun . They grow not passed a foot and a half , or two foot from the ground , and are as read as blood when they are gathered . The grains themselves are called of the Physicians Grana Paradisi . 
 At their coming home the keels of their ships ^Ms that were marvellously overgrown with certain shells of to ships . two inches length and more , as thick as they could stand , and of such bigness that a man might put his thumb in the mouths of them . They certainly affirm that in these there grows a certain slimy substance , which at the length slipping out of the shell and falling in the sea , becomes those fowls which we call Barnacles . The like shells have be seen in Barnacles . ships returning from Iseland , but these shells were not passed half and inch in length . Of the other that came from Guinea , I saw the Primerose lying in the dock , and in manner covered with the said shells , which in my 
 175 
 The death of our men . 
 Five black Moors brought into England . [ II ii . 23. ] Cold may be better abiden then heat . 
 judgement should greatly hinder her sailing . Their ships were also in many places eaten with the worms called Bromas or Bissas , whereof mention is made in the Decades . These creep between the planks , which they eat through in many places . 
 Among other things that chanced to them in this voyage , this is worthy to be noted , that whereas they sailed thither in seven weeks , they could return in no less space then twentie weeks . The cause whereof they say to be this : That about the coast of Cabo Verde the wind is ever at the East , by reason whereof they were inforced to sail far out of their course into the main Ocean , to find the wind at the West to bring them home . There died of our men at this last voyage about twentie and foure , whereof many died at their return into the climb of the cold regions , as between the Islands of Azores and England . They brought with them certain black slaves , whereof some were tall and strong men , and could well agree with our meats and drinks . The cold and moist air does somewhat offend them . Yet doubtless men that are born in hight Regions may better abide cold , then men that are born in cold Regions may abide heat , forasmuch as vehement heat resolves the radical moisture of men's bodies , as cold constrains and preserveth the same . 
 This is also to be considered as a secret work of nature , that throughout all Africke , under the Equinoctial line , and near about the same on both sides , the regions are extreme hight , and the people very black . Whereas contrarily such regions of the West Indies as are under the same line are very temperate , and the people neither black , nor with curlde and short wool on their heads , as they of Africke have , but of the colour of and Olive , with long and black hear on their heads : the cause of which variety is declared in diverse places in the Decades . 
 It is also worthy to be noted that some of them that were at this voyage told me : That is , that they 176 
 reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv 
 w Library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 05 : 12 , subject to 
 overtook the course of the Sun , so that they had it North from them at noon , the 14. day of March .. And to have said thus much of these voyages , it may suffice . 
 . 