The second voyage to Barbary in the year 1552. Set forth by the right worshipful Sir John Yorke , Sir William Gerard , Sir Thomas Wroth , Master Frances Lambert , Master Cole , and others ; Written by the relation of Master James Thomas then Page to Master Thomas Windham chief Captain of this voyage . 
 He ships that went on this voyage were three , whereof two were of the River of Thames , That is to say , the Lion of London , whereof Master Thomas Windham was Captain and part owner , of about and hundred & fiftie tons : The other was the Buttolfe about fourescore 
 tons , and a Portugall Caravel bought of certain Portu-gals in Newport in Wales , and freighted for this voyage , of sum sixtie tons . The number of men in the Fleet were and hundred and twentie . The Master of the Lion was one John Kerry of Mynhed in Somersetshire , his Mate was David Landman . The chief Captain of this small Fleet was Master Thomas Windham a Norffolke gentleman born , but dwelling at Marshfield-parke in Somerset shire . This Fleet departed out of King-rode near Bristoll about the beginning of May 1552. being on a Munday in the morning : and the Munday fortnight next ensuing in the evening came to and anchor at their first port in the road of Zafia , or Asafi on the coast of Barbarie , standing in 32. degrees of latitude , and there put on land part of our merchandise to be conveyed by land to the city of Marocco : which being done , and having refreshed our selves with victuals and water , we went to the second port called Santa Cruz , where we discharged the rest of our goods , being good quantity of linen and woollen cloth , corail , amber , Jet , and diverse other things well accepted by the Moors . In which road we 
 found a French ship , which not knowing whither it were war or peace between England and France , drew her self as near under the town walls as she could possible , craving aid of the town for her defence , if need were , which in deed seeing us draw near , shot at us a piece from the walls , which came over the Lion our Admiral , between the main mast & her foremast . Whereupon we coming to and anchor , presently came a pins aboard us to know what we were , who understanding that we had be there the year before , & came with the good English leave of their king in merchant wise , were fully satisfied , and gave us good leave to bring our goods peaceably year before on shore , where the Viceroy , whose name was Sibill being xyfo . Manache , within short time after came to visit us , and used us with all courtesy . But by diverse occasions we spent here very near three months before we could get in our lading , which was Sugar , Dates , Almonds , and Malassos or sugar Syrrope . And for all our being here in the heat of the Summer , yet none of our company perished by sickness . Our ships being laden , we drew into the Sea for a Western wind for England . But being at sea , a great leak fell upon the Lion , so that we were driven to Lancerota , and Forteventura , where , between the two Hands , we came to a road , whence we put on land out of our said ship 70. chests of Sugar upon Lancerota , with some dozen or sixteene of our company , where the inhabitants supposing we had made a wrongful prize of our caravel , suddenly came with force upon our people , among whom I my self was one , took us prisoners , and spoiled the sugars : 
 which thing being perceived from our ships , they manned [ II ii . 9. ] out three boats , thinking to rescue us , and drave the Spaniards to flight , whereof they slew eighteene , and took their governor of the Hand prisoner , who was a very aged gentleman about 70. years of age . But chasing the enemy so far , for our recovery , as powder and arrows wanted , the Spaniardes perceiving this , returned , and in our men's retire they slew sixe of them . 
 139 
 Then a parley grew , in the which it was agreed , that we the prisoners should be by them restored , and they receive their old governor , giving us a testimony under his and their hands , what damages we had there received , the which damages were here restored , and made good by the king of Spaine his merchants upon our return into England . After we had searched and mended our leak , being returned aboard , we came under sail , and as we were going to the sea on the one side of the Hand , the Cacafuego and other ships of the king of Portugals Armada entered at the other , and came to anchor in the road from whence we were but newly departed , and shot off their great ordinance in our hearing . And here by the way it is to be understood that the Portugals were much offended with this our new trade into Barbarie , and both in our voyage the year before , as also in this they gave out in England by their merchants , that if they took us in those parts , they would use us as their mortali enemies , with great threats and menaces . But by God and good providence we escaped their hands . From this Hand shaping our course for England , we were seven or eight weeks before we could reach the coast of England . The first port we entered into was the haven of Plymouth , from whence within short time we came into the Thames , and landed our merchandise at London , about the end of the month of October , 1552. 
 . 