A letter of M. John Lok to the worshipful company of Merchants adventurers for Guinie , written 1561 , showing reasons for his not proceeding in a voyage then intended to the foresaid country . 
 Orshipfull sirs ; since the arrival of M. Pet and Buttoil Monjoy ( as I understand ) for the voyage it is concluded that the Minion shall proceed on her voyage , if within 20 days she may be repaired of those hurts she hath received by the last storm : or in the month of January 
 also , if the wind will serve therefore . Wherefore for that your worships shall not be ignorant of my determined purpose in the same , with the reasons that have persuaded me thereunto ; I have thought good to advertise you thereof , trusting that your worships will weigh them , as I uprightly and plainly mean them . And not for any fear or discouragement that I have of my self by the raging of the storms of the sea , for that ( I thank the Lord ) these have not been the first that I have abiden , neither trust I they shall the last . First the state of the ship , in which , though I think not but M. Pet can do more for her strengthening then I can conceive , yet for all that , it will neither mend her conditions , nor yet make her so staunch that any cabin in her shall staunch for men to lie dry in : the which soar , what a weakening it will be to the poor men after their labour , that they neither can have a shift of apparel dry , nor yet a dry place to rest in , I refer to your discretion . For though that at Harwich she was both bound and caulked as much as might be , both within and without , yet for all that she left not , afore this flaw , in other weathers , being stressed , to open those seams , and become in the state she was before ; I mean , in wetting her men : notwithstanding her new work . And my judgement , with that little experience 255 
 I have had , leads me to think that the ship whose water works and footing's be spent and rotten cannot be but leak for men . Next , the unseasonable time of the year which is now present . And how only by means of the unseasonable times in the return from the voyage home , many thereby have decayed , to the great misery and calamity of the rest , and also to the great slander of the voyage ( which I much respect ) the last and other voyages have declared . And what it is to make the voyage in unseasonable time , that hath the second voyage also declared . Wherefore weighin and foreseeing this ( as I may well term it ) calamity and unevitable danger of men , and that by men she must be brought home again ( except that God will show and extraordinary miracle ) I purpose not nor dare I venture with a safe conscience to tempt God herein . Again , forsomuch as she is alone , and hath so little help of boat or pinnace in her trade , & also for her watering , where a long time of force must be spent , my going , to the accomplishment of your expectations , will be to small effect for this time , because I shall want both vessel and men to accomplish it . And I would not gladly so spend my time and travel , to my great charges and pain , and after , for not falling out accordingly , to loose both pot and water , as the proverb is . As for the Primrose , if she be there , her trade will be ended or ever we come there , so that she of force , by want of provision , must return : yea , though we should carry with us a supply for her , yet is the meeting of her doubtful , and though we met her , yet will the men not tarry , as no reason is they should : howbeit my opinion of her is that she is put into Ireland . The Flowerdeluce was in Milford . Thus for that your worships might understand the whole cause why I do not proceed , I have troubled you at this time with this my long Letter . And , as God is my Judge , not for fear of the Portugals , which there we shall meet ( and yet alone without aid ) as here is a ship which was in Lisbon , whose men say that there are in a readiness ( only to meet us ) foure great ships , of 2s6 
 the which one is accounted 700 tons , & other pinnaces : yet not for fear of them , nor raging of the seas ( whose rage God is above to rule ) but only for the premises : the sequel whereof must by reason turn to a great [ II ii . 54. ] misery to the men : the which I for my part ( though it might turn me to as much gain as the whole comes to ) yet would I not be so tormented , as the sighed thereof would be a corrosive to my heart , and the more , because foreseeing the same , I should be so lewd , as yielding , to have run into the danger thereof , and therefore I have absolutely determined with my self not to go this voyage . Howbeit if in a seasonable time of the year I had but one ship sufficient , though much less by the half , I would not refuse ( as trial being made thereof should appear ) or if I had ability of my self to venture so much , it should well be seen . And this I speak to give you to understand that I refuse not this for fear : If you purpose to proceed herein , send some one whom you please ; to whom I will not only deliver the articles which I have received , but also will give some particular notes which I have noted in the affairs which you have committed unto me , with the best help and counsel I can . Thus the living God keep your worships all . Bristoll this 11 of December 1561. 
 Your worships to command to his power John Lok . 
 . 