Certain reports of the province of China learned through the Portugals there imprisoned , and chiefly by the relation of Galeotto Perera , a Gentleman of good credit , that lay prisoner in that Country many years . Done out of Italian into English by Richard Wills . 
 His land of China is parted into 13. Shires , the which sometime were each one a kingdom by it self , but these many years they have be all subject unto one King . Fuquien is made by the Fuquien . Portugals the first Shire , because there their troubles began , & they had occasion 
 thereby to know the rest . In this shire be 8. cities , but one principally more famous then others called Fuquieo , the other seven are reasonably great , the best known whereof unto the Portugals is Cinceo , in respect of a Cinceo . certain haven joining thereunto , whither in time passed they were wont for merchandise to resort . 
 Cantan is the second shire , not so great in quantity , Cantan . as well accounted of , both by the king thereof , and also by the Portugals , for that it lies nearer unto Malacca then any other part of China , and was first descried by the Portugals before any other shire in that province : this shire hath in it seven Cities . 
 Chequeam is the third shire , the chiefest City therein Chequeam . is Donchion , therein also stands Liampo , with other 13. or 14. boroughs : country towns therein are too too many to be spoken of . 
 The fourth shire is called Xutiamfu , the principali Xutiamfu . City thereof is great Pachin , where the King is always resident . In it are fifteene other very great Cities : of other towns therein , and boroughs well walled and trenched about , I will say nothing . 
 The fift shire hath name Chelim : the great City Chelim . Nanquin chief of other fifteene cities was herein of 
 295 
 [ II ii . 69. ] 
 ancient time the royal seat of the Chinish kings . From this shire , & from the aforesaid Chequeam forward bore rule the other kings , until the whole region became one kingdom . 
 The 6. shire bears the name Quianci , as also the principal City thereof , wherein the fine clay to make vessels is wrought . The Portugals being ignorant of this Country , and finding great abundance of that fine clay to be sold at Liampo , and that very good cheap , thought at the first that it had be made there , howbeit in fine they perceived that the standing of Quinzi more near unto Liampo then to Cinceo or Cantan was the cause of so much fine clay at Liampo : within the compass of Quinci shire be other 12. cities . 
 The 7. shire is Quicin , the 8. Quansi , the 9. Confu , the 10. Urnan , the 11. Sichiva . In the first hereof there be 16. Cities , in the next 15 : how many Towns the other 3. have , we are ignorant as yet , as also of the proper names of the 12. and 13. shires , and the towns therein . 
 This finally may be generally said hereof , that the greater shires in China province may be compared with mighty kingdoms . 
 In eke one of these shires be set Ponchiassini and Anchiassini , before whom are handled the matters of other Cities . There is also placed in each one a Tutan , as you would say , a governor , and a Chian , that is a visiter , as it were : whose office is to go in circuit , and to see justice exactly done . By these means so uprightly things are ordered there , that it may be worthily accounted one of the best governed provinces in all the world . 
 The king makes always his abided in the great city Pachin , as much to say in our language , as by the name thereof I am advertised , the town of the kingdom . This kingdom is so large , that under five months you are not able to travail from the Towns by the Sea side to the Court , and back again , no not under three 296 
 months in post at your urgent business . The posthorses in this Country are little of body , but swift of foot . Many do travel the greater part of this journey by water in certain light barks , for the multitude of Rivers commodious for passage from one City to another . 
 The King , notwithstanding the hugeness of his king - Theirmoneths . dome , hath such a care thereof , that every Moon ( for by the Moons they reckon their months ) he is advertised fully of whatsoever thing happeneth therein , by these means following . 
 The whole province being divided into shires , and each shire having in it one chief and principali City , whereunto the matters of all the other Cities , Towns and boroughs , are brought , there are drawn in every chief City aforesaid intelligences of such things as do monthly fallen out , and be sent in writing to the Court . If happily in one month every Post be not able to go so long a way , yet doth there notwithstanding once every month arrive one Post out of the shire . Who so comes before the new moon stays for the delivery of his letters until the moon be changed . Then likewise are dispatched other Posts back into all the 13. shires again . 
 Before that we do come to Cinceo we have to pass through many places , and some of great importance . For this Country is so well inhabited near the Sea side , that you cannot go one mile but you shall see some Town , borough or hostry , the which are so abundantly provided of all things , that in the Cities and towns they live civilly . Nevertheless such as dwell abroad are very poor , for the multitude of them every where is so great , that out of a tree you shall see many times swarm a number of children , where a man would not have thought to have found any one at all . 
 From these places in number infinite , you shall come unto two Cities very populous , and , being compared with Cinceo , not possibly to be discerned which is the greater 297 
 of them . These cities are as well walled as any Cities in all the world . As you come in to either of them , there stands so great and mighty a bridge , that the like thereof I have never seen in Portugal nor else where . I herd one of my fellows say , that he told in one bridge 40. arches . The occasion wherefore these bridges are made so great is , for that the Country is towards the sea very plain and low , and overflowed ever as the sea water increases . The breadth of the bridges , although it be well proportioned unto the length thereof , yet are they equally built , no higher in the middle then at either end , in such wise that you may see directly from the one end to the other : the sides are wonderfully well engraved after the manner of Rome-workes . But that we did most marveile at was therewithal ! the hugeness of the stones , the like whereof , as we came in to the City , we did . see many set up in places dis-habited by the way , to no small charges of theirs , howbeit to little purpose , whereas no body sees them but such as do come by . The arches are not made after our fashion , vaunted with sundry stones set together : but paved , as it were , whole stones reaching from one pillar to and other , in such wise that they lie both for the arches heads , and gallantly serve also for the high way . I have be astonished to behold the hugeness of the aforesaid stones : some of them are xii . pases long and upward , the least 11. good pases long , and and half . 
 The ways echwhere are gallantly paved with foursquare stone , except it be where for want of stone they use to lay brick : in this voyage we travailed over certain hills , where the ways were pitched , and in many places no worse paved then in the plain ground . This causeth us to think , that in all the world there be no better workmen for buildings , then the inhabitants of China . The Country is so well inhabited , that no one foot of ground is left untilled : small store of cattle have we seen this day , we saw only certain oxen wherewithal ! the countrymen do blow their ground . 
 298 
 One ox draws the plough alone , not only in this shire , but in other places also , wherein is greater store of cattle . These countrymen by art do that in tillage , which we are constrained to do by force . Here be sold the voidings of close stools , although there wants not the dung of beasts : and the excrements of man are good merchandise throughout all China . The dungfermers seek in every street by exchange to buy this dirty ware for herbs and wood . The custom is very good for keeping the City clean . There is great abundance of hens , geese , ducks , swine , and goats , wethers have they none : the hens are sold by weight , and so are all other things . Two pound of hens flesh , geese , or duck , is worth two foi of their money , that is , worser . ob.sterling . Swines flesh is sold at a penny the pound . Beef bears the same price , for the scarcity thereof , howbeit Northward from Fuquieo and farther ofF from the seacoast , there is beef more plenty and sold better cheap ; We have had in all the Cities we passed through , great abundance of all these victuals , beef only excepted . And if this Country were like unto India , the inhabitants whereof eat neither hen , beef , nor pork , but keep that only for the Portugals and Moors , they [ II ii . 70. ] would be sold here for nothing . But it so falling out , that the Chineans are the greatest eaters in all the world , they do feed upon all things , specially on pork , which , the fatter it is , is unto them the less loathsome . The highest price of these things aforesaid 1 have set down , better cheap shall you sometime buy them for the great plenty thereof in this country . Frogs are sold at the same price that is made of hens , and are good meat among them , as also dogs , cats , rats , snakes , and all other unclean meats . 
 The Cities be very gallant , specially near unto the gates , the which are marvellously great , and covered with iron . The gatehouses are built on high with towers , & the lower part thereof is made of brick & stone , proportionally with the walls , from the walls upward the 
 299 
 building is of timber , and many stories in it one above the other . The strength of their towns is in the mighty walls and ditches , artillery have they none . 
 The streets in Cinceo , and in all the rest of the Cities we have seen are very fair , so large and so straight , that it is wonderful to behold . Their houses are built with timber , the foundations only excepted , the which are laid with stone : in each side of the streets are pentises or continual ! porches for the merchants to walk under : the breadth of the streets is nevertheless such , that in them 15. men may ride commodiously side by side . As they ride they must needs pass under many high arches of triumph that cross over the streets made of timber , and carved diversely , covered with tiles of fine clay : under these arches the Mercers do utter their smaller wares , & such as list to stand there are defended from rain and the heat of the Sun . The greater gentlemen have these arches at their doors : although some of them be not so mightily built as the rest . 
 I shall have occasion to speak of a certain order of gentlemen that are called Louteas . 1 will first therefore Loutea . expound what this word signifies . Loutea is as much to say in our language as Sir , and when any of them calls his name , he answereth Sir : and as we do say , that the king hath made some gentleman , so say they , that there is made a Loutea . And for that among them the degrees are diverse both in name and office , I will tell you only of some principals , being not able to advertise you of all . 
 The manner how gentlemen are created Louteas , and do come to that honour and title , is by the giving of a broad girdle , not like to the rest , and a cap , at the commandment of the king . The name Loutea is more general & common unto more , then the equality of honour thereby signified agreeth withal . Such Louteas as doe serve their prince in weighty matters for justice , are created after trial made of their learning : but the other which serve in smaller affairs , as Captains , constables , 3 00 
 C. 1565. sergeants by land and sea , receivers and such like , whereof there be in every city , as also in this , very many , are made for favour : the chief Louteas are served kneeling . 
 The whole province of China is divided , as I have said , into 13. shires , in every shire at the least is one governor called there Tutan , in some shires there be two . 
 Chief in office next unto them be certain other nam 
 Chians , that is , high Commissioners as you would say , or Chian , or , visiters , with full authority in such wise , that they do Chaen-call unto and account the Tutans themselves , but their authority lasteth not in any shire longer then one year . Nevertheless in every shire being at the least 7. cities , yea , in some of them 15. or 16. beside other boroughs and towns not well to be nurrtbred , these visiters where they come are so honoured and feared , as though they were some great princes . At the years end , their circuit done , they come unto that Ci tie which is chief of others in the shire , to do justice there : finally busying themselves in the searching out of such as are to receive the order of Louteas , whereof more shall said in another place . 
 Over and beside these officers , in the chief City of each one of these aforesaid 13. provinces , is resident one Ponchiassi , Captain thereof , and treasurer of all the kings Ponchiassi . revenues . This Magistrate makes his abided in one of the foure greatest houses that be in all these head Cities . And although the principali part of his function be to be Captain , to be treasurer of the revenues in that province , & to send these revenues at appointed times to the Court : yet hath he notwithstanding by his office also to meddle with matters appertaining unto justice . 
 In the second great house dwells and other Magistrate called Anchiassi , a great officer also , for he hath AncMaui , or dealings in all matters of justice . Who although he be Hexasisomewhat inferior in dignity unto the Ponchiassi , yet for his great dealings and generail charge of justice , whosoever sees the affairs of the one house and the other might judge this Anchiassi to be the greater . 
 3°i 
 Tuzi . Tuzi , and other officer so called , lies in the thirde house , a magistrate of importance , specially in things belonging unto warfare , for thereof hath he charge . 
 There is resident in the 4. house a fourth officer , Taissu . bearing name Taissu . In this house is the principali prison of all the City . Each one of these Magistrates aforesaid may both lay evil doers in prison , & deliver them out again , except you fact be heinous & of importance : in such a case they can do nothing , except they do meet all together . And if the deed deserveth [ II ii . 71. J death , all they together cannot determine thereof , without recourse made unto the Chian wheresoever he be , or to the Tutan : and eftsoons it falls out , that the case is referred unto higher power . In all Cities , not only chief in each shire , but in the rest also , are means found to make Louteas . Many of them do study at the prince his charges , wherefore at the years end they resort unto the head Cities , whither the Chians do come , as it hath be erst said , as well to give these degrees , as to fit in judgement over the prisoners . 
 The Chians go in circuit every year , but such as are to be chosen to the greatest offices meet not but from three years to three years , and that in certain large halls appointed for them to be examined in . Many things are asked them , whereunto if they do answer Licentiates , accordingly , and be found sufficient to take their degree , the Chian by and by grants it them : but the Cap and girdle , whereby they are known to be Louteas , they wear not before that they be confirmed by the Doctors . king . Their examination done , and trial made of them , such as have taken their degree wont to be given them with all ceremonies , use to banquet and feast many days together ( as the Chineans fashion is to end all their pleasures with eating and drinking ) and so remain chosen to do the king service in matters of learning . The other examinates found insufficient to proceed are sent back to their study again . Whose ignorance is 
 302 
 perceived to come of negligence and default , such a one is whipped , and sometime sent to prison , where lying that year when this kind of act was , we found many thus punished , and demanding the cause thereof , they said it was for that they knew not how to answer unto certain things asked them . It is a world to see how these Louteas are served and feared , in such wise , that in public assemblies at one shriek they give , all the servitors belonging unto justice tremble thereat . At their being in these places , when they list to move , be it but even to the gate , these servitors do take them up , and carry them in seats of beaten gold . After this sort are they born when they go in the City , either for their own business abroad , or to see each other at home . For the dignity they have , and office they do bear , they be all accompanied : the very meanest of them all that goes in these seats is ushered by two men at the least , that cry unto the people to give place , howbeit they need it not , for that reverence the common people have unto them . They have also in their company certain Sergeants with their Maces either silvered or altogether silver , some two , some foure , other sixe , other eight , conveniently for each one his degree . The more principal and chief Louteas have going orderly before these Sergeants , many other with staves , and a great many catchpoules with rods of Indish canes dragged on the ground , so that the streets being paved , you may hear afar off as well the noise of the rods , as the voice of the criers . These fellows serve also to apprehend others , and the better to be known they wear livery read girdles , and in their caps peacocks feathers . Behind these Louteas come such as do bear certain tables hanged at staves ends , wherein is written in silver letters , the name , degree , and office of that Loutea , whom they follow . In like manner they have born after them hats agreeable unto their titles : if the Loutea be mean , then hath he brought after him but one hat , and that may not be yealowe : but if he 
 3°3 
 A.D. 
 c . 1565. 
 We , that is the Italians andSpaniards . 
 be of the better sort , then may he have two , three , or foure : the principali and chief Louteas may have all their hats yellow , the which among them is accounted great honour . The Loutea for wars , although he be but mean , may notwithstanding have yellow hats . The Tutans and Chians , when they go abroad , have beside all this before them led three or foure horses with their guard in armour . 
 Furthermore the Louteas , yea and all the people of China , are wont to eat their meat sitting on stools at high tables as we do , and that very cleanly , although they use neither table-clothes nor napkins . Whatsoever is set down upon the board is first carved before that it be brought in : they feed with two sticks , refraining from touching their meat with their hands , even as we do with forks : for the which respect they less do need any table clothes . Ne is the nation only civil at meat , but also in conversation , and in courtesy they seem to exceed all other . Likewise in their dealings after their manner they are so ready , that they far pass all other Gentiles and Moores : the greater states are so vain , that they line their clothes with the best silk that may be found . The Louteas are and idle generation , without all manner of exercises and pastimes , except it be eating and drinking . Sometime they walk abroad in the fields to make the soldiers shoot at pricks with their bows , but their eating passes : they will stand eating even when the other do draw to shoot . The prick is a great blanket spread on certain long poles , he that striketh it , hath of the best man there standing a piece of crimson Taffeta , the which is knit about his head : in this sort the winners be honoured , and the Louteas with their bellies full return home again . The inhabitants of China be very great Idolaters , all generally do worship the heavens : and , as we are wont to say , God knoweth it : so say they at every word , Tien Tautee , that is to say , The heavens do know it . Some do worship the Son , and some the 
 304 
 Moon , as they think good , for none are bound more [ II ii . 72. ] 
 to one then to another . In their temples , the which they do call Meani , they have a great altar in the same place as we have , true it is that one may go round about it . There set they up the image of a certain Loutea of that country , whom they have in great reverence for certain notable things he did . At the right hand stands the devil much more ugly painted then we do use to set him out , whereunto great homage is done by such as come into the temple to ask counsel , or to draw lots : this opinion they have of him , that he is malicious and able to do evil . If you ask them what they do think of the souls departed , they will answer that they be immortali , and that as soon as any one departeth out of this life , he becomes a devil if he have lived well in this world , if otherwise , that the same devil changes him into a bufle , ox , or dog . Wherefore to this devil they do much honour , to him doe they sacrifice , praying him that he will make them like unto himself , and not like other beasts . They have moreover another sort of temples , wherein both upon the altars and also on the walls do stand many idols well proportioned , but bore headed : these bear name Omithofon , accounted of them spirits , but such as in heaven do neither good nor evil , thought to be such men and women as have chastely lived in this world in abstinence from fish and flesh , fed only with rise and salates . Of that devil they make some account : for these spirits they care title or nothing at all . Again they hold opinion that if a man do well in this life , the heavens will give him many temporali blessings , but if he do evil , then shall he have infirmities , diseases , troubles , and penury , and all this without any knowledge of God . Finally , this people knoweth no other thing then to live and die , yet because they be reasonable creatures , all seemed good unto them we speak in our language , though it were not very sufficient : our manner of praying especially pleased them , and truly 
 After the 
 Dutchfashion . 
 Pythagorean like . 
 VI 
 3°5 
 they are well enough disposed to receive the knowledge of the truth . Our Lord grant for his mercy all things so to be disposed , that it may sometime be brought to pass , that so great a nation as this is perish not for want of help . 
 Our manner of praying so well liked them , that in prison importunately they besought us to write for them somewhat as concerning heaven , the which we did to their contentation with such reasons as we knew , howbeit not very cunningly . As they do their idolatry they laugh at themselves . If at any time this country might be joined in league with the kingdom of Portugal , in such wise that free access were had to deal with the people there , they might all be soon converted . The greatest fault we do find in them is Sodomy , a vice very common in the meaner sort , and nothing strange among the best . This sin were it left of them , in all other things so well disposed they be , that a good interpreter in a short space might do there great good : If , as I said , the country were joined in league with us . 
 Furthermore the Louteas , with all the people of China , are wont to solemnize the days of the new and full Moons in visiting one and other , and making great banquets : for to that end , as I erst said , do tend all their pastimes , and spending their days in pleasure . They are wont also to solemnize each one his birth day , whereunto their kindred and friends do resort of custom , with presents of jewels or money , receiving again for their reward good cheer . They keep in like manner a general feast with great banquets that day their king was born . But their most principali and greatest feast of all , and best cheer , is the first day of their new year , namely the first day of the new Moon of February , so that their first month is March , and they reckon the times accordingly , respect being had unto the reign of their princes : as when any deed is written , they date it thus , Made such a day of such a moon , and such 306 
 C. 1565. a year of the reign of such a king . And their ancient writings bear date of the years of this or that king . 
 Now will I speak of the manner which the Chineans do observe in doing of justice , that it may be known how far these Gentiles do herein exceed many Christians , that be more bounden then they to deal justly and in truth . Because the Chinish king makes his abided continually in the City Pachin , his kingdom so great , & the shires so many , as tofore it hath be said : in it therefore the governors and rulers , much like unto our Sheriffs , be appointed so suddenly and speedily discharged again , that they have no time to grow nought . Furthermore to keep the state in more security , the Louteas that govern one shire are chosen out of some other shire distant far off , where they must leave their wives , children and goods , carrying nothing with them but themselves . True it is , that at their coming thither they do find in a readiness all things necessary , their house , furniture , servants , and all other things in such perfection and plenty , that they want nothing . Thus the king is well served without all fear of treason . 
 In the principali Cities of the shires be foure chief Louteas , before whom are brought all matters of the inferior Towns , throughout the whole Realm . Diverse other Louteas have the managing of justice , and receiving of rends , bound to yield and account thereof unto the greater officers . Other do see that there be no evil rule kept in the City : each one as it behooveth him . Generally [ II ii . 73. ] all these do imprison malefactors , cause them to be whipped and racked , hoisting them up and down by the arms with a cord , a thing very usual there , and The Italians accounted no shame . These Louteas do use great diligence in the apprehending of thieves , so that it is ' a wonder to see a thief escape away in any City , town or village . Upon the sea near unto the shore many are taken , and look even as they are taken , so be they first whipped , and afterwards laid in prison , where shortly after they all die for hunger and cold . At that time 
 307 
 when we were in prison , there died of them above threescore and ten . If happily any one , having the means to get food , do escape , he is set with the condemned persons , and provided for as they be by the King , in such wise as hereafter it shall said . 
 Their whips be certain pieces of canes , cleft in the middle , in such sort that they seem rather plain then sharp . He that is to be whipped lies grovelong on the ground : upon his thighs the hangman layeth on blows mightily with these canes , that the Standers by tremble at their cruelty . Ten stripes draw a great deal of blood , 20. or 30. spoil the flesh altogether , 50. or 60. will require long time to be healed , and if they come to the number of one hundred , then are they incurable . 
 The Louteas observe moreover this : when any man is brought before them to be examined , they ask him openly in the hearing of as many as be present , be the offence never so great . Thus did they also behave themselves with us : For this cause among them can there be no false witness , as daily among us it falls out . This good comes thereof , that many being always about the Judge to hear the evidence , and bear witness , the process cannot be falsified , as it happeneth sometime with us . The Moors , Gentiles , and Jewes have all their sundry oaths , the Moors do swear by their Mossafos , the Brachmans by their Fili , the rest likewise by the things they do worship . The Chineans though they be wont to swear by heaven , by the Moon , by the Sun , and by all their Idols , in judgement nevertheless they swear not at all . If for some offence and other be used of any one , by and by with the least evidence he is tormented , so be the witnesses he brings , if they tell not the truth , or do in any point disagree , except they be men of worship and credit , who are believed without any further matter : the rest are made to confess the truth by force of torments and whips . Beside this order observed of them in examinations , they do fear 
 308 
 so much their King , and he where he makes his abided keepeth them so low , that they dare not once stir . Again , these Louteas as great as they be , notwithstanding the multitude of Notaries they have , not trusting any others , do write all great processes and matters of importance themselves . Moreover one virtue they have worthy of great praise , and that is , being men so well regarded and accounted as though they were princes , yet they be patient above measure in giving audience . We poor strangers brought before them might say what we would , as all to be lies and fallacies that they did write , ne did we stand before them with the usual ceremonies of that Country , yet did they bear with us so patiently , that they caused us to wonder , knowing specially how little any advocate or Judge is wont in our Country to bear with us . For wheresoever in any Town of Christendome should be accused unknown men as we were , I know not what end the very innocents cause would have : but we in a heathen Country , having our great enemies two of the chiefest men in a whole Town , wanting and interpreter , ignorant of that Country language , did in the end see our great adversaries cast into prison for our sake , and deprived of their Offices and honour for not doing justice , yea not to escape death : for , as the rumour goes , they shall beheaded . Somewhat is now to be said of the laws that I have be able to know in this Country , and first , no theft or murder is at any time pardoned : adulterers are put in prison , and the fact once proved , are condemned to die , the woman's husband must accuse them : this order is kept with men & women found in that fault , but thieves and murderers are imprisoned as I have said , where they shortly die for hunger and cold . If any one happily escape by bribing the Gailer to give him meat , his process goes further , and comes to the Court where he is condemned to die . Sentence being given , the prisoner is brought in public with a terrible band of piihry men that lay him in Irons hand and foot , with a board board . 
 309 
 at his neck one handful broad , in length reaching down to his knees , cleft in two parts , and with a hold one handful downward in the table fit for his neck , the which they enclose up therein , nailing the board fast together ; one handful of the board stands up behind in the neck : The sentence and cause wherefore the felon was condemned to die , is written in that part of the table that stands before . 
 This ceremony ended , he is laid in a great prison in the company of some other condemned persons , the which are found by the king as long as they do live . The board aforesaid so made torments the prisoners very much , keeping them both from rest , & eke letting them to eat commodiously , their hands being manacled in irons under that board , so that in fine there is no remedy but death . In the chief Cities of every shire , as we have erst said , there be foure principali houses , in each of them a prison : but in one of them , where the Taissu makes his abided , there is a greater and a more principal prison then in any of the rest : and although in every City there be many , nevertheless in three of them remain only such as be condemned to die . Their death is much prolonged , for that ordinarily there is no execution done but once a year , though many die for hunger and cold , as we have seen in this prison . Execution is done in this manner . The Chian , to wit , the high Commissioner or Lord chief Justice , at the years end goes to the head City , where he hears again the causes of such as be condemned . Many times he delivereth some of them , declaring the board to have be wrongfully put about their necks : the visitation ended , he chooses out seven or eight , not many more or less of the greatest malefactors , the which , to fear and keep in awe the people , are brought into a great market place , where all the great Louteas meet together , and after many ceremonies and superstitions , as the use of the Country is , are beheaded . This is done once a year : who so escapeth that day , may be sure that he shall not 
 310 
 be put to death all that year following , and so remains at the kings charges in the greater prison . In that prison where we lay were always one hundred and more of these condemned persons , beside them that lay in other prisons . 
 These prisons wherein the condemned caitiffs do remain are so strong , that it hath not be herd , that any prisoner in all China hath escaped out of prison , for in deed it is a thing impossible . The prisons are thus built . First all the place is mightily walled about , the walls be very strong and high , the gate of no less force : within it three other gates , before you come where the prisoners do lie , there many great lodgings are to be seen of the Louteas , Notaries , Parthions , that is , such as doe there keep watch and ward day and night , the court large and paved , on the one side whereof stands a prison , with two mighty gates , wherein are kept such prisoners as have committed enormous offences . This prison is so great , that in it are streets and Market places wherein all things necessary are sold . Yea some prisoners live by that kind of trade , buying and selling , and letting out beds to hire : some are daily sent to prison , some daily delivered , wherefore this place is never void of 7. or eight hundred men that go at liberty . 
 Into one other prison of condemned persons shall you go at three iron gates , the court paved and vaunted round about , and open above as it were a cloister . In this cloister be eight rooms with iron doors , and in each of them a large gallery , wherein every night the prisoners do lie at length , their feet in the stocks , their bodies hampered in huge wooden grates that keep them from sitting , so that they lie as it were in a cage , sleep if they can : in the morning they are losed again , that they may go into the court . Notwithstanding the strength of this prison , it is kept with a garrison of men , part whereof watch within the house , part of them in the court , some keep about the prison with lanterns and watch-bells answering one another 
 3 ” 
 A.D. 
 c . 1565. 
 five times every night , and giving warning so loud , that the Loutea resting in a chamber not near thereunto , may hear them . In these prisons of condemned persons remain some 15 , other 20. years imprisoned , not executed , for the love of their honourable friends that seek to prolong their lives . Many of these prisoners be shoemakers , and have from the king a certain allowance of rise : some of them work for the keeper , who suffers them to go at liberty without fetters and boards , the better to work . Howbeit when the Loutea calls his check roll , & with the keeper views them , they all wear their liveries , that is , boards at their necks , yronned hand and foot . When any of these prisoners dieth , he is to be seen of the Loutea and Notaries , brought out of a gate so narrow , that there can but one be drawn out there at once . The prisoner being brought forth , one of the aforesaid Partitions striketh him thrice on the head with and iron sledge , that done he is delivered unto his friends , if he have any , otherwise the king hireth men to carry him to his burial in the fields . 
 Thus adulterers and thieves are used . Such as be imprisoned for debt once known , lie there until it be paid . The Taissu or Loutea calls them many times before him by the virtue of his office , who understanding the cause wherefore they do not pay their debts , appoints them a certain time to do it , within the compass whereof if they discharge not their debts being debtors in deed , then they be whipped and condemned to perpetuali imprisonment : if the creditors be many , and one is to be paid before another , they do , contrary to our manner , pay him first of whom they last borrowed , and so ordinarily the rest , in such sort that the first lender be the last receiver . The same order is kept in . Of like the paying legacies : the last nam receives his portion themere ^rst ’ They account it nothing to show favour to such wealthy . a one as can do the like again : but to do good to them that have little or nothing , that is worth thanks , therefore 
 312 
 c . 1565. pay they the last before the first , for that their intent seems rather to be virtuous then gainful . 
 When I said , that such as be committed to prison for theft and murder were judged by the Court , I meant not them that were apprehended in the deed doing , for they need no trial , but are brought immediately before the [ II ii . 75. ] Tutan , who out of hand gives sentence . Other not taken so openly , which do need trial , are the malefactors put to execution once a year in the chief cities , to keep in awe the people : or condemned , do remain in prison , looking for their day . Thieves being taken are carried to prison from one place to another in a chest upon men's shoulders , hired therefore by the king , the chest is 6. handfuls high , the prisoner sitteth therein upon a bench , the cover of the chest is two boards , amid them both a pillery-like hold , for the prisoners neck , there sitteth he with his head without the chest , and the rest of his body within , not able to move or turn his head this way or that way , nor to pluck it in : the necessities of nature he voideth at a hold in the bottom of the chest , the meat he eateth is put into his mouth by others . 
 There abideth he day and night during his whole journey : if happily his porters stumble , or the chest do jog or be set down carelessly , it turns to his great pains that sitteth therein , all such motions being unto him hanging as it were . Thus were our companions carried from Cinceo , 7. days journey , never taking any rest as afterwards they told us , & their greatest grief was to stay by the way : as soon as they came , being taken out of the chests , they were not able to stand on their feet , and two of them died shortly after . When we lay in prison at Fuquieo , we came many times abroad , & Fuquieo . were brought to the palaces of noble men , to be seen of them & their wives , for that they had never seen any Portugale before . Many things they asked us of our Country , and our fashions , & did write every thing , for they be curious in novelties above measure . The gentlemen show great courtesy unto strangers , and so Hereof tofore . 
 3*3 
 did we find at their hands , and because that many times we were brought abroad into the City , somewhat will I say of such things as I did see therein , being a gallant City , and chief in one of the 13. shires aforesaid . The City Fuquieo is very great , & mightily walled with square stone both within and without , and , as it may seem by the breadth thereof , filled up in the middle with earth , laid over with brick & covered with tile , after the manner of porches or galleries , that one might dwell therein . The stairs they use are so easily made , that one may go them up and down a horseback , as eftsoons they do : the streets are paved , as already it hath been said : there be a great number of Merchants , every one hath written in a great table at his door such things as he hath to sei . In like manner every artisan painteth out his craft : the market places be large , great abundance of all things there be to be sold . The city stands upon water , many streams run through it , the banks pitched , & so broad that they serve for streets to the cities use . Over the streams are sundry bridges both of timber & stone , which being made level with the streets , hinder not the passage of the barges too and from , the channels are so deep . Where the streams come in and go out of the city , be certain arches in the wall , Parai . there go in and out their Parai , that is a kind of barges they have , 8c that in the day time only : at night these arches are closed up with gates , so do they shut up all the gates of the City . These streams and barges do ennoblish very much the City , and make it as it were to seem another Venice . The buildings are even , well made , high , not lofted , except it be some wherein merchandise is laid . It is a world to see how great these cities are , and the cause is , for that the houses are built even , as I have said , & do take a great deal of room . One thing we saw in this city that made us all to wonder , and is worthy to be noted : namely , over a porch at the coming in to one of the aforesaid 4. houses , which the king hath in every shire for his governors , as I have 
 314 
 erst said , stands a tower built upon 40. pillars , each one whereof is but one stone , each one 40. handfuls or spans long : in breadth or compass 12 , as many of us did measure them . Beside this , their greatness is such in one piece , that it might seem impossible to work them : they be moreover cornered , and in colour , length and breadth so like , that the one nothing differeth from the other . This thing made us all to wonder very much . 
 We are wont to call this country China , and the people Chineans , but as long as we were prisoners , not hearing among them at any time that name , I determined to learn how they were called : and asked sometime by them thereof , for that they understood us not when we called them Chineans , I answered them , that all the inhabitants of India nam them Chineans , wherefore I prayed them that they would tell me , for what occasion they are so called , whither peradventure any city of theirs bore that name . Hereunto they always answered me , y‘ they have no such name , nor ever had . Then did I ask them what name the whole Country bears , & what they would answer being asked of other nations what countrymen they were ? It was told me that of ancient time in this country had been many kings , & though presently it were all under one , each kingdom nevertheless enjoyed that name it first had , these kingdoms are the provinces I spoke of before . In conclusion they said , that the whole country is called Tamen , & the inhabi - Tamen the tants Tamegines , so that this name China or Chineans , Prtyer ™ me is not herd of in y‘ country . 1 think that the near - tna ' ness of another province thereabout called Cochinchina , & the inhabitants thereof Cochinesses , first discovered before China was , lying not far from Malacca , did give occasion to each of the nations , of that name Chineans , as also the whole country to be nam China . But their proper name is that aforesaid . 
 I have herd moreover that in the City of Nanquim [ II ii . 76. ] remains a table of gold , and in it written a kings name , as a memory of that residence the kings were wont to 
 3T5 
 Mars age of the kings children . 
 keep there . This table stands in a great palace , covered always , except it be on some of their festival ! days , at what time they are wont to let it be seen , covered nevertheless as it is , all the nobility of the City going of duty to do it every day reverence . The like is done in the head Cities of all the other shires in the palaces of the Ponchiassini , wherein these aforesaid tables do stand with the kings name written in them , although no reverence be done thereunto but in solemn feasts . 
 I have likewise understood that the City Pachin , where the king makes his abided , is so great , that to go from one side to the other , beside the Suburbs , the which are greater then the City it self , it requires one whole day a horseback , going hackney pase . In the suburbs be many wealthy merchants of all sorts . They told me furthermore that it was moted about , and in the motes great store of fish , whereof the king makes great gains . 
 It was also told me that the king of China had no king to wage battle withal , beside the Tartars , with whom he had concluded a peace more then 80. years ago . Nevertheless their friendship was not so great , that the one nation might marry with the other . And demanding with whom they married , they said , that in old time the Chinish kings when they would marry their daughters , accustomed to make a solemn feast , whereunto came all sorts of men . The daughter that was to be married , stood in a place where she might see them all , and look whom she liked best , him did she choose to husband , and if happily he were of a base condition , he became by and by a gentleman : but this custom hath be left long since . Now a days the king marrieth his daughters at his own pleasure , with great men of the kingdom : the like order he observeth in the marriage of his sons . 
 They have moreover one thing very good , and that which made us all to marveile at them being Gentiles : namely , that there be hospitals in all their Cities , 316 
 c . 1565. always full of people , we never saw any poor body beg . We therefore asked the cause of this : answered He speaks it was , that in every City there is a great circuit , wherein be many houses for poor people , for blind , lame , old t^cltie^fir folk , not able to travail for age , nor having any other i „ other placet means to live . These folk have in the aforesaid houses there be beg-ever plenty of rice during their lives , but nothing else . as^u Such as be received into these houses , come in after this e ' manner . When one is sick , blind or lame , he makes a swarming out supplication to the Ponchiassi , and proving that to be of trees . true he writeth , he remains in the aforesaid great lodging as long as he lives : beside this they keep in these places swine and hens , whereby the poor be relieved without going a begging . 
 I said before that China was full of rivers , but now I mind to confirm the same anew : for the farther we went into the Country , the greater we found the rivers . Sometime we were so far off from the sea , that where we came no sea fish had be seen , and salt was there very deer , of fresh water fish yet was there great abundance , and that fish very good : they keep it good after this manner . Where the rivers do meet , and so pass into the sea , there lies great store of boats , specially where no salt-water comes , and that in March and April . These boats are so many that it seems wonderful , ne serve they for other then to take small fish . By the rivers sides they make leyres of fine and strong nets , that lie three handfuls under water , and one above to keep and nourish their fish in , until such time as other fishers do come with boats , bringing for that purpose certain great chests lined with paper , able to hold water , wherein they carry their fish up and down the river , every day renewing the chest with fresh water , and selling their fish in every City , town and village where they pass , unto the people as they need it : most of them have net leyres to keep fish in always for their provision . Where the greater boats cannot pass any further forward , they take lesser , and because the whole 
 Country is very well watered , there is so great plenty of diverse sorts of fish , that it is wonderful to see : assuredly we were amazed to behold the manner of their provision . Means to fat Their fish is chiefly nourished with the dung of Bufles and oxen , that greatly fatteth it . Although I said their fishing to be in March and April at what time we saw them do it , nevertheless they told us . that they fished at all times , for that usually they do feed on fish , wherefore it behooveth them to make their provision continually . 
 He speaks When we had passed Fuquien , we went into Quicin ofFuquien shire , where the fine clay vessel is made , as I said before : 
 s m' and we came to a City , the one side whereof is built 
 upon the foot of a hill , whereby passes a river navigable : there we took boat , and went by water towards the Sea : on each side of the river we found many Cities , Towns and villages , wherein we saw great store of merchandise , but specially of fine clay : there did we land by the way to buy victuals and other necessaries . Going down this river Southward , we were glad that we drew near unto a warmer Country , from whence we had be far distant : this Country we passed through in eight days , for our journey lay down the stream . 
 [ II ii . 77. ] Before that I do say any thing of that shire we came into , I will first speak of the great City of Quicin , wherein always remains a Tutan , that is a governor , as you have seen , though some Tutans do go verne two or three shires . 
 That Tutan that was condemned for our cause , of whom I spoke before , was born in this Country , but he governed Foquien shire : nothing it availed him to be so great and officer . This Country is so great , that in many places where we went , there had be as yet no talk of his death , although he were executed a whole Alias Cenchi . year before . At the City Quanchi whither we came , the river was so great that it seemed a Sea , though it were so little where we took water , that we needed small boats . One day about 9. of the clock , beginning to row near the walls with the stream , we came at noon to a bridge 318 
 made of many barges , overlinked all together with two mighty chains . There stayed we until it was late , but we saw not one go either up thereon or down , except two Louteas that about the going down of the Sun , came and set them down there , the one on one side , the other on the other side . Then was the bridge opened in many places , and barges both great and small to the number of sixe hundred began to pass : those that went up the stream at one place , such as came down at and other . When all had thus shot the bridge , then was it shut up again . We hear say that every day they take this order in all principali places of merchandise , for paying of the Custom unto the king , specially for salt , whereof the greatest revenues are made that the king The Kings hath in this Country . The passages of the bridge revenues-where it is opened , be so near the shore , that nothing can pass without touching the same . To stay the barges at their pleasure , that they go no further forward , are used certain iron instruments . The bridge consisteth of 112. barges , there stayed we until the evening that they were opened , loathsomely oppressed by the multitude of people that came to see us , so many in number , that we were inforced to go aside from the bank until such time as the bridge was opened : howbeit we were nevertheless thronged about with many boats full of people . And though in other Cities and places where we went , the people came so importunate upon us , that it was needful to withdraw our selves : yet were we here much more molested for the number of people : & this bridge is the principali way out of the City unto another place so well inhabited , that were it walled about , it might be compared to the City . When we had shot the bridge , we kept along the City until it was night , and then met we with and other river that joined with this , we rowed up that by the walls until we came to another bridge gallantly made of barges , but lesser a great deal then that other bridge over the greater stream : here stayed we that night , and other two days with more 
 3r9 
 quiet , being out of the press of the people . These rivers do meet without at one corner point of the City . In either of them were so many barges great and small , that we all thought them at the least to be above three thousand : the greater number thereof was in the lesser river , where we were . among the rest here lay Parai . certain greater vessels , called in their language Parai , that serve for the Tutan , when he takes his voyage by other rivers that join with this , towards Pachin , where the king makes his abided . For , as many times I have erst said , all this Country is full of rivers . Desirous to see those Parai we god into some of them , where we found some chambers set forth with gilded beds very richly , other furnished with tables and seats , and all other things so neat and in perfection , that it was wonderful . 
 Quiacim shire , as far as I can perceive , lies upon the South . On that side we kept at our first entry thereinto , travailing not far from the high mountains we saw there . Asking what people dwells beyond those mountains , it was told me that they be thieves & men of a strange language . And because that unto sundry places near this river the mountains do approach , whence the people issuing down do many times great harm , this order is taken at the entry into Quiacim shire . To guard this river whereon continually go to & from Parai great & small fraught with salt , Fish powdered fish powdered with peper , and other necessaries for that wtth peper . country , they do lay in diverse places certain Parai , and great barges armed , wherein watch and ward is kept day and night on both sides of the river , for the safety of the passage , & security of such Parai as do remain there , though the travelers never go but many in company . In every road there be at the least thirtie , in some two hundred men , as the passage requires . This guard is kept usually until you come to the City Onchio , where continually the Tutan of this shire , and eke of Cantan , makes his abided . From that City upward , 320 
 where the river waxes more narrow , and the passage more dangerous , there be always armed one hundred and fiftie Parai , to accompany other vessels fraught with merchandise , and all this at the Kings charges . This seemed to me one of the strangest things I did see in this Country . 
 When we lay at Fuquien , we did see certain Moors , who knew so little of their sect , that they could say nothing else but that Mahomet was a More , my father was a More , and I am a More , with some other words of their Alcoran , wherewithal ! , in abstinence from swines flesh , they live until the devil take them all . This when I saw , 8c being sure that in many Chinish [ II ii . 78 , ] Cities the relics of Mahomet are kept , as soon as we came to the City where these fellows be , I informed my self of them , and learned the truth . 
 These Moors , as they told me , in times past came Qre^^ts in great ships fraught with merchandise from Pachin camming from ward , to a port granted unto them by the king , as the North . he is wont to all them that traffic into this Country , where they being arrived at a little Town standing in the havens mouth , in time converted unto their sect the greatest Loutea there . When that Loutea with all his family was become Moorish , the rest began likewise to do the same . In this part of China the people be at liberty , every one to worship and follow what him liketh best . Wherefore no body took heed thereto , until such time as the Moors perceiving that many followed them in superstition , and that the Loutea favoured them , they began to forbid wholly the eating of swines flesh . But all these countrymen and women choosing rather to forsake father and mother , then to leave off eating of pork , by no means would yield to that proclamation . For beside the great desire they all have to eat that kind of meat , many of them do live thereby : and therefore the people complained unto the Magistrates , accusing the Moors of a conspiracy pretended betwixt them and the Loutea against their king . 
 vi 321 x 
 It shouldseeme by their voyage to be Cardandan in Ortelius , 
 A Northern Sea. 
 In this country , as no suspicion , no not one traitorous word is long born withal , so was the king speedily advertised thereof , who gave commandment out of hand that the aforesaid Loutea should be put to death , and with him the Moors of most importance : the other to be laid first in prison , and afterwards to be sent abroad into certain Cities , where they remained perpetuali slaves unto the king . To this City came by happen men and women threescore and odd , who at this day are brought to five men and foure women , for it is now twenty years since this happened . Their offspring passes the number of two hundreth , and they in this City , as the rest in other Cities whither they were sent , have their * Moscheas , whereunto they all resort every Friday to keep their holy day . But , as I think , that will no longer endure , then while they do live that came from thence , for their posterity is so confused , that they have nothing of a More in them but abstinence from swines flesh , and yet many of them do eat thereof privily . They tell me that their native Country hath name Camarian , a firm land , wherein be many kings , and the Indish country well known unto them . It may so be : for as soon as they did see our servants ( our servants were Preuzaretes ) they judged them to be Indians : many of their words sounded upon the Persian tongue , but none of us could understand them . I asked them whither they converted any of the Chinish nation unto their sect : they answered me , that with much a do they converted the women with whom they do marry , yielding me no other cause thereof , but the difficulty they find in them to be brought from eating swines flesh and drinking of wine . I am persuaded therefore , that if this Country were in league with us , forbidding them neither of both , it would be and easy matter to draw them to our Religion , from their superstition , whereat they themselves do laugh when they do their idolatry . 
 I have learned moreover that the Sea , whereby these 322 
 c . 1565. Moores that came to China were wont to travail , is a It seems very great gulf , that falls into this Country out from fme up Tartaria and Persia , leaving on the other side all the he'c^splan1 Country of China , and land of the Mogores , drawing Sea. always towards the South : and of all likelihood it is At Catan . even so , because that these Moors , the which we have Rin ” owr-seene , be rather brown then white , whereby they show themselves to come from some warmer Country then China is near to Pachin , where the rivers are frozen in the Winter for cold , and many of them so vehemently , that carts may pass over them . 
 We did see in this Ci tie many Tartars , Mogores , All Avoins . Brames , and Laoynes , both men and women . The Tartars are men very white , good horsemen and archers , Tartars . confining with China on that side where Pachin stands , separated from thence by great mountains that are Mount Usont . betwixt these kingdoms . Over them be certain ways to pass , and for both sides , Castles continually kept with Soldiers : in time passed the Tartars were wont always to have wars with the Chineans , but these fourescore years past they were quiet , until the second year of our imprisonment . The Mogores be in like Mogores . manner white , and heathen , we are advertised that of one side they border upon these Tartars , and confine with the Persian Tartars on the other side , whereof we saw in them some tokens , as their manner of clothes , and that kind of hat the Saracens do wear . The Moors affirmed , that where the king lies , there be many Tartars and Mogores , that brought into China Certain blews of great valve : all we thought it to be Vanil of Blewes of Cambaia wont to be sold at Ormus . So that this is ™ 
 the true situation of that Country , not in the North - ‘ parts , as many times I have herd say , confining with Germanie . 
 As for the Brames we have seen in this city Brames . Chenchi certain men & women , among whom there was one that came not long since , having as yet her hair tied up after the Pegues fashion : this woman , 
 323 
 and other more with whom a black More damsel in our company had conference , and did understand them well enough , had dwelled in Pegu. This new come woman , [ II ii . 79. ] imagining that we meant to make our abided in that city , bid us to be of good comfort , for that her country was not distant from thence above five days journey , and that out of her country there lay a high way for us home into our own . Being asked the way , she answered that the first three days the way lies over certain great mountains & wilderness , afterwards people are met withal again . Thence two days journey more to the Brames country . Where-^outhward before [ do conclude , that Chenchi is one of the confines telhfsea1^ kingdom , separated by certain huge mountains , ’ as it hath be already said , that lie out towards the 
 South . In the residue of these mountains stands Avoins . the province of Sian , the Laoyns country , Camboia , Campaa , and Cochinchina . 
 Chenchi . This city chief of other sixteene is situated in a pleasant plain abounding in all things necessary , sea-fish only excepted , for it stands far from the sea : of fresh fish so much store , that the market places are never empty . The walls of this city are very strong and high : one day did I see the Louteas thereof go upon the walls to take the view thereof , born in their seats which I spoke of before , accompanied with a troop of horsemen that went two and two : It was told me they might have gone three & three . We have seen moreover , that within this aforesaid City the king hath more then a thousande of his kin lodged in great palaces , in diverse parts of the City : their gates be red , and the entry into their houses , that they may be known , for that is the kings colour . These Gentlemen , according to their nearness in blood unto the king , as soon as they be married receive their place in honour : this place neither increases nor diminisheth in any respect as long as the king lives , the king appoints them their wives and family , allowing them by the 324 
 month all things necessary abundantly , as he does to his governors of shires and Cities , howbeit , not one of these hath as long as he lives any charge or government at all . They give themselves to eating and drinking , and be for the most part burly men of body , insomuch that espying any one of them whom we had not seen before , we might know him to be the King his cousin . They be nevertheless very pleasant , courteous , and fair conditioned : neither did we find , all the time we were in that city , so much honour and good entertainment any where as at their hands . They bid us to their houses to eat and drink , and when they found us not , or we were not willing to go with them , they bid our servants and slaves , causing them to fit down with the first . Notwithstanding the good lodging these Gentlemen have , so commodious that they want nothing , yet are they in this bondage , that during life they never go abroad . The cause , as I did understand , wherefore the king so uses his cousin's is , that none of them at any time may rebel against him : and thus he shutteth them up in three or foure other cities . Most of them can play on the Lute , and to make that kind of pastime peculiar unto them only , all other in the cities where they do live be forbidden that instrument , the Courtesans and blind folk only excepted , who be musicians and can play . 
 This king furthermore , for the greater security of his Realm and the avoiding of tumults , lets not one in all his country to be called Lord , except he be of his blood . Many great estates and governors there be , that during their office are lodged Lordlike , and do bear the port of mighty Princes : but they be so many times displaced and other placed a new , that they have not the time to become corrupt . True it is that during their office they be well provided for , as afterwards also lodged at the kings charges , and in pension as long as they live , paid them monthly in the cities where they dwell by certain officers appointed for that purpose . The 325 
 Goa is a city of the Portu-gals in the East Indies . 
 king then is a Lord only , not one beside him as you have seen , except it be such as be of his blood . A Nephew likewise of the king , the kings sisters son , lies continually within the walls of the city in a strong palace built Castlewise , even as his other cousin's do , remaining always within doors , served by Eunuchs , never dealing with any matters . On their festival days , new moons , & full moons the magistrates make great banquets , and so do such as be of the king his blood . The kings Nephew hath to name Vanfuli , his palace is walled about , the wall is not high , but foursquare , and in circuit nothing inferior to the walls of Goa , the outside is painted read , in every square a gate , and over each gate a tower made of timber excellently well wrought : before the principali gate of the foure that openeth into the high street not Loutea , be he never so great , may pass on horseback , or carried in his seat . Amid this quadrangle stands the palace where that Nobleman lies , doubtless worth the sighed , although we came not in to see it . By report the roofs of the towers and house are glazed green , & the greater part of the quadrangle set with savage trees , as Okes , Chestnuts , Cypress , Pineapples , Cedars , and other such like that we do want , after the manner of a wood , wherein are kept Stags , Oxen , and other beasts , for that Lord his recreation never going abroad as I have said . One pre-eminence this city hath above the rest where we have 
 be , & that of right , as we do think , that beside the multitude of market places wherein all things are to be sold through every street continually are cried all things [ II ii . 80. ] necessary , as flesh of all sorts , freshfish , herbs , oil , vinegar , meal , rise : in summa , all things so plentifully , that many houses need no servants , every thing being brought to their doors . Most part of the merchants remain in the suburbs , for that the cities are shut up every night , as I have said . The merchants therefore , the better to attend their business , do choose rather to make their abided without in the suburbs then within 
 326 
 the city . I have seen in this river a pretty kind of fishing , not to be omitted in my opinion , and therefore I will set it down . The king hath in many rivers Odmcus good store of barges full of sea-crowes that breed , are the 
 fed and do die therein , in certain cages , allowed ' monthly a certain provision of rise . These barges the king bestoweth upon his greatest magistrates , giving to some two , to some three of them as he thinketh good , to fish therewithal ! after this manner . At the hour appointed to fish , all the barges are brought together in a circle , where the river is shallow , and the crows tied together under the wings are let leap down into the water , some under , some above , worth the looking upon : each one as he hath filled his bag , goes to his own barge and emptieth it , which done , he returns to fish again . Thus having taken good store of fish , they set the crows at liberty , and do suffer them to fish for their own pleasure . There were in that city where I was , twentie barges at the least of these aforesaid crows . I went almost every day to see them , yet could I never be thoroughly satisfied to see so strange a kind of fishing . 
 . 