And excellent treatise of the kingdom of China , and of the estate and government thereof : Printed in Latin at Macao a city of the Portugals in China , An. Dom. 1590. and written Dialogue-wise . The speakers are Linus , Leo , and Michael . 
 Linus . 
 Oncerning the kingdom of China ( Michael ) which is our next neighbour , we have herd and daily do hear so many reports , that we are to request at your hands rather a true then a large discourse and narration thereof . And if there be ought in your knowledge beside that 
 which by continual rumours is waxed stale among us , we will right gladly give diligent ear unto it . 
 Michael . Because the report of this most famous kingdom is grown so common among us , reducing diverse and manifold particulars into order , I will especially aim at the truth of things received from the father's 348 
 of the society , which even now at this present are conversant in China . First of all therefore it is not un - The situation known , that of all parts of the main continent this kingdom of China is situate most Easterly : albeit ' certain Hands , as our native Japon , & the He of Manilia stand more Easterly then China it self . As touching the limits & bounds of this kingdom , we may appoint the first towards you West to be a certain He commonly called Hainan , which stands in 19 degrees of Northerly latitude . For the continent next adjoining unto this He trendeth towards the East , and that especially , where the promontory of the city called Nimpo or Liampo doth extend it self . Howbeit , from that place declining Northward , it stretcheth forth and huge length , insomuch that the farthest Chinian inhabitants that way do behold the North pole elevated , at least 50 degrees , and perhaps more also : whereupon a man may easily conjecture ( that I may speak like and Astronomer ) how large the latitude of this kingdom is , when as it containeth about more then 540 leagues in direct extension towards the North . But as concerning the longitude which is accounted from East to West , it is not so exactly found out , that it may be distinguished into degrees . Howbeit certain it is , that according to the Map wherein the people of China describe the form of their kingdom , Chinian Cos-the latitude thereof doth not much exceed you longitude , hers . This kingdom therefore is , without all peradventure , of all earthly kingdoms the most large and spacious : for albeit diverse other kings under their jurisdiction containing in dimensions more length & breadth then all China , do possess very many kingdoms & far distant asunder : yet none of them all enjoyeth any one kingdom so large and so ample , as the most puissant king of China doth . Now , if we shall make enquiry into his The rich revenues and tributes , true it is , that this king of all others , is endued with the greatest and the richest , both china . in regard of the fertility & greatness of his dominions , & also by reason of the severe collection and exaction 
 349 
 Fifteene great provinces in China . 
 The seats royal of the hingofChina . [ II ii . 89. ] 
 The warlike munitions of China , y a marvelous wall . 
 of his duties : yea , tributes are imposed upon his subject's , not only for lands , houses , and impost of merchandise , but also for every person in each family . It is likewise to be understood , that almost no lord or potentate in China hath authority to levy unto himself any peculiar revenues , or to collect any rends within the precincts of his signory , all such power belonging only unto the king : whereas in Europe the contrary is most commonly seen , as we have before signified . In this most large kingdom are contained 15 provinces , every one of which were in it self sufficient to be made one great kingdom . Six of these provinces do border upon the sea , namely ( y* I may use the names of the Chinians themselves ) Coantum , Foquien , Chequiam , Nanquin , Xantum , Paquin : the other 9 be inland provinces , namely , Quiansi , Huquam , Honan , Xiensi , Xansi , Suchuon , Queicheu , Junan , Coansi . among all the foresaid provinces , two are allotted for the kings court and seat royal , that is to say , Paquin for his court in the North , and Nanquin for his court in the South . For the kings of China were wont to be resident altogether at the South court : but afterwards , by reason of the manifold and cruel wars moved by the Tartars , they were constrained to defixe their princely seat and habitation in that extreme province of the North . Whereupon it comes to pass , that those Northern confines of the kingdom do abound with many more fortresses , martial engines , and garrisons of soldiers . 
 Leo . I have herd , among those munitions , a certain strange and admirable wall reported of , wherewith the people of China do repress and drive back the Tartars attempting to invade their territories . 
 Michael . Certes that wall which you have herd tell of is most worthy of admiration ; for it runneth alongst the borders of three Northerly provinces , Xiensi , Xansi , and Paquin , and is said to contain almost three hundred leagues in length , and in such sort to be built , that it hindereth not the courses and streams of any rivers , 35° 
 their channels being overthwarted and fortified with wonderful bridges and other defences . Yet is it not unlikely , that the said wall is built in such sort , that only low and easy passages be therewith stopped and environed ; but the mountains running between those low passages are , by their own natural strength , and inaccessible heighth , a sufficient fortification against the enemy . 
 Linus . Tell us ( Michael ) whither the kingdom of China be so frequented with inhabitants , as we have often be informed , or no ? 
 Michael . It is ( Linus ) in very deed a most populous Abundance kingdom , as I have be certified from the father's of °f the society : who having seen sundry provinces of tn tna ' Europe renowned for the multitude of their inhabitants , do notwithstanding greatly admire the infinite swarms of people in China . Howbeit these multitudes are not pellmell and confusively dispersed over the land , but most conveniently and orderly distributed in their towns and famous cities : of which assemblies there are diverse kinds among the Chinians . For they have certain principal cities called by the name of Fu : other inferior Cities and cities called Cheu : and of a third kind also nam townes-Hien , which be indeed walled towns , but are not privileged with the dignities and prerogatives of cities . To these may be added two other kinds of lesser towns , which are partly villages , and partly garrisons of soldiers . Of the first and principali kind is that most noble city standing near unto the port of Macao , called by the Chinians Coanchefu , but by the Portugals commonly termed Cantam , which is rather the common name of the province , then a word of their proper imposition . Unto the third kind appertaineth a town , which is yet nigher unto the port of Macao , called by the Portugals Ansam , but by the Chinians Hiansanhien . All the foresaid provinces therefore have their greater cities nam Fu , & their lesser cities called Cheu , unto both of which the other towns may be added . Moreover , in every pro - 
 351 
 The Chinian rivers greatly inhabited . 
 Wholesome air , plenty y peace in China . 
 vince there is a certain principal city which is called the Metropolitan thereof , wherein the chief magistrates have their place of residence , as the principal city by me last mentioned , which is the head of the whole province called Coantum . The number of the greater cities throughout the whole kingdom is more then 150 , and there is the same or rather a greater multitude of inferior cities . Of walled towns not endued with the privileges of cities there are more then 1120 : the villages & garrisons can scarce be numbered : over & beside the which convents it is incredible what a number of country farms or granges there be : for it is not easy to find any place desert or void of inhabitants in all that land . Now in the sea , in rivers , & in barks there are such abundance of people , and of whole families inhabiting , that even the Europaeans themselves do greatly wonder thereat : insomuch that some ( albeit beyond measure ) have be persuaded that there are as many people dwelling upon the water as upon the land . Neither were they induced so to think altogether without probability : for whereas the kingdom of China is in all parts thereof interfused with commodious rivers , & in many places consisteth of waters , barges & boats being everywhere very common , it might easily be supposed , that the number of watermen was equal unto the land-inhabitants . Howbeit , that is to be understood by amplification , whereas the cities do swarm so full with citizens & the country with peasants . 
 Leo . The abundance of people which you tell us of seems very strange : whereupon I conjecture the soil to be fertile , the air to be wholesome , and the whole kingdom to be at peace . 
 Michael . You have ( friend Leo ) full judicially conjectured those three : for they do all so excel , y‘ which of the three in this kingdom be more excellent , it is not easy to discern . And hence it is that this common opinion hath be rife among the Portugals , namely , that the kingdom of China was never visited with those three 352 
 most heavy & sharp scourges of mankind , war , famine , & pestilence . But that opinion is more common then true : since there have be most terrible intestine and civil wars , as in many and most authentical histories it is recorded : since also that some provinces of the Chinian said kingdom , even in these our days , have be afflicted stortes-with pestilence and contagious diseases , and with famine . Howbeit , that the foresaid three benefits do mightily flourish and abound in China , it cannot be denied . For ( that I may first speak of the salubrity of the air ) the father's of the society themselves are witnesses , that [ II ii . 90. ] scarcely in any other realm there are so many found that live unto decrepit and extreme old age : so great a multitude is there of ancient and grave personages : neither do they use so many confections and medicines , nor so manifold and sundry ways of curing diseases , as we saw accustomed in Europe . For among them they have no Phlebotomy or letting of blood : but all their cures , as ours also in Japon , are achieved by fasting , decoctions of herbs , & light or gentle potions . But in this behalf let every nation please themselves with their own customs . Now , in fruitfulness of soil this kingdom certes does excel , far surpassing all other kingdoms of the East : yet is it nothing comparable unto the plenty and abundance of Europe , as I have declared at large in the former treatises . But the kingdom of China is , in this regard , so highly extolled , because there is not any region in the East parts that aboundeth so with merchandise , and from whence so much traffic is sent abroad . For whereas this kingdom is most large & full of navigable rivers , so that commodities may easily be conveyed out of one province into another : the Portugals do find such abundance of wares within one and the same City , ( which perhaps is the greatest Mars city of throughout the whole kingdom ) that they are verily Coanchefu , persuaded , that the same region , of all others , most aboundeth with merchandise : which notwithstanding is to be understood of the Orientali regions : albeit there 
 VI 353 z 
 are some kinds of merchandise , wherewith the land of China is better stored then any other kingdom . This region affords especially sundry kinds of metals , of which the chief , both in excellency & in abundance , Great abun - js gold , whereof so many Pezoes are brought from China China‘s to India > and to our country of Japon , that I herd say , tn that in one and the same ship , this present year , 2000 
 such pieces consisting of massy gold , as the Portugals commonly call golden loaves , were brought unto us for merchandise : and one of these loaves is worth almost 100 ducats . Hence it is that in the kingdom of China so many things are adorned with gold , as for example , beds , tables , pictures , images , litters wherein nice and dainty dams are carried upon their servants backs . Neither are these golden loaves only bought by the Portugals , but also great plenty of gold-twine and leaves of gold : for the Chinians can very cunningly beat and Great store of extenuate gold into plataeae and leaves . There is also great nZw . store of silver , whereof ( that I may omit other arguments ) it is no small demonstration , that every year there are brought into the city commonly called Cantam by the Portugal merchants to buy wares , at the least 400 Sestertium thereof , and yet nothing in a manner is conveyed out of the Chinian kingdom : because the people of China abounding with all necessaries , are not greatly inquisitive or desirous of any merchandise from other kingdoms . I do here omit the Silver mines whereof there are great numbers in China , albeit there is much circumspection used in digging the silver thereout : for the king stands much in fear lest it may be and occasion to stir up the covetous and greedy humour of many . Now their silver which they put to uses is for the most part passing fine , and purified from all dross , and therefore in trying it they use great diligence . What should I speak of their iron , copper , led , tin , and other metals , and also of their quicksilver ? Of all which in the realm of China there is great abundance , and from thence they are transported into diverse countries' . Hereunto may be 
 354 
 added the wonderful store of pearls , which , at the He Pearls . of Hainan , are found in shellfishes taken very cunningly by certain Diverse , and do much enlarge the kings revenues . But now let us proceed unto the Silk or eat store of Bombycine fleece , whereof there is great plenty in China : sllkemChtna-so that even as the husbandmen labour in manuring the earth , and in sowing of Rice ; so likewise the women do employ a great part of their time in preserving of silkworms , and in keeming and weaving of Silk . Hence it is that every year the King and Queen with great solemnity come forth into a public place , the one of them touching a plough , and the other a Mulberry tree , with the leaves whereof Silkworms are nourished : and both of them by this ceremony encouraging both men and women unto their vocation and labour : whereas otherwise , all the whole year throughout , no man beside the principali magistrates , may once attain to the sighed of the king . Of this Silk or Bombycine fleece there is such abundance , that three ships for the most part coming out of India to the port of Macao , & at the brought lest one every year coming unto us , are laden mt0 especially with this freight , and it is used not only in India , but carried even unto Portugal . Neither is the Fleet it self only transported thence , but also diverse & sundry stuffs woven thereof , for the Chinians do greatly excel in the Art of weaving , and do very much resemble our weavers of Europe . Moreover the kingdom of China aboundeth with most costly spices & odours , and Sp^h Cam-especially with cinnamon ( albeit not comparable to the y cinnamon of Zeilan ) with camphire also & musk , which ’ is very principal & good . Musk deriveth his name from a beast of the same name ( which beast resembles a Beaver ) from the parts whereof bruised & putrified proceedeth a most delicate & fragrant smel which the Portugals highly esteem , commonly calling those parts of the fdresaid beasts ( because they are like unto the gorges of fowls ) Papos , & convey great plenty of them [ II ii . 91. ] into India , & to us of Japon . But who would believe , 
 355 
 Cotton wool , whereof Cali-cut-cloth is made . 
 Three qualities of porcellan . 
 Plants . 
 that there were so much gossipine or cotton-wool in China ; whereof such variety of clothes are made like unto linen ; which we our selves do so often use , & which also is conveyed by sea into so many regions ? Let us now entreat of that earthen or pliable matter commonly called porcellan , which is pure white , & is to be esteemed the best stuff of that kind in the whole world : whereof vessels of all kinds are very curiously framed . I say , it is the best earthen matter in all the world , for three qualities ; namely , the cleanness , the beauty , & the strength thereof . There is indeed other matter to be found more glorious , and more costly , but none so free from uncleanness , and so durable : this I add , in regard of glass , which indeed is immaculate and clean , but may easily be broken in pieces . This matter is dug , not throughout the whole region of China , but only in one of the fifteene provinces called Quiansi , wherein continually very many artificers are employed about the same matter : neither do they only frame thereof smaller vessels , as dishes , platters , saltsellers , ewers , and such like , but also certain huge tons , and vessels of great quantity , being very finely and cunningly wrought , which , by reason of the danger and difficulty of carriage , are not transported out of the realm , but are used only within it , and especially in the kings court . The beauty of this matter is much augmented by variety of picture , which is laid in certain colours upon it , while it is yet new , gold also being added thereunto , which makes the foresaid vessels to appear most beautiful . It is wonderful how highly the Portugals do esteem thereof , seeing they do , with great difficulty , transport the same , not only to us of Japon and into India , but also into sundry provinces of Europe . Unto the merchandise abovementioned may be added diverse and sundry plants , the roots whereof be right wholesome for men's bodies , and very medicinable , which are brought unto our Isles of Japon , and unto many other Hands , among the which that wood may be 356 
 reckoned , which ( by a synecdoche ) is called The wood of China , being of notable force to expel out of men's bodies those humours , which would breed contagious diseases . To these you may add sugar-canes ( for in the realm of China there is great store of excellent sugar ) Sugar . which is conveyed by the Portugals very plentifully , both into our country , and also into India . My speeches uttered immediately before concerned merchandise only , in regard whereof this kingdom is beneficial not to itself alone , but most profitable to many other nations also . As for those fruits which pertain to yearly sustenance and common food , they can scarce be numbered ; albeit , of those three commodities which they of Europe so greatly account of ; namely of corns , vines , and olives China in a the land of China is not very capable : for the Chinians ” £ , ™ tute know not so much as the name of and Olive tree ( out of the fruit whereof oil is expressed ) neither yet the y oil . name of a vine . The province of Paquin is not altogether destitute of wine , but whither it be brought from other places , or there made , I am not able to say : although it aboundeth with many other , and those not unpleasant liquours , which may serve in the stead of wine it self . Now , as touching corn , there is indeed wheat sown in all the provinces , howbeit rise is in far more use and request then it : and so in regard of these two commodities profitable for men life ; namely , wine and corn ; the kingdom of China and our country of Japon may be compared together . 
 Leo . You have discoursed ( Michael ) of the fruitfulness of China , whereof I have often herd , that it is no less pleasant than fruitful , and I have be especially Chinian maps . induced so to think , at the sighed of the Chinian maps . 
 Michael . The thing it self agrees right well with the picture : for they that have seen thee mediterran or inner parts of the kingdom of China , do report it to be a most amiable country , adorned with plenty of woods , with abundance of fruits and grass , and with wondered variety of rivers , wherewith the Chinian kingdom is 
 357 
 The dispositions y manners of the Chinians . 
 Their language . 
 Their loyalty unto their superiors . 
 [ II ii . 92. ] 
 watered like a garden ; diverse of which rivers do naturally flow , and others by art and industry are derived into sundry places . But now I will entreat of the tranquillity and peace of China , after I have spoken a word or two concerning the manners of the inhabitants . This nation is endued with excellent wit and dexterity for the attaining of all arts , and , being very constant in their own customs , they lightly regard the customs or fashions of other people . They use one and the same kind of vesture , yet so , that there is some distinction between the apparel of the magistrate & of the common subject . They all of them do wear long hair upon their heads , and , after the manner of women , do curiously keame their dainty locks , hanging down to the ground , and , having twined and bound them up , they cover them with calls , wearing sundry caps thereupon , according to their age and condition . It seems that in old time one language was common to all the provinces : notwithstanding , by reason of variety of pronunciation , it is very much altered , and is divided into sundry idioms or proprieties of speech , according to the diverse provinces : howbeit , among the magistrates , and in public assemblies of judgement , there is one and the very same kind of language used throughout the whole realm , from the which ( as I have said ) the speech of each province differeth not a little . Moreover this people is most loyal and obedient unto the king and his magistrates , which is the principali cause of their tranquillity & peace . For whereas the common sort do apply themselves unto the discretion and beck of inferior magistrates , and the inferior magistrates of the superior , and the superior magistrates of the king himself , framing and composing all their actions and affairs unto that level : a world it is to see , in what equability and indifferency of justice all of them do lead their lives , and how orderly the public laws are administered . Which thing notwithstanding shall be handled more at large , when we come to entreat of the government . 
 358 
 Linus . Tell us now ( Michael ) of the industry of that laborpeople , whereof we have herd great reports . ittduttry . 
 Michael . Their industry is especially to be discerned in manuary arts and occupations , and therein the Chinians do surpass most of these Easterly nations . For there are such a number of artificers ingeniously and cunningly framing sundry devices out of gold , silver , and other metals , as likewise of stone , wood , and other matters convenient for men use , that the streets of cities being replenished with their shops and fine workmanship , are very wondered to behold . Beside whom also there are very many Painters , using either the Painting . pencil or the needle ( of which the last sort are called Embrotherers ) and others also that curiously work gold-twine upon cloth either of linen or of cotton : whose operations of all kinds are diligently conveyed by the Portugals into India . Their industry does no less appear in founding of guns and in making of gun - Guns . powder , whereof are made many rare and artificiali fireworks . To these may be added the art of Printing , Printing . albeit their letters be in manner infinite and most difficult , the portraitures whereof they cut in wood or in brass , and with marvellous facility they daily publish huge multitudes of books . Unto these mechanical & illiberali crafts you may add two more ; that is to say , navigation and discipline of war ; both of which have Navigation . bene in ancient times most diligently practised by the inhabitants of China : for ( as we have before signified in the third dialogue ) the Chinians sailing even as far as India , subdued some part thereof unto their own dominion : howbeit afterwards , lest they should diminish the forces of their realm by dispersing them into many provinces , altering their counsel , they determined to contain themselves within their own limits : within which limits ( as I have said ) there were in old time vehement and cruel wars , both between the people of China yartars themselves , and also against the Tartarian king , who ^ramizeii invaded their kingdom , and by himself and his sue - over China . 
 359 
 cessours , for a long season , usurped the government thereof . Howbeit the kings of the Tartarian raze being worn out , and their stock and family being utterly abolished , the Chinians began to lift up their heads , and to advance themselves , enjoying for these 200 years last passed exceeding peace and tranquillity , and at this day the posterity of the same king that expelled the Tartars , with great dignity weareth the crown , and wieldeth the royal sceptre . Albeit therefore the people of China ( especially they that inhabit Southerly from the province of Paquin ) are , for the most part , by reason of continual ease and quiet , grown effeminate , and their courage is abated , notwithstanding they would prove notable and brave soldiers , if they joined use and exercise unto their natural fortitude . As a man may easily observe in them , that maintain continual wars against the most barbarous and cruel Tartars . Howbeit in this kingdom of China there is so great Military regard of military discipline , that no city nor town 
 discipline . there is destitute of a garrison , the captains and gover - 
 nours keeping each man his order ; which all of them , in every province , are subject unto the kings lieutenant general for the wars , whom they call Chumpin , and yet he himself is subject unto the Tutan or viceroy . Let us now come unto that art , which the Chinians do most of all profess , and which . we may , not unfitly , We literature call literature or learning . For although it be commonly of China . reported , that many liberali sciences , and especially natural and moral philosophy are studied in China , and that they have Universities there , wherein such ingenuous arts are delivered and taught , yet , for the most part , this opinion is to be esteemed more popular then true : but I will declare , upon what occasion this conceit first grew . The people of China do , above all things , profess the art of literature ; and learning it most diligently , they employ themselves a long time and the better part of their age therein . For this cause , in all cities and towns , yea , and in petty villages also , there are 
 360 
 certain schoolmasters hired for stipends to instruct children : and their literature being ( as ours in Japon is also ) in manner infinite , their children are put to school even from their infancy and tender years , from whence notwithstanding such are taken away , as are judged to be unfit for the same purpose , and are trained up to merchandise or to manuary sciences : but the residue do so dedicate themselves to the study of learning , that ( a strange thing it is to consider ) being conversant in the principali books , they will easily tell you , if they be asked the question , how many letters be contained in every page , and where each letter is placed . Now , for the greater progress and increase of learning , they ( as the manner is in Europe ) do appoint three degrees to the degrees attaining of noble sciences : that is to say , the lowest , in leaminS-the middle degree , and the highest . Graduates of the first degree are called Siusai , of the second Quiugin , 
 and of the third Chinzu . And in each city or walled [ II ii . 93. ] 
 town there is a public house called the School , and unto that all they do resort from all private and petty - 
 schools that are minded to obtain the first degree ; The first 
 where they do amplify a sentence or theme propounded unto them by some magistrate : and they , whose style is more elegant and refined , are , in each city , graced with the first degree . Of such as aspire unto the second degree second trial is made only in the metropolitan or principali city de&ree-of the province , whereunto , they of the first degree , every third year , have recourse , and , in one public house or place of assembly , do , the second time , make and oration of another sentence obscurer then the former , and do undergo a more severe examination . Now , there is commonly such and huge multitude of people , that this last year , in the foresaid famous city of Cantam , by reason of the incredible assembly of persons flocking to that public act or commencement , at the first entrance of the doors , there were many trodden under foot , and quelled to death , as we have be most certainly informed . third and Moreover they that sue for the highest degree are subject highest degree . 
 361 
 Note the extraordinary honour vouchsafed by the great King of China upon his learned graduates . 
 Motall philosophy . 
 natural philosophy . 
 Excellent astronomers in China . 
 unto a most severe and exact censure , whereby they are to be examined at the Kings Court only , and that also every third year next ensuing the said year wherein graduates of the second degree are elected in each province , and , a certain number being prescribed unto every particular province , they do ascend unto that highest pitch of dignity , which is in so great regard with the king himself , that the three principali graduates doe , for honours sake , drink off a cup filled even with the Kings own hand , and are graced with other solemnities . Out of this order the chief magistrates are chosen : for after that they have attained unto this third degree , being a while trained up in the laws of the realm , and in the precepts of urbanity , they are admitted unto diverse functions . Neither are we to think that the Chinians be altogether destitute of other arts . For , as touching moral philosophy , all those books are fraught with the precepts thereof , which , for their instructions sake , are always conversant in the hands of the foresaid students , wherein such grave and pithy sentences are set down , that , in men void of the light of the Gospel , more can not be desired . They have books also that entreat of things and causes natural , but herein it is to be supposed , that aswell their books as ours do abound with errors . There be other books among them , that discourse of herbs and medicines , and others of chivalry and martial affairs . Neither can I here omit , that certain men of China ( albeit they be but few , and rare to be found ) are excellent in the knowledge of astronomy , by which knowledge of theirs the days of the new moon incident to every month are truly disposed and digested , and are committed to writing and published : beside , they do most infallibly foretell the eclipses of the Sun and Moon : and whatsoever knowledge in this art we of Japon have , it is derived from them . 
 Leo . We do freely confess that ( Michael ) since our books entreating of the same art are , a great part of them , written in the characters or letters of China . 
 362 
 * 59° ' But now , instruct you us as touching their manner of The politic government , wherein the Chinians are said greatly to ° ? 
 excel . ’ 
 Michael . That , that , in very deed , is their chief art , and unto that all their learning and exercise of letters is directed . Whereas therefore , in the kingdom of China , one only king bears rule over so many provinces , it is strange what a number of Magistrates are by him created to administer public affairs . For ( to omit them which in each Town and City have jurisdiction over the townsmen and citizens ) there are three principali Three Magistrates in every province . The first is he that hath Pnnc^11 . 
 • • 11 . 1 • „ , , magistrates in 
 to deal in cases criminali , and is called Ganchasu : the province . second is the Kings Fosterer , and is called Puchinsu : the third is the Lieutenant-general for the wars , nam , as we said before , Chumpin . These three therefore have their place of residence in the chief City of the province : and the two former have certain associates of their own order , but of inferior authority , appointed in diverse Cities and Towns , unto whom , according to the variety of causes , the Governors of Towns , and the Majors of Cities do appeal . Howbeit the three forenamed Magistrates are in subjection unto the Tutan , that is , the Viceroy , ordained in each province . And all these Magistrates bear office for the space of three years together : yet so , that for the governing of each province , not any of the same province , but strangers , that is , men of another province , are selected : whereof it comes to pass , that the Judges may give sentence with a far more entire and incorrupt mind , then if they were among their own kinsfolk and allies . Over and beside all these , there is and annuali or yearly Magistrate , which is called Chaien , whose duty it is to make inquisition of all crimes , and especially the crimes of Magistrates , and also to punish common offences : but concerning the faults of the great magistrates to admonish the king himself . Of this order , every year , are sent out of the Kings Court , for each province , one ; and going over all 
 363 
 Two Senates or Counsels continually held in China . 
 The causes of peace in China . 
 Learning the only step to honour in China . 
 the Cities and Towns thereof , they do most diligently ransack and search out all crimes , and upon them which are imprisoned they inflict due punishment , or , being found not guilty , they dismiss them unpunished . Hence it is , that all Magistrates greatly fearing to be called in question by the Chaien are well kept within the limits of their callings . Beside all these Magistrates there is at either Court , namely in the North , and in the South , a Senate or honourable assembly of grave counsellors , unto the which , out of all provinces , according to the nearness and distance of the place , affairs of greater weight and moment are referred , and by their authority diverse Magistrates are created : howbeit the managing and expedition of principali affairs is committed unto the Senate of Paquin . Moreover there are every year certain Magistrates appointed in each province , to go unto the king : and every third year all the Governors of Cities and of Towns do visit him at once , what time trial is made of them that aspire unto the third degree : upon which occasion there is at the same time and incredible number of people at the Kings Court . By reason of this excellent order and harmony of Magistrates placed one under another , it can scarce be imagined , what sweet peace and tranquillity flourishes throughout the whole realm , especially since , after speedy inquisition , persons that are guilty be put ( as the manner is there ) to the punishment of the bastonado : neither yet are suits or actions any long time delayed . Also it is not to be omitted , that for the obtaining of any dignity or magistracy , the way is open , without all respect of gentry or blood , unto all men , if they be learned , and especially if they have attained unto the third and highest degree aforesaid . Neither can it be expressed how obedient and dutiful the common sort are unto their Magistrates , and with what magnificence and pomp the said Magistrates come abroad : for the most part of them have fiftie or threescore Sergeants attending upon them , and going before them , two and two in a rank : some of 364 
 procession of the Chinian magistrates . 
 them carrying Halberds , Maces , and Battle-axes : some The stately if trailing iron chains upon the ground : others holding great rods or staves of a certain kind of reed , wherewith malefactors are punished , in their hands : and two there are that carry , enclosed in a case , the Kings seal peculiar for each office : and many others also , that show sundry spectacles unto the people : whereunto may be added the horrible outcries and shouts , which between while they utter , to strike a terror into the hearts of all men : and at length come the Magistrates themselves , being carried in a throne upon the backs of foure men , sixe men , or eight men , according to the dignity of their office . Now , as concerning their houses , they are very large and stately , being built and furnished with all necessary stuff , at the Kings own cost , in the which , so long as their magistracy lasteth , they lead a brave and and honourable life . The said houses are without variety of stories one above another , which in the kingdom of China and in our Isles of Japon also are not ordinarily used for habitation , but either to keep watch and ward , or else for solace and recreations sake ( for the which purposes , eight most lofty turrets of nine stories high are built ) or else for the defence of Cities . Howbeit in other regards these buildings do show forth no small magnificence : for they have their cisterns for the receipt of rainwater , which are adorned with beautiful trees , set in order , round about them : and they have also their places designed for the administration of justice , and diverse other convenient rooms to bestow their wives and families in . Within the doors of the foresaid habitations a certain number of Sergeants and officers , having cabins or little houses allotted them on both sides , do always give their attendance ; and so long as matters of judgement are in deciding , they be always ready at hand , that , at the direction of the Magistrates they may either beatrice malefactors , or by torments constrain them to tell the truth . The said Magistrates also have their peculiar barges wherein to 365 
 The houses of the Chinian magistrates . 
 The magistrates barges . 
 The manner of electing magistrates in China . 
 Degrees unto honour . 
 [ II ii . 95. ] 
 take the water ; being in breadth and length not much unlike to the galleys of Europe , but for swiftness and multitude of oars , far inferior unto them . The rowers , sitting upon galleries without the hatches or compass of the barge , do move it on forward with their oars : whereupon it comes to pass , that the middle part of the barge affordeth sufficient room for the Magistrates themselves to abide in , containing chambers therein almost as convenient and handsome , as in any of their foresaid public houses , together with butteries and kitchens , and such other places necessary for the provision and stowage of victuals . 
 Leo . All these things agree right Well with the reports , which we have herd of the stately and renowned kingdom of China : I would now right gladly know somewhat concerning the order which is observed in the obtaining of magistracies . 
 Michael . You have inquired of a matter most worthy to be known , which I had almost omitted to entreat of . The Chinians therefore do use a kind of gradation in advancing men unto sundry places of authority , which for the most part is performed by the Senators of Paquin . For first they are made Judges of Towns : then of Cities : afterwards they are elected to be of that order , which decreeth punishments in cases criminali without further appeal , or of their order , that are the kings fosterers . And in both of these Order , which are very honourable , there are many places and degrees , so that from the inferior place they must ascend unto the superior , until they have attained unto the highest dignity of all : and immediately after that they come to be Viceroys . Howbeit this gradation is not always accomplished in one and the same province , but in changing their offices they change places and provinces also . Moreover , next after the office of Viceroy they are capable to be chosen Senators of Nanquin , and last of all to be elected into the Senate of Paquin . Now , there is such and order and 366 
 method observed in the ascending unto these dignities , that all men may easily conjecture , what office any one is to undertake . And there is so great diligence and celerity used for the substitution of one into the room of another , that , for the same purpose , messengers are dispatched by land , upon swift posthorses , unto diverse Riding post . provinces , almost twenty days journey from the Kings Court . And , to be short , there is such district severity in degrading those that unjustly or negligently demean themselves , from and honourable unto and inferior and base office , or altogether in depriving them of the kings authority : that all Magistrates do stand in fear of nothing in the world more then of that . The same order , almost , is observed among the Captains and Lieutenants general for the wars : except only in them , that their birth and offspring is respected : for many there be , who descending by parentage from such Martiali men as have in times past achieved brave exploits in warfare , so soon as they come to sufficient years , are created Centurions , Colonels , and Governors , until at last they attain to be Lieutenants generail and Protectors of some whole province : who notwithstanding ( as I have said ) are in all things subject unto the Viceroy . All the foresaid Magistrates both of war and of peace have a set number of attendants allotted unto them , enjoying a stipend , and carrying certain ensigns and peculiar badges of their office : and ( beside the ordinary watch , which soldiers appointed for the same purpose do in the night season , after the City gates be shut , keep in their forts ) wheresoever any Magistrate is , either at his house or in his barge , the said attendants striking upon a cymbali of brass , at certain appointed times , do keep most circumspect and continual watch and ward about his person . 
 Linus . You have ( Michael ) sufficiently discoursed of the Magistrates : inform us now of the king himself , whose name is so renowned and spread abroad . 
 Michael . Concerning this matter I will say so much 367 
 The succession of the ci'owne . 
 The kings younger brothers . 
 only as by certain rumours hath come to . my knowledge : for of matters appertaining unto the kings Court we have no eyewitnesses , since the father's . of the society have not as yet proceeded unto Paquin , who so soon as ( by Gods assistance ) they shall there be arrived , will by their letters more fully advertise us . The king of China therefore is honoured with wondered reverence and submission throughout his whole Realm : and whensoever any of his chief Magistrates speaks unto him , he calls him VAN-SVI , signifying thereby that he wishes tenne thousands of years unto him . The succession of the kingdom dependeth upon the blood royal : for the eldest son born of the kings first and lawful wife obtaineth the kingdom after his father's decease : neither do they deprive themselves of the kingly authority in their life time ( as the manner is in our Hands of Japon ) but the custom of Europe is there observed . Now , that the safety and life of the king may stand in more security , his younger brothers , and the rest born of concubines are not permitted to live in the kings Court : but places of habitation are by the king himself assigned unto them in diverse provinces far distant asunder , where they dwell most com-modiously , being comparable unto kings for their buildings and revenues : howbeit they exercise no authority over the people , but all the government of those Cities wherein they dwell , concerns the Magistrates , who notwithstanding have the said Princes in high regard and honour , and do visit them twice in a month , and salute them kneeling upon their knees , and bowing their faces down to the earth : and yet they communicate nothing unto them as touching the administration of the Commonwealth . These are they which may properly be called the Peers or Princes of the Realm of China : for they derive their houses and revenues unto their posterity , and so are these royal families continually preserved . But to return unto the king himself , he is most chary in observing the Chinian laws and customs , 
 368 
 and diligently exerciseth himself in learning so much as concerns his estate , shows himself daily unto his chief Magistrates , and communeth of matters appertaining to the public commodity of the Realm . His palace is of wondered largeness and capacity , out of the which he very seidome takes his progress ; and whensoever he doth so , there are twelve chariots Twelve brought forth , all of them most like one to another charMts-both in workmanship and in valve , that no man may discern in which the king himself is placed . He follows in religion especially the opinions of the The idolatrous Magistrates , attributing divine power unto heaven and °^the earth as unto the parents of all , and with great solemnity ' sacrificing unto them . He hath-divers most sumptuous Temples dedicated unto his ancestors , whereunto likewise he ascribeth divine honour , and yet ceases he not to favour Priests of other sects , yea he erecteth Temples unto their Patrons , endowing them with most rich revenues ; and so often as any urgent necessity requires , he enjoins continual fastings and prayers [ II ii . 96. ] unto them : and after this sort he doth in a manner patronise all the idolatrous sects of his Realm , and showing himself ready to embrace any false religion whatsoever , he lives in sundry and manifold kinds of superstition . Out of all the former particulars by me cwt^ alleged , you may easily conjecture that the administration of the kingdom of China doth , for the most part , agreeable to agree with the instinct of nature , authority being come - the instinct of mitted , not unto rude and unskilful persons , but unto « ature . such as have been conversant in the use and exercise or learning , yea , and in promoting learned men unto magistracies , great consideration is had of their wisdom , justice , and of other virtues esteemed by the Chinians : wherefore the way being open for all men , without any respect of degree or parentage , to obtain any of the foresaid dignities , it can not be but that this most mighty and famous kingdom must needs enjoy exceeding peace and tranquillity . 
 vi 369 2 a 
 The five virtues principally esteemed among the Chinians . 
 Urbanity . 
 The Chinians great piety towards their parents . 
 Leo . I would now ( Michael ) right gladly understand , what kind of urbanity or civil demeanour both the common people and the Magistrates do use one towards another : for it is not likely that where such due administration of justice is , common civility , which so well beseem eth all men , should be wanting . 
 Michael . You have hit even the very nail on the head : for among the five virtues , which the Chinians principally regard , urbanity or courtesy is one ; the rest are piety , a thankful remembrance of benefits , true dealing in contracts or bargains , and wisdom in achieving of matters : with the praises and commendations of which virtues the Chinian books are full fraught . Now as touching their urbanity , it is much unlike unto ours in Japan , and unto that of Europe : howbeit under two principali kinds the rule of their urbanity or courtesy may be comprehended : whereof one is observed between equals , and the other betwqene superiors and inferiors . For when men of equal dignity meet together , they stand bending their backs , and bowing their heads down to the ground , and this they do either once or twice , or sometime thrice . Now , when the inferior meets with his superior , the said inferior , for the most part kneeling lowly on his knees , inclineth his countenance down to the earth . But how often and when this obeizance is to be performed it is wondered what a number of rules and prescriptions are set down , which to recount would require a long time . Somewhat also I will say as touching their piety , and especially of the piety which they use towards their parents , which verily is so exceeding great , that for the space of three whole years together , the sons being clad in mourning vestures do bewail the death of their parents , which duty is performed not only by the common sort , but even by all the Magistrates themselves , and that most curiously and diligently . And , that all men may wholly give their attendance unto this business , it is provided by a most 37® 
 inviolable law among the Chinians , that Magistrates , upon the death of their parents , must forthwith renounce their authority , and three whole years , for the performance of their father's exequies , must betake themselves unto a private kind of living : which also is most duly put in practice by the Senators of the Kings own Council . For albeit a man be right gracious in the eyes of his Prince , yea , and such and one , as upon whom the administration of the Realm doth principally depend ; yet having herd of the death of his parents , that is , of his father or his mother , he hies himself immediately home to solemnize their funerals : insomuch that if the king would retain him still in his office , he should be esteemed by the people , as a transgressor of the laws and customs of China : which accident ( as it is recorded ) in ancient times fell out even so . For whenas a certain king most A memorable familiarly used a certain Senator of his about the storymanaging and expedition of public affairs , and understanding well how necessary the help of his foresaid Senator was , would gladly , after the death of his father , have retained him still in his office : yet a certain other man , being a wellwiller unto the Chinian laws , could in no case abide it , but checking his Prince with sharp rebukes , objected the transgression of the law against him . The king waxing wrath menaced present death unto the man : but when the party being no wit daunted with the terror of death , persisted still in his sayings , the king changing his determination dismissed the Senator to mourn for his father , but as for his repre-hender he advanced him unto and higher dignity . 
 Linus . I perceive ( Michael ) that drawing to and end of these dialogues , and being weary of your long raze , you begin to affect brevity : yet let it not seem troublesome unto you to speak somewhat of the religion of China , The religion which only thing seems to be wanting in this present °fChina-dialogue . 
 Michael . I confess indeed that I endeavour to be brief , not so much in regard of wearisomeness , as for 371 
 [ II ii . 97 - ] Three principali sects among the Chinians . 
 Confucius author of the first sect . 
 Confucius his doctrine . 
 fear least I have be over tedious unto you : howbeit I will not fail but accomplish that which I have undertaken , and ( according to your request ) add somewhat more concerning religion . Whereas therefore the kingdom of China hath hitherto be destitute of true religion , and now the first beginnings thereof are included in most narrow bounds , that nation being otherwise a people most ingenious , and of and extraordinary and high capacity , hath always lived in great errors and ignorance of the truth , being distracted into sundry opinions , and following manifold sects . And among these sects there are three more famous then the rest : the first is of them that profess the doctrine of one Confucius a notable philosopher . This man ( as it is reported in the history of his life ) was one of most upright and incorrupt manners , whereof he wrote sundry treatises very pithily and largely , which above all other books , are seriously read and perused by the Chinians . The same doctrine do all Magistrates embrace , and others also that give their minds to the study of letters , a great part whereof Confucius is said to have invented : and he is had in so great honour , that all his followers and clients , upon the days of the new and full Moon , do assemble themselves at the common School , which I have above mentioned , and before his image , which is worshipped with burning of incense and with tapers , they do thrice bend their knees , and bow their heads down to the ground ; which not only the common scholars , but the chief Magistrates do perform . The sum of the foresaid doctrine is , that men should follow the light of nature as their guide , and that they should diligently endeavour to attain unto the virtues by me before mentioned : and lastly , that they should employ their labour about the orderly government of their families and of the Commonwealth . All these things are in very deed praiseworthy , if Confucius had made any mention of almighty God and of the life to come , and had not ascribed so much unto the heavens , and unto fatal necessity , nor yet had so curiously entreated 
 37 « 
 of worshipping the images of their forefathers . In which regard he can very hardly or not at all be excused from the crime of idolatry : notwithstanding it is to be granted , that none other doctrine among the Chinians approaches so near unto the truth as this doth . The second sect Xequiam avis of them which follow the instructions of Xaquam , or as 
 the Chinians call him Xequiam , whose opinions , because whosefollowers they are well known among us , it were bootless for are called Cen me to repeat ; especially since , in the Catechism come - or Bonzi . posed by our grave visitor , they are notably refuted . This doctrine do all they embrace , which are in China called Cen , but with us at Japon are nam Bonzi . For this I do briefly and by the way give you to understand , that all words of the Chinians language are of one sillable Note . only , so that if there be any word that consisteth of more syllables then one , it consisteth also of more words then one . These sectaries called Cen do shave their beards and their heads , and do for the most part , together with diverse of their associates , inhabit the Temples of Xaquam , or of others which in regard of the same profession have in their Calendars been canonized for Saints , and do rehearse certain prayers after their manner , either upon books or beads , using other ceremonies after the manner of our Bonzi . These men have some inkling of the life to come , and of the rewards of good men , and the punishments of the wicked : howbeit all their asser - 
 tions are fraught with errors . The third sect is of them The third sect . which are called Tauzu : and those do imitate a certain other man , to be adored , as they think , for his holiness . 
 These also are Priests after their kind , howbeit they let their hair grow , and do in other observations differ from the former . Now , because the sect of Confucius is the most famous of all the three , and the two other sects called Cen and Tauzu are not much addicted unto learning , their religion prevailing only among the common sort , the Priests of both the said sects do lead a most base and servile life among the Chinians , insomuch that they kneel down before the Magistrates , and 
 373 
 Christian religion planted in China . 
 [ IL ii . 98. ] 
 are not permitted to fit beside them , and sometime , if the Magistrate please , are abased unto the punishment of the bastonado : whereas in our Isles of Japon it is far otherwise , Priests , even of false religion , being had in so great honour among us . 
 Leo . I herd also ( Michael ) that the Saracens superstition takes place in China : now , whither it does or not , you can resolve us . 
 Michael . That foreign superstition was brought into China what time the Tartars invaded the kingdom , and usurped the government thereof . All the Saracens therefore in China are originally descended of the Tartars , who , because they were and infinite number , could not utterly be expelled and rooted out of the kingdom , but remaining still there , have propagated their posterity , though not their religion . These therefore are soldiers for the greater part of them , and sometime do obtain martial dignities : and except a few ceremonies of their superstition which is now become stale and almost worn out , they do live altogether after the Chinians fashion , their predecessors being , brought into the same kingdom about foure hundred years ago . 
 Linus . Now ( Michael ) let us hear you say somewhat of the Christian religion , which as we hope hath set most happy footing in that kingdom . 
 Michael . I could say much concerning those most wished and acceptable beginnings , were they not already published in Japon by the letters of the father's : howbeit I will make a brief rehearsal of all things , that I may not seem altogether to have abandoned this labour . You know that from the time wherein the father's of the society arrived in our Hands , to the end they might augment Christian religion , they were in like sort most careful how they might insinuate themselves into the innermost parts of the kingdom of China . In the midst of this endeavour and travel Francis Xavier , a most devout man of the foresaid society , departed out of this present life at the He of Sancian ( which some call 374 
 Sangiam ) leaving and example unto the rest of his associates , how they should likewise do their best to plant the religion of Christ in that nation . This man was seconded by others , who used all means , and left no practice unattempted , that they might bring these good beginnings unto a prosperous issue : howbeit they were greatly hindered by reason of and ancient custom in China , in ancient regard whereof they do not without great difficulty and circumspection admit any strangers into their dominions , ’ 
 except those which having a long time executed the office of ambassadors do ordinarily every third year present themselves before the king : in the admission of whom likewise there is marvellous care used , that they may not easily espy and become acquainted with the affairs of the Realm . Hereunto may be added , that the Chinians Chinians are great contemners or other nations , and most constant 
 i ° r , • - i , ’ . „ .. , nations .. 
 observers or their own laws and customs : in all which respects it came to pass , that there was wondered labour and diligence employed above thirty years together , only to get and entrance , until in the year one thousand five hundred fourescore and three , two father's of the foresaid society , that had pretty skill in the letters and language of China , utterly despairing of men help , and depending upon the providence of almighty God , obtained licence of the Tutan or Viceroy to built them and house and a Church in the City of Xauquin , which by reason of the commodiousness thereof is the seat of the Viceroy himself . This work being begun , the said father's of the society , for the novelty thereof , were a few years right well entreated by the Magistrates : insomuch that two others out of India had free and easy access unto them , one couple remaining still in their foresaid house at Xauquin , and the other two taking their journey for the inner provinces , to convert more people unto the faith : who notwithstanding afterwards , other Magistrates not approving of their attempts , were constrained to retire . Now all the time wherein the foresaid father's abided at Xauquin 
 375 
 ( being more then five years ) certain of the common people were restrained from false superstition to Christian religion , and seventy persons were baptised . But the enemy of mankind , who omitteth none opportunity for the hindrance of Christian religion , suggested into the minds of the Chinians ( being , as I said , of their own nature , a people estranged from the traffic and acquaintance of other nations , and always being too too suspicious of strangers ) that they should exhibit letters of supplication unto the Caien and J the Tutan their principali Magistrates , to have the father's expelled out of Xauquin : which Magistrates repairing unto their foresaid house and Church entered consultation how they might banish them out of thee ( said City of Xauquin : in which thing verily they used great moderation , not any way offending or exasperating the minds of the father's , but only signifying that they had regard unto the estate of their Commonwealth . For the Tutan or Viceroy calling the father's unto him , and ( to let pass other accidents ) using courteous and familiar conference with them , declared by many arguments , that their habitation in the City of Xauquin was not convenient , especially since so many Magistrates resorted unto that City , who would take great offence at the presence of strangers . For the which cause he persuaded them to accept some part of the money which they had bestowed in the building of their house , and so to return either home into their own country , or unto the port of Macao . Howbeit , such was the instant supplication of the father's , and so worthy of compassion , that the Tutan or Viceroy , in the extreme and mediterrane borders of the province of Coantum , assigned unto them a new habitation at the city called Xaucheo , commending them also to a certain Magistrate , who was come from the same place to salute him . Thither therefore the said father's , not without great sorrow and grief of the Christians , hied themselves , and as we are informed by 
 376 
 their last letters , they have even now laid the foundation of their first building , and have also written that they are like to live much more peaceably and conveniently for the propagating of Christian religion . 
 These be the first beginnings of Christianity in China , where , even as in other places of the Christian Commonwealth , the seed is to be sown with , great labour and tears , that acceptable fruits may be reaped with gladness . 
 Leo . It is even as you have said ( Michael ) and now for this your pleasant and eloquent discourse we do acknowledge our selves much bounden unto you . 
 . 