Of the Hand Japan , and other little Isles in the East Ocean . By R. Wills . 
 He extreme part of the known world unto us is the noble Hand Giapan , written otherwise Japon and Japan . This Island stands in the East Ocean , beyond all Asia , betwixt Cathayo and the West Indies sixe and thirtie degrees Northward from the Equinoctial line , in 
 the same climb with the South part of Spaine and Portugal , distant from thence by sea sixe thousand leagues : the travail thither , both for civil discord , great piracy , and often shipwracks is very dangerous . This country is hilly and pestered with snow , wherefore it is neither so warm as Portugal ! , nor yet so wealthy , so far as we 327 
 can learn , wanting oil , butter , cheese , milk , eggs , sugar , honey , vinegar , saffron , cinnamon and pepper . Barley-bran the Handers do use in stead of salt : medi-cinable things wholesome for the body have they none at all . Nevertheless in that Hand sundry fruits do grow , not much unlike the fruits of Spaine : and Great etore of great store of Silver mines are therein to be seen . Stiver mines . people are tractable , civil , witty , courteous , without deceit , in virtue and honest conversation exceeding all other nations lately discovered , but so much standing upon their reputation , that their chief Idol may be thought honour . The contempt thereof causeth among them much discord and debate , manslaughter and murder : even for their reputation they do honour their parents , keep their promises , abstain from adultery and robberies , punishing by death the least robbery done , holding for a principle , that whosoever steals a trifle , will , if he see occasion , steal a greater thing . It may be theft is so severely punished of them , for that the nation is oppressed with scarcity of all things necessary , and so poor , that even for misery they strangle their own children , preferring death before want . These fellows do neither eat nor kill any foul . They live chiefly by fish , herbs , and fruits , so healthfully , that they die very old . Of Rice and Wheat there is no great store . No man is ashamed there of his poverty , neither be their gentlemen therefore less honoured of the meaner people , neither will the poorest gentleman there match his child with the baser sort for any gain , so much they do make more account of gentry then of wealth . The greatest delight they have is in armour , each boy at fourteene years of age , be he born gende or otherwise , hath his sword and dagger : very good archers they be , contemning all other nations in comparison of their manhood and prowess , putting not up one injury be it never so small in word or deed , among themselves . They feed moderately , but they drink largely . The use of vines they know not , their 
 328 
 drink they make of Rice , utterly they do abhor dice , and all games , accounting nothing more vile in a man , then to give himself unto those things that make us greedy and desirous to get other men's goods . If at any time they do swear , fot that seidome they are wont to do , they swear by the Sun : many of them are taught good letters , wherefore they may so much the sooner be brought unto Christianitie . Each one is contented with one wife : they be all desirous to learn , & naturally inclined unto honesty & courtesy : godly talk they listen unto willingly , especially when they understand it thoroughly . Their government consisteth of 3 estates . The first place is due unto the high Priest , by whose laws & decrees all public and private matters aPPERTAINING to religion are decided . The sects of their clergy men , whom they do call Bonzi , be of no estimation or authority except the high Priest by letters patent do confirm the same : he confirmeth and alloweth of their Tundi , who be as it were Bishops , although in many places they are nominated by sundry Princes . These Tundi are greatly honoured of all sorts : they do give benefices unto inferior ministers , and do grant licences for many things as to eat flesh upon those days they go in pilgrimage to their Idols with such like privileges . Finally , this high Priest wont to be chosen in China for his wisdom and learning , made in Japan for his gentry and birth , hath so large a Dominion and revenues so great , that eftsoon he beardeth the petie Kings and Princes there . 
 Their second principal Magistrate , in their language Vo , is the chief Herehaught , made by succession and birth , honoured as a God . This gentleman never touches the ground with his foot without forfeiting of his office , he never goes abroad out of his house , nor is at all times to be seen . At home he is either carried about in a litter , or else he goes in wooden Choppines a foot high from the ground : commonly he sitteth in his chair with a sword in one side , and a bow and arrows in the 
 329 
 [ II ii . 81. ] 
 other , next his body he weareth black , his outward garments be read , all shadowed over with Cypress , at his cap hang certain Lambeaux much like unto a Bishops Miter , his forehead is painted white and read , he eateth his meat in earthen dishes . This Herehaught determineth in all Japan the diverse titles of honour , whereof in that Hand is great plenty , each one particularly known by his badge , commonly seen in sealing up their letters , and daily altered according to their degrees . About this Vo every Noble man hath his Soliciter , for the nation is so desirous of praise and honour , that they strive among themselves who may bribe him best . By these means the Herehaught grows so rich , that although he have neither land nor any revenues otherwise , yet may he be accounted the wealthiest man in all Japan . For three causes this great Magistrate may lose his office : first , if he touch the ground with his foot , as it hath been already said : next , if he kill any body : thirdly , if he be found and enemy unto peace and quietness , howbeit neither of these aforesaid causes is sufficient to put him to death . 
 Their third chief officer is a Judge , his office is to take up and to end matters in controversy , to determine of wars and peace , that which he thinketh right , to punish rebels , wherein he may command the noble men to assist him upon pain of forfeiting their goods : nevertheless at all times he is not obeyed , for that many matters are ended rather by might and arms , then determined by law . Other controversies are decided either in the Temporali Court , as it seems good unto the Princes , or in the Spirituali consistory before the Tundi . 
 Rebels are executed in this manner , especially if they be noble men or officers . The king look what day he gives sentence against any one , the same day the party , wheresoever he be , is advertised thereof , and the day told him of his execution . The condemned person asks of the messenger whither it may be lawful for 33° 
 him to kill himself : the which thing when the king doth grant , the party taking it for and honour , putteth on his best apparel and lancing his body a cross from the breast down all the belly , murdereth himself . This kind of death they take to be without infamy , neither do their children for their father's crime so 
 punished , lose their goods . But if the king reserve them to be executed by the hangman , then flocketh he together his children , his servants , and friends home 
 to his house , to preserve his life by force . The king committeth the fetching of him out unto his chief Judge , who first sets upon him with bow and arrows , and afterwards with pikes and swords , until the rebel ! and all his family be slain to their perpetuali ignominy and shame . 
 The Indy-writers make mention of sundry great cities in this Hand , as Cangoxima a haven town in the South part thereof , and Meaco distant from thence three hundred leagues northward , the royal seat of the king and most wealthy of all other towns in that Hand . The people thereabouts are very noble , and their language the best Japonish . In Meaco are said to be ninetie thousande houses inhabited and upward , a famous University , and in it five principali Colleges , beside closes & cioysters of Bonzi , Leguixil , and Hamacata , that is , Priests , Monks and Nuns . Other five notable Universities there be in Japan , namely , Coia , Negru , Homi , Frenoi , and Bandu . The first foure have in them at the least three thousand & five hundred scholars : in the fift are many more . For Bandu province is very great and possessed with sixe princes , five whereof are vassals unto the sixt , yet he himself subject unto the Japonish king , usually called the great king of Meaco : lesser schools there be many in diverse places of this Island . And thus much specially concerning this glorious Hand , among so many barbarous nations and rude regions , have I gathered together in one sum , out of sundry letters written from thence into Europe , by no less faithful reporters 331 
 Petrus Ma^eius de rebusx Japonicis . 
 than famous travellers . For confirmation whereof , as also for the knowledge of other things not contained in the premises , the curious readers may peruse these 4 volumes of Indian matters written long ago in Italian , and of late compendiously made latin , by Petrus Maffeius my old acquainted friend , entitling the same , De rebus Japonicis . One whole letter out of the fift book thereof , specially entreating of that country , I have done into English word for word in such wise as follows . 
 Aloisius Froes to his companions in Jesus Christ that remain in China and India . 
 THe last year , deer brothers , I wrote unto you from Firando , how Cosmus Turrianus had appointed me to travail to Meaco to help Gaspar Vilela , for that there the harvest was great , the labourers few , and that I should have for my companion in that journey Aloisius Almeida . It seems now my part , having by the help of God ended so long a voyage , to signify unto you by letter such things specially as I might think you would most delight to know . And because at the beginning Almeida and I so parted the whole labour of writing letters betwixt us , that he should speak of our voyage , and such things as happened therein , I should make relation of the Meachians estate , & write what I could well learn of the Japans manners and conditions : setting aside all discourses of our voyage , that which stands me upon I will discharge in this Epistle , that you considering how artificially , how cunningly , under the pretext of religion , that crafty adversary of mankind leads and draws unto perdition the Japanish minds , blinded with many superstitions and ceremonies , may the more pity this Nation . 
 The inhabiters of Japan , as men that never had greatly to do with other Nations , in their Geography divided the whole world into three parts , Japan , Sian , and China . And albeit the Japans received out of Sian and China 332 
 their superstitions and ceremonies , yet do they nevertheless contemn all other nations in comparison of themselves , and standing in their own conceit do far prefer themselves before all other sorts of people in wisdom and policy . 
 Touching the situation of the country and nature of the soil , unto the things eftsoons erst written , this one thing I will add : in these Hands , the summer to be most hight , the winter extreme cold . In the kingdom of Canga , as we call it , falls so much snow , that the houses being buried in it , the inhabitants keep within doors certain months of the year , having no way to come forth except they break up the tiles . Whirlwinds most vehement , earthquakes so common , that the Japans dread such kind of fears little or nothing at all . The country is full of silver mines otherwise barren , not so much by fault of nature , as through the slothfulness of the inhabitants : howbeit Oxen they keep and that for tillage sake only . The air is wholesome , the waters good , the people very fair and well bodied : bore headed commonly they go , procuring baldness with sorrow and tears , eftsoons rooting up with pinsars all the hair of their heads as it grows , except it be a little behind , the which they knot and keep with all diligence . Even from their childhood they wear daggers and swords , the which they use to lay under their pillows when they go to bed : in show courteous and affable , in deed haughty and proud . They delight most in warlike affairs , and their greatest study is arms . Mens apparel diversely coloured is worn down half the legs and to the elbows : women's attire made handsomely like unto a veil , is somewhat longer : all manner of dicing and theft they do eschew . The merchant , although he be wealthy , is not accounted of . Gentlemen , be they never so poor , retain their place : most precisely they stand upon their honour and worthiness , ceremoniously striving among themselves in courtesies and fair speeches . Wherein if any one happily be less careful than he should be , even 
 333 
 for a trifle many times he gets evil will . Want , though it trouble most of them , so much they do detest , that poor men cruelly taking pity of their infants newly born , especially girls , do many times with their own feet strangle them . Noble men , and other likewise of meaner calling generally have but one wife a piece , by whom although they have issue , yet for a trifle they diverse themselves from their wives , and the wives also sometime from their husbands , to marry with others . After the second degree cousin's may there lawfully marry . Adoption of other men's children is much used among them . In great towns most men and women can write and read . 
 This Nation feeds sparingly , their usual meat is rice and salads , and near the sea side fish . They feast one another many times , wherein they use great diligence , especially in drinking one to another , insomuch that the better sort , lest they might rudely commit some fault therein , do use to read certain books written of . duties and ceremonies aPPERTAINING unto banquets . To be delicate and fine , they put their meat into their mouths with title forks , accounting it great rudeness to touch it with their fingers : winter & summer they drink water as hight as they may possibly abide it . Their houses are in danger of fire , but finely made and clean , laid all over with straw-pallets , whereupon they do both fit in stead of stools , and lie in their clothes with billets under their heads . For fear of defiling these pallets , they go either barefoot within doors , or wear straw pantoffles on their buskin's when they come abroad , the which they lay aside at their return home again . Gentlemen for the most part do pass the night in banqueting , music , & vain discourses , they sleep the day time . In Meaco and Sacaio there is good store of beds , but they be very little , and may be compared unto our pues . 
 In bringing up their children they use words only to rebuke them , admonishing as diligently and advisedly 334 
 1565. boys of sixe or seven years of age , as though they were old men . They are given very much to entertain strangers , of whom most curiously they love to ask even in trifles what foreign nations do , and their fashions . Such arguments and reasons as be manifest , and are made plain with examples , do greatly persuade them . They detest all kind of theft , whosoever is taken in that fault may be slain freely of any body . No public prisons , no common gayles , no ordinary Justicers : privately each householder hath the hearing of matters at home in his own house , and the punishing of greater crimes that deserve death without delay . Thus usually the people is kept in awe and fear . 
 About foure hundred years passed ( as in their old records we find ) all Japan was subject unto one Emperor whose royal seat was Meaco , in the Japonish language called Cubucama . But the nobility rebelling against him , by little and little have taken away the greatest part of his dominion , howbeit his title continually remaineth , and the residue in some respect do make great account of him still , acknowledging him for their superior . Thus the Empire of Japan , in times passed but one alone , is now divided into sixtie sixe kingdoms , the only cause of civil wars continually in that Hand , to no small hindrance of the Gospel , whilst the kings that dwell near together invade one another , each one coveting to make his kingdom greater . Furthermore in the city Meaco is the palace of the high Priest , whom that nation honoureth as a God , he hath in his house 366 Idols , one whereof by course is every night set by his side for a watchman . He is thought of the common people so holy , that it may not be lawful for him to go upon the earth : if happily he do set one foot to the ground , he loses his office . He is not served very But his alms sumptuously he is maintained by alms . The heads and are beards - of his ministers are shaved , they have name Cangues , and their authority is great throughout all Japan . The Cubucama uses them for Ambassadors to 
 335 
 decide controversies betwixt princes and to end their wars , whereof they were wont to make very great gain . It is now two years since or there about , that one of them came to Bungo , to entreat of peace betwixt the king thereof and the king of Amanguzzo . This Agent favouring the king of Bungo his cause more then the other , brought to pass that the foresaid king of Bungo should keep two kingdoms , the which he had taken in wars from the king of Amanguzzo . Wherefore he had for his reward of the king of Bungo above 30000 ducats . And thus far hereof . 
 I come now to other superstitions and ceremonies , that you may see , deer brothers , that which I said in the beginning , how subtly the devil hath deceived the Japonish nation , and how diligent and ready they be to obey & worship him . And first , all remembrance and knowledge not only of Christ our Redeemer , but also of that one God the maker of all things is clean extinguished and utterly abolished out of the Japans hearts . Moreover their superstitious sects are many , whereas it is lawful for each one to follow that which liketh him best : but the principali sects are two , namely the Amidans and Xacaians . Wherefore in this country shall you see many monasteries , not only of Bonzii men , but also of Bonziae women diversely attired , for some do wear white under , and black upper garments , other go appareled in ash colour , and their Idol hath to name Denichi : from these the Amidanes differ very much . Again the men Bonzii for the most part dwell in sumptuous houses , and have great revenues . These fellows are chaste by commandment , marry they may not upon pain of death . In the midst of their Temple is erected and altar , whereon stands a wooden Idol of Amida , naked from the girdle upward , with holes in his ears after the manner of Italian gentlewomen , sitting on a wooden rose goodly to behold . They have great libraries , and halls for them all to dine and sup together , and bells wherewith they are at certain hours called to 336 
 prayers . In the evening the Superintendent gives each one a theme for meditation . After midnight before the altar in their Temple they do say Mattens as it were out of Xaca his last book , one quire one verse , the other quire and other . Early in the morning each one gives himself to meditation one hour : they shave their heads and beards . Their cioysters be very large , and within the precinct thereof , Chapels of the Fotoquiens , for by that name some of the Japanish Saints are called : their holidays yearly be very many . Most of these Bonzii be gentlemen , for that the Japanish nobility charged with [ II ii . 84. ] many children , use to make most of them Bonzii , not being able to leave for each one a patrimony good enough . The Bonzii most covetously bent , know all the ways how to come by money . They fell unto the people many scrolls of paper , by the help whereof the common people thinketh it self warranted from all power of the devils . They borrow likewise money to be repaid with great usury in and other world , giving by obligation unto the lender and assurance thereof , the which departing out of this life he may carry with him to hell . 
 There is another great company of such as are called Inambuxu . Inambuxu , with curled and staring hair . They make profession to find out again things either lost or stolen , after this sort . They set before them a child whom the devil invadeth , called up thither by charms : of that child then do they ask that which they are desirous to know . 
 These men's prayers both good and bad are thought greatly to prevail , insomuch that both their blessings and their curses they fell unto the people . The novices of this order , before they be admitted , go together two or three thousand in a company , up a certain high mountain to do penance there , threescore days voluntarily punishing themselves . In this time the devil shows himself unto them in sundry shapes : and they like young graduats , admitted as it were fellows into some certain company , are set forth with vi 337 v 
 white tassels hanging about their necks , and black Bonnets that scarcely cover any more then the crown of their heads . Thus attired they range abroad in all Japan , to set out themselves and their cunning to sale , each one beating his basin which he carrieth always about with him , to give notice of their coming in all towns where they pass . 
 There is also and other sort called Genguis , that make profession to show by soothsaying where stolen things are , and who were the thieves . These dwell in the top of and high mountain , black in the face : for the continual heat of the sun , for the cold winds , and reins they do continually endure . They marry but in their own tribe and line : the report goes that they be horned beasts . They climb up most high rocks and hills , and go over very great rivers by the only art of the devil , who to bring those wretches the more into error , bids them to go up a certain high mountain , where they stand miserably gazing and earnestly looking for him as long as the devil appoints them . At the length at nonetide or in the evening comes that devil , whom they call Amida among them to show himself unto them : this show breeds in the brains and hearts of men such a kind of superstition , that it can by no means be rooted out of them afterwards . 
 The devil was wont also in another mountain to show himself unto the Japanish Nation . Who so was more desirous than other to go to heaven and to enjoy Paradise , thither went he to see that sighed , and having seen the devil followed him ( so by the devil persuaded ) into a den until he came to a deep pit . Into this pit the devil was wont to leap , and to take with him his worshipper whom he there murdered . This deceit was thus perceived . And old man blinded with this superstition , was by his son dissuaded from thence , but all in vain . Wherefore his son followed him privily into that den with his bow & arrows , where the devil gallantly appeared unto him in the shape of a man . Whilst the old man 338 
 falls down to worship the devil , his son speedily shooting and arrow at the spirit so appearing , struck a Fox in stead of a man , so suddenly was that shape altered . This old man his son tracking the Fox so running away , came to that pit whereof I spoke , and in the bottom thereof he found many bones of dead men , deceived by the devil after that sort in time past . Thus delivered he his father from present death , and all other from so pestilent and opinion . 
 There is furthermore a place bearing name Coia , very famous for you multitude of Abbeys which the Bonzii have therein . The beginner and founder whereof is thought to be one Combendaxis a subtle crafty fellow , that god the name of holiness by cunning speech , although the laws and ordinances he made were altogether devilish : he is said to have found out the Japanish letters used at this day . In his latter years this Sim subtle buried himself in a fou resquare grave , foure cubits deep , severely forbidding it to be opened , for that then he died not , but rested his body wearied with continual business , until many thousand thousands of years were passed , after the which time a great learned man nam Mirozu should come into Japan , and then would he rise up out of his grave again . About his tomb many lamps are lighted , sent thither out of diverse provinces , for that the people are persuaded that whosoever is liberali and beneficial towards the beautifying of that monument shall not only increase in wealth in this world , but in the life to come be safe through Combendaxis help . Such as give themselves to worship him , live in those Monasteries or Abbeys with shaved heads , as though they had forsaken all secular matters , whereas in deed they wallow in all sorts of wickedness and lust . In these houses , the which are many ( as I said ) in number , do remain 6000 Bonzii , or thereabouts beside the multitude of lay men , women be restrained from thence upon pain of death . Another company of Bonzii dwells at Fatonochaiti . They teach a great multitude 
 339 
 [ II ii . 8$ . ] 
 A warlike people 300 leagues to the North of Meaco . 
 The Japanish funerals . 
 of children all tricks & sleights of guile & theft : whom they do find to be of great towardness , those doe they instruct in all the petigrues of princes , and fashions of the nobility , in chivalry and eloquence , and so send them abroad into other provinces , attired like young princes , to this end , that feigning themselves to be nobly born , they may with great sums of money borrowed under the colour and pretence of nobility return again . Wherefore this place is so infamous in all Japan , that if any scholar of that order be happily taken abroad , he incontinently dieth for it . Nevertheless these cozeners leave not daily to use their wonted wickedness and knavery . 
 North from Japan , three hundred leagues out of Meaco , lies a great country of savage men clothed in beasts skins , rough bodied , with huge beards and monstrous muchaches , the which they hold up with little forks as they drink . These people are great drinkers of wine , fierce in wars , and much feared of the Japans : being hurt in fight , they wash their wounds with salt water , other Surgery have they none . In their breasts they are said to carry looking glasses : their swords they tie to their heads , in such wise , that the handle do rest upon their shoulders . Service and ceremonies have they none at all , only they are wont to worship heaven . To Aquita a great town in that Japonish kingdom , which we call Gevano , they much resort for merchandise , and the Aquitanes likewise do travel into their country , howbeit not often , for that there many of them are slain by the inhabiters . 
 Much more concerning this matter I had to write : but to avoid tediousness I will come to speak of the Japans madness again , who most desirous of vain glory do think then specially to get immortali fame , when they procure themselves to be most sumptuously and solemnly buried : their burials and obsequies in the city Meaco are done after this manner . About one hour before the dead body be brought forth , a great multitude of his friends appareled in their best array go before unto the 340 
 fire , with them go their kinswomen and such as bee of their acquaintance , clothed in white ( for that is the mourning colour there ) with a changeable coloured veil on their heads . Each woman hath with her also , according to her ability , all her family trimmed up in white mockado : the better sort and wealthier women go in litters of Cedar artificially wrought and richly dressed . In the second place marches a great company of footmen sumptuously appareled . Then afar off comes one of these Bonzii master of the ceremonies for that superstition , bravely clad in silks and gold , in a large and high litter excellently well wrought , accompanied with 30 other Bonzii or thereabouts , wearing hats , linen albes , and fine black upper garments . Then attired in ash colour ( for this colour also is mourning ) with a long torch of Pineapple , he shows the dead body the way unto the fire , lest it either stumble or ignorantly go out of the way . Well near 200 Bonzii follow him singing the name of that devil the which the party deceased chiefly did worship in his life time , and therewithal ! a very great basin is beaten even to the place of fire in stead of a bell . Then follow two great paper baskets hanged open at staves ends full of paper roses diversely coloured , such as bear them do march but slowly , shaking ever now and then their staves , that the aforesaid flowers may fallen down by little and little as it were drops of rain : and be whirled about with wind . This shower say they is and argument that the soul of the dead man is gone to paradise . After all this , eight beardies Bonzii orderly two and two drag after them on the ground long spears , the points backward , with flags of one cubit a piece , wherein the name also of that idol is written . Then there be carried 10 lanterns trimmed with the former inscription , overcast with a fine veil , and candles burning in them . Beside this , two young men clothed in ash colour bear pineapple torches , not lighted , of three foot length , the which torches serve to kindle the fire wherein the dead corpses is to be burned . In the 
 341 
 They burn their dead . 
 same colour follow many other that wear on the crowns of their heads fair , little , threesquare , black lethren caps tied fist under their chins ( for that is honourable among them ) with papers on their heads , wherein the name of the devil I spoke of , is written . And to make it the more solemn , after comes a man with a table one cubit long , one foot broad , covered with a very fine white veil , in both sides whereof is written in golden letters the aforesaid name . At the length by foure men is brought forth the corpse sitting in a gorgeous litter clothed in white , hanging down his head and holding his hands together like one that prayed : to the rest of his apparel may you add and upper gown of paper , written full of that book the which his God is said to have made , when he lived in the world , by whose help and merits commonly they do think to be saved . The dead man his children come next after him most gallantly set forth , the youngest whereof carrieth likewise a pineapple torch to kindle the fire . Last of all followeth a great number of people in such caps as I erst spoke of . 
 When they are all come to you place appointed for the obsequy , all the Bonzii wl the whole multitude for the space of one hour , beating pans and basons with great clamours , call upon the name of that devil , the which being ended , the Obsequy is done in this manner . In the midst of a great quadrangle railed about , hanged with course linen , and agreeably unto the foure parts of the world made with foure gates to go in and out at , is dug a hold : in the hold is laid good store of wood , whereon is raised gallantly a waved roof : before that stand two tables furnished with diverse kinds of meats , especially dry Figs , Pomegranates and Tarts good store , but neither Fish nor Flesh : upon one of them stands also a chafer with coals , and in it sweet wood to make perfumes . When all this is ready , the cord wherewith the litter was carried , is thrown by a long rope into the fire : as many as are present strive to take the rope in their hands , using their aforesaid clamours , which done , 342 
 they go in procession as it were round about the quadrangle thrice . Then setting the litter on the wood built up ready for the fire that Bonzius who then is master of the ceremonies , sayeth a verse that no body there understands , whirling thrice about over his head a torch lighted , to signify thereby that the soul of the dead man had neither any beginning , ne shall have at any time and end , and throweth away the torch . Two of the dead man his children , or of his near kin , take it up again , and standing one at the East side of the litter , the other at the West , do for honour and reverence reach it to each other thrice over the dead corpse , and so cast it into the pile of wood : by and by they throw in oil , sweet wood , and other perfumes , accordingly as they have plenty , and so with a great flame bring the corpses to ashes : his children in the mean while putting sweet wood into the chafer at the table with odours , do solemnly and religiously worship their father as a Saint : which being done , the Bonzii are paid each one in his degree . The master of the ceremonies hath for his part five ducats , sometime tenne , sometime twentie , the rest have tenne Julies a piece , or else a certain number of other presents called Caxae . The meat that was ordained , as soon as the dead corpse friends and all the Bonzii are gone , is left for such as served at the obsequy , for the poor and impotent lazars . 
 The next day return to the place of obsequy the dead man his children , his kindred and friends , who gathering up his ashes , bones , and teeth , do put them in a gilded pot , and so carry them home , to be set up in the same pot covered with cloth , in the midst of their houses . Many Bonzii return likewise to these private funerals , and so do they again the seventh day : then carry they out the ashes to be buried in a place appointed , laying thereupon a foursquare stone , wherein is written in great letters drawn all the length of the stone , the name of that devil the which the dead man worshipped in his life time . Every day afterwards his 343 
 A.D. 
 I565 - 
 children resort unto the grave with roses and warm water that the dead corpse thirst not . Nor the seventh day only , but the seventh month and year , within their own houses they renew this obsequy , to no small commodities and gain of the Bonzii : great rich men do spend in these their funerals 3000 ducats or thereabouts , the meaner sort two or three hundred . Such as for poverty be not able to go to that charges , are in the night time darkelong without all pomp and ceremonies buried in a dunghill . 
 They have another kind of burial , especially near the Sea side , for them that be not yet dead . These fellows are such , as having religiously with much devotion worshipped Amida , now desirous to see him , do slay themselves . And first they go certain days begging alms , the which they thrust into their sleeves , then preach they in public a sermon unto the people , declaring what they mind to do , with the great good liking of all such as do hear them : for every body wondereth at such a kind of holiness . Then take they hooks to cut down briers and thorns that might hinder them in their way to heaven , and so embark themselves in a new vessel , tying great stones about their necks , arms , loins , thighs , and feet : thus they launching out into the main Sea be either drowned there , their ship bouged for that purpose , or else do cast themselves overboard headlong into the Sea. The empty bark is out of hand set a fire for honours sake by their friends that follow them in another boat of their own , thinking it blasphemy that any mortali creature should afterwards once touch the bark that had be so religiously hallowed . 
 Truly when we went to Meaco , eight days before we came to the He of Hiu at Before town , sixe men and two women so died . To all such as die so the people erecteth a Chapel , and to each of them a pillar and a pole made of Pineapple for a perpetuali monument , hanging up many shreds of paper in sticks all the roof 344 
 over , with many verses set down in the walls in commendation of that blessed company . Wherefore unto this place both day and night many come very super-stitiously in pilgrimage . It happened even then as Aloisius Almeida and I went to christen a child we traveled that way at what time foure or five old women came forth out of the aforesaid chapel with beads in their hands ( for in this point also the devil counterfaiteth Christianitie ) who partly scorned at us for [ II ii . 87. ] folly , partly frowned and taunted at our small devotion , for passing by that holy monument without any reverence or worship done thereunto at all . 
 It remains now we speak two or three words of those Sermons the Bonzii are wont to make , not so many as ours in number , but assuredly very well provided for . The Pulpit is erected in a great temple with a silk Canopy over it , therein stands a costly seat , before the seat a table with a bell and a book . At the hour of Sermon each sect of the Japans resorteth to their own doctors in diverse Temples . Up goes the doctor into the Pulpit , and being set down , after that he hath lordlike looked him about , signifies silence with his bell , and so readeth a few words of that book we spoke of , the which he expoundeth afterwards more at large . These preachers be for the most part eloquent , and apt to draw with their speech the minds of their hearers . Wherefore to this end chiefly ( such is their greediness ) tendeth all their talk , that the people be brought under the colour of godliness to enrich their monasteries , promising to each one so much the more happiness in the life to come , how much the greater costs and charges they be at in Church matters and obsequies : notwithstanding this multitude of superstitious Sects and companies , and the diversities thereof among themselves : yet in this principally all their Superintendents do travel so to persuade their Novices in their own tales and lies , that they think nothing else truth , nothing else sure to 345 
 come by everlasting salvation , nothing else worth the hearing . Whereunto they add other subtleties , as in going gravity , in countenance , apparel , and in all outward show , comeliness . Whereby the Japans minds are so nousled in wicked opinions , & do conceive thereby such trust and hope of everlasting salvation , that not only at home , but also abroad in every corner of the town continually almost they run over their beads , humbly asking of Amida and Xaca , wealth , honour , good health , and everlasting joys . Thus then , deer brothers , may you think how greatly they need the help of God , that either do bring the Gospel into this country , or receiving it brought unto them , do forsake idolatry and join themselves with Christ , being assaulted by so many snares of the devil , troubled with the daily dissuasions of their Bonzii , and finally , so injuriously , so hardly , so sharply vexed of their kindred and friends , that except the grace of God obtained by the sacrifices and prayers of the Catholic church do help us , it cannot be chosen but that the faith and constancy of many , if not of all , in these first beginnings of our churches , will greatly be put in j eopardie . So much the more it stands you upon that so earnestly long for the health of souls , to commend specially these Japanish flocks unto our Lord . 
 We came to Sacaio the eight and twentie day of January : Aloisius Almeida first for business , but afterwards let by sickness , stayed there some while , but I parting the next day from thence came thirteene leagues off to Meaco the last of Januarie . Of my coming all the Christians took great comfort , but specially Gaspar Vilela who in 6 years had seen none of our company at Meaco : his years are not yet fortie , but his grey hairs show him to be seventie , so vehemently is his little body afflicted and worn with extreme cold . He speaks Japanish so skilfully after the phrase of Meaco ( the which for the renown of this people and royal seat of the king is best accounted of ) that he doth 346 
 both confess and preach in that language . Certain godly books also he hath done into that speech , not omitting to translate other as laisure suffers him . To make and end , our Lord for his goodness vouchsafe to preserve us all continually , and to give us aid both rightly to interpret his will , and well to do the same . From Meaco the 19 of February 1565. 
 Other such like matter is handled both in other his letters , and also in the Epistles written by his companions to be seen at large in the aforesaid volume . among the rest this seemed in my judgement one of the principali , and therefore the rather I took upon me to do it into English . 
 Of the Isles beyond Japan in the way from China to the Moluccas . 
 A Amongst other Isles in the Asian sea betwixt Cantan 11 a Chinish haven in Cathaio & the Moluccas , much spoken of in the Indian histories and painted out in Maps , Ainan and Santianum are very famous . Ainan Ainan . stands 19 degrees on this side of the Equinoctial line never China , from whence the Chinish nation have their provision for shipping and other necessaries requisite for their Navy . There stayed Balthasar Gagus a great traveller 5 months , who describeth that place after this De reb . Jap . manner . Ainan is a goodly country full of Indian fruits 4-& all kind of victuals , beside great store of jewels and pearl , well inhabited , the towns built of stone , the people rude in conditions , appareled in diverse coloured rugs , with two ox homes , as it were , made of fine cypress hanging down about their ears , and a pair of sharp cyzers at their foreheads . 
 The cause wherefore they go in such attire I could not [ II ii . 88. ] understand , except it be for that they do counterfeit the devil in the form of a brutus beast , offering themselves up to him . 
 Santianum is and He near unto the haven Cantan in Santianum . the confines likewise of China , famous for the death 
 347 
 of that worthy traveller and godly professor and painful doctor of the Indian nation in matters concerning religion , Francis Xavier , who after great labours , many injuries , and calamities infinite sufired with much patience , singular joy and gladness of mind , departed in a cabben made of bows and rushes upon a desert mountain , no less void of all worldly commodities , then endued with all spirituali blessings , out of this life , the 2 day of December , the year of our Lord 1552. after that many thousand of these Easterlings were brought by him to the knowledge of Christ . Of this holy man , his particular virtues , and specially travel , and wonderful works in that region , of other many little Isles ( yet not so little , but they may right well be written of at laisure ) all the latter histories of the Indian regions are full . 
 . 