A voyage to the Azores with two pinnaces , the one called the Serpent , and the other the Marry Spark of Plimouth , both of them belonging to Sir Walter Ralegh , written by John Evesham Gentleman , wherein were taken the governor , of the Isle of Saint Michael , and Pedro Sarmiento governor of the Straits of Magalanes , in the year 1586. 
 THe 10. of June 1586. we departed from Plimouth with two Pinnaces , the one nam the Serpent , of the burden of 35. Tons , and the other the Marry Spark of Plimouth of the burden of 50. Tons , both of them belonging to sir Walter Ralegh knight ; and directing 
 our course towards the coast of Spaine , & from thence towards the Isles of the Azores , we took a small bark laden with Sumacke and other commodities , wherein was the governor of S. Michaels Island , being a Portugal , having other Portugals and Spaniards with him . And from thence we sailed to the Island of Graciosa , to the Westward of the Island of Tercera , where we descried a sail , and bearing with her we found her to be a Spaniard : But at the first not greatly respecting whom we took , so that we might have enriched our selves , which was the cause of this our travail , and for that we would not be known of 
 434 
 1586. what nation we were , we displayed a white silk ensign in our main top , which they seeing , made account that we had be some of the king of Spaines Armadas , lying in wait for English men of war : but when we came within shot of her , we took down our white flag , and spread abroad the Cross of S. George , which when they saw , it made them to fly as fast as they might , but all their haste was in vain , for our ships were swifter of sail then they , which they fearing , did presently cast their ordinance and small shot with many letters , and the draft of the Straights of Magelan into the Sea , and thereupon immediately we took her , wherein we also took a gentleman of 
 Spaine , nam Pedro Sarmiento , governor of the Pedro Sarmi-Straights of Magelan , which said Pedro we brought entothe&ver-into England with us , and presented him to our sovereign Lady the Queen . Magelan 
 After this , lying off and about the Islands , we de - takenprisoner . scried another sail , and bearing after her , we spent the main mast of our Admiral , but yet in the night our Viceadmiral took her , being laden with fish from Cape A ship laden Blank , the which ship we let go again for want with fish taken of men to bring her home . The next day we descried andfie^ase^ two other sails , the one a ship and the other a a^mne ’ Caravel , to whom we gave chase , which they seeing , with all speed made in under the Isle of Graciosa , to a certain Fort there for their succour , where they came to and anchor , and having the wind of us we could not hurt them with our ships , but we having a small boat , which we called a light horseman , wherein my self was , being a Musqueter , and foure more with Calivers , and foure that rowed , came near unto the shore against the wind , which when they saw us come towards them they carried a great part of their merchandise on land , whither also the men of both vessels went and landed , and as soon as we came within Musquet shot , they began to shoot at us with great ordinance and small shot , and we likewise at them , and in the end we 
 435 
 One of the ships taken , and sent away with 2. persons . 
 The Caravel is taken . 
 [ II ii . 121. ] 
 The prizes sent home . 
 Two Carracks , 10. Galleons , 12 small ships . 
 boarded one ship wherein was no man left , so we cut her cables , hoised her sails , and sent her away with two of our men , and the other 7. of us passed more near unto the shore , and boarded the Caravel , which did ride within a stones cast from the shore , and so near the land that the people did cast stones at us , but yet in despite of them all we took her , and one only Negro therein ; and cutting her cables in the hawse we hoised her sails and being becalmed under the land , we were constrained to row her out with our boat , the Fort still shooting at us , and the people on land with Musquets and calivers , to the number of 150. or thereabouts : and we answered them with the small force we had ; In the time of which our shooting , the shot of my Musquet being a crossebarreshot happened to strike the gunner of the fort to death , even as he was giving level to one of his great pieces , and thus we parted from them without any loss or hurt on our side . And now , having taken these five sails of ships , we did as before , turn away the ship with the fish , without hurting them , and from one of the other ships we took her main Mast to serve our Admirals turn , and so sent her away putting into her all the Spaniards and Portugals , ( saving that gentleman Pedro Sarmiento , with three other of the principal men and two Negroes ) leaving them all within sighed of land , with bred and water sufficient for 10. days if need were . 
 Thus setting our course for England , being oflF the Islands in the height of 41. degrees , or there about , one of our men being in the top descried a sail , then 10. sail , then 15. whereupon it was concluded to send home those prizes we had , and so left in both our Pinasses not above 60. men . Thus we returned again to the Fleet we had descried , where we found 24. sail of ships , whereof two of them were Carracks , the one of 1200. and the other of a 1000. tons , and 10. Gallons , the rest were small ships and Caravels all 436 
 laden with Treasure , spices , and sugars , with which 24. ships we with two small Pinasses did fight , and kept company the space of 32. hours , continually fighting with them and they with us , but the two Carracks kept still betwixt the Fleet and us , that we could not take any one of them , so wanting powder , we were forced to give them over against our wills , for that we were all wholly bent to the gaining of some of them , but necessity compelling us , and that only for want of powder , without loss of any of our men , ( which was a thing to be wondered at considering the inequality of number ) at length we gave them over . Thus we again The 2 . pinasses set our course for England , and so came to Plimouth r‘tIl^for within 6. hours after our prizes , which we sent away n&an ’ 40. hours before us , where we were received with triumphant joy , not only with great Ordinance then shot off , but with the willing hearts of all the people of the Town , and of the Country thereabouts ; and we not sparing our Ordinance ( with the powder we had left ) to requite and answer them again . And from thence we brought our prizes to Southampton , where sir Walter Ralegh being our owner , rewarded us with our shares . 
 Our prizes were laden with sugars , Elephants teeth , wax , hides , rice , brazil , and Cuser , as by the testimony of John Evesham himself , Captain Whiddon , Thomas Rainford , Benjamin Wood , William Cooper Master , William Cornish Master , Thomas Drake Corporali , John Ladd gunner , William Warefield gunner , Richard Moon , John Drew , Richard Cooper of Harwich , William Bears of Ratcliffe , John Row of Saltash , and many others , may appear . 
 . 