The voyage set forth by M. John Newton , and M. John Bird merchants of London to the kingdom and City of Benin in Africa , with a ship called the Richard of Arundell , and a pinnace , in the year 1588. briefly set down in this letter following , written by the chief Factor in the voyage to the foresaid Merchants at the time of the ships first arrival at Plimouth . 
 Orshipful Sirs , the discourse of our whole proceeding in this voyage will ask more time and a person in better health then I am at this present , so that I trust you will pardon me , till my coming up to you : in the mean time let this suffice . Whereas we departed in the 
 month of December from the coast of England with your good ship the Richard of Arundell and the pinnace , we held on our direct course towards our appointed port , and the 14 day of Februarie following we arrived in the haven of Benin , where we found not water enough to carry the ship over the bar , so that we left her without in the road , and with the pinnace & ship boat , into which we had put the chiefest of our merchandise , we went up the river to a place called Goto , where we arrived the 20 of February , the foresaid Goto being the nearest place that we could come to by water , to go for Benin . From thence we presently sent Negroes to the king , to certify him of our arrival , and of the cause of our coming thither : who returned to us again the 22 day with a noble man in their 458 
 .. i589‘ company to bring us up to the City , and with 200 Negroes to carry our commodities : hereupon the 23 day we delivered our merchandise to the kings Factor , & the 25 day we came to the great City of Benin , The great where we were well entertained : The sixe & twenty cttte °fBentn-day we went to the Court to have spoken with the king , which ( by reason of a solemn feast then kept among them ) we could not do : but yet we spoke with his Veadore , or chief man , that hath the dealing with the Christians : and we conferred with him concerning our trading , who answered us , that we should have all things to our desire , both in pepper and Elephants teeth . 
 The first of March we were admitted to the kings presence , and he made us the like courteous answer For our traffic : the next day we went again to the Court , where the foresaid Veadore showed us one basket of green pepper , and another of dry in the stalks : we desired to have it plucked from the stalks and made clean , who answered , that it would ask time , but yet it should be done : and that against ■ another year it should be in better readiness , & the reason why we found it so unprepared was , because in this kings time no Christians had ever resorted thither , to lade pepper . The next day there were sent us 12 baskets , and so a little every day until the 9 of March at which time we had made upon 64 serons of pepper , and 28 Elephants teeth . In this time of our being at Benin ( our nature's at this first time not so well acquainted with that climate ) we fell all of us into the disease of the fever , whereupon the Captain sent me down with those goods which we already had received , to the rest of our men at Goto : where being arrived , I found all the men of our pinnace sick also , and by reason of their weakness not able to convey the pinnace and goods down to the place where our ship [ II ii . 150. ] road : but by good hap within two hours after my coming to Goto , the boat came up from the ship , 
 459 
 to see how all things stood with us , so that I put the goods into the boat , and went down towards the s ip• but by that time I was come aboard , many of our men died : namely , Master Benson , the Cooper , the Carpenter , & 3 or 4 more , & my self was also in such a weak state that I was not able to return again to Benin . Whereupon I sent up Samuel Dunne , and the Chirurgeon with him to our men , that were about to let them blood , if it were thought needful ! : who at their coming to Benin , found the Captain and your son William Bird dead , and Thomas Hempsteede very weak , who also died within two days after their coming thither . This sorrowful accident caused them with such pepper and teeth , as they could then find , speedily to return to the ship , as by the Cargason will appear : at their coming away the Veadore told them , that if they could or would stay any longer time , he would use all possible expedition to bring in more commodities : but the common sickness so increased and continued among us all , that by the time our men which remained were come aboard , we had so many sick and dead of our company , that we looked all for the same happen , and so thought to lose both our ship , life , country and all . Very hardly and with much ado could we get up our anchors , but yet at the last by the mercy of God having got them up , but leaving our pinnace behind us , we god to sea , and set sail , which was upon the 13 of Aprill . After which by little and little our men began to gather up their crumbs and to recover some better strength : and so sailing betwixt the Islands of Cape Verde , and the main we came to the Islands of the Azores upon the 25 of July , where our men began a fresh to grow ill , and diverse died , among whom Samuel Dun was one , and as many as remained living were in a hard case : but in the midst of our distress , it fell so well out , by Gods good providence , that we met with your ship the Bark Burre , on this side the North cape , 460 
 1590. which did not only keep us good company , but also sent us sixe fresh men aboard , without whose help , we should surely have tasted of many inconveniences . 
 But by this good means we are now at the last arrived in Plimouth , this 9 day of September : and for want of better health at this time , I refer the further knowledge of more particularities , till my coming to London . 
 Yours to command 
 Anthony Ingram . 
 . 