The Queens Majesties letters to the Emperor of Marocco . 
 The Queens letters to the Emperor . 
 The same in English . 
 Right high and mighty Prince , Having understood from our Agent the great affection and good will which you bear us , and how great honour and favour you show him for our sake , to the end to give us more ample testimony of your friendship , we have received very great 
 contentment & satisfaction , aswell of the one as of the other : and withal we could not omit to magnify you , according to your desert . We have also received your letters , and do not a little rejoice thereof , because they come from a prince unto whom we are so much beholden . Our Agent hath written unto us concerning certain things which you desire to be sent unto you from hence . And albeit we wish that we could particularly satisfy you , as you desire , yet it is fallen out , that the wars , wherein at this present we be busied , will not suffer us fully to do the same : nevertheless , we have commanded to satisfy you in part , and [ IL ii . 120. ] according as the present necessity doth permit us , as our Agent will declare unto you more particularly , hoping you will receive it in good part , and according to the good will wherewith we grant the same . And because it hath be signified unto us that you have promised to proceed in justice against one John Herman John Herman our subject , which hath grievously offended us , in such a ” is sort as we have sent word unto you , we have given * order to our said Agent to inform you more particularly in that which we desire to be done in this business , praying you also to command the same to be 
 vi 433 2 e 
 The governor ofS . Michael taken prisoner . 
 put in execution : and that it would please you always to favour our said Agent and to hold him jn good credit , as you have done hitherto , not suffering your self to be changed in your opinion , for all the false reports which they may raise against him , nor to doubt that we will not accomplish at large all that he shall promise you on our behalf . Our Lord keep and preserve your right high and mighty person . Written in our royal Court at Greenwich the 20. of July 1587. A voyage to the Azores with two pinnaces , the one called the Serpent , and the other the Marry Spark of Plimouth , both of them belonging to Sir Walter Ralegh , written by John Evesham Gentleman , wherein were taken the governor , of the Isle of Saint Michael , and Pedro Sarmiento governor of the Straits of Magalanes , in the year 1586. 
 . 