The voyage of Richard Rainolds and Thomas Dassel to the rivers of Senega and Gambra adjoining upon Guinea , 1591 , with a discourse of the treasons of certain of DONE Antonio his servants and followers . 
 The names of the chief places of traffic between Senega y Gambra . 
 [ II ii . 189. ] 
 Y virtue of her Majesties most gracious charter given in the year 1588 , and in the thirtieth year of her Highness reign , certain English merchants are granted to trade , in and from the river of Senega to and in the river of Gambra , on the Western coast of Africa . The 
 chiefest places of traffic on that coast between these rivers , are these : 
 1 Senega river : The commodities be hides , gum , elephants teeth , a few grains , ostrich feathers , amber-griece , and some gold . 
 2 Beseguiache , a town by Capo Verde * leagues from Senega river : The commodities be small hides , and a few teeth . 
 3 Refisca Viejo , a town 4 leagues from Beseguiache : The commodities be small hides , and a few teeth now and then . 
 4 Palmerin , a town 2 leagues from Refisca : The commodities be small hides , and a few elephants teeth now and then . 
 5 Porto d’Ally , a town 5 leagues from Palmerin : The commodities be small hides , teeth , amber-griece , and a little gold : and many Portugals are there . 
 6 Candimal , a town half a league from Porto d’Ally : The commodities be small hides , and a few teeth now and then . 
 7 Palmerin , a town 3 leagues from Candimal : The commodities be small hides , and a few teeth now and then . 
 8 Joala , a town 6 leagues from Palmerin : The 
 commodities be hides , wax , elephants teeth , rice , and some gold : and many Spaniards and Portugals are there . 
 9 Gambra river : The commodities are rice , wax , hides , elephants teeth , and gold . 
 The Frenchmen of Diepe and New-haven have traded trade thither above thirty years : and commonly with foure or five ships a year , whereof two small barks go into the ' river of Senega . The other were wont ( until within these foure years , that our ships came thither ) to ride with their ships in the road of Porto d’Ally and so sent their small shaloups of sixe or eight tons to some of these places on the Sea coast before repeated . Where in all places generally they were well beloved and as courteously entertained of the Negroes , as if they had be naturally born in the country . And very often the Negroes come into France and return again , which is a further increasing of mutual love and amity . Since our coming to that coast the Frenchmen ride with their ships at Refisca Viejo , and suffer us to anchor with our ships at Porto d’Ally . The Frenchmen never use to go into the river of Gambra : which is a river of secret Gambra d trade and riches concealed by the Portugals . For long since one Frenchman entered the river with a small bark conceaied . which was betrayed , surprised , and taken by two galleys of the Portugals . 
 In our second voyage and second year there were by vile treacherous means of the Portugals and the king v°3a&-of the Negroes consent in Porto d’Ally and Joala about forty Englishmen cruelly slain and captived , and most Forty English or all of their goods confiscated : whereof there returned mentraMr-onely two , which were the merchants . And also by pro - and captived . curement of Pedro Gonsalves , one of DONE Antonio the kings servants , Thomas Dassel and others had be betrayed , if it had not pleased almighty God to reveal the same , whereby it was prevented . 
 From the South side of Senega river on the Sea coast unto about Palmerin is all one kingdom of Negros . 
 The kings name is Melick Zamba , who dwells two days journey within the land from Refisca . 
 The 12 of November 1591 , I Richard Rainolds & Thomas Dassel factors in a ship called the Nightingale of London of 125 tons , and a pinnace called the Cape Verde . Messenger of 40 tons arrived near unto Capo Verde at a little Hand called The Hand of liberty . At this Hand we set up a small pinnace , with which we carry our merchandise on land when we traffic . And in the mean time Thomas Dassel went with the great pinnace to traffic with Spaniards or Portugals in Porto d’Ally or Joala . Over against the said Island on the main Besegueache . is and habitation of the Negroes called Besegueache . The alcaid or governor thereof with a great train came aboard in their canoas to receive the kings duties for ankerage and permitting the quiet setting up of our pinnace : who liked passing well that no Portugall came in the ship , saying , we should be better thought of by the king and people , if we never did bring Portugall , but come of our selves as the Frenchmen ever did and do . And to purchase the more love , I Richard Rainolds gave him and all his company courteous entertainment . Also upon his entreaty , having sufficient pledge aboard , I and others went on land with him . At this instant there was great war between this alcaid and another governor of the next province . Nevertheless upon our arrival truce was taken for a space ; and I with our company conducted among both enemies to the governors Besegueache . house in Besegueache , and were gently and friendly feasted after their manner , and with some presents returned safe aboard again . The next day the alcaid came aboard again , to will me to send some iron and other commodities in the boat to traffic with the Negroes , and also requested me that I would go to Refisca with the ship ; which I did . And one thing I noted , that a number of Negros attended the alcaids landing in warlike manner with bows and poisoned arrows , darts poisoned , and swords , ( because that the enemies by 92 
 1591. reason of the truce taken were there also to view the ship ) who for the most part approached to him kneeling down and kissed the back of his hand . 
 The 17 of November we weighed anchor ; and by reason no French ship was yet come , I went to the road of Refisca : where I sent for the alcaids interpreters , who came thither aboard , and received of me the kings duties for to have free traffic with the Negroes , with whom daily I exchanged my iron & other wares for hides and some elephants teeth , finding the people very friendly and tractable . And the next day after our arrival ! I went up into the land about three miles to the town of Refisca , where I was friendly used and well entertained Refisca . of the alcaid , and especially of a young nobleman called Conde Amar Pattay , who presented me with and ox for my company , goats and some young kids , assuring me that the king would be glad to hear of the arrival of a Christians ship , whom they called Blancos , that is , [ II ii . 190. ] white men : especially of and English ship . And so daily the young Cond came with a small company of horsemen to the sea side , feasting me very kindly and courteously . 
 And the fift of December he with his train came aboard to see the ship ; which to them seemed wondered , as people that seidome had seen the like : who told me that his messenger from the king was returned ; and the king rejoiced much to hear that English men were come with a ship to trade in his ports ; and being the first Englishman that ever came with a ship , I was the better welcome ; promising that I or any Englishman hereafter should be well entreated & find good dealing at their hands . And further the Cond on the kings behalf and his own , earnestly requested , that before my departure off the coast I would return again to his road to confer with him for the better continuance and confirming of amity between them and Englishmen : which I agreed unto . And so showing him and his company the best friendship and courtesy I could , he went on shore , and should have had the honour of our 93 
 ordinance but that he desired the contrary , being amazed at the sighed of the ship and noise of the guns , which they did greatly admire . 
 The 13 of December at night we weighed anchor , and Port » Dally , arrived the 14 day at the road of Porto d’Ally , which is another kingdom : the king thereof is called Amar Meleck , & son to Meleck Zamba the other king , and dwells a days journey and and half from Porto d’Ally . When we had anchored , the kings kinsmen being governors , with all the officers of that town came aboard to receive all duties for the ship & licence to traffic due to the king ; who there generally seemed to be very glad that no Portugall was come in our ship out of England ; saying it was the kings pleasure we should bring none hereafter ; for that the king did esteem them as people of no truth ; and complained of one Francisco de Costa servant to DONE Antonio , how he had often and the last year also abused and deluded their king Amar Meleck in promising to bring him certain things out of England , which he never performed , and deemed that to be the cause of his staying behind this voyage , and that neither Spaniard nor Portugall could abide us , but reported very badly and gave out hard speeches tending to the defamation & great dishonour of England : and also affirmed that at the arrival of and English ship called The Comanda The Command , of Richard Kelley of Dartmouth , one ^rd^Kd^ ' Pedro Gonsalves a Portugall that came in the said ship The monstrous fr°m DONE Antonio reported unto them , that we were lies of a Por - fled out of England and come away upon intent to rob tugall . and do great spoil upon this coast to the Negroes and Portugals , and that Thomas Dassel had murdered Francisco de Acosta since our coming from England , who was coming to their king in our ship with great presents from DONE Antonio , and desired that at our arrival stay might be made of our goods and our selves in secret manner ; which they denied , not giving credit to his report , having be often abused by such frivolous and slanderous speeches by that nation ; telling me their 
 king was sorry for the former murder and captivity of our nation , and would never yield to the like , having the Portugals and Spaniards in generail hatred ever since , and conceiveth much better of our country , and us , then these our enemies report of . For which I yielded them hearty thanks , assuring them they should find great difference between the loyalty of the one and disloyalty of the other : and so paid their duties : and for that Port Dally the it was the chief place of trade , I showed them howed was resolved to go to their king with certain presents ’ which we had brought out of England ; which we determined for the more honour and credit of our country , and augmenting of their better affection towards us . 
 All this while Thomas Dassel was with our great pinnace at the town of Joala , being in the kingdom of Joala . king Jocoel Lamiockeric , trafficking with the Spaniards & Portugals there . And the forenamed Pedro Gonsalves , which came out of England , was there also with other English merchants about the business of Rich. Kelley ; and as it should seem , for that he could not obtain his mischievous pretended purpose against Thomas Dassel and others at the town of Porto d’Ally , where I Richard Rainolds remained , he attempted with consent of other Portugals which were made privy to his intent to betray the said Thomas Dassel at this town , & had with bribes seduced the chief commanders and Negroes to effect his wicked & most villainous practice : which as God would , was revealed to the said Thomas Dassel by Rich. Cape and Englishman and servant to the forenamed Rich. Kelley ; to whom this said Pedro Gonsalves had disclosed his secret treachery , willing him with all expedition to stand upon his guard . Whereupon Thomas Dassel went aboard a small English bark called The Cherubin The Cherubin of Lime , and there one John Payva a Portugall and at servant of DONE Antonio declared , that if he & one Garcia ' a Portugall of the said town would have consented with Pedro Gonsalves , the said Thomas Dassel had be betrayed long before . And upon this warning Thomas 
 Dassel the next day having got three Portugals aboard , advised for our better securities to send two on land , & detained one with him called Villa nova , telling them that if the next day by eight of the clock , they would bring Pedro Gonsalves aboard to him , he would release the said Villam nova , which they did not . And Thomas Dassel having intelligence that certain Negroes and Portugals were ridden post overland to Porto d’AIly with intent to have Richard Rainolds and his company stayed on land , being doubtful what friendship soever the unconstant Negroes professed ( by reason they be often wavering being overcome with drinking wine ) how they would deal , to prevent the dangerous wiles that might be effected in the road by Portugals , and for better strength , the 24 of December he came with his pinnace & Portugall to ride in the road of Porto d’Ally , where our great ship the Nightingale was : who was no sooner arrived but he had news also from the shore from John Baily Anthony Dassels servant , who was there with our goods detained by the Portugals means , that above 20 Portugals and Spaniards were come from Joala by land , and Pedro Gonsalves in their company , to take order for the releasing of Villa nova . So having had conference two or three days with the Commanders , the Negroes , some Spaniards , and some Portugals , in the end by due examination of the matter the Negroes seeing how vilely Pedro Gonsalves had dealt , he being in their power , said he should suffer death or be tortured , for and example to others . But we in recompense of his cruelty pitied him and showed mercy , desiring the Negroes to entreat him well though undeserved : and thereupon the Commanders brought him aboard the pinnace to Thomas Dassel to do with him what he would : where at his coming from the shore , for lavish speeches which he used of Princes , he was well buffeted by a Spaniard , and might have be slain , if for our sakes he had not be rescued . 
 While I went on shore with Villa nova , the said Pedro Gonsalves confessed unto Thomas Dassel that he did 96 
 inquire of some Negroes and Portugals if he might not stay him and his goods in the land , and that he did nothing but by commission from his king by his letters which he received from London in Dartmouth after we were departed from London , for that we presumed to come to Guinea to traffic without a servant of his : and further , that he had power or procuration from Francisco de Costa the Portugall that stayed behind in England to detain the goods of Anthony Dassel in Guinea . 
 By consent of M. Francis Tucker , John Browbeare , and the rest of the factors of Richard Kelley , with whom this Pedro Gonsalves came , for avoiding further mischief that might be practised , we agreed that the said Pedro Gonsalves should stay aboard our ship , and not go any more on land until they departed . So the ninth of January he was delivered aboard to go for England in the same ship wherein he came : who was all the time of his abided in our ship both courteously and friendly used at my hands , much against the mariners wills , who could not abide such a wicked creature and caitiff , that is nourished and relieved in our country , and yet by villainous means sought the destruction of us all . 
 The Spaniards and Portugals though they be dissemblers and not to be trusted , when they perceived how king Amar Melicks Negroes befriended and favoured us , and that it would be prejudicial ! to their trade for diverse respects , if we should any way be injuried , renounced the said practises , detesting the author , and protested to defend us in such cases with all faithfulness : desiring we would , as the king of Negros had commanded us , never bring Portugal with us more : using this phrase in disdain of such as came out of England , let your Portugals be bars of iron : for in truth in regard of the rich trade maintained by Frenchmen and by us of late , they esteem more of one bar of iron then of twenty Portugals which we should bring out of England : who at their coming thither very subtly disadvantage us , and do great hurt to every party . 
 vn 97 g 
 [ II ii . 192. ] San Domingo . Rio grande . Note this trade . 
 At the beginning of these broils the king Amar Melick had sent his chief secretary and three horses for me Richard Rainolds : but I denied to go by reason of the hurley burley , though I might have had Negroes of account for pledges aboard : yet we sent the presents unto the king ; who so soon as he understood the cause why I came not to him , being sorry and offended thereat , commanded presently by proclamation , that no injury should be offered us in his dominions by his own people , or suffered to be done by Spaniards or Portugals . And if the Negroes joining to his kingdom should confederate with the Spaniards and Portugals to molest or trouble us ; that his subject's the Negroes should be ready to aid , succour and defend us . In which people appeared more confident love and goodwill towards us , then ever we shall find either of Spaniards or Portugals , though we should relieve them of the greatest misery that can be imagined . 
 In the river of Senega no Spaniard or Portugall use to trade : and only one Portugall called Ganigoga dwells far within the river , who was married to a kings daughter . 
 In the towns of Porto d’Ally and Joala , being towns of chiefest trade , and in the towns of Canton and Cassan in the river of Gambra are many Spaniards and Portugals resident by permission of the Negroes ; who have rich trades there along the coast , especially to San Domingo and Rio grande , not far distant from Gambra river ; whither they transport the iron which they buy of Frenchmen and us , and exchange it for Negroes ; which be carried continually to the West Indies in such ships as came from Spaine . Also by the governors order and Renters of Castle de Mina and other places , where gold is , upon the coast of Guinea , they have a place limited how far they must go to trade within the river of Gambra ; and further they may not go upon pain of confiscation of their goods , and loss of life : for that the Renters themselves send at certain times their own 
 ■ 98 
 ' 594-barks within the river to such places , where as they have great store of gold . And in all these places hereabout , mb tr^e 
 where we use to trade , they have no Fort , Castle , or ™ place of strength , but only trading by the Negroes safe - ' 
 conduct and permission . And the most part of the Spaniards and Portugals that be resident in these places be banished men or fugitives , for committing most heinous crimes and incestuous acts , their life & conversation being agreeable ; and they are of the basest behaviour that we have ever seen of these nations in any other country . 
 . 