The valiant fight performed by 10. Merchant's ships of London , against 12. Spanish galleys in the Straights of Gibraltar , the 24. of April 1590. 
 TO is not long since sundry valiant ships appertaining to the Merchants of London , were freighted & rigged forth , some for Venice , some for Constantinople , & some to sundry other places of traffic , among whom these ensuing met within the Straights of Gibraltar , as they were 
 taking their course homeward , having before escaped all other danger . The first whereof was the Salomon aPPERTAINING to M. Aiderman Barnam of London , and M. Bound , and M. Twyd of Harwich ; which went forth the first day of February last . The second was the Margaret and John belonging to M. Wats of London : The thirde was the Minion : The fourth was the Ascension . The fifth was the Centurion of Master Cordal : The sixt the Violet : the seventh the Samuel : the eight the Crescent : the ninth the Elizabeth : and the 10. was the Richard belonging to M. Duffield . All these ships being of notable and approved service , coming near to the mouth of the Straights hard by the coast of Barbary , descried twelve tall Galleys bravely furnished and strongly provided with men and munition , ready to seize upon these English ships : which being perceived by the Captains and Master's thereof , we made speedy preparation for the defence of our selves , 31 
 [ II ii . 167. ] 
 February 
 I59° - 
 still waiting all the night long for the approaching of the enemy . In the morning early being the Tuesday in Easter week , and the 24 of April 1590. according to our usual customs , we said Service and made our prayers unto Almighty God , beseeching him to save us from the hands of such tyrants as the Spaniards , whom we justly imagined to be , and whom we knew and had found to be our most mortali enemies upon the Sea. And having finished our prayers , and set our selves in a readi ness , we perceived them to come towards us , and that they were indeed the Spanish Galleys that lay under the conduct of Andre Doria , who is Viceroy for the King of Spaine in the Straights of Gibraltar , and a notable known enemy to all Englishmen . So when they came somewhat nearer unto us , they waved us a main for the King of Spaine , and we waved them a main for the Queen of England , at which time it pleased Almighty God greatly to encourage us all in such sort , as that the nearer they came the less we feared their great multitudes and huge number of men , which were planted in those Galleys to the number of two or three hundred men in each Galley . And it was thus concluded among us , that the foure first and tallest ships should be placed hindmost , and the weaker & smallest ships foremost , and so it was performed , every man being ready to take part of such success as it should please God to send . 
 At the first encounter the Galleys came upon us very fiercely , yet God so strengthened us , that if they had . bene ten times more , we had not feared them at all . Whereupon the Salomon being a hight ship , and having sundry cast pieces in her , gave the first shot in such a sour sort , as that it shared away so many men as sat on the one side of a Galley , and pierced her through in such manner , as that she was ready to sink , which made them to assault us the more fiercely . Whereupon the rest of our ships , especially the foure chiefest , namely , the Margaret and John , the Minion , and the Ascension 
 followed , and gave a hight charge upon them , and they at us , where began a hight and fierce battle with great valiancy the one against the other , and so continued for A figjit if sixe the space of sixe hours . About the beginning of this tu > ures our fight there came two Flemings to our Fleet , who seeing the force of the Galleys to be so great , the one of them presently yielded , struck his sails , and was taken by the Galleys , whereas if they would have offered them - p^^ selves to have fought in our behalf and their own defence , they needed not to have be taken so cowardly as they were to their cost . The other Fleming being also ready to perform the like piece of service began to veil his sails , and intended to have yielded immediately . 
 But the Trumpeter in that ship plucked forth his falchion and stepped to the Pilot at the helm , and vowed that if he did not speedily put ofF to the English Fleet , and so take part with them , he would presently kill him : which the Pilot for fear of death did , and so by that means they were defended from present death , and from the tyrannic of those Spaniards , which doubtless they should have found at their hands . 
 Thus we continued in fight sixe hours and somewhat more , wherein God gave us the upper hand , and we escaped the hands of so many enemies , who were constrained to fly into harbour and shroud themselves from us , and with speed to seek for their own safety . This was the handy work of God , who defended us all from danger in such sort , as that there was not one man of us slain . And in all this fierce assault made upon us by the Spanish power , we sustained no hurt or damage at all more then this , that the shrouds and backestay of the Salomon , who gave the first and last shot , and galled the enemy shrewdly all the time of the battle , were clean stricken off 
 The battle being ceased , we were constrained for want of wind to stay and waft up and down , and then went back again to Tition in Barbary , which is sixe leagues off from Gibraltar , and when we came thither we found vn 33 c 
 the people wondrous favourable to us , who being but Moors and heathen people showed us where to have fresh water and all other necessaries for us . And there we had such good entertainment , as if we had be in any place of England . 
 The governor was one that favoured us greatly , whom we in respect of his great friendship presented with gifts and such commodities as we had in our custody , which he wonderfully well accepted of : and here we stayed foure days . 
 After the battle was ceased , which was on Easter Tuesday , we stayed for want of wind before Gibraltar , until the next morning , where we were becalmed , and [ II ii . 168. ] therefore looked every hour when they would have sent forth some fresh supply against us , but they were far unable to do it , for all their Galleys were so soar battered , that they durst not come forth of the harbour , by reason of our hight resistance which they so lately before had received . Yet were they greatly urged thereunto by the Governor of the said Town of Gibraltar . 
 At our being at Tition in Barbary , there we herd report of the hurt that we had done to the Galleys , for at our coming from them we could not well discern any thing at all by reason of the smoke which the powder had made : there we herd that we had almost spoiled those twelve Galleys by shooting them clean through , that two of them were ready to sink , and that we had slain of their men such great abundance , as that they were not able to furnish forth any more Galleys at all for that year . 
 Thus after we came from Tition , we assayed to depart the Straight three several times , but could not pass , yet , God be thanked , the fourth time we came safely away , and so sailed with a pleasant wind until we came upon the coast of England , which was in the beginning of the month of July 1590. 
 . 