A report of Master Robert Flicke directed to Master Thomas Bromley , Master Richard Staper , and Master Cordall concerning the success of a part of the London supplies sent to my Lord Thomas Howard to the Isles of the Azores , 1591. 
 Orshipfull , my hearty commendations unto you premised : By my last of the twelfth of August from this place I advertised you particularly of the accidents of our Fleet until then . It remaineth now to relate our endeavours in accomplishing the order received for the joining with my 
 Lord Thomas Howard , together with the success we have had . Our departure from hence was the seventeenth of August , the wind not serving before . The next day following I caused a Flag of Counsel to be put forth , whereupon the Captains and Master's of every ship 
 came aboard , and 1 acquainted them with my Commission , firmed by the Right honourable the Lords of her Majesties Counsel , and with all the advertisements of Sir Edward Denny , of my Lords determination to remain threescore leagues to the West of Fayal , spreading North and South betwixt thirtie seven and a half or thirty eight and a half degrees . And not finding him in this height to repair to the Isles of Flores and Corvo , where a Pinnace of purpose should stay our coming until the last of August , with intent after that day to repair to you coast of Spaine , about the heighth of The Rock , some twentie or thirtie leagues off the shore . The which being advisedly considered of , having regard unto the shortness of time , by reason of our long abided in this place , and the uncertainty of the weather to favour us , it was generally held for the best and securest way to meet with my Lord , to bear with the heighth of The Rock , without making any stay upon the coast , and so 
 directly for the Islands which was accordingly fully agreed and performed . The 28 day we had sighed of the Burlings , and the 29 being thwart of Peniche , the wind Serving us , without any stay we directed our course West for the Islands . The 30 day we met with Captain Royden in the Red-Rose , sometime called the Golden Dragon , separated from my Lord of Cumberland in a storm : who certified us of 50 sails of the Spanish kings Armadas to be gone for the Hands , but could not inform us any news of my Lord Thomas Howard , otherwise then upon presumption to remain about the Islands , and so we continued our course the wind standing with us . 
 The 4 of September we recovered Tercera , and ranged along all the Islands , both on the South and North sides the space of foure days : during which time it was not our hap to meet with any shipping , whereby either to understand of my Lord , or of the Indian Fleet : hereupon we directed our course to the West from Fayal , according to the instructions of Sit* Edward Denny . The 11 day in the plying to the Westwards we descried a sail out of our main top , and in the afternoon between two and three of the clock having raised her hull , the weather became calm , so that the ship could not fetch her . I sent off " my Skiff thoroughly manned , furnished with shot and swords , The Cherubin , and the Margaret and John doing the like . Upon this the sail stood ofF again , and the night approaching , our boats lost her and so returned . In this our pursuit after the sail the Centurion being left a stern , the next morning we missed her , and spent that day in plying up and down seeking her . And for as much as every of the ships had received order , that , if by extremity of weather or any other mischance they should be severed from our Fleet , they should meet and join at Flores , we , according to the instructions of Sir Edward Denny , proceeded to the finding of my Lord Thomas Howard , being in the heighth appointed and not able to hold the same by reason of 
 extreme tempests which forced us to the Isles of Flores and Corvo , which we made the 14 day in the morning , and there also joined again with the Centurion , whose company before we had lost : who declared unto us that the 12 day , being the same day they lost us , they met with five and forty sails of the Indian Fleet . The same night upon these news we came to and anchor between Flores and Corvo , and the morrow following at the break of day , a flag of Counsel being put out , the Captains & Master's came aboard me : where , for the desire to understand some tidings of my Lord , as also the supplying of our want of water , it was thought good to send our boats furnished on shore , under the conduct of Captain Brothus , and then it was also ordered after our departure thence to range along the Southsides of the Islands to the end we might either understand of my Lord , or else light on the Indian fleet ; and in the missing of our purpose to direct our course for Cape Sant Vincente . 
 The boats , according to the foresaid determination , being sent on shore , it chanced that The Costly riding uttermost in the road , did weigh to bring her self more near among us for the succour of the boats sent off , and in opening the land discovered two sails , which we in the road could not perceive : whereupon she gave us a warning piece , which caused us to wave off our boats back , and before they could recover our ships , the descried ships appeared unto us , towards the which we made with all haste , and in a very happy hour , as it pleased God . In that we had not so soon cleared the land , and spoken with one of them , which was a Bark of Bristoll , who had also sought my Lord in the heigts appointed and could not find him , but a violent storm arose , in such manner , as if we had remained in the road , we had been in danger of perishing : and the same extremely continued during the space of threescore hours . In which storm I was separated from our Fleet , except the Cherubin and the Costly , which kept 58 
 company with me . And so sailing among the Hands , I viewed the road of Fayal , and finding no Readers there , went directly for the Isle Tercera . 
 The nineteenth day in the morning coming unto you same with intent to edge into the Road , a tempest arose and scanted the wind , that we could not seize it : from the which being driven we fell among certain of the Indian Fleet , which the said storm dispersed , and put them from the road : whereupon my self with the other two ships in company gave several ! chases , and thereby lost the company each of other . 
 In following our chase above noon we made her to Portugall strike and yield , being a Portugal ! , laden with hides , Prize taken ' salsa-perilla and Anile . At this very instant we espied another , and taking our Prize with us followed her , and somewhat before night obtained her , nam the Conception , Francisco Spinola being Captain , which was ric^ Westladen with hides , Cochonillio , and certain raw silk . InfM Prize And for that the seas were so grown , as neither with ‘ boat nor ship they were to be boarded , we kept them till fit opportunity . The same night a little before day there happened another into our company , supposing us by our two prizes to be of their Fleet , which we until the morning dissembled . 
 The 20 day in the morning , the sail being shot somewhat a head of us , having a speciali care for the safe keeping of the two former , we purposed to cause our Prizes to put out more sail thereby to keep them near in giving chase to the other : unto the which the Master would not harken nor be persuaded , but that they would follow us : by the which his wilfulness by such time as we had caused the other to yield , and sent men aboard , the Conception , Francisco Spinola Captain being brought a stern , and having got the wind of us , stood ofF with all her sails bearing , so as we were forced to make a new chase of her : and had not the wind enlarged upon us we had lost her . In the pursuit before we recovered her and brought our selves again in company of our 
 other Prizes , the whole day was spent , and by this means we lost the opportunity of that day , the weather fitly serving to board the Portugall Prize , which was in great distress , and made request to take them being ready to sink , and , as we well perceived , they ceased not to pump day and night : the which ship to all our judgements the same night perished in the sea . 
 The one and twentie day the Conception , whereof Francisco Spinola was Captain , being also in a leak , and the same still increasing notwithstanding the continual pumping , in such sort as not to be kept along above water , I took and discharged out of her two and forty chests of Cochonillio and silks , and so left her with 11 foot water in hold , and her furniture and 4700 hides , unto the seas . 
 The other Prize which we have brought into the harbour is nam Nostra Sennora de los remedios , whereof Francisco Alvares is Captain , laden with 16 chests of Cochonillio , certain farthels of raw silk , and about 4000 hides . Upon the discharge of the goods your worships shall be particularly advertised thereof . 
 In the boarding of the Prizes the disorder of the company was such , as that they letted not presently beside the rifling of the Spaniards to break open the chests and to purloin such money as was in them : notwithstanding that it was ordered at convenient leisure to have gone aboard my self , and there in the presence of three or foure witnesses to have taken a just account thereof , and the same to have put in safe keeping , according to the effects of articles received in this behalf . 
 And whereas there were also certain sums of money [ II ii . 178. ] taken from the company which they had thus purloined and embeseled , and the same with some other parcels brought aboard my ship , amounting unto 2129 pezoes & a half , the company as pillage due unto them demanded to have the same shared , which I refused , & openly at the main mast read the articles firmed by my Lord Treasurer and my lord Admiral , whereby we 
 ought to be directed , and that it was not in me any way to dispose thereof until the same were finally determined at home . Hereupon they mutined and at last grew into such fury , as that they would have it or else break down the cabbine , which they were also ready to put in practice , whereby I was forced to yield , lest the Spaniards which we had aboard being many perceiving the same , might have had fit opportunity to rise against us , which , after their brawls were appeased , they sought to have put in execution . 
 By the last advice from Castile the general of the kings Armada which is lately come to sea hath received commandment to join his Fleet with those of the Indies , and for to stay altogether at Tercera until the 15 of October : for that 6 pataches with 7 or 8 millions of the kings treasure will come by that time , or else they stay their coming from Havana until January next , or the kings further pleasure therein to be known . These Pataches are said to be of 300 tons the piece , and to carry 30 pieces of brass , and also of sail reported to have the advantage of any shipping . 
 There perished of the Indies Fleet sunk in the sea before their coming to Flores 11 sails , whereof the General was one , and not one man saved . And it is by the Spaniards themselves presupposed that the storms which we had at Flores & at Tercera have devoured many more of them , whereof in part we were eye witnesses . And so what by the seas and our men of war I presume that of 75 sails that came from Havana , half of them will never arrive in Spaine . 
 The 11 day of October at night we came to anchor in the found of Plimouth , and the next morning with our Prize came into Cattewater : for which God be thanked : for that a vehement storm arose , and with such fury increased , as that the Prize was forced to cut over her main mast : otherwise with the violence of the storm , her ground tackle being bad , she had driven on shore : which was the most cause that moved me to put in here ; 
 intending now here to discharge the goods without further adventure , and have certified thus much unto my Lord Admiral , and therewith also desired to understand the direction of the Lords of the Counsel together with yours , insomuch as my Lord Thomas Howard is not returned . How the rest of our consorts which were separated from us by weather have sped , or what Prizes they have taken , whereof there is much hope by reason of the scattering of the West Indian Fleet , as yet we are able to say nothing . And thus expecting your answer , and for all other matters referring me unto the bearer Captain Furtho , I end . Plymouth the 24 of October . 1591. 
 Your worships loving friend 
 Robert Flicke . 
 . 