The valiant fight performed in the Straight of Gibraltar , by the Centurion of London , against five Spanish Galleys , in the month of April 159I - 
 N the month of November 1590 , there were sundry ships appertaining to several Merchants of London , which were rigged and fraught forth with merchandise , for sundry places within the Straight of Gibraltar : who , together having wind and weather , which ofttime fell out very uncertain , arrived safely in short space , at such places as they desired . Among whom was the Centurion of London , a very tall ship of burden , yet but weakly manned , as appears by this discourse following . 
 This aforesaid ship called The Centurion safely arrived at Marseils , where after they had delivered their goods , they stayed about the space of five weeks , and better , and then took in lading , intending to return to England . 
 Now when the Centurion was ready to come away from Marseils , there were sundry other ships of smaller burden which entreated the Master thereof , ( whose name is Robert Bradshaw , dwelling at Limehouse ) to stay a day or two for them , until they were in a readiness to depart with them , thereby persuading them , that it would be far better for them to stay and go together in respect of their assistance , then to depart of themselves without company , and so happily for want of aid fallen into the hands of their enemies in the Spanish Galleys . Upon which reasonable persuasion , notwithstanding that this ship was of such sufficiende as they might hazard her in the clanger of the Sea , yet they stayed for those little ships , according to their request , who together did put to Sea from Marseils , and vowed in generail not to 35 
 fly one from another , if they should happen to meet with any Spanish Galleys . 
 These small ships , accompanied with the Centurion , sailing along the coast of Spaine , were upon Easter day in the Straight of Gibraltar suddenly becalmed , where immediately they saw sundry Galleys make towards them , in very valiant and courageous sort : the chief Leaders and soldiers in those Galleys bravely appareled in silk coats , with their silver whistles about their necks , and great plumes of feathers in their hats , who with their Calivers shot at the Centurion so fast as they might : so that by 10. of the clock and somewhat before , they had boarded the Centurion , who before their coming had prepared for them , and intended to give them so sour a welcome as they might . And thereupon having prepared their close fights , and all things in a readiness , they called upon God , on whom only they trusted : and having made their prayers , and cheered up one another to fight so long as life endured , they began to discharge their great Ordinance upon the Galleys , but the little ships durst not come forward , but lay aloof , while five Galleys had boarded them , yea and with their grappling irons made their Galleys fast to the said ship called the Centurion . 
 The Galleys were grappled to the Centurion in this manner , two lay on one side , and two on another , and the Admiral lay full in the stern , which galled and battered the Centurion so soar , that her main Mast was greatly weakened , her sails filled with many holes , and the Mizzen and stern made almost unserviceable . 
 During which time there was a soar and deadly fight on both sides , in which the Trumpet of the Centurion sounded forth the deadly points of war , and encouraged them to fight manfully against their adversaries : on the contrary part , there was no warlike Music in the [ II ii . 169. J Spanish Galleys , but only their whistles of silver , which they sounded forth to their own contentment : in which fight many a Spaniard was turned into the Sea , and they 36 
 in multitudes came crawling and hung upon the side of the ship , intending to have entered into the same , but such was the courage of the Englishmen , that so fast as the Spaniards did come to enter , they gave them such entertainment , that some of them were glad to tumble alive into the Sea , being remediless for ever to get up alive . In the Centurion there were in all , of men and boys , fourtie and eight , who together fought most valiantly , and so galled the enemy , that many a brave and lusty Spaniard lost his life in that place . 
 The Centurion was fired five several ! times , with wild fire and other provision , which the Spaniards threw in for that purpose : yet , God be thanked , by the great and diligent foresight of the Master it did not harm at all . 
 In every of the Galleys there were about 200. soldiers : who together with the shot , spoiled , rend , and battered the Centurion very soar , shot through her main Mast , and slew 4. of the men in the said ship , the one of them being the Master's ' mate . 
 Ten other persons were hurt , by means of splinters which the Spaniards shot : yea , in the end when their provision was almost spent , they were constrained to shoot at them hammers , and the chains from their slaves , and yet God be thanked , they received no more damage : but by spoiling and overwearying of the Spaniards , the Englishmen constrained them to ungrapple themselves , and get them going : and sure if there had be any other fresh ship or succour to have relieved and assisted the Centurion , they had slain , sunk , or taken all those Galleys and their Soldiers . 
 The Dolphin lay a loof off and durst not come near , while the other two small ships fled away , so that one of the Galleys went from the Centurion and set upon the Dolphin , which ship immediately was set on fire with their own powder , whereby both men and ship perished : but whither it was with their good wills or no , that was not known unto the Cen - 
 turion , but sure , if it had come forward , and be and aid unto the Centurion , it is to be supposed that it had not perished . 
 Five hours and a half this fight continued , in which time both were glad to depart only to breath themselves , but when the Spaniards were gone , they never durst return to fight : yet the next day sixe other Galleys came and looked at them , but durst not at any hand meddle with them . 
 Thus God delivered them from the hands of their enemies , and gave them the victory : for which they heartily praised him , and not long after safely arrived in London . 
 There were present at this fight Master John Hawes Merchant , and sundry other of good account . 
 . 