A particular note of the Indian fleet , expected to have come into Spaine this present year of 1591. with the number of ships that are perished of the same : according to the examination of certain Spaniards lately taken and brought into England by the ships of London . 
 He fleet of Nova Hispania , at their first gathering together and setting forth , were two and fiftie sails . The Admiral ! was of sixe hundred tons , and the Vice Admiral ! of the same burden . Foure or five of the ships were of nine hundred and 1000 tons a piece , 
 some five hundred , and some foure hundred and the least of two hundred tons . Of this fleet 19 were cast away , and in them 2600 men by estimation , which was done along the coast of Nova Hispania , so that of the same fleet there came to the Havana but 33 sails . 
 The fleet of Terra Firma were , at their first departure from Spaine , fiftie sails , which were bound for Number de Dios , where they did discharge their lading , and thence returned to Cartagena , for their healths sake , until ! the time the treasure was ready they should take in , at the said Number de Dios. But before this fleet departed , some were gone by one or two at a time , so that only 23 sails of this fleet arrived in the Havana . 
 i 33 sails of Nova Hispania . 
 At the Havana ! 23 sails of Terra Firma . 
 there met 
 12 sails of San Domingo . 
 9 sails of the Hunduras . 
 The whole 77 ships , joined and set sails all together at the Havana , the 17 of July , according to our account , and kept together until they came into the height of thirtie five degrees , which was about the tenth 54 
 of August , where they found the wind at Southwest changed suddenly to the North , so that the sea coming out of the Southwest , and the wind very violent at North , they were put all into great extremity , and then first lost the general of their fleet , with 500 men in her ; and within three or foure days after , and other storm rising , there were five or sixe other of the biggest ships cast away with all their men , together with their Vice-Admirall . 
 And in the height of 38. degrees , about the end of August , grew another great storm , in which all the fleet saving 48. sails were cast away : which 48. sails kept together , until they came in sighed of the Islands of Corvo and Flores , about the fift or sixt of September , at which time a great storm separated them : of which number fifteene or sixeteene were after seen by these Spanyards to ride at anchor under the Tercera ; and twelve or foureteene more to bear with the Island of S. Michael ; what became of them after that these Spaniards were taken cannot yet be certified ; their opinion is , that very few of the fleet are escaped , but are either drowned or taken . And it is otherways of late certified , that of this whole fleet that should have come into Spaine this year , being one hundred twentie [ H. ii . 1764 and three sail , there are arrived as yet but five and twentie . This note was taken out of the examination of certain Spaniardes , that were brought into England by sixe of the ships of London , which took seven of the above nam Indian Fleet , near the Islands of Azores . 
 . 