The firing and sinking of the stout and warlike Carrack called Las Cinque Llaguas , or , The five Wounds , by three tall Ships set forth at the charges of the right honourable the Earl of Cumberland and his friends : Written by the discreet and valiant captain M. Nicholas Downton . 
 Beside these 3 ships there was a pinnace called the Violet , or the Why not I . . 
 N the latter end of the year i£93 - the right honourable Earl of Cumberland , at his own charges and his friends , prepared 3 ships all at equal rate , and either of them had like quantity of victuals , and like numbers of men , there being embarked in all 3 ships 420 men 
 of all sorts . The Royal Exchange went as Admiral , wherein M. George Cave was captain . The May-flower Viceadmiral under the conduct of William Anthonie : and the Sampson , the charge whereof it pleased his honour to commit unto me Nicholas Dounton . Our directions were sent us to Plimmouth , and we were to open them at sea . 
 The sixt of Aprill 1594 we set sail in the found of Plimmouth , directing our course towards the coast of Spaine . 
 The 24 of the said month at the Admirals direction we divided our selves East and West from each other , being then in the heighth of 43 degrees , with commandment at night to come together again . 
 118 
 THE FIRING OF ‘ THE FIVE WOUNDS ’ a.d. 
 The 27 day in the morning we descried the Mayflower and the little Pinnace with a Prize that they had taken , being of Viana in Portugall , and bound for Angola in Africa . This Bark was of 28 tons , having some 17 persons in the same . There were in her some 12 Commodities Buts of Galicia wine , whereof we took into every ship fi* fir Angola . a like part , with some Ruske in chests and barrels , with 5 buts of blue course cloth , and certain course linen-cloth for Negroes shirts , which goods were divided among our fleet . 
 The 4 of May we had sighed of our Pinnace , and the Admirals Shallop which had taken three Portugall Caravels , whereof they had sent two away and kept the third . 
 The second of June we had sighed of S. Michael . The third day in the morning we sent our small pinnace , which was of some 24 tons , with the small Caravel which we had taken at the Burlings to range the road of all the Hands , to see if they could get any thing in the same : appointing them to meet usW . S.W . 12 leagues from Faiall . Their going from us was to no purpose . They missed coming to us when we appointed , as also we missed them , when we had great cause to have used them . 
 The 13 of June we met with a mighty Carrack of the East Indies , called Las cinque Llagas , or The five wounds . The May-flower was in fight with her before night . I , in the Sampson , fetched her up in the evening , and as I commanded to give her the broad side , as we term it , while I stood very heedfully prying to discover her strength : and where I might give counsel to board her in the night when the Admiral came up to us , and as I remember at the very first shot she discharged at us , I was shot in a little above the belly , whereby I was made unserviceable for a good while after , without touching any other for that night . Yet by means of and honest truehearted man which I had with me , one captain Grant , nothing was neglected : until midnight when 
 119 
 the Admiral came up , the May-flower , and the Sampson never left by turns to ply her with their great ordinance ; but then captai ne Cave wished us to stay till morning , at what time each one of us should give her three bouts with our great ordinance , & so should clap her a board : but indeed it was long lingered in the morning until io of the clock before we attempted to board her . The Admiral laid her a board in the mid ship : the May-flower coming up in the quarter , as it should seem , to lie at the stern of the Admiral on the larboard side . The captain of the said May-flower was slain at the first coming up : whereby the ship fell to [ II ii . 200. ] the stern of the out-licar of the Carrack , which ( being a piece of timber ) so wounded her foresail , that they said they could come no more to fight , I am sure they did not , but kept aloof from us . The Sampson went aboard on the bow , but having not room enough , our quarter lay on the Exchanges bow , and our bow on the Carracks bow . The Exchange also at the first coming had her captain M. Cave shot into both the legs , the one whereof he never recovered , so he for that present was not able to do his office , and in his absence he had not any that would undertake to led out his company to enter upon the enemy . My friend captain Grant did led my men on the Carracks side , which being not manfully backed by the Exchanges men , his forces being small , made the enemy bolder then he would have be , whereby I had sixe men presently slain and many more hurt , which made them that remained unhurt to return aboard , and would never more give the assault . I say not but some of the Exchanges men did very well , and many more ( no doubt ) would have done the like , if there had be any principali man to have put them forward , and to have brought all the company to the fight , and not to have run into corners themselves . But 1 must needs say , that their ship was as well provided for defence , as any that I have seen . And the Portugals peradventure encouraged by our slack working , played 
 120 
 the men and had Barricados made , where they might stand without any danger of our shot . They plied us also very much with fire , so that most of our men were burned in some place or other : & while our men were putting out of the fire , they would ever be plying them with small shot or darts . This unusual casting of fire did much dismay many of our men and made them draw back as they did . When we had not men to enter , we plied our great ordinance much at them as high up as they might be mounted , for otherwise we did them little harm , and by shooting a piece out of our forecastle being close by her , we fired a mat on her beakhead , which more and more kindled , and ran from thence to the mat on the bowsprit , and from the mat up to the wood of the bowsprit , and thence to the topsail yard , which fire made the Portugals abaft in the ship to stagger , and to make show of parley . But they that had the charge before encouraged them , making show , that it might easily be put out , and that it was nothing . Whereupon again they stood stiffly to their defence . Anone the fire grew so strong , that I saw it beyond all help , although she had be already yielded to us . Then we desired to be off from her , but had little hope to obtain our desire ; nevertheless we plied water very much to keep our ship well . In deed I made little other reckoning for the ship , my self , and diverse hurt men , then to have ended there with the Carrack , but most of our people might have saved themselves in boats . And when my care was most , by Gods providence only , by the burning asunder of our spritsail-yard with ropes and sail , and the ropes about the spritsail-yard of the Carrack , whereby we were fast entangled , we fell apart , with burning of some of our sails which we had then on board . The Exchange also being farther from the fire , afterwards was more easily cleared , and fell off from abaft . And as soon as God had put us out of danger , the fire god into the forecastle , where , I think , was store of Benjamin , and such other like combustible matter , for 
 121 
 it flamed and ran over all the Carrack at and instant in a manner . The Portugal s leapt overboard in great numbers . Then sent I captain Grant with the boat , with leave to use his own discretion in saving of them . So he brought me aboard two gentlemen , the one an*old man called Nuno Velio Pereira , which ( as appears by the 4 chapter in the first book of the worthy history of Huighen de Linschoten ) was governor of Mozambique and Cefala , in the year 1582. and since that time had be likewise a governor in a place of importance in the East Indies . And the ship wherein he was coming home was cast away a little to the East of the Cape of Buona Speranza , and from thence he traveled overland to Mozambique , and came as a passenger in this Carrack . The other was called Brass Carrero , and was captain of a Carrack which was cast away near Mozambique , and came likewise in this ship for a passenger . Also three men of the inferior sort we saved in our boat , only these two we clothed and brought into England . The rest which were taken up by the other ship boats , we set all on shore in the He of Flores , except some two or three Negroes , whereof one was born in Mozambique , and another in the East Indies . This fight was open ofF the Found between Faial and Pico 6 leagues to the Southward . The people which we saved told us that the cause why they would not yield , was , because this Carrack was for the king , and that she had all the goods belonging to the king in the country for that year in her , and that the captain of her was in favour with the king , and at his return into the Indies should have be Viceroy there . And withal this ship was nothing at all pestered neither within board nor without , and was more like a ship of war then otherwise : moreover , she had the ordinance of a Carrack that was cast away at Mozambique , and the company of her , together with the company of another Carrack that was cast away a little to the Eastwards of the Cape of Buona Speranza . Yet through sickness which they caught at Angola , where they watered , they 
 122 
 THE FIRING OF ‘ THE FIVE WOUNDS ’ a.d. 
 1594-say , they had not now above 150 white men , but Negroes 
 a great many . They likewise affirmed that they had [ II ii . 201. ] three noblemen and three ladies in her , but we found them to differ in most of their talk . All this day and all the night she burned , but the next morning her poulder which was lowest being 60 barrels blew her abroad , so that most of the ship did swim in parts above the water . Some of them say , that she was bigger then the Madre de Dios , and some , that she was less : but she was much undermasted , and undersailed , yet she went well for a ship that was so foul . The shot which we made at her in great Ordinance before we laid her aboard might be at seven bouts which we had , and sixe or 7 shot at a bout , one with another , some 49 shot : the time we lay aboard might be two hours . The shot which we discharged aboard the Carrack might be some twentie Sacars . And thus much may suffice concerning our dangerous conflict with that unfortunate Carrack . 
 The last of June after long traversing of the seas we had sighed of another mighty Carrack which diverse of our company at the first took to be the great S. Philip the Admiral of Spaine , but the next day being the first of July fetching her up we perceived her indeed to be a Carrack , which after some few shot bestowed upon her we summoned to yield ; but they standing stoutly to their defence utterly refused the same . Wherefore seeing no good could be done without boarding her I consulted what course we should take in the boarding . But by reason that we which were the chief captains were partly slain and partly wounded in the former conflict , and because of the murmuring of some disordered and cowardly companions , our valiant and resolute determinations were crossed : and to conclude a long discourse in few words , the Carrack escaped our hands . After this attending abput Corvo & Flores for some West Indian purchase , and being disappointed of our expectation , and victuals growing short , we returned for England , where I arrived at Portesmouth the 28 of August . 
 . 