A true report of the honourable service at Sea performed by Sir John Burrough Knight , Lieutenant generail of the fleet prepared by the honour . Sir Walter Ralegh Knight , Lord warden of the Stanneries of Cornwall and Devon . Wherein chiefly the Santa Clara of Biscay , a ship of 600 tons was taken , and the two East Indian caracks , the Santa Cruz ' and the Madre de Dios were forced , the one burned , and the other taken and brought into Dartmouth the seventh of September , 1592. 
 Ir Walter Ralegh upon commission received from her Majesty for and expedition to be made to the West Indies , slacked not his uttermost diligence to make full provision of all things necessary , as both in his choice of good ships , and sufficient men to perform the actium 
 evidently appeared . For his ships which were in number 14 or 15 , those two of her Majesties , the Garland & the Foresight were the chiefest ; the rest 
 either his own or his good friends or adventurers of London . For the gentlemen his consorts and officers , to give them their right , they were so well qualitied in courage , experience , & discretion , as the greatest prince might repute himself happy to be served with their like . The honour of Lieutenant general was imposed upon sir John Burrough , a gentleman , for his manifold good and heroical parts , thought every way worthy of that commandment : with whom after sir W. R. returned was joined in commission sir Martin Frobisher , who for his speciali skill & knowledge in marine causes had formerly carried employments of like or greater place . The rest of the captains , soldiers , and sailors were men of notable resolution , and for the most part such as heretofore had given to the world sufficient proof of their valour in diverse services of the like nature . With these ships thus manned sir Walter Ralegh departed towards the West country , there to store himself with such further necessaries as the state of his voyage did needfully require : where the Westerly winds blowing for a long time contrary to his course , bound and constrained him to keep Rarborough so many weeks , that the fittest season for his purpose was gone , the minds of his people much altered , his victuals consumed ; and withal , her Majesty understanding how crosly all this sorted , began to call the proceeding of this preparation into question : insomuch that , whereas the sixt of May was first come before sir Walter could put to sea , the very next day sir Martin Frobisher in a pinnace of my lord Admirals called The Disdain , met him , and brought to him from her Majesty letters of revocation , with commandment to relinquish ( for his own part ) the [ II ii . 195. ] intended attempt , and to leave the charge and conduct of all things in the hands of sir John Burrough and sir Martin Frobisher . But sir Walter finding his honour so far engaged in the undertaking of this voyage , as without proceeding he saw no remedy either to salve his reputation , or to content those his friends which had put 
 106 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ in adventures of great sums with him ; and making construction of the Queens letters in such sort as if her commandment had be propounded in indifferent terms , either to advance forward or to retire , at his own discretion ; would in no case yield to leave his fleet now under sail . Wherefore continuing his course into the sea , he met within a day or two , with certain sails lately come from Spaine : among which was a ship appertaining to Monsieur Gourdon governor of Caleis , and found aboard her one M. Nevel Davies and Englishman , who having endured a long and miserable captivity for the space of twelve years , partly in the inquisition in Spaine , was now by good fortune escaped , and upon return to his country . This man , among other things , reported for certain , that there was little hope of any good this year to be done in the West India ; considering that the king of Spaine had sent express order to all the ports both of the Hands and of Terra firma , that no ship should stir that year , nor any treasure be laid aboard for Spaine . But neither this unpleasant relation nor ought else could stay his proceedings , until a tempest of strange and uncouth violence arising upon Thursday the 11 of May , when he was athwart the Cape Finister , had so scattered the greater part of the fleet , and sunk his boats and pinnaces , that as the rest were driven and severed , some this way and some that , sir Walter himself being in the Garland of her Majesty was in danger to be swallowed up of the Sea. Whereupon sir W. Ralegh finding that the season of the year was too far gone to proceed with the enterprise which he had upon Panama , having be held on the English coast from February till May , and thereby spent three months victuals ; and considering withal , that to lie upon the Spanish coast or at the Hands to attend the return of the East or West Indian fleets was rather a work of patience then ought else : he gave directions to sir John Burgh and sir M. Frobisher to divide the fleet in two parts ; sir M. with the Garland , cap . George Gifford , 107 
 The Santa Clara a Biscain ship oj 600 tons taken . 
 cap . Henry Thin , cap . Grenvile and others to lie off the South cape , thereby to amaze the Spanish fleet , and to hold them on their own coast ; while sir J. Burgh , captain . Robert Cross , captain . Tomson , & others should attend at the Hands for the caracks or any other Spanish ships coming from Mexico or other parts of the West Indies . Which direction took effect accordingly ; for the king of Spaines Admiral receiving intelligence that the English fleet was come on the coast , attended to defend the South parts of Spaine , & to keep himself as never sir Mart. Frobisher as he could , to impeach him in all things which he might undertake ; and thereby neglected the safeconduct of the caracks , with whom it fared as hereafter shall appear . Before the fleet severed themselves they met with a great Biscain on the Spanish coast called Santa Clara a ship of 600 tons . 
 The noise of the artillery on both sides being herd , immediately they drew to their fleet ; where after a reasonable hight fight , the ship was entered and mastered , which they found freighted with all sorts of small ironwork , as horseshoes , nails , ploughshares , iron bars , spikes , bolts , locks , gimbols , & such like , valued by us at 6000 or 7000 li . but worth to them triple the valve . This Biscain was sailing towards S. Lucar , there to take in some further provision for the West India . This ship being first roomaged , and after sent for England , our fleet coasted along towards the Southcape of S. Vincent , and by the way , about the Rock never Lisbon , sir John Burrough in the Roebuck spying a sail afar off , gave her present chase ; which being a flyboat and of good sail , drew him far Southwards before he could fetch her ; but at last she came under his lee and struck sail . The master of which flyboat coming aboard him , confessed that the king indeed had prepared a great fleet ' in S. Lucar and Cadiz , and ( as the report in Spaine was currant ) for the West Indies . But in deed the Spanish king had provided this fleet upon this counsel . He received intelligence , that sir Walter Ralegh was to put 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ 
 out strong for the West India : to impeach him , and to ranconter his force he appointed this fleet ; although looking for the arrival of his East Indian caracks , he first ordained those ships to waft them from the Azores . But persuading himself , that if the fleet of sir Walter Ralegh did go for the West India , then the Hands should have none to infest them but small men of war , which the caracks of themselves would be well able to match ; his order was to DONE Alonso de Ba ? and brother to the Marks of Santa Cruz , and general of his armada , to pursue sir Walters fleet , and to confront him , what course soever he held . And that this was true , our men in short time by proof understood : for sir John Burrough , not long after the taking of his last prize the flyboat , as he sailed back again towards the rest of his company , discovered the Spanish fleet to seaward of him : which having likewise espied him betwixt them and the shore , made full account to bring him safe into Spanish harbour ; and therefore spread themselves in such sort before him , that indeed his danger was very great : for both the liberty of the sea was brought into a narrow straight , and the shore being enemy could give him no comfort of relief : so that trusting to Gods help only and his good sail , he thrust out from among them in spite of all their force , and to the notable illusion of all their cunning , which they showed to the uttermost , in laying the way for his apprehension . But now sir John Burrough having happily escaped their douches , finding the coast guarded by this fleet , and knowing it was but folly to expect a meeting there with sir Martin Frobisher ( who understanding of this armada aswell as himself , would be sure not to come that way ) began to shape his course to the Azores according to sir W. Raleghs direction , and came in sighed of S. Michael , running so near by Villam Franca , that he might easily discern the ships lying there at anchor . Diverse small caravels both here and between S. Georges and the Pike in his course towards Flores he intercepted ; of which no great intelli - 
 109 
 [ II ii . 196. ] 
 Sir John Burrough in great danger of the Spanish fleet . 
 The lie ofS . Michael . 
 Diverse small ships taken . 
 gence for his affairs could be understood . Arriving before Flores upon Thursday the 21 of June , towards evening , accompanied only with captain Caufield and the Master of his ship , the rest not being yet arrived , he made towards the shore with his boat , finding all the Santa Cruz a people of Santa Cruz , a village of that Hand , in arms , wBagemthe fearing their landing , and ready marshaled to defend e oj oars , town from spoil . Sir John contrariwise made signs of amity unto them by advancing a white flag , a common token of peace , which was answered again of them with the like : whereupon ensued intercourses of good friendship ; and pledges were taken on both sides , the captain of the town for them , and captain Caufield for ours : so that whatsoever our men wanted , which that place could supply either in fresh water , victuals , or the like , was very willingly granted by the inhabitants : and good leave had they to refresh themselves on shore as much and as oft as they would without restraint . At Newer of the this Santa Cruz sir John Burrough was informed , that arah^ * ndeed there was among them no expectation of any ’ fleet to come from the West , but from the East , that no 
 longer since then three days before his arrival a carrack was passed by for Lisbon , and that there were foure caracks more behind , of one consort . Sir John being very glad of this news , stayed no longer on shore , but presently embarked himself , having only in company a small bark of threescore tons belonging to one M. Hopkins of Bristoll . In the mean while that these things thus passed at Flores , part of the rest of the English fleet , which sir John Burrough had left upon the coast of Spaine , drew also towards the Azores : and whereas he quickly at sea had discovered one of the caracks , the same evening he might descry two or three of the Earl of Cumberlands ships ( whereof one M. Norton was captain ) which having in like sort kenned the carrack , pursued her by that course which they saw her to run towards the Hands . But on no side was there any way made by reason of a great calm which yielded 
 IIO 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ a.d. 
 1592-no breath to spread a sail . Insomuch that fitly to discover her what she was , of what burden , force , and countenance , sir John Burrough took his boat , and rowed the space of three miles , to make her exactly : and being returned , he consulted with the better sort of the company then present , upon the boarding her in the morning . But a very mighty storm arising in the night , the extremity thereof forced them all to weigh anchors , yet their care was such in wrestling with the weather not to loose the carrack , that in the morning , the tempest being qualified , and our men bearing again with the shore , they might perceive the carrack very near the land , and the Portugals confusedly carrying on shore such things as they could any manner of way convey out of her ; and seeing the haste our men made to come upon them , forsook her : but first , that nothing might be Acarakcalled left commodious to our men , set fire to that which they could not carry with them , intending by that means wholly to consume her ; that neither glory of victory nor benefit of ship might remain to ours . And lest the approach and industry of the English should bring means to extinguish the flame , thereby to preserve the residue of that which the fire had not destroyed ; being foure hundred of them in number and well armed , they entrenched themselves on land so near to the carrack , that she being by their forces protected , and our men kept aloof off , the fire might continue to the consumption of the whole . This being noted by sir John Burrough he soon provided a present remedy for this mischief . For landing one hundred of his men , whereof many did swim And hundred and wade more then breast high to shore , and easily °four men scattering those that presented themselves to guard the ' land ' coast , he no sooner drew towards their new trenches , but they fled immediately , leaving as much as the fire had spared to be the reward of our men's pains . Here was taken among others one Vincent Fonseca a Portugall , Purser of the carrack , with two others , one and Almain and the second a Low-dutchman , canoniers : who refusing 
 to make any voluntary report of those things which were demanded of them , had the torture threatened , the fear whereof at the last wrested from them this intelligence , that within fifteene days three other greater caracks then that lately fired would arrive at the same Hand : and that being five caracks in the fleet at their departure from Goa , to wit , the Buen Jesus admiral , the Madre de Dios , the S Bernardo , the S. Christophoro , and the S. Cruz , ( whose fortune you have already herd ) they had received speciali commandement from the king not to [ II ii . 197. ] touch in any case at the Hand of S. Helena , where the 
 Portugall caracks in their return from the East India were always till now wont to arrive to refresh themselves with water and victuals . And the kings reason was ; because of the English men of war , who ( as he was informed ) lay there in wait to intercept them . If therefore their necessity of water should drive them to Angola a new seek supply any where , he appointed them Angola in foi^thecaraks ma*ne Africa , with order there to stay only the 
 ’ taking in of water to avoid the inconvenice of infections , whereunto that hight latitude is dangerously subject . The last rendezvous for them all was the Hand of Flores , where the king assured them not to miss of his armada thither sent of purpose for their wafting to Lisbon . Upon this information sir John drew to counsel , meeting there captain Norton , captain Dounton , captain Abraham Cock , captains of three ships of the Earl of Cumberland , M. Tomson of Harwich cap . of the Dainty of sir John Haukins , one of sir W. Raleghs fleet , and M. Christopher Newport cap . of the Golden dragon newly returned from the West India , and others . These being assembled , he communicated with them what he had understood of the foresaid examinates , and what great presumptions of truth their relation did carry : wishing that forasmuch as God & good fortune had brought them together in so good a season , they would show the uttermost of their endeavours to bring these Easterlings under the lee of the English obedience . Hereupon a 
 I I 2 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ present accord on all sides followed not to part company or leave of those seas till time should present cause to put their consultations in execution . The next day her Majesties good ship the Foresight commanded by sir Rob. Crosse came in to the rest : and he likewise informed of the matter was soon drawn into this service . Thus sir John with all these ships departing thence 6 or 7 leagues to the West of Flores , they spread themselves abroad from the North to the South , each ship two leagues at the least distant from another . By which order of extension they were able to discover the space of two whole degrees at sea . In this sort they lay from the 29 of June to the third of August , what time cap . Thomson in the Dainty had first sighed of the huge carrack called the Madre de Dios , one of the greatest receipt belonging to the crown of Portugall . The Dainty being of excellent sail god the start of the rest of our fleet , and began the conflict somewhat to her cost , with the slaughter and hurt of diverse of her men . Within a while after , sir John Burrough in the Roebuck of sir W. Raleghs , was at hand to second her , who saluted her with shot of great ordinance , and continued the fight within musket shot assisted by cap . Tomson and cap . Newport till sir R. Cross viceadmiral of the fleet came up being to leeward , at whose arrival sir J. Burgh demanded of him what was best to be done , who answered , that if the carrack were not boarded she would recover the shore and fire herself as the other had done . Whereupon sir J. Burgh concluded to entangle her ; and sir R. Cross promised also to fasten himself to her together at the instant ; which was performed : but after a while sir John Burgh receiving a shot with a canon perier under water , and ready to sink , desired sir R. C. to fallen off , that he might also clear himself , and save his ship from sinking , which with difficulty he did : for both the Roebuck and the Foresight were so entangled , as with much ado could they clear themselves . 
 The same evening sir R. Cross finding the carrack then un 113 H 
 sure & drawing never the Hand persuaded his company to board her again , or else there was no hope to recover her : who after many excuses & fears , were by him encouraged , and so fell athwart her foreships all alone ; and so hindered her sailing that the rest had time to TheMadrede come up to his succour , & to recover the carrack year she Dios taken . recovered the land : and so towards the evening after he had fought with her alone three hours single , my lord of Cumberlands two ships came up , & with very little loss entered with sir R. Cross , who had in that time broken their courages , and made the assault easy for the rest . 
 The general having disarmed the Portugals , and stowed them for better security on all sides , first had presented to his eyes the true proportion of the vast body of this carrack , which did then and may still justly provoke the admiration of all men not formerly acquainted with such a sighed . But albeit this first appearance of the hugeness thereof yielded sights enough to entertain our men's eyes ; yet the pitiful object of so many bodies slain and dismembered could not but draw each men eye to see , and heart to lament , and hands to help those miserable people , whose limnes were so torn with the violence of shot , and pain made grievous with the multitude of wounds . No man could almost step but upon a dead carcase or a bloody floor , but specially about the helm , where very many of them fell suddenly from stirring to dying . For the greatness of the stirrage requiring the labour of twelve or foureteene men at once , and some of our ships beating her in at the stern with their ordinance often times with one shot slew foure or five labouring on either side of the helm ; whose rooms being still furnished with fresh supplies , and our artillery still playing upon them with continual volleys , it could not be but that much blood should be shed in that place . Exceeding Whereupon our general moved with singular commiser-shmecPto the ation their misery , sent them his own chirurgeons , enemy . denying them no possible help or relief that he or any 
 114 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ a.d. 
 1592. 
 of his company could afford them . Among the rest of [ II ii . 198. ] those , whose state this chance had made very deplorable , was DONE Fernando de Mendosa Grand captain and Commander of this Carake : who indeed was descended of the house of Mendosa in Spaine ; but being married into Portugall , lived there as one of that nation ; a gentleman well stricken in years , well spoken , of comely personage , of good stature , but of hard fortune . In his several services against the Moors he was twice taken prisoner , and both times ransomed by the king . In a former voyage of return from the East India he was driven upon the Baxos or sands of Juda never the coast of Cephala , being then also captain of a carrack which was there lost , and himself , though escaping the seadanger , yet fell into the hands of infidels on land ; who kept him under long and grievous servitude . Once more the king carrying a loving respect to the man , and desirous to better his condition , was content to let him try his fortune in this Easterly navigation , and committed unto him the conduct of this carrack , wherein he went from Lisbon general of the whole fleet , and in that degree had returned , if the Vice-rey of Goa embarked for Portugall in the Bon Jesus had not , by reason of his late office , be preferred . Sir John intending not to add too much affliction to the afflicted , moved with pity and compassion of humane misery , in the end resolved freely to dismiss this captain & the most part of his followers to their own country , and for the same purpose ’ bestowed them in certain vessels furnished with all kinds of necessary provision . This business thus dispatched , good leisure had he to take such view of the goods as conveniency might afford . And having very prudently ( to cut ofF the unprofitable spoil & pillage whereunto he saw the minds of many inclined ) seized upon the whole to her Majesties use , after a short & slender rummaging & searching of such things as first came to hand , he perceived that you wealth would arise nothing disanswerable to expectation ; but that the variety and 
 A briefs cata-hpie of you sundry rich commodities of the Madre de Dios. 
 grandure of all rich commodities would be more theft sufficient to content both the adventurers desire & the soldiers travel . And here I cannot but enter into the consideration and acknowledgement of Gods great favour towards our nation , who by putting this purchase into our hands hath manifestly discovered those secret trades & Indian riches , which hitherto lay strangely hidden , and cunningly concealed from us ; whereof there was among some few of us some small and unperfect glimpse only , which now is turned into the broad light of full and perfect knowledge . Whereby it should seem that the will of God for our good is ( if our weakness could apprehend it ) to have us communicate with them in those East Indian treasures , & by the erection of a lawful traffic to better our means to advance true religion and his holy service . The carrack being in burden by the estimation of the wise and experienced no less then 1600 tons had full 900 of those stowed with the gross bulk of merchandise , the rest of the tunnage being allowed , partly to the ordinance which were 32 pieces of brass of all sorts , partly to the passengers and the victuals , which could not be any small quantity , considering the number of the persons betwixt 600 and 700 , and the length of the navigation . To give you a taste ( as it were ) of the commodities , it shall suffice to deliver you a general particularity of them , according to the catalogue taken at Leaden hall the 15 of September 1592. Where upon good view it was found , that the principali wares after the jewels ( which were no doubt of great valve , though they never came to light ) consisted of spices , drug , silks , calicos , quilts , carpets and colours , etc. The spices were pepper , cloves , maces , nutmegs , cinamom , green ginger : the drugs were benjamim , frankincense , galingale , mirabolans , aloes zocotrina , camphire : the silks , damasks , taffatas , sarcenets , altobassos , that is , counterfeit cloth of gold , unwrought China silk , sleaved silk , white twisted sike , curled cypress . The calicos were book-calicos , calico-lanes , broad white calicos , fine 116 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ aa 1592-starched calicos , course white calicos , brown broad calicos , brown course calicos . There were also canopies , and course diaper-towels , quilts of course sarsenet and of calico , carpets like those of Turky ; whereunto are to be added the pearl , musk , civet , and amber-griece . The rest of the wares were many in number , but less in valve ; as elephants teeth , porcellan vessels of China , coconuts , hides , eben-wood as black as jet , bedsteds of the same , cloth of the rinds of trees very strange for the matter , and artificiali in workmanship . All which piles of commodities being by men of approved judgement rated but in reasonable sort amounted to no less then 150000 li . sterling , which being divided among the adventurers ( whereof her Majesty was the chief ) was sufficient to yield contentment to all parties . The cargazon being taken out , and the goods freighted in tenne of our ships sent for London , to the end that the bigness , heighth , length , breadth , and other dimensions of so huge a vessel might by the exact rules of Geometricali observations be truly taken , both for present knowledge , and derivation also of the same unto posterity , one M. 
 Robert Adams , a man in his faculty of excellent skill , capacity omitted nothing in the description , which either his art could demonstrate , or any men judgement think worthy jytos 
 the memory . After and exquisite survey of the whole frame he found the length from the beakhead to the stern ( whereupon was erected a lantern ) to contain 165 foot . The breadth in the second close deck whereof [ II ii . 199. ] she had three , this being the place where there was most extension of breadth , was 46 foot and 10 inches . She drew in water 31 foot at her departure from Cochin in India , but not above 26 at her arrival in Dartmouth , being lightened in her voyage by diverse means , some 5 foot . She carried in height 7 several stories , one main Orlop , three close decks , one forecastle , and a spar-deck of two floors a piece . The length of the keel was 100 foot , of the maine-mast 121 foot , and the circuit about at the partners 10 foot 7 inches , the mainyard was 106 
 117 
 foot long . By which perfect commensuration of the parts appears the hugeness of the whole , far beyond the mould of the biggest shipping used among us either for war or receipt . 
 DONE Alonso de Ba ? and having a great Fleet and suffering these two caracks , the Santa Cruz to be burned , and the Madre de Dios to be taken , was disgraced by his prince for this negligence . 
 . 