The offer of the discovery of the West Indies by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seventh in the year 1488 the 13 of February : with the kings acceptation of the offer , & the cause whereupon he was deprived of the same : recorded in the thirteenth chapter of the history of DONE Fernand Columbus of the life and deeds of his father Christopher Columbus . 
 The same in English . 
 / " ^Hristopher Columbus fearing lest if the king of V-U Castile in like manner ( as the king of Portugall had done ) should not condescend unto his enterprise , he should be enforced to offer the same again to some other prince , 8c so much time should be spent therein , sent into England a certain brother of his which he had with him , whose name was Bartholomew Columbus , who , albeit he had not the Latin tongue , yet nevertheless was a man of experience and skilful in Sea causes , and could very well make sea cards & globes , and other instruments belonging to that profession , as he was instructed by his brother . Wherefore after that Bartholomew Columbus was departed for England , his luck was to fallen into the hands of pirates , which spoiled him with the rest of them which were in the ship which he went in . Upon which occasion , and by reason of his poverty and sickness which cruelly assaulted him in a country so far distant from his friends , he deferred his am-bassage for a long while , until such time as he had 
 got somewhat handsome about him with making of Sea fir England . cards . At length he began to deal with king Henry the seventh the father of Henry the eight , which reigneth at this present : unto whom he presented a map of the world , wherein these verses were written , which I found among his papers : and I will here set them down , rather for their antiquity then for their goodness . 
 Thou which desirest easily the coasts of lands to know , This comely map right learnedly the same to thee will show : 
 Which Strabo , Plinie , Ptolomew and Isodore maintain : Yet for all that they do not all in one accord remain . 
 137 
 . 
 The occasion why the West Indies were not discovered 
 King Henry the seventh his acceptation of Columbus offer . 
 Here also is set down the late discovered burning Zone 
 By Portingals , unto the world which whilom was unknown , 
 Whereof the knowledge now at length thorough all the world is blown ; 
 And a little under he added : 
 For the Author or the Drawer . 
 He , whose deer native soil hight stately Genua , Even he whose name is Bartholomew Colon de Terra 
 Rubra , 
 The year of Grace a thousand and foure hundred and fourescore 
 And eight , and on the thirteenth day of February more , 
 In London published this work . To Christ all laud therefore . 
 And because some peradventure may observe that he calls himself Columbus de Terra Rubra , I say , that in like manner I have seen some subscriptions of my father Christopher Columbus , before he had the degree of Admiral , wherein he signed his name thus , Columbus de Terra Rubra . But to return to the king of England , I say , that after he had seen the map , and that which my father Christopher Columbus offered unto him , he accepted the offer with joyful countenance , and sent to call him into England . But because God had reserved the said offer for Castile , Columbus was gone in the mean space , and also returned with the performance of his enterprise , as hereafter in order shall be rehearsed . Now will I leave off from making any farther mention of that which Bartholomew Colon had negotiated in England , and I will return unto the Admiral , etc. 
 . 