The second voyage of Master Martin Frobisher , made to the West and Northwest Regions , in the year 1577. with a description of the Country , and people : Written by Master Dionise Settle . 
 N Whitsunday , being the sixe and twentieth of May , in the year of our Lord God 1577. Captain Frobisher departed from Black Wall , with one of the Queens Majesties ships , called The Aid , of nine score tons , or thereabouts : and two other little Barks like 
 wise , the one called The Gabriel , whereof Master Fenton , a Gentleman of my Lord of Warwikes , was Captain : 
 211 
 TheOrcadians upon small occasion f . ee their home . 
 and the other , The Michael , whereof Master Yorke , a Gentleman of my Lord Admirals was Captain , accompanied with seven score Gentlemen , soldiers , and sailors , well furnished with victuals , and other provision necessary for one half year , on this his second voyage , for the further discovering of the passage to Cathay , and other Countries' , thereunto adjacent , by West and Northwest navigations : which passage or way , is supposed to be on the North and Northwest part of America : and the said America to be and Island environed with the sea , where through our Merchant's may have course and recourse with their merchandise , from these our Northernmost parts of Europe , to those Orientali coasts of Asia , in much shorter time , and with greater benefit then any others , to their no little commodity and profit that do or shall frequent the same . Our said Captain and General of this present voyage and company having the year before , with two little pinnaces , to his great danger , and no small commendations , given a worthy attempt towards the performance thereof , is also pressed , when occasion shall be ministered ( to the benefit of his Prince , and native Country ) to adventure himself further therein . As for this second voyage , it seems sufficient , that he hath better explored and searched the commodities of those people and Countries' , which in his first voyage the year before he had found out . 
 Upon which considerations , the day and year before expressed , we departed from Black Wall to Harwich , where making and accomplishment of things necessary , the last of May we hoist up sails , and with a merry wind the 7. of June we arrived at the Islands called Orcades , or vulgarly Orkney , being in number 30. subject and adjacent to Scotland , where we made provision of fresh water ; in the doing whereof our general licensed the Gentlemen and soldiers for their recreation , to go on shore . At our landing , the people fled from their poor cottages , with shrieks and alarms , to warn their neighbours of enemies , but by gentle persuasions we reclaimed 212 
 them to their houses . It seems they are often frighted with Pirates , or some other enemies , that move them to such sudden fear . Their houses are very simply built with Pebble stone , without any chimneis , the fire being made in the midst thereof . The good man , wife , children , and other of their family eat and sleep on the one side of the house , and the cattle on the other , very beastly and rudely , in respect of civility . They are destitute of wood , their fire is turfs , and Cowshards . No wood in They have corn , big , and oats , with which they pay their Kings rend , to the maintenance of his house . They take great quantity of fish , which they dry in the wind and Sun . They dress their meat very filthily , and eat it without salt . Their apparel is after the rudest sort of Scotland . Their money is all base . Their Church and religion is reformed according to the Scots . The 
 fisher men of England can better declare the dispositions Fisher men oj of those people then I : wherefore I remit other their England have usages to their reports , as yearly repairs thither , in ta Orkney their course to and from Island for fish . 
 We departed herehence the 8. of June , and followed our course between West and Northwest , until the 4. June and of July : all which time we had no night , but that easily , thoseld^st and without any impediment we had when we were so and North-disposed , the fruition of our books , and other pleasures - west regions . to pass away the time : a thing of no small moment , to such as wander in unknown seas , and long navigations , especially , when both the winds and raging surges do pass their common and wonted course . This benefit endureth in those parts not 6. weeks , while the sun is near the Tropike of Cancer : but where the pole is raised to 70. or 80. degrees , it continueth much longer . 
 All along these seas , after we were sixe days sailing Great abun-from Orkney , we met doting in the sea , great Fir trees , dance of Fin e which as we judged , were with the fury of great floods fo^ngin rooted up , and so driven into the sea . Island hath ’ almost no other wood nor fuel , but such as they take up upon their coasts . It seems , that these trees are 
 213 
 Inquire driven from some part of the New found land , with the current that sets from the West to the East . 
 cun ent . The we came within the making of Fris - 
 land . From this shore io . or 12. leagues , we met great Islands of ice , of half a mile , some more , some less in compass , showing above the sea , 30. or 40. fathoms , and as we supposed fast on ground , where with our led we could scarce found the bottom for depth . 
 Here , in place of odoriferous and fragrant smells of sweet gums , & pleasant notes of musical birds , which other Countries' in more temperate Zones do yield , we tee , snow , and tasted the most boisterous Boreal blasts mixed with snow hrite ui June j hail , in the months of June and July , nothing inferior to our untemperate winter : a sudden alteration , and especially in a place or Parallel , where the Pole is not elevate above 61. degrees : at which height other Countries' more to the North , yea unto 70. degrees , show themselves more temperate then this does . 
 All along this coast ice lies , as a continual bulwark , & so defendeth the Country , that those that would land there , incur great danger . Our general 3. days together attempted with the ship boat to have gone on shore , which for that without great danger he could not accomplish , he deferred it until a more convenient time . All along the coast lie very high mountains covered with snow , except in such places , where through the steepenes of the mountains of force it must needs fallen . Foure days coasting along this land , we found no sign of habitation . Little birds , which we judged to have lost Friseland sub - the shore , by reason of thick fogs which that Country ject tofigge . js much subject unto , came flying into our ships , which causeth us to suppose , that the Country is both more tolerable , and also habitable within , then the outward shore makes show or signification . 
 From hence we departed the eight of July : and the 16. of the same , we came with the making of land , which land our general the year before had nam The Queens foreland , being and Island as we judge , lying 214 
 near the supposed continent with America : and on the other side , opposite to the same , one other Island called Halles Isle , after the name of the Master of the ship , near adjacent to the firm land , supposed continent with Asia . Between the which two Islands there is a large entrance or straight , called Frobishers straight , after the name of our general , the first finder thereof . This strni said straight is supposed to have passage into the sea of Sur , which I leave unknown as yet . 
 It seems that either here , or not far hence , the sea should have more large entrance , then in other parts within the frozen or untemperate Zone : and that some contrary tide , either from the East or West , with main force casts out that great quantity of ice , which comes floating from this coast , even unto Friseland , causing that Country to seem more untemperate then others , much more Northerly then the same . 
 I cannot judge that any temperature under the Pole , the time of the Suns Northern declination being half a year together , and one whole day , ( considering that the Suns elevation surmounteth not 23. degrees and 30. minutes ) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge ice , comparable to great mountains , except by l^tsds of ice . some other force , as by swift currents and tides , with t0 
 the help of the said day of half a year . mounatnes . 
 Before we came within the making of these lands we tasted cold storms , in so much that it seemed we had changed summer with winter , if the length of the days had not removed us from that opinion . 
 At our first coming , the straights seemed to be shut up with a long mure of ice , which gave no little cause of discomfort unto us all : but our general , ( to whose Captain Fn-diligence imminent dangers , and difficult attempts seemed hts s^e ' nothing , in respect of his willing mind , for the come - diligence fir moditie of his Prince and Country , ) with two little the benefit of Pinnaces prepared of purpose , passed twice thorough his Prince and them to the East shore , and the Islands thereunto Countrey-adjacent : and the ship , with the two Barks lay off and 
 215 
 The order of the people appearing on shore . 
 Fierce and bold people . One taken . 
 on something further into the sea , from the danger of the ice . 
 Whilst he was searching the Country near the shore , some of the people of the Country showed themselves leaping and dancing , with strange shrieks and cries , which gave no little admiration to our men . Our general desirous to allure them unto him by fair means , caused knives , and other things to be proffered unto them , which they would not take at our hands : but being laid on the ground , and the party going away , they came and ' took up , leaving some thing of theirs to countervail the same . At the length two of them leaving their weapons , came down to our general and Master , who did the like to them , commanding the company to stay , and went unto them : who after certain dumb signs , and mute congratulations , began to lay hands upon them , but they deliverly escaped , and ran to their bows and arrows , and came fiercely upon them , ( not respecting the rest of our company which were ready for their defence ) but with their arrows hurt diverse of them : we took the one , and the other escaped . 
 Whilst our general was busied in searching the Country , and those Islands adjacent on the Eastshoare , the ship and barks having great care , not to put far into the sea from him , for that he had small store of victuals , were forced to abide in a cruel tempest , chancing in the night , among and in the thickest of the ice , which was so monstrous , that even the least of a thousand had be of force sufficient , to have shivered our ship and barks into small portions , if God ( who in all necessities , hath care upon the infirmity of man ) had not provided for this our extremity a sufficient remedic through the light of the night , whereby we might well discern to flee from such imminent dangers , which we avoided with 14. Bourds in one watch the space of 4 hours . If we had not incurred this danger among these monstrous Islands of ice , we should have lost our 216 
 general and Master , and the most of our best sailors , which were on the shore destitute of victuals : but by the valour of our Master Gunner , Master Jackman , and hard Cox , Andrew Dier , the Master's Mates , men expert both in Easier gunnavigation , and other good qualities , we were all content Master jack-to incur the dangers aforerehearsed , before we would man . with our own safety , run into the seas , to the destrue - AndrewDier . cion of our said general , and his company . 
 The day following , being the 19. of Julie , our captain returned to the ship , with report of supposed riches , which showed it self in the bowels of those barren mountains , wherewith we were all satisfied . 
 Within foufe days after we had be at the entrance of the straights , the Northwest and West winds dispersed the ice into the sea , & made us a large entrance into the straights , so that without any impediment , on the 19. of Julie we entered them , and the 20. thereof , our general and Master with great diligence , sought out and sounded the West shore , and found out a fair Harbour for the ship and barks to ride in , and nam it after our Master's mate , Jackmans found , and brought the ship , Jackmans barks , and all their company to safe anchor , except one man , which died by Gods visitation . 
 At our first arrival , after the ship road at anchor , our general , with such company as could well be spared from the ships , in marching order entered the land , having speciali care by exhortations , that at our entrance thereinto , we should all with one voice , kneeling upon our knees , chiefly thank God for our safe arrival : secondly beseech him , that it would please his divine Majesty , long to continue our Queen , for whom he , and all the rest of our company in this order took possession of the Possession Country : and thirdly , that by our Christian study and taken-endevour , those barbarous people trained up in Paganism , and infidelity , might be reduced to the knowledge of true religion , and to the hope of salvation in Christ our Redeemer . With other words very apt to signify his willing mind , and affection towards his Prince and 
 217 
 Country : whereby all suspicion of and undutifiill subject , may credibly be judged to be utterly exempted from his mind . All the rest of the Gentlemen and other deserve 
 fee needful to be regarded of seafaring men . 
 Stones glister with sparkles like gold . 
 worthily herein , their due praise and commendation . 
 These things in this order accomplished , our general commanded all the company to be obedient in things needful for our own safeguard , to Master Fenton , Master Yorke , and Master Beast his Lieutenant , while he was occupied in other necessary affairs , concerning our coming thither . 
 After this order we marched through the Country , with Ensign displayed , so far as was thought needful , and now and then heaped up stones on high mountains , and other places in token of possession , as likewise to signify unto such as hereafter may chance to arrive there , that possession is taken in the behalf of some other Prince , by those who first found out the Country . 
 Whoso makes navigations to those Countries' , hath not only extreme winds , and furious seas to encounter withal , but also many monstrous and great Islands of ice : a thing both rare , wonderful , and greatly to be regarded . 
 We were forced sundry times , while the ship did ride here at anchor , to have continual watch , with boats & men ready with halsers to knit fast unto such ice , as with the ebb & flood were tossed to and from in the harbour , & with force of oars to hale them away , for endangering the ship . 
 Our general certain days searched this supposed continent with America , and not finding the commodity to answer his expectation , after he had made trial thereof he departed thence with two little barks , and men sufficient to the East shore being the supposed continent of Asia , and left the ship with most of the Gentlemen , soldiers , and sailors , until such time as he either thought good to send or come for them . 
 The stones of this supposed continent with America be altogether sparkled , and glister in the Sun like 218 
 gold : so likewise does the sand in the bright water , yet they verify the old Proverb : All is not gold that 4 common pro-glistereth . verb . 
 On this West shore we found a dead fish floating , which had in his nose a horn straight and torquet , of length two yards lacking two inches , being broken in the top , where we might perceive it hollow , into the which some of our sailors putting spiders they presently died . I saw not the trial hereof , but it was reported unto me of a truth : by the virtue whereof we supposed it to be the sea Unicorn . U " * - 
 After our general had found out good harbour for corn ' the ship and barks to anchor in , and also such store of supposed gold over as he thought himself satisfied withal , he returned to the Michael , whereof Master Yorke aforesaid was Captain , accompanied with our master and his Mate : who coasting along the West shore not far from whence the ship road , they perceived a fair harbour , and willing to found the same , at the entrance thereof they espied two tents of Seal skins , unto which the Captain , our said Master , and other company resorted . At the sighed of our men the people fled into The people the mountains : nevertheless they went to their tents , where leaving certain trifles or ours , as glasses , bells , me „ _ knives , and such like things they departed , not taking any thing of theirs except one dog . They did in like manner leave behind them a letter , pen , ink , and paper , whereby our men whom the Captain lost the year before , and in that peoples custody , might ( if any of them were alive ) be advertised of our presence and being there . 
 On the same day after consultation had , all the Gentlemen , and others likewise that could be spared from the ship , under the conduct and leading of Master Master Phil-Philpot , ( unto whom in our general his absence , and his Lieutenant Master Beast , all the rest were obedient ) went Master Beast . a shore , determining to see , if by fair means we could either allure them to familiarity , or otherwise take some of 
 219 
 them , and so attain to some knowledge of those men whom our general lost the year before . 
 At our coming back again to the place where their tents were before , they had removed their tents further into the said Bay or Found , where they might if they were driven from the land , flee with their boats into the sea . We parting our selves into two companies , and compassing a mountain came suddenly upon them by land , who espying us , without any tarrying fled to their boats , leaving the most part of their oars behind them for haste , and rowed down the bay , where our two Pinnaces met them and drove them to shore : but if they had had all their oars , so swift are they in rowing , it had be lost time to have chased them . 
 When they were landed they fiercely assaulted our men with their bows and arrows , who wounded three of them with our arrows : and perceiving themselves thus hurt , they desperately leapt off7 the Rocks into the Sea , and drowned themselves : which if they had not done , but had submitted themselves , or if by any means we could have taken them alive ( being their enemies as they judged ) we would both have saved them , & also have sought remedy to cure their wounds received at our hands . But they altogether void of humanity , and ignorant what mercy means , in extremities look for no other then death : and perceiving they should fallen into our hands , thus miserably by drowning rather desired death then otherwise to be saved by us : the rest perceiving their fellows in this distress , fled into the high mountains . Two women not being so apt to escape as the men were , the one for her age , and the other being encumbered with a young child , we took . The old wretch , whom diverse of our Sailors supposed to be either a devil , or a witch , had her buskin's plucked ofF , to see if she were cloven footed , and for her ugly hew and deformity we let her go : the young woman and the child we brought away . We nam the place where they were slain , Bloody point : and the Bay or Harbour , Yorks 
 220 
 found , after the name of one of the Captains of the two Barks . 
 Having this knowledge both of their fierceness and Fair means cruelty , and perceiving that fair means as yet is not able to allure them to familiarity , we disposed our selves , familiarity t0 contrary to our inclination , something to be cruel , returned to their tents and made a spoil of the same : where we found and old shirt , a doublet , a girdle , and also shoes of our men , whom we lost the year before : on nothing else unto them belonging could we set our eyes . 
 Their riches are not gold , silver or precious Drapery , but their said tents and boats , made of the skins of read °f Dear and Seal skins : also dogs like unto wolves , 5 s' but for the most part black , with other trifles , more to be wondered at for their strangeness , then for any other commodity needful for our use . 
 Thus returning to our ship the 3. of August , we Our departure departed from the West shore supposed firm with West America , after we had anchored there 13. days : and so ' the 4. thereof we came to our general on the East shore , and anchored in a fair Harbour nam Anne Warwick's found , unto which is annexed and Island both nam after the Countesseof Warwicke , Anne Warwickes found and Isle . 
 In this Isle our general thought good for this - voyage , to fraught both the ship and barks , with such stone or supposed gold minerali , as he judged to countervail the charges of his first , and this his second navigation to these Countries' . 
 In the mean time of our abided here some of thee The country country people came to show themselves unto us , sundry setoes times on the main shore , near adjacent to the said unt0 us . Isle . Our general desirous to have some news of his men , whom he lost the year before , with some company with him repaired with the ship boat to common , or sign with them for familiarity , whereunto he is persuaded to bring them . They at the first show made tokens , that three of his five men were alive , and desired 
 221 
 Their usage in traffic or exchange . 
 The people show themselves the third time . 
 The people show themselves again on jirme land . 
 pen , ynck , and paper , and that within three or foure days they would return , and ( as we judged ) bring those of our men which were living , with them . 
 They also made signs or tokens of their King , whom they called Cacough , & how he was carried on men's shoulders , and a man far surmounting any of our company , in bigness and stature . 
 With these tokens and signs of writing , pen , ink , and paper was delivered them , which they would not take at our hands , but being laid upon the shore , and the party gone away , they took up : which likewise they do when they desire any thing for change of theirs , laying for that which is left so much as they think will countervail the same , and not coming near together . It seems they have be used to this trade or traffic , with some other people adjoining , or not far distant from their Country . 
 After 4. days some of them showed themselves upon the firm land , but not where they were before . Our General very glad thereof , supposing to hear of our men , went from the Island , with the boat , and sufficient company with him . They seemed very glad , and allured him about a certain point of the land : behind which they might perceive a company of the crafty villains to lie lurking , whom our general would not deal withal , for that he knew not what company they were , and so with few signs dismissed them and returned to his company . 
 And other time as our said general was coasting the Country with two little Pinnaces , whereby at our return he might make the better relation thereof , three of the crafty villains , with a white skin allured us to them . Once again our generail , for that he hoped to hear of his men , went towards them : at our coming near the shore whereon they were , we might perceive a number of them lie hidden behind great stones , & those 3. in sighed labouring by all means possible that some would come on land : and perceiving we made no haste 222 
 by words nor friendly signs , which they used by clapping Their first of their hands , and being without weapon , and but 3. 
 in sighed , they sought further means to provoke us as^us 0 thereunto . One alone laid flesh on the shore , which Their second we took up with the Boat hook , as necessary victuals means . 
 for the relieving of the man , woman , and child , whom we had taken : for that as yet they could not digest our meat : whereby they perceived themselves deceived of their expectation , for all their crafty allurements . Yet once again to make ( as it were ) a full show of their Their third crafty nature's , and subtle sleights , to the intent thereby an^crafiest 
 . 1 ° r allurement . 
 to nave entrapped and taken some or our men , one or them counterfeited himself impotent and lame of his legs , who seemed to descend to the water side , with great difficulty : and to cover his craft the more , one of his fellows came down with him , and in such places where he seemed unable to pass , he took him on his shoulders , set him by the water side , and departed from him , leaving him ( as it should seem ) all alone , who playing his counterfeit pageant very well , thought thereby to provoke some of us to come on shore , not fearing , but that one of us might make our party good with a lame man . 
 Our general having compassion of his impotency , Compassion to thought good ( if it were possible ) to cure him thereof : c “ re a crafty wherefore he caused a soldier to shoot at him with ’ his caliver , which grazed before his face . The counterfeit villeine deliverly fled , without any impediment at all , and god him to his bow and arrows , and the rest from their lurking holes , with their weapons , bows , arrows , slings , and darts . Our general caused some calivers to be shot off " at them , whereby some being hurt , they might hereafter stand in more fear of us . 
 This was all the answer for this time we could have of our men , or of our Generals letter . Their crafty dealing at these three several times being thus manifest unto us , may plainly show their disposition in other things to be correspondent . We judged that they used 
 223 
 these stratagems , thereby to have caught some of us , for the delivering of the man , woman and child whom we had taken . 
 They are men of a large corporature , and good proportion : their colour is not much unlike the Sun burned Country man , who laboureth daily in the Sun for his living . 
 They wear their hair something long , and cut before either with stone or knife , very disorderly . Their women wear their hair long , and knit up with two loupes , showing forth on either side of their faces , and the rest foltred upon a knot . Also some of their women raze their faces proportionally , as chin , cheeks , and forehead , and the wrists of their hands , whereupon they lay a colour which continueth dark azurine . 
 They eat their meat all raw , both flesh , fish , and foul , or something per boiled with blood and a little water which they drink . For lack of water they will eat ice , that is hard frozen , as pleasantly as we will do Sugar Candie , or other Sugar . 
 If they for necessities sake stand in need of the premises , such grass as the Country yields they pluck up and eat , not deintily , or salletwise to allure their stomachs to appetite : but for necessities sake without either salt , oils or washing , like brutus beasts devouring the same . They neither use table , stool , or table cloth for comeliness : but when they are imbrued with blood knuckle deep , and their knives in like sort , they use their tongues as apt instruments to lick them clean : in doing whereof they are assured to lose none of their victuals . 
 Dogs like They frank or keep certain dogs not much unlike unto wolves . Wolves , which they yoke together , as we do oxen & horses , to a sled or trade : and so carry their necessaries over the ice and snow from place to place : as the captive , whom we have , made perfect signs . And when those dogs are not apt for the same use : or when with hunger they are constrained for lack of other victuals , 224 
 > 577-they eat them : so that they are as needful for them They eat dtp in respect of their bigness , as our oxen are for us . fiesh - 
 They apparel themselves in the skins of such beasts as they kill , sewed together with the sinews of them . All the foul which they kill , they skin , and make thereof one kind of garment or other , to defend them from the cold . 
 They make their apparel with hoods and tails , which Hoods and . tails they give when they think to gratify any friend - tatles ship showed unto them : a great sign of friendship a " are ’ with them . The men have them not so side as the 
 women . 
 The men and women wear their hose close to their 
 legs , from the waste to the knee without any open before , as well the one kind as the other . Upon their legs they wear hose of leather , with the fur side inward two or three pair on at once , and especially the women . In those hose they put their knives , needles , and other things needful to bear about . They put a bone within their hose , which reaches from the foot to the knee , whereupon they draw their said hose , and so in place of garters they are held from falling down about their feet . 
 They dress their skins very soft and souple with the hair on . In cold weather or Winter they wear the fur side inward : and in Summer outward . Other 
 apparel they have none but the said skins . 
 Those beasts , fish , and fowls , which they kill , are their meat , drink , apparel , houses , bedding , hose , shoes , thread , and sails for their boats , with many other necessaries whereof they stand in need , and almost all their riches . 
 Their houses are tents made of Seal skins , pitched up with 4. Fir quarters foure square meeting at the top , and the skins sewed together with sinews , and laid thereupon : they are so pitched up , that the entrance into them is always South or against the Sun . 
 They have other sorts of houses which we found not 
 Their houses of Seal skins and Fir . 
 VII 
 225 
 to be inhabited , which are raised with stones and Whale bones , and a skin laid over them , to withstand the rain , or other weather : the entrance of them being not much unlike and Ovens mouth , whereto I think they resort for a time to fish , hunt , and foul , and so leave them until the next time they come thither again . 
 Their weapons Their weapons are bows , arrows , darts , and slings . 
 of defence . Their bows are of wood of a yard long , sinewed at the back with strong sinews , not glued too , but fast girded and tied on . Their bow strings'are likewise sinews . Their arrows are three pieces nocked with bone , and ended with bone , with those two ends , and the wood in the midst , they pass not in length half a yard or little more . They are feathered with two feathers the pen end being cut away , and the feathers laid upon the arrow with the broad side to the wood ; insomuch that they seem when they are tied on , to have foure Three sorts of feathers . They have also three sorts of heads to those heads to their arrows . one sort of stone or iron , proportioned like to ’ a heart : the second sort of bone , much like unto a stopped head , with a hook on the same : the third sort of bone likewise made sharp at both sides , and sharp pointed . They are not made very fast but lightly tied to , or else set in a nock , that upon small occasion the arrows leave these heads behind them : and they are of small force , except they be very near when they shoot . 
 Two sorts of Their Darts are made of two sorts : the one with many rts ' forks of bones in the before end and likewise in the midst : their proportions are not much unlike our toast - 
 ing irons but longer : these they cast out of and instrument of [ wood , very readily . The other sort is greater then the first aforesaid , with a long bone made sharp on both sides not much unlike a Rapier , which I take to be their most hurtful weapon . 
 Two sorts of They have two sorts of boats made of leather , set out ather^ on * nner S^e Quarters °f wood , artificially tied together with thongs of the same : the greater sort are not much unlike our wherries , wherein sixeteene or 
 226 
 twenty men may fit : they have for a sail dressed the guts of such beasts as they kill very fine and thin , which they sew together : the other boat is but for one man to fit and row in with one oar . 
 Their order of fishing , hunting , and fouling are with these said weapons : but in what sort , or how they use them we have no perfect knowledge as yet . 
 I can suppose their abided or habitation not to be here , for that neither their houses or apparel , are of such force to withstand the extremity of cold , that the Country seems to be infected with all : neither do I see any sign likely to perform the same . 
 Those houses or rather dens which stand there , have no sign of footway , or any thing else trodden , which is one of the chiefest tokens of habitation . And those 
 They use ft foul , fish , and hunt . 
 It is to be supposed that their inhabiting is elsewhere .. 
 tents which they bring with them , when they have sufficiently hunted and fished , they remove to other places : and when they have sufficiently stored them of such victuals , as the Country yields or brings forth , they return to their winter stations or habitations . This conjecture do I make , for the infertility which I conjecture to be in that Country . 
 They have some iron whereof they make arrow heads , T^ir ttse it knives , and other little instruments , to work their boats , bows , arrows , and darts withal , which are very unapt to do any thing withal but with great labour . 
 It seems that they have conversation with some other people , of whom for exchange they should receive the same . They are greatly delighted with any thing that is bright , or gives a found . 
 What knowledge they have of God , or what Idol Anthropophagi . they adore , we have no perfect intelligence , I think them rather Anthropophagi , or devourers of men flesh then otherwise : for that there is no flesh or fish which they find dead ( smell it never so filthily ) but they will eat it , as they find it without any other dressing . A loathsome thing , either to the beholders or hearers . 
 There is no manner of creeping beast hurtful , except 
 227 
 Signet of gold some Spiders ( which as many affirm , are signs of great eure - store of gold ) and also certain stinging Gnats , which bite so fiercely , that the place where they bite shortly after swells and itcheth very soar . 
 Signs of gold They make signs of certain people that wear bright 
 from other plataeae of gold in their foreheads , and other places of ' their bodies . 
 Description of The Countries' on both sides the straights lie very the Countries . high with rough stony mountains , and great quantity of snow thereon . There is very little plain ground and no grass , except a little which is much like unto moss that grows on soft ground , such as we get TurfFes in . There is no wood at all . To be brief there is nothing fit or profitable for the use of man , which that Country with root yields or brings forth : Howbeit there is great quantity of Dear , whose skins are like unto Asses , there heads or horns do far exceed , as well in length as also in breadth , any in these our parts or Countries' : their feet likewise are as great as our oxens , which we measured to be seven or eight inches in breadth . There are also hares , wolves , fishing bears , and sea foul of sundry sorts . 
 As the Country is barren and unfertile , so are they rude and of no capacity to culture the same to any perfection : but are contented by their hunting , fishing , and fouling , with raw flesh and warm blood to satisfy their greedy paunches , which is their only glory . 
 A sign oj There is great likelihood of Earthquakes or thunder : Earthquakes £or t^at there are huge and monstrous mountains , whose greatest substance are stones , and those stones so shaken with some extraordinary means that one is separated from another , which is discordant from all other Quarries . 
 There are no rivers or running springs , but such as uchatlhe111 trough heat of the Sun , with such water as Sun does descendeth from the mountains and hills , whereon cause to come great drifts of snow do lie , are engendered . 
 of mow . It argue also that there should be none : for that 
 the earth , which with the extremity of the Winter is so 228 
 1577-frosen within , that that water which should have recourse probability within the same to maintain springs , hath not his . 
 motion , whereof great waters have their originali , as by er 
 experience is seen otherwhere . Such valleis as are risers in the capable to receive the water , that in the Summer time ground . by the operation of the Sun descendeth from great abundance of snow , which continually lies on the mountains and hath no passage , sinks into the earth and so vanishes away , without any runnell above the earth , by which occasion or continual standing of the said water , the earth is opened , and the great frost yields to the force thereof , which in other places foure or five fathoms within the ground for lack of the said moisture , the earth ( even in the very Summer time ) is frozen , and so combineth the stones together , that scarcely instruments with great force can unknit them . 
 Also where the water in those valleis can have no such passage away , by the continuance of time in such order as is before rehearsed , the yearly descent from the mountains fills them full , that at the lowest bank of the same , they fallen into the valley , and so continue as fishing Ponds or Stagnes in Summer time full of water , and in the Winter hard frozen : as by skarres that remain thereof in Summer may easily be perceived : so that the heat of Summer is nothing comparable or of force to dissolve the extremity of cold that comes in Winter . 
 Nevertheless I am assured that below the force of the frost within the earth , the waters have recourse , and empty themselves out of sighed into the sea , which through the extremity of the frost are constrained to do the same : by which occasion the earth within is kept the warmer , and springs have their recourse , which is the Springs nou-onely nutriment of gold and Minerals within the same . 
 There is much to be said of the commodities of these Countries' , which are couched within the bowels of the earth , which I let pass till more perfect trial be made thereof . 
 229 
 Gur departure from those Countries' . 
 How when we lost our i . Barks , which God nevertheless restored . 
 The conclusion . 
 The 24. of August , after we had satisfied our minds with fraught sufficient for our vessels , though not our covetous desires with such knowledge of the Country , people , and other commodities as are before rehearsed , we departed therehence . The 17. of September we fell with the lands end of England , and so sailed to Milford Haven , from whence our general road to the Court for order , to what Port or Haven to conduct the ship . 
 We lost our two Barks in the way homeward , the one the 29. of August , the other the 31. of the same month , by occasion of great tempest and fog . Howbeit God restored the one to Bristowe , and the other made his course by Scotland to Yermouth . In this voyage we lost two men , one in the way by Gods visitation , and the other homeward cast over board with a surge of the sea . 
 I Could declare unto the Readers , the latitude and longitude of such places and regions as we have be at , but not altogether so perfectly as our master's and others , with many circumstances of tempests and other accidents incident to Sea faring men , which seem not altogether strange , but I let them pass to their reports as men most apt to set forth and declare the same . I have also left the names of the Countries' on both the shores untouched , for lack of understanding the peoples 
 yet to be declared . 
 Countries' new discovered where commodity is to be looked for , do better accord with a new name given by the discoverers , then and uncertain name by a doubtful Author . 
 Our general nam sundry Islands , Mountains , Capes , and Harboroughs after the names of diverse Noble men and other gendemen his friends , aswell on the one shore as also on the other . 
 . 