A true discourse of the three Voyages of discovery , for the finding of a passage to Cathaya , by the Northwest , under the conduct of Martin Frobisher general : Before which , as a necessary Preface is prefixed a twofold e discourse , containing certain reasons to prove all parts of the World habitable . Penned by Master George Best , a Gentleman employed in the same voyages . 
 What commodities and instructions may be reaped by diligent reading this Discourse . 
 i TTUrst , by example may be gathered , how a Dis-J ? coverer of new Countries is to proceed in his first attempt of any Discovery . 
 2 Item , how he should be provided of shipping , victuals , munition , and choice of men . 
 3 How to proceed and deal with strange people , be they never so barbarous , cruel and fierce , either by lenity or otherwise . 
 4 How trade of Merchandise may be made without money . 
 5 How a Pilot may deal , bqing environed with mountains of ice in the frozen Sea. 
 25° 
 6 How length of days , change of seasons , Summer's and Winter's do differ in ' sundry regions . 
 7 How dangerous it is to attempt new Discoveries , either for the length of the voyage , or the ignorance of the language , the want of Interpreters , new and unaccustomed Elements and airs , strange and unsavoury meats , danger of thieves and robbers , fierceness of wild beasts and fish , hugeness of woods , dangerousness of Seas , dread of tempests , fear of hidden rocks , steepness of mountains , darkness of sudden falling fogs , continual pains taking without any rest , and infinite others . 
 8 How pleasant and profitable it is to attempt new Discoveries , either for the sundry sights and shapes of strange beasts and fish , the wonderful works of nature , the different manners and fashions of diverse nations , the sundry sorts of government , the sighed of strange trees , fruit , fowls , and beasts , the infinite treasure of Pearl , Gold and Silver , the news of new found lands , the sundry positions of the Sphere , and many others . 
 9 How valiant Captains use to deal upon extremity , and otherwise . 
 10 How trusty soldiers dutifully use to serve . 
 11 Also here may be seen a good example to be observed of any private person , in taking notes , and making observations of all such things as are requisite for a Discoverer of new Countries . 
 12 Lastly , the Reader here may see a good pattern of [ in . 4.8 . J a well governed service , sundry instructions of matters of Cosmography , Geographic , and Navigation , as in reading more at large may be seen . 
 [ Experiences 
 251 
 Experiences and reasons of the Sphere , to prove all parts of the world habitable , and thereby to confute the position of the five Zones . 
 Experience to prove thatTor-rida Zona is habitable . 
 Irst , it may be gathered by experience of our Englishmen in Anno 1553. For Captain Windam made a Voyage with Merchandise to Guinea , and entered so far within the Torrida Zona , that he was within three or foure degrees of the Equinoctial , and his company abiding 
 there certain Months , returned , with gain . 
 Also the Englishmen made another Voyage very prosperous and gainful , An. 1554. to the coasts of Guinea , within 3. degrees of the Equinoctial . And yet it is reported of a truth , that all the tract from Cape de las Palmas trending by C. de tres puntas alongst by Benin , unto the He of S. Thomas ( which is perpendicular under the Equinoctial ) all that whole Bay is more subject to many blooming and smothering heats , with infectious and contagious airs , then any other place in all Torrida Zona : and the cause thereof is some accidents in the land . For it is most certain , that mountains , Seas , woods and lake's etc. may cause through their sundry kind of situation , sundry strange and extraordinary effects , which the reason of the climb otherwise would not give . I mention these Voyages of our Englishmen , not so much to prove that Torrida Zona may be , and is inhabited , as to show their readiness in attempting long and dangerous Navigations . we also among us in England have black Moors , . / Ethiopians , out of all parts of Torrida Zona , which after a small continuance , can well endure the cold of our Country , and why should not we as well abide the heat of their Country ? But what should I name any more experiences , seeing that all the coasts of Guinea and Benin are inhabited of Portugals , Span - 
 252 
 yards , French , and some Englishmen , who there have built Castles and Towns . Only this I will say to the Merchant's of London , that trade yearly to Marochus , it is very certain , that the greatest part of the burning Zone is far more temperate and cool in June , then the Country of Marochus , as shall appear by these reasons and experiences following . For let us first consider the breadth and bigness of this burning Zone ( which as every man knoweth , is 47. degrees ) each Tropicke , which are the bounders thereof , being 23. degrees and a half distant from the Equinoctial . Imagine again two other Parallels , on each side the Equinoctial one , either of them distant from the Equinoctial about 20. degrees , which Parallels may be described either of them twice a year by the Sun , being in the first degrees of Gemini the 11. of May , and in Leo the 13. of July , having North latitude . And again , the Sun being in the first degrees of Sagittarius , the 12. of November , and in Aquarius the 9. of January , having South latitude , I am to prove by experience and reason , that all that distance included between these two Parallels last nam ( containing 40. degrees in latitude , going round about the earth , according to longitude ) is not only habitable , but the same most fruitful and delectable , and that if any extremity of heat be , the same not to be within the space of twenty degrees of the Equinoctial on either side , but only under and about the two Tropickes , and so proportionally the nearer you do approach to either Tropicke , the more you are subject to extremity of heat ( if any such be ) and so Marochus being situate but sixe or seven degrees from the Tropicke of Cancer , shall be more subject to heat , then any place under or near the Equinoctial line . 
 And first by the experience of sundry men , yea thousands , Travelers and Merchant's , to the East and West Indies in many places both directly under , and hard by the Equinoctial , they with one consent affirm , that it aboundeth in the midst of Torrida Zona with all 
 253 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 Marochus more hight then about the Equinoctial . 
 1578. manner of Grain , Herbs , grass , fruit , wood and cattle , that we have here , and thousandes other sorts , far more wholesome , delectable and precious , then any we have in these Northern climates , as very well shall appear to him that will read the Histories and Navi - 
 Marvellous fruitful soil under the Equinoctial . gations of such as have traveled Arabia , India intra & extra Gangem , the Islands Moluccas , America , etc. which all lie about the middle of the burning Zone , where it is truly reported , that the great herbs , as are Radish , Lettuce , Coleworts , Borage , and such like , do wax ripe , greater , more savoury and delectable in taste then ours , within sixteene days after the seed is sown . Wheat being sowed the first of Februarie , was 
 found ripe the first of May , and generally , where it is less fruitful , the wheat will be ripe the fourth month after the seed is sown , and in some places will bring forth and ear as big as the wrist of a man’s arm containing 1000. grains ; Beans , peace , etc. are there ripe twice a year . Also grass being cut down , will grow up in sixe days above one foot high . If our cattle be transported thither , within a small time their young ones become of bigger stature , and more fat then 
 Great trees . ever they would have be in these countries' . There are found in every wood in great numbers , such timber trees as twelve men holding hands together are not able to fathom . And to be short , all they that have be there with one consent affirm , that there are the goodliest green meadows and plains , the fairest mountains 
 Commodities and pleasures under the Equinoctial . covered with all sorts of trees and fruits , the fairest valleys , the goodliest pleasant fresh rivers , stored with infinite kind of fish , the thickest woods , green and bearing fruit all the whole year , that are in all the world . And as for gold , silver , and all other kind of Metals , all kind of spices and delectable fruits , both for delicacy and health , are there in such abundance , as hitherto they have be thought to have been bred no where else but there . And in conclusion , it is now thought that no where else but under the Equinoctial , 254 
 or not far from thence , is the earthly Paradise , and the only place of perfection in this world . And that these things may seem the less strange , because it hath be accounted of the old Philosophers , that there could nothing prosper for the extreme heat of the Sun continually going over their heads in the Zodiac , I thought good here to allege such natural causes as to me seem very substantiali and sure reasons . 
 First you are to understand that the Sun doth work his more or less heat in these lower parts by two means , the one is by the kind of Angle that the Sun beams do make with the earth , as in all Torrida Zona it makes perpendicularly right Angles in some place or other at noon , and towards the two Poles very oblique and uneven Angles . And the other mean is the longer or shorter continuance of the Sun above the Horizon . So that wheresoever these two causes do most concur , there is most excess of heat : and when the one is wanting , the rigor of the heat is less . For though the Sun beams do beatrice perpendicularly upon any region subject unto it , if it hath no continuance or abided above the Horizon , to work his operation in , there can no hight effect proceed . For nothing can be done in a moment . And this second cause mora Solis supra Horizontem , the time of the suns abiding above the Horizon , the old Philosophers never remembered , but regarded only the manner of Angles that the Sun beams made with the Horizon , which if they were equal and right , the heat was the greater , as in Torrida Zona : if they were unequal and oblique , the heat was the less , as towards both Poles , which reason is very good and substantiali : for the perpendicular beams reflect and reverberate in themselves , so that the heat is doubled , every beam striking twice , & by uniting are multiplied , and continue strong in form of a Column . But in our Latitude of 50. and 60. degrees , the Sun beams descend oblique and slanting wise , and so strike but once and depart , and therefore our 
 255 
 Heat is caused by two means that is by his manner of Angle and by his continuance . 
 Note this reason . 
 heat is the less for any effect that the Angle of the Sun beams make . Yet because we have a longer continuance of the Suns presence above our Horizon then they have under the Equinoctial ; by this continuance the heat is increased , for it shines to us 16. or 18. hours sometime , when it continueth with them but twelve hours always . 
 And again , our night is very short wherein cold vapours use to abound , being but sixe or eight hours long , whereas theirs is always twelve hours long , by which two advantages of long days and short nights , though we want the equality of Angle , it comes to-passe that in Summer our heat here is as great as theirs is there , as hath be proved by experience , and is nothing dissonant from good reason . Therefore whosoever will rightly weigh the force of cold and heat in any region , must not only consider the Angle that the Sun beams make , but also the continuance of the same above the Horizon . As first to them under the Equinoctial the Sun is twice a year at noon in their Zenith perpendicular over their heads , and therefore during the two hours of those two days the heat is very urgent , and so perhaps it will be in foure or five days more and hour every day , until the Sun in his proper motion have crossed the Equinoctial ; so that this extreme heat caused by the perpendicular Angle of the Sun beams , endureth but two hours of two days in a year . But if any man say the Sun may scalde a good while before and after it come to the Meridian , so far forth as reason leads , I am content to allow it , and therefore I will measure and proportion the Suns heat , by comparing the Angles there , with the Angles made here in England , because this temperature is best known unto us . As for example , the ii . day of March , when under the Equinoctial it is half hour passed eight of the clock in the morning , the Sun will be in the East about 38. degrees above the Horizon , because there it riseth always at sixe 256 
 of the clock , and moveth every hour 15. degrees , and so high very near will it be with us at London the said eleventh day of March at noon . And therefore look what force the Sun hath with us at noon , the eleventh of March , the same force it seems to have under the Equinoctial at half and hour passed eight in the morning , or rather less force under the Equinoctial . For with us the Sun had be already sixe hours above the horizon , and so had purified and cleansed all the vapours , and thereby his force increased at noon ; but under the Equinoctial , the Sun having be up but two hours and and half , had sufficient to do , to purge and consume the cold and moist vapours of the long night past , and as yet had wrought no effect of heat . And therefore I may boldly pronounce , that there is much less heat at half and hour passed eight under the Equinoctial , then is with us at noon : i fortiori . But in March we are not only contented to have the Sun shining , but we greatly desire the same . Likewise the 11 of June , the Sun in our Meridian is 62 degrees high at London : and under the Equinoctial it is so high after 10 of the clock , and seeing then it is beneficial with us ; A fortiori it is beneficial to them after 10 of the clock . 
 And thus have we measured the force of the Suns greatest heat , the hottest days in the year , under the Equinoctial , that is in March and September , from sixe till after tenne of the clock in the morning , and from two until Sun set . And this is concluded , by respecting only the first . cause of heat , which is the consideration of the Angle of the Sun beams , by a certain similitude , that whereas the Sun shines never above twelve hours , more then eight of them would be cool and pleasant even to us , much more to them that are acquainted always with such warm places . So there remains less then foure hours of any excessive heat , and that only in the two Summer days of the year , that is the eleventh day of March , and the foure-vii 257 R 
 teenth of September : for under the Equinoctial they have two Summers , the one in March , and the other in September , which are our Spring and Autumn : and likewise two Winter's , in June and December , which are our Summer and Winter , as may well appear to him that hath only tasted the principles of the Sphere . But if the Sun be in either Tropicke , or approaching near thereunto , then may we more easily measure the force of his Meridian altitude , that it striketh upon the Equinoctial . As for example , the twelfth of June the Sun will be in the first degree of Cancer . Then look what force the heat of the Sun hath under the Equinoctial , the same force and greater it hath in all that Parallel , where the Pole is elevated between fourtie and seven , Paris in . and fourtie and eight degrees . And therefore Paris in France ss as prance the twelfth day of June sustaineth more heat of the Equinoc - the Sun , then Saint Thomas Hand lying near the tiall in June , same Meridian doth likewise at noon , or the Hands 
 Taprobana , Moluccae , or the firm land of Peru in America , which all lie underneath the Equinoctial . For upon the twelfth day of June aforesaid , the Sun beams at noon do make and Isoscheles Triangle , whose Vertex is the Centre of the Sun , the Basis a line extended from Saint Thomas Hand under the Equinoctial , unto Paris in France near the same Meridian : therefore the two Angles of the Base must needs be equal per 5. primi , Ergo the force of the heat equal , if there were no other cause then the reason of the Angle , as the old Philosophers have appointed . But In June is because at Paris the Sun riseth two hours before it m^then0* r^set^ to under the Equinoctial , and sets like-under the wise two hours after them , by means of the obliquity Equinoctial , of the Horizon , in which time of the Suns presence foure hours in one place more then the other , it works some effect more in one place then in the other , and being of equal height at noon , it must then needs follow to be more hight in the Parallel of Paris , then it is under the Equinoctial . 
 258 
 Also this is and other reason , that when the Sun sets to them under the Equinoctial , it goes very deep and low under their Horizon , almost even to their Antipodes , whereby their twilights are very short , twilights and their nights are made very extreme dark and long , and ’ sl®rter . ’ and so the moisture and coldness of the long nights darker under wonderfully increases , so that at length the Sun the Equinoc-rising can hardly in many hours consume and drive at away the cold humours and moist vapours of the night Paris ' past , which is clean contrary in the Parallel of Paris : for the Sun goes under their Horizon but very little , after a sloping sort , whereby their nights are not very dark , but lightsome , as looking into the North in a clear night without clouds it doth manifestly appear , their twilights are long : for the Parallel of Cancer cutteth not the Horizon of Paris at right Angles , but at Angles very uneven , and unlike as it doth the Horizon of the Equinoctial . Also the Summer day at Paris is sixteene hours long , and the night but eight : where contrariwise under the Equinoctial the day is but twelve hours long , and so long is also the night , in whatsoever Parallel the Sun be : and therefore look what odds and difference of proportion there is between . the Suns abided above the Horizon in Paris , and the abided it hath under the Equinoctial , ( it being in Cancer ) the same proportion would seem to be between the heat of the one place , and heat of the other : for other things ( as the Angle of the whole ark of the Suns progress that day in both places ) are equal . 
 But under the Equinoctial the presence and abided of the Sun above the Horizon is equal to his absence , and abided under the Horizon , eke being twelve hours . And at Paris the continuance and abided of the Sun is above the Horizon sixteene hours long , and but eight hours absence , which proportion is double , from which if the proportion of the equality be subtracted to find the difference , there will remain still a double propor - 
 259 
 In what proportion the Angle of the Sun beantes heateth . 
 They use and have need of fire under the Equinoctial . 
 Cold intermingled with heat under the Equinoctial . 
 cion , whereby it seems to follow , that in June the heat at Paris were double to the heat under the equinoctial . For ( as I have said ) the Angles of the Sun beams are in all points equal , and the cause of difference is , Mora Solis supra Horizontem , the stay of the Sun in the one Horizon more then in the other . Therefore , whosoever could find out in what proportion the Angle of the Sun beams heateth , and what increase the Suns continuance doth add thereunto , it might expressly be set down , what force of heat and cold is in all regions . 
 Thus you partly see by comparing a Climate to us well known , and familiarly acquainted by like height of the Sun in both places , that under the Equinoctial in June is no excessive heat , but a temperate air rather tending to cold . For as they have there for the most part a continual moderate heat , so yet sometime they are a little pinched with cold , and use the benefit of fire as well as we , especially in the evening when they go to bed , for as they lie in hanging beds tied fast in the upper part of the house , so will they have fires made on both sides their bed , of which two fires , the one they devise superstitiously to drive away spirits , and the other to keep away from them the coldness of the nights . 
 Also in many places of Torrida Zona , especially in the higher lands somewhat mountainous , the people a little shrink at the cold , and are often forced to provide themselves clothing , so that the Spaniards have found in the West Indies many people clothed , especially in Winter , whereby appears , that with their heat there is cold intermingled , else would they never provide this remedy of clothing , which to them is rather a grief and trouble then otherwise . For when they go to wars , they will put off all their apparel , thinking it to be cumbersome , and will always go naked , that they thereby might be more nimble in their fight . 
 Some there be that think the middle Zone extreme hight , because the people of the country can , and doe 260 
 • .... IS78 ' live without clothing , wherein they childishly are deceived : for our Climb rather tendeth to extremity of cold , because we cannot live without clothing : for this our double lining , furring , and wearing so many clothes , is a remedy against extremity , and argue not the goodness of the habitation , but inconvenience and injury of cold : and that is rather the moderate , temperate , and delectable habitation , where none of these troublesome things are required , but that we may live naked and bore , as nature brings us forth . 
 Others again imagine the middle Zone to be extreme hight , because the people of Africa , especially the Ethiopians , are so coal black , and their hair like wool curled short , which blackness and curled hair they suppose to come only by the parching heat of the Sun , which how it should be possible I cannot see : for even under the Equinoctial in America , and in the East Indies , and in the Hands Moluccae the people are not black , but tauney and white , with long hair uncurled as we have , so that if the Ethiopians blackness Ethiopians came by the heat of the Sun , why should not those Americans and Indians also be as black as they , seeing ’ 
 the Sun is equally distant from them both , they abiding in one Parallel : for the concave and convex Superficies of the Orb of the Sun is concentrike , and equidistant to the earth ; except any man should imagine somewhat of Aux Solis , and Oppositum , which indifferently may be applied aswell to the one place as to the other . But the Sun is thought to give no otherwise heat , but by way of Angle in reflection , and not by his nearness to the earth : for throughout all Africa , yea in the midst of the middle Zone , and in all other places upon the tops of mountains there lies con - ume tinuall snow , which is nearer to the Orb of the Sun , ^ateth not then the people are in the valley , by so much as the but oneiy height of these mountains amount unto , and yet the reflection . Sun notwithstanding his nearness , can not melt the snow for want of convenient place of reflections . Also 
 261 
 A black Moors son born in England . 
 The colour of the people in Meta Incognita . The complexion of the people of Meta incognita . 
 the middle region of the air where all the hail , frost , and snow is engendered , is nearer unto the Sun then the earth is , and yet there continueth perpetuali cold , because there is nothing that the Sun beams may reflect against , whereby appears that the nearness of the body of the Sun works nothing . 
 Therefore to return again to the black Moors . I my self have seen and Ethiopian as black as a coal brought into England , who taking a fair English woman to wife , begat a son in all respects as black as the father was , although England were his native country , and and English woman his mother : whereby it seems this blackness proceedeth rather of some natural infection of that man , which was so strong , that neither the nature of the Climb , neither the good complexion of the mother concurring , could any thing altar , and therefore , we cannot impute it to the nature of the Climb . And for a more fresh example , our people of Meta Incognita ( of whom and for whom this discourse is taken in hand ) that were brought this last year into England , were all generally of the same colour that many nations be , lying in the midst of the middle Zone . And this their colour was not only in the face which was subject to Sun and air , but also in their bodies , which were still covered with garments as ours are , yea the very sucking child of twelve months age had his skin of the very same colour that most have under the Equinoctial , which thing cannot proceed by reason of the Climb , for that they are at least ten degrees more towards the North then we in England are , No , the Sun never comes near their Zenith by fourtie degrees : for in effect , they are within three or foure degrees of that which they call the frozen Zone , and as I said , fourtie degrees from the burning Zone , whereby it follows , that there is some other cause then the Climate or the Sons perpendicular reflection , that should cause the Ethiopians great blackness . And the most probable cause to my judgement is , that this blackness proceedeth of some 262 
 natural infection of the first inhabitants of that Country , and so all the whole progeny of them descended , are still polluted with the same blot of infection . Therefore it shall not be far from our purpose , to examine the first originali of these black men , and how by a lineali dissent they have hitherto continued thus black . 
 It manifestly and plainly appears by holy Scripture , The cause of that after the generail inundation and overflowing of EthwPians the earth , there remained no more men alive but No ‘ and his three sons , Sem , Cham , and Japhet , who only were left to possess and inhabit the whole face of the earth : therefore all the sundry descents that until this present day have inhabited the whole earth , must needs come of the ofF-spring either of Sem , Cham , or Japhet , as the only sons of Noe , who all three being white , and their wives also , by course of nature should have begotten and brought forth white children . But the envy of our great and continual enemy the wicked Spirit is such , that as he could not suffer our old father Adam to live in the felicity and Angellike state wherein he was first created , but tempting him , sought and procured his ruin and fallen : so again , finding at this flood none but a father and three sons living , he so caused one of them to transgress and disobey his father's commandment , that after him all his posterity should be accursed . The fact of disobedience was this : When The Ark of Noe at the commandment of God had made the Ark and entered therein , and the floodgates of heaven were opened , so that the whole face of the earth , every tree and mountain was covered with abundance of water , he straitely commanded his sons and their wives , that they should with reverence and fear behold the justice and mighty power of God , and that during the time of the flood while they remained in the Ark , they should use continency , and abstain from carnail copulation with their wives : and many other precepts he gave unto them , and admonitions touching the justice of God , in revenging sin , and his mercy in delivering them , 263 
 who nothing deserved it . Which good instructions and exhortations notwithstanding his wicked son Cham disobeyed , and being persuaded that the first child born after the flood ( by right and Law of nature ) should inherit and possess all the dominions of the earth , he contrary to his father's commandment while they were yet in the Ark , used company with his wife , and craftily went about thereby to disinherit the ofF-spring of his other two brothers : for the which wicked and detestable fact , as and example for contempt of Almighty God , and disobedience of parents , God would a son should be born whose name was Chus , who not only it self , but all his posterity after him should be so black and loathsome , that it might remain a spectacle of disobedience to all the world . And of this black and cursed Chus came all these black Moors which are in Africa , for after the water was vanished from off - the face of the earth , and that the land was dry , Sem chosen that part of the land to inhabit in , which now is called Asia , and Japhet had that which now is called Europa , wherein we dwell , and Africa remained for Cham and his black son Chus , and was called Chamesis after the father's name , being perhaps a cursed , dry , sandy , and unfruitful ground , fit for such a generation to inhabit in . 
 Thus you see , that the cause of the Ethiopians blackness is the curse and natural infection of blood , and not the distemperature of the Climate ; Which also may be proved by this example , that these black men are found in all parts of Africa , as well without the Tropickes , as within , even unto Capo de buona Speranza Southward , where , by reason of the Sphere , should be the same temperature that is in Sicilia , Morea and Candie , where all be of very good complexions . Wherefore I conclude , that the blackness proceedeth not of the hotenesse of the Climb , but as I said , of the infection of blood , and therefore this their argument gathered of the African's blackness is not able to destroy the temperature of the middle Zone . we may therefore very well be ascertained , 264 
 that under the Equinoctial is the most pleasant and delectable place of the world to dwell in ; where although the Sun for two hours in a year be direct over their heads , and therefore the heat at that time somewhat of force , yet because it comes so seidome , and continueth so small a time , when it comes , it is not to be weighed , but rather the moderate heat of other Greatest tem-times in all the year to be remembered . And if the feature under heat at any time should in the short day wax somewhat ^umoc~ urgent , the coldness of the long night there would easily refresh it , according as Honterus sayeth , speaking of the temperature under the Equinoctial . 
 Qu6dque die solis violento incanduit aestu , Humida nox reficit , paribusque refrigerat horis . 
 If the heat of the Sun in the day time do burn or parch any thing , the moisture of the night doth cool and refresh the same again , the Sun being as long absent in the night , as it was present in the day . 
 Also our Author of the Sphere , Johannes de Sacro Bosco , in the Chapter of the Zodiac , deriveth the Etymologic of Zodiacus , of the Greek word Zoe , which in Latin signifies Vita , life ; for out of Aristotle he allegeth , that Secundum accessum & recessum solis in Zodiaco , fiunt generationes & corruptiones in rebus inferioribus : according to the Suns going to and from in the Zodiac , the inferior bodies take their causes of generation and corruption . Then it follows , that where there is most going too and from , there is most generation and corruption : which must needs be between the two Tropickes ; for there the Sun goes too and from most , and no where else but there . Therefore between thee Under the two Tropikes , that is , in the middle Zone , is greatest Equinoctiallis increase , multiplication , generation , and corruption of things , which also we find by experience ; for there is ' Summer twice in the year , and twice Winter , so that they have two Harvests in the year , and continual Spring . Seeing then the middle Zone falls out so 
 265 
 Greatest heat under the Tropics . 
 temperate , it rests to dedare where the hottest part of the world should be , for we find some places more hight then others . 
 To answer this doubt , reason persuadeth , the ho test place in the world to be under and about the two Tropickes ; for there more then in any other place do both the causes of heat concur , that is , the perpendicular falling of the Sun beams , at right angles , and a greater continuance of the Sun above the Horizon , the Pole there being elevated three or foure and twentie degrees . And as before I concluded , that though the Sun were perpendicular to them under the Equinoctial , yet because the same continued but a small time , ( their days being short , and their nights long ) and the speedy departure of the Sun from their Zenith , because of the sudden crossing of the Zodiac with the Equinoctial , and that by such continual course and recourse of hight and cold , the temperature grew moderate , and very well able to be endured : so now to them under the two Tropickes , the Sun having once by his proper motion declined twentie degrees from the Equinoctial , begins to draw near their Zenith , which may be ( as before ) about the eleventh day of May , and then begins to send his beams almost at right Angles , about which time the Sun entereth into the first degree of Gemini , and with this almost right Angle the Sun beams will continue until it be past Cancer , that is , the space of two months every day at noon , almost perpendicular over their heads , being then the time of Solstitium Aestivale : which so long continuance of the Sun about their Zenith may cause and extreme heat ( if any be in the world ) but of necessity far more heat then can be under the Equinoctial , where the Sun hath not such long abided in the Zenith , but passes away therehence very quickly . Also under the Tropickes , the day is longer by and hour and a half , then it is under the Equinoctial ; wherefore the heat of the Sun having a longer time of operation , must needs be increased , 266 
 especially seeing the night wherein cold and moisture do abound under the Tropickes , is less then it is under the Equinoctial . Therefore I gather , that under the Tropickes is the hottest place , not only of Torrida Zona , but of any other part of the world , especially because there both causes of heat do concur , that is , the perpendicular falling of the Sun beams two months together , and the longer abided of the Suns presence above the Horison . And by this means more at large is proved , that Marochus in Summer is far more hight , then at any time under the Equinoctial , because it is situate so near the Tropick of Cancer , and also for the length of their days . Neither yet do I think , that the Regions situate under the Tropicks are not habitable , for they are found to be very fruitful also ; although Marochus and some other parts of Afrike near the Tropike for the dryness of the native sandy soil , and some accidents may seem to some to be intemperate for over much heat . For Ferdinandus Oviedus speaking of Cuba and Hispaniola , Hands of America , lying hard Cuba . under , or by the Tropike of Cancer , says , that these HtsPant°la-Hands have as good pasture for cattle , as any other country in the world . 
 Also , they have most wholesome and clear water , and temperate air , by reason whereof the heards of beasts are much bigger , fatter , and of better taste , then any in Spaine , because of the rank pasture , whose moisture is better digested in the herb or grass , by continual ! and temperate heat of the Sun , whereby being made more fat and unctious , it is of better and more steadfast nourishment : For continual and temperate heat doth not only draw much moisture out of the earth to the nourishment of such things as grow , and are engendered in that Climb , but doth also by moderation preserve the same from putrifying , digesting also , and condensating or thickening the said moist nourishment into a gum and ■ unctious substance , whereby appears also , that under moderat'tem the Tropikes is both wholesome , fruitful , and pleasant perature . 
 267 
 habitation , whereby lastly it follows , that all the middle Zone , which until of late days hath be counted and called the burning , broiling , and parched Zone , is now found to be the most delicate , temperate , commodious , pleasant , and delectable part of the world , and especially under the Equinoctial . 
 Having now sufficiently at large declared the temperature of the middle Zone , it remains to speak somewhat also of the moderate and continual heat in cold Regions , as well in the night as in the day all the Summer long , and also how these Regions are habitable to the inhabitants of the same , contrary to the opinion of the old writers . 
 Of the temperature of cold Regions all the Summer long , and also how in Winter the same is habitable , especially to the inhabitants thereof . 
 He cold Regions of the world are those , which tending towards the Poles Arctike , and Antarctike , are without the circuit or bounds of the seven Climates : which assertion agreeable to the opinion of the old Writers , is found and set out in our author of the Sphere , Johannes de 
 Nine Climates . 
 Sacrobosco , where he plainly says , that without the seventh Climate , which is bounded by a Parallel passing at fiftie degrees in Latitude , all the habitation beyond is discommodious and intolerable . But Gemma Frisius a 
 late writer finding England and Scotland to be without the compass of those Climates , wherein he knew to be very temperate and good habitation , added thereunto two other Climates , the uttermost Parallel whereof passes by 56. degrees in Latitude , and therein com-prehendeth over and above the first computation , England , Scotland , Denmarke , Moscovia , etc. which all are rich and mighty kingdoms . 
 268 
 The old writers persuaded by bore conjecture , went about to determine of those places , by comparing them to their own complexions , because they felt them to be hardly tolerable to themselves , and so took thereby and argument of the whole habitable earth ; as if a man born in Marochus , or some other part of Barbarie , comparison should at the latter end of Summer upon the sudden , either naked , or with his thin vesture , be brought into England , he would judge this Region presently not to be habitable , because he being brought up in so warm a Country , is not able here to live , for so sudden and alteration of the cold air : but if the same man had come at the beginning of Summer , and so afterwards by little and little by certain degrees , had felt and acquainted himself with the frost of Autumn , it would have seemed by degrees to harden him , and so to make it far more tolerable , and by use after one year or two , the air would seem to him more temperate . It was counted a great matter in the old time , that there was a brass pot broken in sunder with frozen water in Pontus , which after was brought and showed in Delphis , in token of a miraculous cold region and winter , and therefore consecrated to the Temple of Apollo . 
 This effect being wrought in the Parallel of fouretie three degrees in Latitude , it was presently counted a place very hardly and uneasily to be inhabited for the great cold . And how then can such men define upon other Regions very far without that Parallel , whither they were inhabited or not , seeing that in so near a place they so grossly mistook the matter , and others their followers being contented with the inventions of the old Authors , have persisted willingly in the same opinion , with more confidence then consideration of the cause : so lightly was that opinion received , as touching the unhabitable Climb near and under the Poles . 
 Therefore I am at this present to prove , that all the land lying between the last climate even unto the point ° ' directly under either poles , is or may be inhabited , habitable . 
 369 
 especially of such creatures as are engendered and bred therein . For indeed it is to be confessed , that some particular living creature cannot live in every particular place or region , especially with the same joy and felici tie , as it did where it was first bred , for the certain agreement of nature that is between the place and the thing 
 Elephant . bred in that place ; as appears by the Elephant , which being translated and brought out of the second or third climate , though they may live , yet will they never engender or bring forth young . Also we see the like in many kinds Orange tree , of plants and herbs ; for example , the Orange trees , although in Naples they bring forth fruit abundantly , in Room and Florence they will bear only fair green leaves , but not any fruit : and translated into England , they will hardly bear either flowers , fruit , or leaves , but are the next Winter pinched and withered with cold : yet it follows not for this , that England , Rome , and Florence should not be habitable . 
 Twa causes of ln the proving of these cold regions habitable , I shall heat - very short , because the same reasons serve for this purpose , which were alleged before in the proving the middle Zone to be temperate , especially seeing all heat and cold proceed from the Sun , by the means either of the Angle which his beams do make with the Horizon , or else by the long or short continuance of the Suns presence above ground : so that if the Suns beams do beatrice perpendicularly at right Angles , then there is one cause of heat , and if the Sun do also long continue above the Horizon , then the heat thereby is much increased by access of this other cause , & so grows to a kind of extremity . And these two causes , as I said before , do most concur under the two Tropicks , and therefore there is the greatest heat of the world . And likewise , where both these causes are most absent , there is greatest want of heat , and increase of cold ( seeing that cold is nothing but the privation and absence of heat ) and if one cause be wanting , and the other present , the effect will grow indifferent . Therefore this is to be 
 270 
 understood , that the nearer any region is to the Equinoctial , the higher the Sun does rise over their heads at noon , and so makes either right or near right Angles , but the Sun tarrieth with them so much the shorter time , and causeth shorter days , with longer and colder nights , to restore the damage of the day past , by reason of the moisture consumed by vapour . But in such regions , over the which the Sun riseth lower ( as in regions extended towards either pole ) it makes there unequal Angles , but the Sun continueth longer , and makes longer days , and causeth so much shorter and warmer nights , as retaining warm vapours of the day past . For there are found by experience Summer Hight nights nights in Scotland and Gothland very hight , when under never tO / ie the Equinoctial they are found very cold . This benefit of the Suns long continuance & increase of the day , does augment so much the more in cold regions as they are nearer the poles , and ceases not increasing until it come directly under the point of the pole Arcticke , where the Sun continueth above ground the space of .. sixe months or half a year together , and so the day ? ' 
 is half a year long , that is the time of the Suns being in the North signs , from the first degree of Aries until the last of Virgo , that is all the time from our io day 
 of March until the 14 of September . The Sun their - °f before during the time of these sixe months without any Sixe monet , is-offence or hindrance of the night , gives his influence upon those lands with heat that never ceases during that time , which makes to the great increase of Summer , by reason of the Suns continuance . Therefore it follows , that though the Sun be not there very high over their heads , to cause right angle beams , and to give great heat , yet the Sun being there sometime almost 24 degrees high does cast a convenient and mean heat , which there continueth without hindrance of the night the space of sixe months ( as is before said ) during which 
 time there follows to be a convenient , moderate and Moderate heat temperate heat : or else rather it is to be suspected the under you poles . 
 271 
 The Sun never sets in 182 days . 
 Horizon and Equinoctial all one under the pole . 
 heat there to be very great , both for continuance , and also , Quia virtus unita crescit , the virtue and strength of heat united in one increases . If then there be such a moderate heat under the poles , and the same to continue so long time ; what should move the old writers to say there cannot be place for habitation . And that the certainty of this temperate heat under both the poles might more manifestly appear , let us consider the position & quality of the sphere , the length of the day , and so gather the height of the Sun at all times , and by consequent the quantity of his angle , and so lastly the strength of his heat . 
 Those lands and regions lying under the pole , and having the pole for their Zenith , must needs have the Equinoctial circle for their Horizon : therefore the Sun entering into the North signs , and describing every 24 hours a parallel to the Equinoctial by the diurnal motion of Primum mobile , the same parallels must needs be wholly above the Horizon : and so look how many degrees there are from the first of Aries to the last of Virgo , so many whole revolutions there are above their Horizon that dwell under the pole , which amount to 182 , and so many of our days the Sun continueth with them . During which time they have there continual day and light , without any hindrance of moist nights . Yet it is to be noted , that the Sun being in the first degree of Aries , and last degree of Virgo , makes his revolution in the very horizon , so that in these 24 hours half the body of the Sun is above the horizon , and the other half is under his only centre , describing both the horizon and the equinoctial circle . 
 And therefore seeing the greatest declination of the Sun is almost 24 degrees , it follows , his greatest height in those countries' to be almost 24 degrees . And so high is the Sun at noon to us in London about the 29 of October , being in the 15 degree of Scorpio , and likewise the 21 of January being in the 15 of Aquarius . Therefore look what force the Sun at noon hath in 
 272 
 London the 29 of October , the same force of heat it London . hath , to them that dwell under the pole , the space almost of two months , during the time of the Summer solstitium , and that without intermingling of any cold night ; so that if the heat of the Sun at noon could be well measured in London ( which is very hard to do , because of the long nights which engender great moisture and cold ) then would manifestly appear by express numbers the manner of the heat under the poles , which certainly must needs be to the inhabitants very commodious and profitable , if it incline not to overmuch heat , and if moisture do not want . 
 For as in October in England we find temperate air , and have in our gardens herbs and flowers notwithstanding our cold1 nights , how much more should they have the same good air , being continual without night . This heat of ours continueth but one hour , while the Sun is in that meridian , but theirs continueth a long time in one height . This our heat is weak , and by the coolness of the night vanishes , that heat is strong , and by continual access is still increased and strengthened . And thus by a similitude of the equal height of the Sun in both places appears thee come - Commodious modious and moderate heat of the regions under the t^ngt " ider . ° the poles . 
 poles . 1 
 And surely I cannot think that the divine providence hath made any thing uncommunicable , but to have given such order to all things , that one way or other the same should be employed , and that every thing and place should be tolerable to the next : but especially all things in this lower world be given to man to have dominion and use thereof . Therefore we need no longer to doubt of the temperate and commodious habitation under the poles during the time of Summer . 
 But all the controversy consisteth in the Winter , for then the Sun leaveth those regions , and is no more seen for the space of other sixe months , in the which time all the Suns course is under their horizon for vii 273 s 
 the space of half a year , and then those regions ( say some ) must needs be deformed with horrible darkness , and continual night , which may be the cause that beasts can not seek their food , and that also the cold should then be intolerable . By which double evils all living creatures should be constrained to die , and were not able to endure the extremity and injury of Winter , and famine ensuing thereof , but that all things should perish before the Summer following , when they should bring forth their brood and young , and that for these causes the said Climb about the pole should be desolate and not habitable . To all which objections may be answered in this manner : First , that though the Sun be absent from them those six months , yet it follows not that there should be such extreme darkness ; for as the Sun is departed under their horizon , so is it not far from them : and not so soon as the Sun falls so suddenly comes the dark night ; but the evening does substitute and prolong the day a good while after by twilight . After which time the residue of the night receives light of the Moon and Stars , until the break of the day , which gives also a certain light before the Suns rising ; so that by these means the nights are seidome dark ; which is verified in all parts of the world , but least in the middle Zone under the Equinoctial , where the twilights are short , and the nights darker then in any other place , because the Sun goes under their horizon so deep , even to their antipodes . We see in England in the Summer nights , when the Sun goes not far under the horizon , , that by the light of the Moon & Stars we may travel all night , and if occasion were , do some other labour also . And there is no man that doubteth whither our cattle can see to feed in the nights , seeing we are so well certified thereof by our experience : and by reason of the sphere our nights should be darker then any time under the poles . 
 The Astronomers consent that the Sun descending 274 
 from our upper hemisphere at the 18 parallel under the horizon makes and end of twilight , so that at length the dark night ensueth , and that afterwards in the morning the Sun approaching again within as many parallels , does drive away the night by access of the twilight . Again , by the position of the sphere under the pole , the horizon , and the equinoctial are all one . These revolutions therefore that are parallel to the equinoctial are also parallel to the horizon , so that the Sun descending under that horizon , and there describing certain parallels not far distant , does not bring dark nights to those regions until it come to the parallels distant 18 degrees from the equinoctial , that is , about the 21 degree of Scorpio , which will be about the 4 day of our November , and after the Winter solstitium , the Sun returning back again to the 9 degree of Aquarius , which will be about the 19 of January ; during which time only , that is , from the 4 day of November until the 19 day of January , which is about six weeks space , those regions do want the commodity of twilights : therefore , during the time of these said six months of darkness under the poles , the night is destitute of the benefit of the Sun and the said twilights only for the The regions space of six weeks or thereabouts . And yet neither this under thepole time of six weeks is without remedy from heaven ; for the Moon with her increased light hath access at that time , and illuminateth the months lacking light every one of themselves severally half the course of that month , by whose benefit it comes to pass that the night nam extreme dark possesses those regions no longer then one month , neither that continually , or all at one time , but this also divided into two sorts of shorter nights , of the which either of them endureth for the space of 15 days , and are illuminate of the Moon accordingly . 
 And this reason is gathered out of the sphere , whereby we may testify that the Summer's are warm and fruitful , and the Winter's nights under the pole are tolerable to living creatures . And if it be so that the Winter and 
 275 
 Winter nights time of darkness there be very cold , yet hath not nature unfer^ left them unprovided therefore : for there the beasts are sng crea - covered with hair so much the thicker in how much the tures . vehemency of cold is greater ; by reason whereof the best and richest furs are brought out of the coldest regions . Also the fowls of these cold countries' have thicker skins , thicker feathers , and more stored of down then in other hight places . Our English men that travel to S. Nicholas , and go a fishing to Wardhouse , enter far within the circle Arctike , and so are in the frozen Zone , and yet there , aswell as in Island and all along those Northern Seas , they find the greatest store of the greatest fish that are ; as Whale's , etc. and also abundance of mean fish ; as Herrings , Cods , Haddocks , Brets , etc. which argue that the sea as well as the land may be and is well frequented and inhabited in the cold countries' . 
 And objection But some perhaps will marvel there should be such °f Meta incog - temperate places in the regions about the poles , when at 
 ' under 62 degrees in latitude our captain Frobisher & his company were troubled with so many and so great mountains of fleeting ice , with so great storms of cold , with such continual snow on tops of mountains , and with such barren soil , there being neither wood nor trees , but low shrubs , and such like . To all which objections may be answered thus : First , those infinite Islands of ice were engendered and congealed in time of Winter , and now by the great heat of Summer were thawed , and then by ebbs , floods , winds , and currents , were driven to and from , and troubled the fleet ; so that this is and argument to prove the heat in Summer there to be great , that was able to thaw so monstrous mountains of ice . As for continual snow on tops of mountains , it is there not otherwise then is in the hottest part of the middle Zone , where also lies great snow all the Summer long upon tops of mountains , because there is not sufficient space for the Suns reflection , whereby the snow should be melted . Touching the cold stormy 276 
 winds and the barrenness of the country , it is there as it is in Cornwall and Devonshire in England , which parts though we know to be fruitful and fertile , yet on the North side thereof all alongst the coast within seven or eight miles off the sea there can neither hedge nor tree grow , although they be diligently by art husbanded and seen unto : and the cause thereof are the Northern driving winds , which coming from the sea are so bitter and sharp that they kill all the young & tender plants , and suffer scarce any thing to grow ; and so is it in the Islands of Meta incognita , which are subject most to Meta incogEast & Northeastern winds , which the last year choked habited . up the passage so with ice that the fleet could hardly recover their port . Yet notwithstanding all the objections that may be , the country is habitable ; for there are men , women , children , & sundry kind of beasts in great plenty , as bears , deer , hares , foxes and dogs : all kind of flying fowls , as ducks , seamewes , wilmots , partridges , larks , crows , hawks , and such like , as in the third book you shall understand more at large . Then it appears that not only the middle Zone but also the Zones about the poles are habitable . 
 Which thing being well considered , and familiarly Captain known to our general captain Frobisher , aswell for F^uhers that he is thoroughly furnished of the knowledge of the 5 sphere and all other skills appertaining to the art of navigation , as also for the confirmation he hath of the same by many years experience both by sea and land , and being persuaded of a new and nearer passage to Cataya then by Capo de buona Speranda , which the Portugals yearly use : he began first with himself to devise , and then with his friends to confer , and laid a plain plate unto them that that voyage was not only possible by the Northwest , but also he could prove easy to be performed . And further , he determined and resolved with himself to go make full proof thereof , and to accomplish or bring true certificate of the truth , or else never to return again , knowing this to be the only thing of 
 277 
 the world that was left yet undone , whereby a notable mind might be made famous and fortunate . But although his will were great to perform this notable voyage , whereof he had conceived in his mind a great hope by sundry sure reasons and secret intelligence , which here for sundry causes I leave untouched , yet he wanted altogether means and ability to set forward , and perform the same . Long time he conferred with his private friends of these secrets , and made also many offers for the performing of the same in effect unto sundry merchant's of our country above 15 years before he attempted the same , as by good witness shall well appear ( albeit some evil willers which challenge to themselves the fruits of other men's labours have greatly injured him in the reports of the same , saying that they have be the first authors of that actium , and that they have learned him the way , which themselves as yet have never gone ) but perceiving that hardly he was harkened unto of the merchant's , which never regard virtue without sure , certain , and present gains , he repaired to the Court ( from whence , as from the fountain of our Common wealth , all good causes have their chief increase and maintenance ) and there laid open to many great estates and learned men the plot and sum of his device . And among many honourable minds which favoured his honest and commendable enterprise , he was specially bound and beholding to the right honourable Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwicke , whose favourable mind and good disposition hath always be ready to countenance and advance all honest actions with the authors and executers of the same : and so by means of my lord his honourable countenance he received some comfort of his cause , and by little and little , with no small expense and pain brought his cause to some perfection , and had drawn together so many adventurers and such sums of money as might well defray a reasonable charge to furnish himself to sea withal . 
 He prepared two small barks of twenty and five and 278 
 1578. twenty tun a piece , wherein he intended to accomplish his pretended voyage . Wherefore , being furnished with the foresaid two barks , and one small pinnace of ten tun burden , having therein victuals and other necessaries for twelve months provision , he departed upon the said voyage from Black-wall the 15 or June anno Domini 1576. 
 One of the barks wherein he went was nam The Gabriel , and the other The Michael ; and sailing Northwest from England upon the 11 of July he had sighed of and high and ragged land , which he judged to be Frisland ( whereof some authors have made mention ) but durst not approach the same by reason of the great store of ice that lay alongst the coast , and the great mists that troubled them not a little . Not far from thence he lost company of his small pinnace , which by means of the great storm he supposed to be swallowed up of the Sea , wherein he lost only foure men . 
 Also the other bark nam The Michael mistrusting 7^ Michael the matter , conveyed themselves privily away from him , returned and returned home , with great report that he was cast me-away . 
 The worthy captain notwithstanding these discomforts , although his mast was sprung , and his top mast blown overboard with extreme foul weather , continued his course towards the Northwest , knowing that the sea at length must needs have and ending , & that some land should have a beginning that way ; and determined therefore at the least to bring true proof what land and sea the same might be so far to the Northwestwards , beyond any man that hath heretofore discovered . And the twentieth of July he had sighed of and high land , which he called Queen Elizabeths Foreland , after her Majesties name . And sailing more Northerly alongst that coast , he descried another foreland with a great gut , bay , or passage , divided as it were two main lands or continents asunder . There he met with store of exceeding great ice all this coast along , and coveting still to continue his 
 279 
 " Frobishers first entrance within you straights . 
 Frobishers straights . 
 course to the Northwards , was always by contrary wind detained overthwart these straights , and could not get beyond . Within few days after he perceived the ice to be well consumed and gone , either there ingulfed in by some swift currents or indrafts , carried more to the Southwards of the same straights , or else conveyed some other way : wherefore he determined to make proof of this place , to see how far that gut had continuance , and whither he might carry himself thorough the same into some open sea on the back side , whereof he conceived no small hope , and so entered the same the one and twentieth of July , and passed above fifty leagues therein , as he reported , having upon either hand a great main or continent . And that land upon his right hand as he sailed Westward he judged to be the continent of Asia , and there to be divided from the firm of America , which lies upon the left hand over against the same . 
 This place he nam after his name , Frobishers straights , like as Magellanus at the Southwest end of the world , having discovered the passage to the South sea ( where America is divided from the continent of that land , which lies under the South pole ) and called the same straights , Magellanes straits . 
 After he had passed 60 leagues into this foresaid straight , he went ashore , and found signs where fire had be made . 
 Dear . He saw mighty deer that seemed to be mankind , 
 which ran at him , and hardly he escaped with his life in a narrow way , where he was feign to use defence and policy to save his life . 
 In this place he saw and perceived sundry tokens of the peoples resorting thither . And being ashore upon the top of a hill , he perceived a number of small things fleeting in the sea afar off , which he supposed to be porposes or seals , or some kind of strange fish ; but coming nearer , he discovered them to be men in small The first sighed boats made of leather . And before he could descend of you Savages . down from the hill , certain of those people had almost 280 
 cut off his boat from him , having stolen secretly behind the rocks for that purpose , where he speedily hasted to his boat , and bent himself to his halberd , and narrowly escaped the danger , and saved his boat . Afterwards he had sundry conferences with them , and they came aboard his ship , and brought him salmon Salmon . and raw flesh and fish , and greedily devoured the same before our men's faces . And to show their agility , they tried many masteries upon the ropes of the ship after our mariners fashion , and appeared to be very strong of their arms , and nimble of their bodies . They exchanged coats of seals , and bears skins , and such like , with our men ; and received bells , looking glasses , and other toys , in recompense thereof again . After great courtesy , and many meetings , our mariners , contrary to their captains direction , began more easily to 
 trust them ; and five of our men going ashore were by Five EngRsh-them intercepted with their boat , and were never since herd of to this day again : so that the captain being t^en destitute of boat , bark , and all company , had scarcely sufficient number to conduct back his bark again . 
 He could now neither convey himself ashore to rescue his men ( if he had be able ) for want of a boat ; and again the subtle traitors were so wary , as they would after that never come within our men's danger . The captain notwithstanding desirous to bring some token from thence of his being there , was greatly discontented that he had not before apprehended some of them : and therefore to deceive the deceivers he wrought a pretty policy ; for knowing well how they greatly delighted in our toys , and specially in bells , he rang a pretty lowbell , making signs that he would give him the same that would come and fetch it . And because they would not come within his danger for fear , he flung one bell unto them , which of purpose he threw short , that it might fallen into the sea and be lost . And to make Taking of the them more greedy of the matter he rang a louder bell , firstSava&-so that in the end one of them came never the ship 
 281 
 The taking possession of Meta incognita . 
 How the over was found by chance . 
 side to receive the bel ; which when he thought to take at the captains hand , he was thereby taken himself : for the captain being readily provided let the bell fallen , and caught the man fast , and plucked him with main force boat and all into his bark out of the sea . Whereupon when he found himself in captivity , for very choler and disdain he bit his tongue in twaine within his mouth : notwithstanding , he died not thereof , but lived until he came in England , and then he died of cold which he had taken at sea . 
 Now with this new prey ( which was a sufficient witness of the captains far and tedious travel towards the unknown parts of the world , as did well appear by this strange infideli , whose like was never seen , read , nor herd of before , and whose language was neither known nor understood of any ) the said captain Frobisher returned homeward , and arrived in England in Harwich the 2 of October following , and thence came to London 1576 , where he was highly commended of all men for his great and notable attempt , but specially famous for the great hope he brought of the passage to Cataya . 
 And it is especially to be remembered that at their first arrival in those parts there lay so great store of ice all the coast along so thick together , that hardly his boat could pass unto the shore . At length , after diverse attempts he commanded his company , if by any possible means they could get ashore , to bring him whatsoever thing they could first find , whither it were living or dead , stock or stone , in token of Christian possession , which thereby he took in behalf of the Queens most excellent Majesty , thinking that thereby he might justify the having and enjoying of the same things that grew in these unknown parts . 
 Some of his company brought flowers , some green grass ; and one brought a piece of black stone much like to a sea coal in colour , which by the weight seemed to be some kind of metal or minerali . This 282 
 was a thing of no account in the judgement of the captain at the first sighed ; and yet for novelty it was kept in respect of the place from whence it came . 
 After his arrival in London , being demanded of sundry his friends what thing he had brought them home out of that country , he had nothing left to present them withal but a piece of this black stone . And it fortuned a gentlewoman one of the adventurers wives to have a piece thereof , which by chance she threw and burned in the fire , so long , that at the length being taken forth , and quenched in a little vinegar , it glistered with a bright marquesset of gold . Whereupon the matter being called in some question , it was brought to certain Goldfiners in London to make assay thereof , who gave out that it held gold , and that very richly for the quantity . Afterwards , the same Goldfiners pro - Many adven-mised great matters thereof if there were any store to turers-be found , and offered themselves to adventure for the searching of those parts from whence the same was brought . Some that had great hope of the matter sought secretly to have a lease at her Majesties hands of those places , whereby to enjoy the mass of so great a public profit unto their own private gains . 
 In conclusion , the hope of more of the same gold over to be found kindled a greater opinion in the hearts of many to advance the voyage again . Whereupon preparation was made for a new voyage against the year following , and the captain more specially directed by commission for the searching more of this gold over I » then for the searching any further discovery of the v°ya& compassage . And being well accompanied with diverse resolute & ven me^ and forward gentlemen , her Majesty then lying at the fir the bring-right honourable the lord of Warwicks house in Essex , mg of over . he came to take his leave , and kissing her hignesse hands , with gracious countenance & comfortable words departed towards his charge . 
 [ A true 
 283 
 A true report of such things as happened in the second voyage of captain Frobisher , pretended for the discovery of a new passage to Cataya , China and the East India , by the Northwest . Ann. Dom. 1577. 
 Eing furnished with one tall ship of her Majesties , nam The Aid , of two hundred tun , and two other small barks , the one nam The Gabriel , the other The Michael , about thirty tun a piece , being fitly appointed with men , munition , victuals , and all things nieces - 
 sary for the voyage , the said captain Frobisher , with the rest of his company came aboard his ships riding at Blackwall , intending ( with Gods help ) to take the first wind and tide serving him , the 25 day of May , in the year of our Lord God 1577. 
 The names of such gentlemen as attempted this discovery , and the number of soldiers and mariners in each ship , as follows . 
 Aboard the Aid being Admiral were the number of 100 men of all sorts , whereof 30 or more were Gentlemen and Soldiers , the rest sufficient and tall Sailors . 
 Aboard the Gabriel being Viceadmiral , were in all 18 persons , whereof sixe were Soldiers , the rest Mariners . 
 Aboard the Michael were 16 persons , whereof five were Soldiers , the rest Mariners . 
 284 
 ' general of the | whole company for her Majesty 1 Martin Frobisher . 
 His Lieutenant His Ensign Corporali of the shot George Best . 1 Richard Philpot. Francis Forder . 
 Aboard the Aid was The rest of the gentlemen ' Henry Carew . Edmund Stafford . John Lee. M. Harvie . Mathew Kinersley . Abraham Lins . Robert Kinersley . Francis Brakenbury . William Armshow . 
 Aboard Gabrieli Aboard Michaell the J was | the J was ] The Master The Mate The Pilot - The Master gunner ' Captain | One Gentleman's The Master 1 Captain | One Gentleman's The Master 1 ' Christopher Hall . Charles Jackman . Andrew Dier . Richard Cox. ' Edward Fenton . William Tamfield . William Smyth . " " Gilbert Yorke . Thomas Chamberlaine . James Bear . 
 ON Whitsunday being the 26 of May , Anno 1577 , early in the morning , we weighed anchor at Blackwall , and fell that tIED down to Gravesend , where we remained until Monday at night .. 
 On munday morning the 27 of May , aboard the Aid the^mmun-we received all the Communion by the Minister of ion 285 
 Thefirst arrival after our departingfrom England . 
 A Mine of silver found in Orkney . 
 Gravesend , and prepared us as good Christians towards God , and resolute men for all fortune's : and towards night we departed to Tilbery Hope . 
 Tuesday the eight and twenty of May , about nine of the clock at night , we arrived at Harwitch in Essex and there stayed for the taking in of certain victuals , until Friday being the thirtieth of May , during which time came letters from the Lords of the Council , straightly commanding our general , not to exceed his compliment and number appointed him , which was , one hundred and twentie persons : whereupon he discharged many proper men which with unwilling minds departed . 
 He also dismissed all his condemned men , which he thought for some purposes very needful for the voyage , and towards night upon Friday the one and thirtieth of May we set sail , and put to the Seas again . And sailing Northward alongst the East coasts of England and Scotland , the seventh day of June we arrived in Saint Magnus found in Orkney Hands , called in latin Orcades , and came to anchor on the South side of the Bay , and this place is reckoned from Blackwall where we set sail first leagues . 
 Here our company going on land , the Inhabitants of these Islands began to flee as from the enemy , whereupon the Lieutenant willed every man to stay together , and went himself unto their houses to declare what we were and the cause of our coming thither , which being understood , after their poor manner they friendly entreated us , and brought us for our money such things as they had . And here our Goldfiners found a Mine of silver . 
 Orkney is the principali of the Isles of the Orcades , and stands in the latitude of fiftie nine degrees and a half . The country is much subject to cold , answerable for such a climate , and yet yields some fruits , and sufficient maintenance for the people contented so poorly to live . 
 There is plenty enough of Poultrey , store of eggs , fish , and foul . 
 286 
 For their bred they have Oaten Cakes , and their drink is Ewes milk , and in some parts Ale . 
 Their houses are but poor without and sluttish enough within , and the people in nature thereunto agreeable . 
 For their fire they burn heath and turf , the Country in most parts being void of wood . 
 They have great want of Leather , and desire our old shoes , apparel , and old ropes ( before money ) for their victuals , and yet are they not ignorant of the valve of our coin . The chief town is called Kyrway . Kyrway the 
 In this Island hath be sometime and Abbey or a CQ , fa ™ ne < > f religious house called Saint Magnus , being on the West s Magnus side of the He , whereof this found bears name , through Found why so which we passed . Their Governor or chief Lord is called . 
 called the Lord Robert Steward , who at our being there , as we understood , was in durance at Edenburgh , by the Regents commandment of Scotland . 
 After we had provided us here of matter sufficient for our voyage the eight of June we set sail again , and passing through Saint Magnus found having a merry wind by night , came clear and lost sighed of all the land , and keeping our course West Northwest by the space of two days , the wind shifted upon us so that we lay in traverse on the Seas , with contrary winds , making good ( as near as we could ) our course to the westward , and sometime to the Northward , as the wind shifted . And hereabout we met with 3 sail of English fishermen from Iseland , bound homeward , by whom we wrote our letters 
 unto our friends in England . We traversed these Seas by the space of 26 days without sighed of any land , and met with much drift wood , & whole bodies of trees . We saw many monstrous fish and strange fowls , 
 Great bodies of trees driving in the seas . 
 Monstrous fish y strange foul living 
 which seemed to live only by the Sea , being there so far distant from any land . At length God favoured us with more prosperous winds , and after we had sailed foure days with good wind in the Poop , the fourth of July the Michaell being foremost a head shot off a piece Sea. 
 287 
 Water being black and smooth signified land to be near . 
 Hands ofyce . 
 We first sighed of Frisland the . 4. of July . 
 Frisland described . 
 And easy kind of Fishing . 
 of Ordinance , and stroke all her sails , supposing that they descried land which by reason of the thick mists they could not make perfect : howbeit , as well our account as also the great alteration of the water , which became more black and smooth , did plainly declare we were not far off the coast . Our general sent his Master aboard the Michaell ( who had been with him the year before ) to bear in with the place to make proof thereof , who descried not the land perfect , but saw sundry huge Hands of ice , which we deemed to be not passed twelve leagues from the shore , for about tenne of the clock at night being the fourth of July , the weather being more clear , we made the land perfect and knew it to be Frislande . And the heighth being taken here , we found our selves to be in the latitude of 60 degrees and a half , and were fallen with the Southermost part of this land . Between Orkney and Frisland are reckoned leagues . 
 This Frislande shows a ragged and high lahde , having the mountains almost covered over with snow alongst the coast full of drift ice , and seems almost inaccessible , and is thought to be and Hand in bigness not inferior to England , and is called of some Authors , West Frislande , I think because it lies more West then any part of Europe . It extendeth in latitude to the Northward very far as seemed to us , and appears by a description set out by two brothers Venetians , Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni , who being driven off from Ireland with a violent tempest made shipwreck here , and were the first known Christians that discovered this land about two hundred years since , and they have in their Sea-cardes set out every part thereof and described the condition of the inhabitants , declaring them to be as civil and religious people as we . And for so much of this land as we have sailed alongst , comparing their Card with the coast , we find it very agreeable . This coast seems to have good fishing , for we lying becalmed let fallen a hook without any bait and presently 288 
 caught a great fish called a Hollibut , who served the whole company for a days meat , and is dangerous meat for surfeiting . And sounding about five leagues off from the shore , our lead brought up in the tallow a kind of Coral almost white , and small stones as bright as Crystal : and it is not to be doubted but that this land may be found very rich and beneficial if it were thoroughly discovered , although we saw no creature there but little birds . It is a marvellous thing to behold of what great bigness and depth some Hands of ice be here , some seventie , some eightie fathom under water , beside that which is above , seeming Hands more then half a mile in circuit . All these ice are in taste fresh , and seem to be bred in the sounds thereabouts , or in some land near the pole , and with the wind and tides are driven alongst the coasts . We found none of these Hands of ice salt in taste , whereby it appears that they were not congealed of the Ocean Sea water which is always salt , but of some standing or little moving lake's or great fresh waters near the shore , caused either by melted snow from tops of mountains , or by continual access of fresh rivers from the land , and intermingling with the Sea water , bearing yet the dominion ( by the force of extreme frost ) may cause some part of salt water to freeze so with it , and so seem a little brackish , but otherwise the main Sea freezeth not , and therefore there is no Mare Glaciale or frozen Sea , as the opinion hitherto hath be . Our general proved landing here twice , but by the sudden fallen of mists ( whereunto this coast is much subject ) he was like to lose sighed of his ships , and being greedy endangered with the driving ice alongst the coast , was forced aboard and feign to surcease his pretence till a better opportunity might serve : and having spent foure days and nights sailing alongst this land , finding the coast subject to such bitter cold and continual mists , he determined to spend no more time therein , but to bear out his course towards the straights called Frobishers straights after the Generals name , who 
 vii 289 TO 
 White Coral god by sounding . 
 Monstrous Isles of ice , in taste fresh , tohere-hence they are supposed to come . 
 The opinion of the frozen seas is destroyed by experience . 
 being the first that ever passed beyond 58 degrees to the Northwards , for any thing that hath been yet known of certainty of New found land , otherwise called the continent or firm land land of America , discovered the said straights this last year 1576. 
 Between Frisland and the straights we had one great storm , wherein the Michaell was somewhat in danger , The Stirrage having her Stirrage broken , and her top Masts blown °bnkenb^ae^ over board , & being not passed 50 leagues short of the tempest ? straights by our account , we stroke sail & lay a hull , fearing the continuance of the storm , the wind being at the Northeast , and having lost company of the Barks The first en - in that flaw of wind , we happily met again the seven-tranceofthe teenth day of July , having the evening before seen * s' diverse Hands of fleeting ice , which gave and argument that we were not far from land . Our general in the morning from the main top ( the weather being reasonfill . 63. ] able clear ) descried land , but to be better assured he sent the two Barks two contrary courses , whereby they might descry either the South or North foreland , the Aid lying off and on at Sea , with a small sail by and Hand of ice , which was the mark for us to meet together again . And about noon , the weather being more clear , we made the North foreland perfect , which Halls Ilana otherwise is called Halles Hand , and also the small Hand bearing the name of the said Hall whence the Over was taken up which was brought into England this last year 1576 the said Hall being present at the finding & taking up thereof , who was then Master in the Gabrieli with Captain Frobisher . At our arrival here all the Seas about this coast were so covered over with huge quanti tie of great ice , that we thought these places might only deserve the name of Mare Glaciale , and be called the Isie Sea. 
 The descrip - This North foreland is thought to be divided from the trafhb continent of the Northerland , by a little found called 
 ' Halls found , which makes it and Hand , and is thought 
 little less then the He of Wight , and is the first entrance 290 
 of the straights upon the Norther side , and stands in the latitude of sixtie two degrees and fiftie minutes , and is reckoned from Frisland leagues . God having blessed us with so happy a landfall , we bore into the straights which run in next hand , and somewhat further up to the Northward , and came as near the shore as we might for the ice , and upon the eighteenth day of July our general taking the Goldfiners with him , attempted to go on shore with a small rowing Pinnace , upon the small Island where the Over was taken up , to prove whither there were any store thereof to be found , but he could not get in all that Hand a piece so big as a Walnut , where the first was found . But our men which sought the other Hands thereabouts found them all to have good store of the Over , whereupon our general with these good tidings returned aboard about tenne of the clock at night , and was joyfully welcomed of the company with a volie of shot . He brought eggs , fowls , and a young Seal aboard , which the company had killed ashore , and having found upon those Hands begins set to catch fowl , and sticks new cut , with other things , he well perceived that not long before some of the country people had resorted thither . 
 Having therefore found those tokens of the peoples access in those parts , and being in his first voyage well acquainted with their subtle and cruel disposition , he provided well for his better safety , and on Friday the ninteenth of July in the morning early , with his best company of Gentlemen and soldiers , to the number of fortie persons , went on shore , aswell to discover the Inland and habitation of the people , as also to find out some fit harborowe for our ships . And passing towards the shore with no small difficulty by reason of the abundance of ice which lay alongst the coast so thick together • that hardly any passage through them might be discovered , we arrived at length upon the main of Halls greater Hand , and found there also aswell as in the other small Hands good store of the Over . And 
 No more gold Over found in the first Hand . 
 Eggs y fowls of Meta incognita . Snares set to catch birds withal . 
 291 
 The building of a Column , called Mount Warwicke . 
 The first sighed of the country people , wafting with a flag . 
 The meeting apart of two Englishmen , with two of that country . 
 The order oj their traffic 
 leaving his boats here with sufficient guard we passed up into the country about two English miles , and recovered the top of a high hill , on the top whereof our men made a Column or Cross of stones heaped up of a good heighth together in good sort , and solemnly sounded a Trumpet , and said certain prayers kneeling about the Ensign , and honoured the place by the name of Mount Warwicke , in remembrance of the Right Honourable the Lord Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick , whose noble mind and good countenance in this , as in all other good actions , gave great encouragement and good furtherance . This done , we retired our companies not seeing any thing here worth further discovery , the country seeming barren and full of ragged mountains and in most parts covered with snow . 
 And thus marching towards our boats , we espied certain of the country people on the top of Mount Warwick with a flag wafting us back again and making great noise , with cries like the mowing of Buis seeming greatly desirous of conference with us : whereupon the general being therewith better acquainted , answered them again with the like cries , whereat and with the noise of our trumpets they seemed greedy to rejoice , skipping , laughing and dancing for joy . And hereupon we made signs unto them , holding up two fingers , commanding two of our men to go apart from our companies , whereby they might do the like . So that forthwith two of our men & two of theirs met together a good space from company , neither party having their weapons about them . Our men gave them pins and points and such trifles as they had . And they likewise bestowed on our men two bow cases and such things as they had . They earnestly desired our men to go up into their country , and our men offered them like kindness aboard our ships , but neither part ( as it seemed ) admitted or trusted the others courtesy . Their manner of traffic is thus , they do use to lay down of their merchandise upon the ground , so much as they mean to part withal , and 
 292 
 so looking that the other party with whom they make trade should do the like , they themselves do depart , and then if they do like of their Mars they come again , and take in exchange the others merchandise , otherwise if they like not , they take their own and depart . The day being thus well near spent , in haste we retired our companies into our boats again , minding forthwith to search alongst the coast for some harbour fit for our ships , for the present necessity thereof was much , considering that all this while they lay off and on between the two lands , being continually subject aswell to great danger of fleeting ice , which environed them , as to the sudden flaws which the coast seems much subject unto . But when the people perceived our departure , with great tokens of affection they earnestly called us back again , following us almost to our boats : whereupon our general taking his Master with him , who was best acquainted with their manners , went apart unto two of them , meaning , if they could lay sure hold upon them , forcibly to bring them aboard , with intent to bestow certain toys and apparel upon the one , and so to dismiss him with all arguments of courtesy , and retain the other for and Interpreter . The general and his Master being met with their two companions together , after they had exchanged certain things the one with the other , one of the Salvages for lack of better merchandise , cut off the tail of his coat ( which is a chief ornament among them ) and gave it unto our general for a present . But he presently upon a watchword given with his Master suddenly laid hold upon the two Salvages . But the ground underfoot being slippery with the snow on the side of the hill , their handfast failed and their prey escaping ran away and lightly recovered their bow and arrows , which they had hid not far from them behind the rocks . And being only two Salvages in sighed , they so fiercely , desperately , and with such fury assaulted and pursued our general and his Master , being altogether unarmed , and not mistrusting their subtlety 
 293 
 Another meeting of two of our men with two of theirs . 
 The Englishmen chased to their boats . 
 One of that Countrymen taken . 
 that they chased them to their boats , and hurt the general in the buttock with and arrow , who the rather speedily fled back , because they suspected a greater number behind the rocks . Our soldiers ( which were commanded before to keep their boats ) perceiving the danger , and hearing our men calling for shot came speedily to rescue , thinking there had be a greater number . But when the Salvages herd the shot of one of our calivers ( and yet having first bestowed their arrows ) they ran away , our men speedily following them . But a servant of my Lord of Warwick , called Nicholas Conger a good footman , and uncumbered with any furniture having only a dagger at his back overtook one of them , and being a Cornishman and a good wrestler , showed his companion such a Cornish trick , that he made his sides ache against the ground for a month after . And so being stayed , he was taken alive and brought away , but the other escaped . Thus with their strange and new prey our men repaired to their boats , and passed from the main to a small Hand of a mile compass , where they resolved to tarry all night ; for even now a sudden storm was grown so great at sea , that by no means they could recover their ships . And here every man refreshed himself with a small portion of victuals which was laid into the boats for their dinners , having neither eat nor drunk all the day before . But because they knew not how long the storm might last , nor how far ofF the ships might be put to sea , nor whither they should ever recover them again or not , they made great spare of their victuals , as it greatly behooved them : For they knew full well that the best cheer the country could yield them , was rocks and stones , a hard food to live withal , and the people more ready to eat them then to give them wherewithal ! to eat . And thus keeping very good watch and ward , they lay there all night upon hard clifles of snow and ice both wet , cold , and comfortless . 
 These things thus happening with the company on land , 294 
 the danger of the ships at Sea was no less perilous . For within one hour after the Generals departing in the morning by negligence of the Cook in overheating , and the workman in making the chimney , the Aid was set on fire , and had be the confusion of the whole if by chance a boy espying it , it had not be speedily with great labour and Gods help well extinguished . 
 This day also were diverse storms and flaws , and by nine of the clock at night the storm was grown so great , & continued such until the morning , that it put our ships at sea in no small peril : for having mountains of fleeting ice on every side , we went roomer for one , and loofed for another , some scraped us , and some happily escaped us , that the least of a M. were as dangerous to strike as any rock , and able to have split asunder the strongest ship of the world . We had a scope of clear without ice , ( as God would ) wherein we turned , being otherwise compassed on every side about : but so much was the wind and so little was our 
 sea room , that being able to bear only our forecourse we cast so oft about , that we made fourteene hordes in eight ' glasses running , being but foure hours : but God being our best Steresman , & by the industry of Charles Jackman and Andrew Dyer the master's mates , both very expert Mariners , & Richard Cox you master Gunner , with other very careful sailors , then within board , and also by the help of the clear nights which are without darkness , we did happily avoid those present dangers , whereat since we have more marveled then in the present danger feared , for that every man within board , both better and worse had enough to do with his hands to hale ropes , and with his eyes to look out for danger . But the next morning being the 20 of July , as God would , the storm ceased , and the general espying the ships with his new Captive and whole company , came happily aboard , and reported what had passed a shore , whereupon altogether upon our knees we gave God humble and hearty thanks , for that it had pleased him , 
 The Aid set on fire . 
 The great danger of those rocks of ice . 
 Night without darkness in that country . 
 295 
 from so speedy peril to send us such speedy deliverance , and so from this Northern shore we stroke over towards the Southerland . 
 The one and twentieth of July , we discovered a bay which ran into the land , that seemed a likely harbour Gur first come - for our ships , wherefore our general rowed thither with his boats , to make proof thereof , and with his goldfiners fa , " » ™ to search for Over , having never assayed any thing on the 
 straights . South shore as yet , and the first small Hand which we 
 landed upon . Here all the sands and cliffs did so glister and had so bright a marquesite , that it seemed all to be gold , but upon trial made , it proved no better then A Mine of black-lead , and verified the proverb . All is not gold Black led . tjiat glistereth . 
 Upon the two and twentieth of July we bore into the said found , and came to anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore , where thinking our selves in good security , we were greatly endangered with a piece of drift ice , which the Ebb brought forth of the sounds and came thwart us ere we were aware . But the gentlemen and soldiers within board taking great pains at this pinch at the Capstone , overcame the most danger thereof , and yet for all that might be done , it stroke on our stern such a blow , that we feared lest it had stricken away our rudder , and being forced to cut our Cable in the hawse , we were feign to set our before sail to run further up within , and if our stirrage had not be stronger then in the present time we feared , we had run the ship upon the rocks , having a very narrow Channel to turn in , but as God would , all came well to pass . And this Jackmans was nam Jackmans found , after the name of the 
 found . Master's mate , who had first liking unto the place . 
 Smiths Hand . Upon a small Hand , within this found called Smith's Hand ( because he first set up his forge there ) was found a Mine of silver , but was not won out of the rocks without great labour . Here our goldfiners made say of such Over as they found upon the Northerland , and found foure sorts thereof to hold gold in good quantity . 
 296 
 i577-Upon another small Hand here was also found a great dead fish , which as it should seem , had be embayed with ice , and was in proportion round like to a Porpose , being about twelve foot long , and in bigness answerable , having a horn of two yards long growing out of Thejmdingtf the snout or nostrils . This horn is wreathed and an " ic°rnes strait , like in fashion to a Taper made of wax , and ’ may truly be thought to be the sea Unicorn . This horn is to be seen and reserved as a Jewel by the Queens Majesties commandment , in her Wardrobe of Robes . 
 Tuesday the three and twentieth of July , our general with his best company of gentlemen , soldiers and sailors , to the number of seventie persons in all , marched with ensign displayde , upon the continent of the Southerland ( the supposed continent of America ) where , commanding a Trumpet to found a call for every man to repair to the ensign , he declared to the whole company how much the cause imported for the service of her Majesty , our country , our credits , and the safety of our own lives , and therefore required every man to be conformable to order , and to be directed by those he should assign . And he appointed for leaders , Captain Fenton , Captain Yorke , and his Lieutenant George Beste : which done , we cast our selves into a ring , and altogether upon our knees , gave God humble thanks for that it had pleased him of his great goodness to preserve us from such imminent dangers , beseeching likewise the assistance of his holy spirit , so to deliver us in safety into our Country , whereby the light and truth of these secrets being known , it might redound to the more honour of his holy name , and consequently to the advancement of our common wealth . And so , in as good sort as the place suffered , we marched towards the tops of the mountains , which were no less painful in climbing then dangerous in descending , by reason of their steepness & ice . And having passed about five miles , by such unwieldy ways , we returned unto our ships with - 
 297 
 out sighed of any people , or likelihood of habitation . Here diverse of the Gentlemen desired our general to suffer them to the number of twentie or thirtie persons to march up thirtie or fortie leagues in the country , to the end they might discover the Inland , and do some acceptable service for their country . But he not contented with the matter he sought for , and well considering the short time he had in hand , and the greedy desire our country hath to a present savour and return of gain , bent his whole endeavour only to find a Mine to fraught his ships , and to leave the rest ( by Gods help ) hereafter to be well accomplished . And therefore the twentie sixe of July he departed over to the Northland , with the two barks , leaving the Aid riding in Jackmans found , and meant ( after he had found convenient harbour , and fraught there for his ships ) to discover further for the passage . The Barks came the same night to anchor in a found upon the Northerland , where the tides did run so swift , and the place was so subject to indrafts of ice , that by reason thereof they were greatly endangered , & having found a very rich Mine , as they supposed , and god almost twentie tun of Over together , upon the 28 of July the ice came driving into the found where the Barks road , in such sort , that they were therewith greatly distressed . And the Gabrieli riding astern the Michael , had her Cable galled asunder in the hawse with a piece of driving ice , and lost another anchor , and having but one cable and anchor left , for she had lost two before , and the ice still driving upon her , she was ( by Gods help ) well fenced from the danger of the rest , by one great Hand of ice , which came a ground hard a head of her , which if it had not so chanced , I think surely she had been cast upon the rocks with the ice . The Michael mored anchor upon this great ice , and road under the lee thereof : but about midnight , by the weight of it self , and the setting of the Tides , the ice brake within half the Barks length , and made 298 
 unto the company within board a sudden and fearful noise . The next flood towards the morning we weighed anchor , and went further up the straights , and leaving our Over behind us which we had dug , for haste left the place by the name of Bears found after the Master's name of the Michaell , and nam the Hand Lecesters Hand . In one of the small Hands here we found a Tomb , wherein the bones of a dead man lay together , and our savage Captive being with us , & being demanded by signs whither his countrymen had not slain this man and eat his flesh so from the bones , he made signs to the contrary , and that he was slain with Wolves and wild beasts . Here also was found hid under stones good store of fish , and sundry other things of the inhabitants ; as sleds , bridles , kettles of fish-skinnes , knives of bone , and such other like . And our Savage declared unto us the use of all those things . And taking in his hand one of those country bridles , he caught one of our dogs and hampered him handsomely therein , as we do our horses , and with a whip in his hand , he taught the dog to draw in a sled as we do horses in a coach , setting himself thereupon like a guide : so that we might see they use dogs for that purpose that we do our horses . And we found since by experience , that the lesser sort of dogs they feed fat , and keep them as domestical cattle in their tents for their eating , and the greater sort serve for the use of drawing their sleds . 
 The twentie ninth of July , about five leagues from Bears found , we discovered a Bay which being fenced on each side with small Hands lying off the main , which break the force of the tides , and make the place free from any indrafts of ice , did prove a very fit harbour for our ships , where we came to anchor under a small Island , which now together with the found is called by the name of that right Honourable and virtuous Lady , Anne Countess of Warwicke . And this is the furthest place that this year we have entered up 
 299 
 Bears found . Lecesters Hand . 
 A tomb with a dead men bones in it . 
 Bridles , knives , and other instruments found hid among the Rocks . 
 They use great dogs to draw sleds , and title dogs for their meat . 
 Thirty leagues discovered within the straits . 
 A good president of a good Captain showed by Captain Frobisher . 
 within the streites , and is reckoned from the Cape of the Queens foreland , which is the entrance of the streites not above 30 leagues . Upon this Hand was found good store of the Over , which in the washing held gold to our thinking plainly to be seen : whereupon it was thought best rather to load here , where there was store and indifferent good , then to seek further for better , and spend time with jeoperdie . And therefore our general setting the Miners to work , and showing first a good president of a painful labourer and a good Captain in himself , gave good examples for others to follow him : whereupon every man both better and worse , with their best endeavours willingly laid to their helping hands . And the next day , being the thirtieth of July , the Michaell was sent over to Jackmans found , for the Ay de and the whole company to come thither . Upon the main land over against the Countesses Hand we discovered and beheld to our The manner of great marvel the poor caves and houses of those their houses in country people , which serve them ( as it should seem ) ts country . por tjjejr winfer dwellings , and are made two fathom under ground , in compass round , like to and Oven , being joined fast one by another , having holes like to a Fox or Conny berry , to keep and come together . They undertrenched these places with gutters so , that the water falling from the hills above them , may slide away without their annoyance : and are seated commonly in the foot of a hill , to shield them better from the cold winds , having their door and entrance Whale's bones ever open towards the South . From the ground up-timber^ ward they build with whale's bones , for lack of m er ' timber , which bending one over another , are handsomely compacted in the top together , and are covered over with Sealesskinnes , which in stead of tiles , fence them from the rain . In which house they have only one room , having the one half of the flower raised with broad stones a foot higher than the other , whereon strawing Moss , they make their nests to sleep in . 
 300 
 They defile these dens most filthily with their beastly feeding , & dwell so long in a place ( as we think ) until their sluttishness loathing them , they are forced to S‘ seek a sweeter air , and a new seat , and are ( no doubt ) a dispersed and wandering nation , as the Tar-tarians , and live in hordes and troops , without any certain abided , as may appear by sundry circumstances of our experience . 
 Here our captive being ashore with us , to declare set UP the use of such things as we saw , stayed himself alone behind the company , and did set up five small sticks meaning round in a circle one by another , with one small bone thereof . placed just in the midst of all : which thing when one of our men perceived , he called us back to behold the matter , thinking that he had meant some charm or witchcraft therein . But the best conjecture we could make thereof was , that he would thereby his countrymen should understand , that for our five men which they betrayed the last year ( whom he signified by the five sticks ) he was taken and kept prisoner , which he signified by the bone in the midst . For afterwards The savage when we showed him the picture of his countreman , which the last year was brought into England ( whose countreimans counterfeit we had drawn , with boat and other furni - picture . ture , both as he was in his own , & also in English apparel ) he was upon the sudden much amazed thereat , and beholding advisedly the same with silence a good while , as though he would strain courtesy whither should begin the speech ( for he thought him no doubt a lively creature ) at length began to question with him , as with his companion , and finding him dumb and mute , seemed to suspect him , as one disdeinfull , and would with a little help have grown into choler at the matter , until at last by feeling and handling , he found him but a deceiving picture . And then with great noise and cries , ceased not wondering , thinking that we could make men live or die at our pleasure . 
 And thereupon calling the matter to his remembrance , 
 301 
 Another show of twenty persons of that country in one boat . 
 he gave us plainly to understand by signs , that he had knowledge of the taking of our five men the last year , and confessing the manner of each thing , numbered the five men upon his five fingers , and pointed unto a boat in our ship , which was like unto that wherein our men were betrayed : And when we made him signs , that they were slain and eaten , he earnestly denied , and made signs to the contrary . 
 The last of July the Michael returned with the Aid to us from the Southerland , and came to anchor by us in the Countess of Warwicks found , and reported that since we departed from Jackmans found there happened nothing among them there greatly worth the remembrance , until the thirtieth of July , when certain of our company being a shore upon a small Island within the said Jackmans found , near the place where the Aid road , did espy a long boat with diverse of the country people therein , to the number of eighteene or twenty persons , whom so soon as our men perceived , they returned speedily aboard , to give notice thereof unto our company . They might perceive these people climbing up to the top of a hill , where with a flag , they wafted unto our ship , and made great outcries and noises , like so many Buis . Hereupon our men did presently man forth a small skiff , having not above sixe or seven persons therein , which rowed near the place where those people were , to prove if they could have any conference with them . But after this small boat was sent a greater , being well appointed for their rescue , if need required . 
 As soon as they espied our company coming near them , they took their boats and hasted away , either for fear , or else for policy , to draw our men from rescue further within their danger : wherefore our men construing that their coming thither was but to seek advantage , followed speedily after them , but they rowed so swiftly away , that our men could come nothing near them . Howbeit they failed not of their best endeavour in 
 302 
 rowing , and having chased them above two miles into the sea , returned into their ships again . 
 The morning following being the first of August , Captain Yorke with the Michael came into Jackmans found , and declared unto the company there , that the last night passed he came to anchor in a certain bay ( which since was nam Yorkes found ) about foure leagues distant from Jackmans found , being put to leeward of that place for lack of wind , where he discovered certain tents of the country people , where going with his company ashore , he entered into them , but found the people departed , as it should seem , for fear of their coming . But among sundry strange things which in these tents they found , there was raw and new killed flesh of unknown sorts , with dead carcases and bones 
 Yorkes found . 
 The apparel 
 of dogs , and I know not what . They also beheld ( to their greatest marveile ) a doublet of Canvas made after f0 ™ * 1 a^n^ . , the English fashion , a shirt , a girdle , three shoes for Jmen which the 
 contrary feet , and of unequal bigness , which they well year before conjectured to be the apparel of our five poor country - were taken men , which were intercepted the last year by these caPtwe-Countrey people , about fiftie leagues from this place , further within the Straights . Whereupon our men being 
 in good hope , that some of them might be here , and 
 yet living : the Captain devising for the best left his mind behind him in writing , with pen , ink , and paper also , whereby our poor captive countrymen , if it might come to their hands , might know their friends minds , and of their arrival , and likewise return their answer . And so without taking any thing away in their tents , leaving there also looking glasses , points , and other of our toys ( the better to allure them by such friendly means ) departed aboard his Bark , with intent to make haste to the Aid , to give notice unto the company of all such things as he had there discovered : and so meant to return to these tents again , hoping that he might by force or policy entrap or entice the people to some friendly conference . Which things when he had delivered 
 A good devise of Captain Yorke . 
 3°3 
 to the whole company there , they determined forthwith to go in hand with the matter . Hereupon Captain Yorke with the master of the Aid and his mate ( who the night before had be at the tents , and came over from the other side in the Michael with him ) being accompanied with the Gentlemen and soldiers to the number of thirty or forty persons in two small rowing Pinnaces made towards the place , where the night before they discovered the tents of those people , and setting Charles Jackman , being the master's Mate , ashore with a convenient number , for that he could best guide them to the place , they marched over land , meaning to compass them on the one side , whilst the Captain with his boats might entrap them on the other side . But landing at last at the place where the night before they left them , they found them with their tents removed . Notwithstanding , our men which marched up into the country , passing over two or three mountains , by chance espied certain tents in a valley underneath them near unto a creek by the Sea side , which because it was not the place where the guide had be the night before , they judged them to be another company , and besetting The Savages them about , determined to take them if they could . But have boats of they having qUickly descried our company , launched one 3 ™ ’ great & another small boat , being about 16 or 18 persons , and very narrowly escaping , put themselves to sea . The English Whereupon our soldiers discharged their Calivers , and " those^people of f°^owed them , thinking the noise thereof being herd that country . to our boats at sea , our men there would make what speed they might to that place . And thereupon indeed our men which were in the boats ( crossing upon ' them in the mouth of the found whereby their passage was let from getting sea room , wherein it had be impossible The swift for us to overtake them by rowing ) forced them to put rowtngof those themselves ashore upon a point of land within the said * e < * e ' found ( which upon the occasion of the slaughter there , The bloody was since nam The bloody point ) whereunto our men 
 V ™ * ' so speedily followed , that they had little leisure left them 
 304 
 to make any escape . But so soon as they landed , each of them brake his Oar , thinking by that means to prevent us , in carrying away their boats for want of Oars . And desperately returning upon our men , resisted them manfully in their landing , so long as their arrows and darts lasted , and after gathering up those arrows which our men shot at them , yea , and plucking our arrows out of their bodies encountered afresh again , and maintained their cause until both weapons and life failed them . And when they found they were mortally wounded , being ignorant what mercy means , with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rocks into the sea , lest perhaps their enemies should receive glory or prey of their dead carcaises , for they supposed us belike to be Canibals or eaters of men flesh . In this conflict one of our men was dangerously hurt in the belly with one of their arrows , and of them were slain five or sixe , the rest by flight escaping among the rocks , saving two women , whereof the one being old and ugly , our men thought she had be a devil or some witch , and therefore let her go : the other being young , and cumbered with a sucking child at her back , hiding her self behind the rocks , was espied by one of our men , who supposing she had be a man , shot through the hair of her head , and pierced through the child's arm , whereupon she cried out , and our Surgeon meaning to heal her child's arm , applied salves thereunto . But she not acquainted with such kind of surgery , plucked those salves away , and by continual licking with her own tongue , not much unlike our dogs , healed up the child's arm . And because the day was wellnear spent our men made haste unto the rest of our company which on the other side of the water remained at the tents , where they found by the apparel , letter , and other English furniture , that they were the same company which Captain Yorke discovered the night before , having removed themselves from the place where he left them . 
 And now considering their sudden flying from our vn 305 u 
 Yorkes found . 
 A hight skirmish between the English and them of that country . 
 The desperate nature of those people . 
 The taking of the woman & her child . 
 A pretty kind of surgery which nature teaches . 
 men , and their desperate manner of fighting , we began to suspect that we had herd the last news of our men which the last year were betrayed of these people . And considering also their ravenous and bloody disposition in eating any kind of raw flesh or carrion howsoever stinking , it is to be thought that they had slain and devoured our men : For the doublet which was found in their tents had many holes therein being made with their arrows and darts . 
 But now the night being at hand , our men with their captives and such poor stufie as they found in their tents , returned towards their ships , when being at sea , there arose a sudden flaw of wind , which was not a little dangerous for their small boats : but as God would they came all safely aboard . And with these good news they returned ( as before mentioned ) into the Countess of Warwicks found unto us . And between Jackmans found , from whence they came , and the Countess of Warwicks found between land and land , being thought The narrowest the narrowest place of the Straights were judged nine raius^s leagues over at the least : and Jackmans found being leagues over . uPon the Southerland , lies directly almost over against the Countesses found , as is reckoned scarce thirty leagues The Queens within the Straights from the Queens Cape , which is the entrance of the Streits of the Southerland . This Cape being nam Queen Elizabeths Cape , stands in the latitude of 62 degrees and a half to the Northwards of New found land , and upon the same continent , for any thing that is yet known to the contrary . 
 The manner of Having now god a woman captive for the comfort the meeting of Qf our manj We brought them both together , and every fives , and their man with silence desired to behold the manner of their entertainment , meeting and entertainment , the which was more worth the beholding than can be well expressed by writing . At their first encountering they beheld each the other very wistly a good space , without speech or word uttered , with great change of colour and countenance , as though it seemed the grief and disdeine of their captivity had 306 
 taken away the use of their tongues and utterance : the woman at the first very suddenly , as though she disdained or regarded not the man , turned away , and began to sing as though she minded another matter : but being again brought together , the man brake up the silence first , and with stern and stayed countenance , began to tell a long solemn tale to the woman , whereunto she gave good hearing , and interrupted him nothing , till he had finished , and afterwards , being grown into more familiar acquaintance by speech , they were turned together , so that ( I think ) the one would hardly have lived without the comfort of the other . And for so 
 much as we could perceive , albeit they lived continually together , yet they did never use as man & wife , though the woman spared not to do all necessary things that appertained to a good housewife indifferently for them both , as in making clean their Cabin , and every other thing that appertained to his ease : for when he was seasick , she would make him clean , she would kill 
 and flay the dogs for their eating , and dress his meat . Only I think it worth the noting , the continency of them both : for the man would never shift himself , except he had first caused the woman to depart out of his cabin , and they both were most shamefast , lest any of their privy parts should be discovered , either of themselves , or any other body . 
 On Munday the sixth of August , the Lieutenant with all the Soldiers , for the better guard of the Miners and the other things a shore , pitched their tents in the Countesses Island , and fortified the place for their better defence as well as they could , and were to the number of forty persons , when being all at labour , they might perceive upon the top of a hill over against them a number of the country people wafting with a flag , and making great outcries unto them , and were of the same company , which had encountered lately our men upon the other shore , being come to complain their late losses , and to entreat ( as it seemed ) for restitution of 
 The shamefastness and chastity of those Savage captives . 
 Another appearance of the country people . 
 307 
 These people know the use of writing . 
 A letter sent unto the five English captives . 
 the woman and child , which our men in the late conflict had taken and brought away ; whereupon the general taking the savage captive with him , and setting the woman where they might best perceive her in the highest place of the Island , went over to talk with them . This captive at his first encounter of his friends fell so out into tears that he could not speak a word in a great space , but after a while , overcoming his kindness , he talked at full with his companions , and bestowed friendly upon them such toys and trifles as we had given him , whereby we noted , that they are very kind one to another , and greedy sorrowful for the loss of their friends . Our general by signs required his five men which they took captive the last year , and promised them , not only to release those which he had taken , but also to reward them with great gifts and friendship . Our Savage made signs in answer from them that our men should be delivered us , and were yet living , and made signs likewise unto us that we should write our letters unto them , for they knew very well the use we have of writing , and received knowledge thereof , either of our poor captive countrymen which they betrayed , or else by this our new captive who hath seen us daily write , and repeat again such words of his language as we desired to learn : but they for this night , because it was late , departed without any letter , although they called earnestly in haste for the same . And the next morning early being the seventh of August , they called again for the letter , which being delivered unto them , they speedily departed , making signs with three fingers , and pointing to the Sun , that they meant to return within 3 days , until which time we herd no more of them , & about the time appointed they returned , in such sort as you shall afterwards hear . 
 This night because the people were very near unto us , the Lieutenant caused the Trumpet to found a call , and every man in the Island repairing to the Ensign , he put them in mind of the place so far from their 308 
 country wherein they lived , and the danger of a great multitude which they were subject unto , if good watch and ward were not kept , for at every low water the enemy might come almost dryfoot from the main unto us , wherefore he willed every man to prepare him in good readiness upon all sudden occasions , and so giving the watch their charge , the company departed to rest . 
 I thought the Captains letter well worth the remembering , not for the circumstance of curious enditing , but for the substance and good meaning therein contained , and therefore have repeated here the same , as by himself it was hastily written . 
 . 