Order agreed upon by the Captains and Master's to be observed by the fleet of Sir Humfrey Gilbert . 
 Irst the Admiral to carry his flag by day , and his light by night . 
 2 Item , if the Admiral shall shorten his sail 
 by night , then to show two lights until he be answered again by every ship showing one light for a short time . 
 3 Item , if the Admiral after his shortening of sail , as aforesaid , shall make more sail again : then he to show three lights one above another . 
 4 Item , if the Admiral shall happen to hull in the night , then to make a wavering light over his other light , wavering the light upon a pole . 
 5 Item , if the fleet should happen to be scattered weather , or other mishap , then so soon as one shall descry another , to hoist both top sails twice , if the weather will serve , and to strike them twice again ; but if the weather serve not , then to hoist the main top sail twice , and forthwith to strike it twice again . 
 6 Item , if it shall happen a great fog to fallen , then presently every ship to bear up with the admiral , if there be wind : but if it be a calm , then every ship to hull , and so to lie at hull till it be clear . And if the fog do continue long , then the Admiral to shoot ofF two pieces every evening , and every ship to answer it with one shot : and every man bearing to the ship , that is to leeward so near as he may . 
 7 Item , every master to give charge unto the watch to look out well , for laying aboard one of another in the night , and in fogs . 
 8 Item , every evening every ship to hail the admiral , and so to fallen astern him , sailing thorough the Ocean : and being on the coast , every ship to hail him both morning and evening . 
 9 Item , if any ship be in danger any way , by leak or otherwise , then she to shoot ofF a piece , and presently to hang out one light , whereupon every man to bear towards her , answering her with one light for a short time , and so to put it out again ; thereby to give knowledge that they have seen her token . 
 10 Item , whensoever the Admiral shall hang out her ensign in the main shrowds , then every man to come aboard her , as a token of counsel . 
 11 Item , if there happen any storm or contrary wind to the fleet after the discovery , whereby they are separated : 
 1583. then every ship to repair unto their last good port , there to meet again . 
 Our course agreed upon . 
 He course first to be taken for the discovery is to bear directly to cape Raze , the most Southerly cape of Newfound land ; and there to harbour 
 our selves either in Rogneux or Fermous , being the first places appointed for our Rendez vous , and the next harbours unto the Northward of cape Raze : and therefore every ship separated from the fleet to repair to that place so fast as God shall permit , whither you shall fallen to the Southward or to the Northward of it , and there to stay for the meeting of the whole fleet the space of ten days : and when you shall depart , to leave marks . 
 A direction of our course unto the Newfound land . 
 BEginning our course from Silley , the nearest is by Westsouthwest ( if the wind serve ) until such time as we have brought our selves in the latitude of 43 or 44 degrees , because the Ocean is subject much to Southerly winds in June and July . Then to take traverse from 45 to 47 degrees of latitude , if we be enforced by contrary winds : and not to go to the Northward of the height of 47 degrees of Septentrionali latitude by no means : if God shall not enforce the contrary ; but to do your endeavour to keep in the height of 46 degrees , so never as you can possibly , because cape Raze lies about that height . 
 Notes . 
 IF by contrary winds we be driven back upon the coast of England , then to repair unto Silley for a place of our assembly or meeting . 
 If we be driven back by contrary winds that we can 
 not pass the coast of Ireland , then the place of our assembly to be at Bear haven or Baltimore haven . 
 If we shall not happen to meet at cape Raze , then the place of Rendez vous to be at cape Briton , or the nearest harbour unto the Westward of cape Briton . 
 If by means of other shipping we may not safely stay there , then to rest at the very next safe port to the Westward ; every ship leaving their marks behind them for the more certainty of the after comers to know where to find them . 
 The marks that every man ought to leave in such a case , were of the Generals private device written by himself , sealed also in close wax , and delivered unto every ship one scroule , which was not to be opened until occasion required , whereby every man was certified what to leave for instruction of after comers : that every of us coming into any harbour or river might know who had be there , or whither any were still there up higher into the river , or departed , and which way . 
 Order thus determined , and promises mutually given to be observed , every man withdrew himself unto his charge , the anchors being already weighed , and our ships under sail , having a soft gale of wind , we began our voyage upon Tuesday the eleventh day of June , in the year of our Lord 1583 , having in our fleet ( at our departure from Causet bay ) these ships , whose names and burdens , with the names of the captains and master's of them , I have also inserted , as follows : 
 1 The Delight ali&s The George , of burden 120 tons , was Admiral : in which went the general , and William Winter captain in her and part owner , and Richard Clerk master . 
 2 The Bark Raleigh set forth by M. Walter Raleigh , of the burden of 200 tons , was then Viceadmiral : in which went M. Butler captain , and Robert Davis , of Bristoll master . 
 3 The Golden hind , of burden 40 tons , was then Rear-admiral : in which went Edward Hayes captain and owner , and William Cox of Limehouse master . 
 4 The Swallow , of burden 40 tons : in her was captain Maurice Browne . 
 5 The Squirrel , of burden 10 tons : in which went captain William Andrewes , and one Cade master . 
 We were in number in all about 260 men : among Our fleet con-whom we had of every faculty good choice , as Ship - tiste^offive wrights , Masons , Carpenters , Smith's , and such like , " w / Mlibout requisite to such and actium : also Minerali men and 260 men . Refiners . Beside , for solace of our people , and allure - Previsions fit meant of the Savages , we were provided of Music in fir su^ good variety : not omitting the least toys , as Morris covenes ' dancers , Hobby horse , and Maylike conceits to delight the Savage people , whom we intended to win by all fair means possible . And to that end we were indifferently furnished of all petty haberdasherie wares to barter with those simple people . 
 In this manner we set forward , departing ( as hath be June 11. said ) out of Causon bay the eleventh day of June being Tuesday , the weather and wind fair and good all day , but a great storm of thunder and wind fell the same night . 
 Thursday following , when we hailed one another in June 13. the evening ( according to the order before specified ) they signified unto us out of the Vizadmirall , that both Observe . the Captain , and very many of the men were fallen sick . And about midnight the Viceadmiral forsook us , notwithstanding we had the wind East , fair and good . But it was after credibly reported , that they were infected with a contagious sickness , and arrived greatly distressed at Plimmoth : the reason I could never understand . Sure I am , no cost was spared by their owner Master Raleigh in setting them forth : Therefore I leave it unto God . 
 By this time we were in 48 degrees of latitude , not a little grieved with the loss of the most puissant ship in 
 July 20. Greatfogges upon the Ocean sea Northward . 
 July 27. 
 The bank in length unknown , stretchethfrom North into South , in breadth 10. leagues , in depth of water upon it 30. fathom . 
 our fleet : after whose departure , the Golden Hind succeeded in the place of Vizadmirall , and removed her flag from the mizon unto the foretop . 
 From Saturday the 15 of June until the 28 , which was upon a Friday , we never had fair day without fog or rain , and winds bad , much to the West northwest , whereby we were driven Southward unto 41 degrees scarce . 
 About this time of the year the winds are commonly West towards the Newfound land , keeping ordinarily within two points of West to the South or to the North , whereby the course thither falls out to be long and tedious after June , which in March , Apriell & May , hath be performed out of England in 22 days and less . We had wind always so scant from West northwest , and from West southwest again , that our traverse was great , running South unto 41 degrees almost , and afterwards North into 51 degrees . 
 Also we were encumbered with much fog and mists in manner palpable , in which we could not keep so well together , but were dissevered , losing the company of the Swallow and the Squirrel upon the 20. day of July , whom we met again at several places upon the Newfound land coast the third of August , as shall declared in place convenient . 
 Saturday the 27 of July , we might descry not far from us , as it were mountains of ice driven upon the sea , being then in 50 degrees , which were carried Southward to the weather of us : whereby may be conjectured that some current does set that way from the North . 
 Before we come to Newfound land about 50 leagues on this side , we pass the bank , which are high grounds rising within the sea and under water , yet deep enough and without danger , being commonly not less then 25 and 30 fathom water upon them : the same ( as it were some vain of mountains within the sea ) do run along , and from the Newfound land , beginning Northward about 52 or 53 degrees of latitude , & do extend 48 
 into the South infinitely . The breadth of this bank is somewhere more , and somewhere less : but we found the same about io leagues over , having sounded both on this side thereof , and the other towards Newfound land , but found no ground with almost 200 fathom of line , both before & after we had passed the bank . The Portugals , and French chiefly , have a notable trade of great fishfishing upon this bank , where are sometime and hundred or more sails of ships : who commonly begin the ' fishing in Apriell , and have ended by July . That fish is large , always wet , having no land near to dry , and is called Corre fish . 
 During the time of fishing , a man shall know without sounding when he is upon the bank , by the incredible multitude of sea foul hovering over the same , to pray Abundance of upon the offalles & garbish of fish thrown out by fishermen , and floating upon the sea . 
 Upon Tuesday the 11 of June , we forsook the coast of England . So again Tuesday the 30 of July ( seven J Ay 30. weeks after ) we god sighed of land , being immediately d^^ embayed in the Grand bay , or some other great bay : the ’ certainty whereof we could not judge , so great hase and fog did hang upon the coast , as neither we might 
 discern the land well , nor take the suns height . But by our best computation we were then in the 51 degrees of latitude . 
 Forsaking this bay and uncomfortable coast ( nothing appearing unto us but hideous rocks and mountains , bore of trees , and void of any green herb ) we followed the coast to the South , with weather fair and clear . 
 We had sighed of and Hand nam Penguin , of a foul Hand and a there breeding in abundance , almost incredible , which n ? med cannot fly , their wings not able to carry their body , being en^tn-very large ( not much less then a goose ) and exceeding fat : which the French men use to take without difficulty upon that Hand , and to barrel them up with salt . But for lingering of time we had made us there the like provision . 
 viii 49 WORSER 
 Trending this coast , we came to the Hand called Baccalaos , being not passed two leagues from the main : to fafish th6 South thereof lies Cape S. Francis , 5. leagues distant taken there , from Baccalaos , between which goes in a great bay , by the vulgar sort called the bay of Conception . Here we met with the Swallow again , whom we had lost in the fog , and all her men altered into other apparel : whereof it seemed their store was so amended , that for joy and congratulation of our meeting , they spared not to cast up into the air and overboard , their caps & hats in good plenty . The Captain albeit himself was very honest and religious , yet was he not appointed of men to his humour and desert : who for the most part were such as had be by us surprised upon the narrow seas of England , being pirates and had taken at that instant certain Frenchmen laden , one bark with wines , and another with salt . Both which we rescued , & took the man of war with all her men , which was the same ship now called the Swallow , following still their kind so oft , as ( being separated from the general ) they found opportunity to rob and spoil . And because Gods justice did follow the same company , even to destruction , and to the overthrow also of the Captain ( though not consenting to their misdemeanour ) I will not conceal any thing that makes to the manifestation and approbation of his judgements , for examples of others , persuaded that God more sharply took revenge upon them , and hath tolerated longer as great outrage in others : by how much these went under protection of his cause and religion , which was then pretended . 
 Misdemeanour Therefore upon further enquiry it was known , how of them in the this company met with a bark returning home after fallow . the Ashing with his fraught : and because the men in the Swallow were very near scanted of victuali , and chiefly of apparel , doubtful withal where or when to find and meet with their Admiral , they besought the captain they might go aboard this Newlander , only to borrow what might be spared , the rather because the same 
 1583-was bound homeward . Leave given , not without charge to deal favorably , they came aboard the fisherman , whom they rifled of tackle , sails , cables , victuals , & the men of their apparel : not sparing by torture ( winding cords about their heads ) to draw out else what they thought good . This done with expedition ( like men skilful in such mischief ) as they took their cock boat to go aboard their own ship , it was overwhelmed in the sea , and certain of these men there drowned : the rest were preserved even by those silly souls whom they had before spoiled , who saved and delivered them aboard the Swallow . What became afterwards of the poor Newlander , perhaps destitute of sails and furniture sufficient to carry them home ( whither they had not less to run then 700 leagues ) God alone knoweth , who took vengeance not long after of the rest that escaped at this instant : to reveal the fact , and justify to the world Gods judgements inflicted upon them , as shall declared in place convenient . 
 Thus after we had met with the Swallow , we held on our course Southward , until we came against the harbour called S. John , about 5 leagues from the former Cape of S. Francis : where before the entrance into the harbour , English ships we found also the Frigate or Squirrel lying at anchor , Whom the English merchants ( that were & always be mirais Admirals by turns interchangeably over the fleets of fieetes , fishing fishermen within the same harbour ) would not permit to upon the South enter into the harbour . Glad of so happy meeting both purtsofUew-of the Swallow and Frigate in one day ( being Saturday °un and ' the 3. of August ) we made ready our fights , & prepared to enter the harbour , any resistance to the contrary notwithstanding , there being within of all nations , to the number of 36 sails . But first the general dispatched a boat to give them knowledge of his coming for no ill intent , having Commission from her Majesty for his voyage he had in hand . And immediately we followed with a slack gale , and in the very entrance ( which is but narrow , not above 2 buts length ) the Admiral fell upon 
 Good order taken by English merchants for our supply in Newfound land . 
 a rock on the larboard side by great oversight , in that the weather was fair , the rock much above water fast by the shore , where neither went any sea gate . But we found such readiness in the English Merchants to help us in that danger , that without delay there were brought a number of boats , which towed off the ship , and cleared her of danger . 
 Having taken place convenient in the road , we let fallen anchors , the Captains and Master's repairing aboard our Admiral : whither also came immediately the Master's and owners of the fishing fleet of Englishmen , to understand the Generals intent and cause of our arrival there . They were all satisfied when the General had showed his commission , and purpose to take possession of those lands to the behalf of the crown of England , and the advancement of Christian religion in those Paganish regions , requiring but their lawful aid for repairing of his fleet , and supply of some necessaries , so far as conveniently might be afforded him , both out of that and other habors adjoining . In lieu whereof , he made offer to gratify them , with any favour and privilege , which upon their better advice they should demand , the like being not to be obtained hereafter for greater price . So craving expedition of his demand , minding to proceed further South without long detention in those parts , he dismissed them , after promise given of their best endeavour to satisfy speedily his so reasonable request . The merchants with their Master's departed , they caused forthwith to be discharged all the great Ordinance of their fleet in token of our welcome . 
 It was further determined that every ship of our fleet should deliver unto the merchants and Master's of that harbour a note of all their wants : which done , the ships aswell English as strangers , were taxed at and easy rate to make supply . And beside , Commissioners were appointed , part of our own company and part of theirs , to go into other harbours adjoining ( for our English merchants command all there ) to leavy our provision : 
 whereunto the Portugals ( above other nations ) did most willingly and liberally contribute . Insomuch as we were presented ( above our allowance ) with wines , marmalads , most fine rusk or biscuit , sweet oils and sundry delicacies . Also we wanted not of fresh salmons , trouts , lobsters and other fresh fish brought daily unto us . Moreover as the manner is in their fishing , every week to choose their Admiral a new , or rather they succeed in orderly course , and have weekly their Admirals feast solemnized : even so the General , Captains and master's of our fleet were continually invited and feasted . To grow short , in our abundance at home , the entertainment Goadenter-had be delightful , but after our wants and tedious passage through the Ocean , it seemed more acceptable ianJt and of greater contentation , by how much the same was Savages in the unexpected in that desolate corner of the world : where at South part of other times of the year , wild beasts and birds have only the fruition of all those countries , which now seemed a ’ place very populous and much frequented . 
 The next morning being Sunday and the 4 of August , August 4. the general and his company were brought on land by English merchants , who showed unto us their accustomed walks unto a place they call the Garden . But nothing appeared more then Nature it self without art : who confusedly hath brought forth roses abundantly , wild , but odoriferous , and to sense very comfortable . Also the like plenty of rasps berries , which do grow in every place . 
 Munday following , the General had his tent set up , August 5. who being accompanied with his own followers , summoned the merchants and master's , both English and strangers to be present at his taking possession of those Possession Countries . Before whom openly was read & interpreted taken‘ unto the strangers his Commission : by virtue whereof he took possession in the same harbour of S. John , and 200 leagues every way , invested the Queens Majesty with the title and dignity thereof , had delivered unto him ( after the custom of England ) a rod & a turfle of 
 Actuallposses-sion maintained in Newfoundland . 
 the same soil , entering possession also for him , his heirs and assigns for ever : And signified unto all men , that from that time forward , they should take the same land as a territory appertaining to the Queen of England , and himself authorised under her Majesty to possess and enjoy it . And to ordain laws for the government thereof , agreeable ( so near as conveniently might be ) unto the laws of England : under which all people coming thither hereafter , either to inhabit , or by way of traffic , should be subjected and governed . And especially at the same time for a beginning , he proposed & delivered three laws to be in force immediately . That is to say : the first for Religion , which in public exercise should be according to the Church of England . The 2. for maintenance of her Majesties right and possession of those territories , against which if any thing were attempted prejudicial ! , the party or parties offending should be adjudged and executed as in case of high treason , according to the laws of England . The 3. if any person should utter words sounding to the dishonour of her Majesty , he should lose his ears , and have his ship and goods confiscate . 
 These contents published , obedience was promised by generail voice and consent of the multitude aswell of Englishmen as strangers , praying for continuance of this possession and government begun . After this , the assembly was dismissed . And afterwards were erected not far from that place the Arms of England engraven in led , and infixed upon a pillar of wood . Yet further and actually to establish this possession taken in the right of her Majesty , and to the behoof of Sir Humfrey Gilbert knight , his heirs and assigns for ever : the general granted in fee farm diverse parcels of land lying by the water side , both in this harbour of S. John , and elsewhere , which was to the owners a great commodity , being thereby assured ( by their proper inheritance ) of grounds convenient to dress and to dry their fish , whereof many times before they did fade , being prevented 54 
 SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT by them that came first into the harbour . For which grounds they did covenant to pay a certain rend and service unto sir Humfrey Gilbert , his heirs or assigns for ever , and yearly to maintain possession of the same , by themselves or their assigns . 
 Now remained only to take in provision granted , according as every ship was taxed , which did fish upon the coast adjoining . In the mean while , the general appointed men unto their charge : some to repair and trim the ships , others to attend in gathering together our supply and provisions : others to search the commodities and singularities of the country , to be found by sea or land , and to make relation unto the general what either themselves could know by their own travail and experience , or by good intelligence of English men or strangers , who had longest frequented thee same coast . Also some observed the elevation of the pole , and drew plots of the country exactly graded . And by that I could gather by each men several relation , I have drawn a brief description of the Newfound land , with the commodities by sea or land already made , and such also as are in possibility and great likelihood to be made : Nevertheless the Cards and plots that were drawing , with the due gradation of the harbors , bays , and capes , did perish with the Admiral : wherefore in the description following , I must omit the particulars of such things . 
 . 