A brief and summary discourse upon the intended voyage to the hithermost parts of America : written by Captain Carlile in April , 1583. for the better inducement to satisfy such 
 Merchant's of the Moscovian company and others , as in disbursing their money towards the furniture of the present charge , do demand forthwith a present return of gain , albeit their said particular disbursements are required but in very slender sums , the highest being 25. li . the second at 12. li . 10. s . and the lowest at 6. pound five shillings . 
 Hen the Goldsmith desires to find the certain goodness of a piece of gold , which is newly offered unto him , he presently brings the same to the Touchstone , where , by comparing the show or touch of this new piece with the touch or show of that which he 
 knoweth of old , he forthwith is able to judge what the valve is of that , which is newly offered unto him . After the example whereof I have thought it good to make some brief repetition of the particular estate of many other foreign voyages and trades already frequented and known unto us , whereby we may be the better 
 134 
 CHRISTOPHER CARLILE’S DISCOURSE a.d. 
 ... Us - 
 able to conceive and judge what certain likelihood of good there is to be expected in the voyage , which is presently recommended unto your knowledge and resolution . 
 And first to lay down that of Moscovia , whose Moscovie . beginning is yet in the remembrance of many : It is well known , that what by the charges of the first discovery , and by the great gifts bestowed on the Emperor and his Nobili tie , together with the lewd dealing of some of their servants , who thought themselves safe enough from orderly punishment , it cost the company above fourescore thousand pounds , before it could be brought to any profitable reckoning . And now that after so long a patience and so great a burden of expenses , the same began to frame to some good course and commodity : It ralleth to very ticklish terms , and to as slender likelihood of any further goodness , as any other trade that may be nam . 
 For first the estate of those Countries' and the Emperors dealings , are things more fickle then are by every body understood . 
 Next , the Dutchmen are there so crept in as they Dutchmen . daily augment their trade thither , which may well confirm that uncertainty of the Emperor's disposition to keep promise with our nation . 
 Thirdly , the quality of the voyage , such as may not be performed but once the year . 
 Fourthly , the charges of all Ambassadors between that Prince and her Majesty , are always born by the merchant's stock . 
 And lastly , the danger of the king of Denmarke , who Denmarke . beside that presently he is like to enforce a tribute on us , hath likewise and advantage upon the ships in their voyage , either homeward or outward whensoever he lists to take the opportunity . 
 The bad ‘ dealings of the Easterlings are sufficiently Easterlings . known to be such towards our merchant's of that trade , as they do not only offer them many injuries 
 i3S 
 overlong to be written , but do seek all the means they can , to deprive them wholly of their occupying that way : and to the same purpose have of late clean debarred them their accustomed and ancient privileges in all their great towns . 
 Turkle . The traffic into Turkey , beside that by some it is thought a hard point to have so much familiarity with the professed and obstinate enemy of Christ : It is likewise a voyage which can not be made but at the devotion , and as it were in the danger of many states , who for sundry respects are apt to quarrel with us upon sudden occasions , and the presents to be given away in Turkey this year , cost little less then two thousand pounds . 
 Levant . As for the trades into all the parts of Italie , it may easily be considered by every one of judgement , that the same stand in the like terms touching the passages , as that of Turkey , and that many times our ships being taken in the way by the Galleys of Alger , our poor Mariners after the loss of their goods and travel ! , are set at such excessive ransoms before they can be freed of their slavery , as for the most part they are no way able to discharge . As for example , at this instant there are some prisoners , poor ordinary Mariners , for whose releasing there must be paid two hundred Ducats the man , for some three hundred , yea , foure or five hundred Ducats the man for some of them . And how enviously the Venetians do already oppose themselves against our frequenting into their parts , may appear by the late customs which they have imposed as well upon our English merchandise which we bring them , as also upon such their merchandise which we fetch from them . 
 Barbarie . The trade into Barbarie grows likewise to worse terms then before times , and when it was at the best , our merchant's have be in danger of all their goods they had there , whensoever it happened the king to die . For until a new were chosen , the liberty of all disordered persons is such , as they spoil and wrong whom they list , without any redress at all . 
 136 
 CHRISTOPHER CARLILE’S DISCOURSE a.d. 
 1583 - 
 Touching Spaine and Portugall , with whom we have Spaine . 
 very great trade , and much the greater , by means of their venting a good part of our wares in their Indies , as also of the provision they have from the same , wherewith are made many of our returns from them again : It falls out that twice the year ordinarily we send our Fleets into those parts : So that whensoever the king of Remember the Spaine lists to take the opportunity , he may at these seasons deprive us not only of a great number of ers . our very good ships , but also of our honestest and 1598. ablest sort of Mariners that are to be found in our 
 whole Realm again , which is a matter of no small consequence : for it is to be noted , that when he shall take a quarrel in hand , though it be but his own particularly , yet hath he the means to put in hazard as well those our ships which are in his own Countries' of Spaine and Portugall , as also all others which shall be bound to any the parts of all Italie or of Turkey either . And further whosoever he be that is but meanly affected in Religion , as of necessity becomes every ordinary man and good Christian to be , cannot but be aggrieved in his heart to consider , that his children and servants whom he desires to have well brought up , are in these trades of Spaine and Portugall , and all Italie , forced to deny their own profession , and made to acquaint themselves with that which the Parents and Master's do utterly deny and refuse , yea which many of them do in their own hearts abhor as a detestable 
 and most wicked doctrine . 
 But who shall look into the quality of this voyage , being directed to the latitude of fortie degrees or thereabouts , of that hithermost part of America , shall find it hath as many points of good moment belonging unto it , as may almost be wished for . 
 1 As first it is to be understood , that it is not any long course , for it may be performed too and from in foure months after the first discovery thereof . 
 2 Secondly , that one wind suffices to make the pas - 
 137 
 Commodities of this voyage in shortness . 
 Commodities of the country more then those of Moscovy . 
 sage , whereas most of your other voyages of like length , are subject to 3. or 4. winds . 
 3 Thirdly , that it is to be performed at all times of the year . 
 4 Fourthly , that the passage is upon the high sea , whereby you are not bound to the knowledge of dangers , on any other coast , more then of that Country , and of ours hear at home . 
 5 Fiftly , that those parts of England and Ireland , which lie aptest for the proceeding outward or homeward upon this voyage , are very well stored of goodly harbours . 
 6 Sixtly , that it is to be accounted of no danger at all as touching the power of any foreign prince or state , when it is compared with any the best of all other voyages before recited . 
 7 And to the godly minded , it hath this comfortable commodity , that in this trade their Factors , be they their servants or children , shall have no instruction or confessions of Idolatrous Religion inforced upon them , but contrarily shall be at their free liberty of conscience , and shall find the same Religion exercised , which is most agreeable unto their Parents and Master's . 
 As for the merchandising , which is the matter especially looked for , albeit that for the present we are not certainly able to promise any such like quantity , as is now at the best time of the Moscovian trade brought from thence : So likewise is there not demanded any such proportion of daily expenses , as was at the first , and as yet is consumed in that of Moscovia and other . 
 But when this of America shall have be haunted and practised thirtie years to and end , as the other hath be , I doubt not by Gods grace , that for the tenne ships that are now commonly employed once the year into Moscovia , there shall in this voyage twice tenne be employed well , twice the year at the least . And if for the present time there do fallen out nothing else to be found then the bore Fishing , yet doubt I not after the first years planting , but by that matters only to serve 138 
 CHRISTOPHER CARLILE’S DISCOURSE a.d. 
 1583-halfe a dozen of your best sort of ships , although my supply of people do not follow me so substantially , as in all reason may be well looked for . 
 But when it is asked what may be hoped from thence overall after some years , it is first to be considered , that this merchandtse-situation in fourtie degrees , shall be very apt to gather the commodities either of those parts which stand to the Southward of it , as also of those which are to the Northward . 
 In the Northerly may be expected not only and especial good fishing for Salmon , Codde , and Whale's , but also any other such commodities , as the Eastern Countries' doe yield us now : as Pitch , Tar , Hemp , and thereof cordage , Masts , Losshe hides , rich Furs , and other such like without being in any sort beholding to a king of Denmarke , or other prince or state that shall be in such sort able to command our ships at their pleasure , as those do at this day , by means of their strait passages and strong shipping . 
 As for those parts which lie West and to the Southwards , it may well be hoped they will yield Wines with a small help , since the grapes do grow there of themselves already very fair and in great abundance . Olives being once planted , will yield the like Oil as Spaine , Province and Italie . The Country people being made to know , that for Wax and honey , we will give them such trifling things as they desire of us , and showing them once the means how to provide the same , the labour thereof being so light , no doubt but in short time they will earnestly care to have the same in good quantity for us . Beside , what great likelihood there is of good means to make Salt , which may serve for the fishing of lake of salt those parts , may well enough appear unto them , who ™ his can judge the quality of such places as are required to make the same in . 
 Thus much for the beginning , because they may be had with and easy kind of travel ! : but when it may have pleased God to establish our people there any such time 
 139 
 as they may have planted among them in sundry parts of the Country , and that by gentle and familiar entreating them , they be made to see what is better for them then they do as yet understand of , and that in so many sorts of occasions as were infinite to be set down : It is to be assuredly hoped , that they will daily by little and little forsake their barbarous and savage living , and grow to such order and civility with us , as there may be well expected from thence no less quantity and diversity of merchandise then is now had out of Dutchland , Italie , France or Spaine . And as the bordering neighbours are commonly the aptest to fallen out with us , so these parts being somewhat remote , are the liker to take , or give less occasion of disquiet . But when it is considered that they are our own kindred , and esteemed our own country nation which have the government , meaning by those who shall be there planted , who can look for any other then the dealing of most loving and most assured friends ? 
 There are farther to be considered these two points of good importance , concerning the matter of trade . The one is , that by the good prospering of this actium , there must of necessity fallen out a very liberali utterance of our English Clothes into a main Country , described to be bigger then all Europe , the larger part whereof bending to the Northward , shall have wonderful great use of our said English Clothes , after they shall come once to know the commodity thereof . The like will be also of many other things , over many to be reckoned , which are made here by our Artificers and labouring people , and of necessity must be provided from hence . 
 The other is , if there be any possible means to find a sea passage or other fresh water course , which may serve in some reasonable and convenient sort , to transport our merchandise into the East Indian Sea , through any of these Northerly parts of America , it shall be soonest and most assuredly performed by these who shall inhabit and first grow into familiarity with the Inland people . 
 140 
 What Minerali matter may fallen out to be found , is a thing left in suspense , until some better knowledge , because there be many men , who having long since expected some profits herein , upon the great promises that have be made them , and being as yet in no point satisfied , do thereupon conceive that they be but words purposely cast out for the inducing of men to be the more ready and willing to furnish their money towards the charge of the first discovery . 
 But now to answer some others who begin with and other objection , saying : That it is not for the Merchants purse to continue the charges of transporting and planting : and that since these hundred men which are now to be planted , will cost foure thousand pound : It is then to be thought , that the charge of a far greater number , will be also a far greater sum of money . 
 Whereunto I answer , that in all attempts unknown , especially such a one as this is , wherewith we are presently in hand , the first charges are commonly adventured in more desperate kind , then those that follow upon some better knowledge : and therewith it falls out , that whereas one adventureth in the first enterprise , and hundred for that one will of themselves be willing and desirous to adventure in the next , if there be never so little more appearance , that the intended matter is by some knowledge of our own , found true in some points of our first presumption . 
 The examples are many , and may easily be remembered by those who be Merchants , even in their ordinary and daily trades , as well as in extraordinary attempts , which of late years have fallen into those terms of some likelihood , as is aforesaid . So then no doubt , but when certain reports shall be brought by them who directly come from thence , that such a Country and people they have themselves seen , as is by us spoken of , but that then there will come forward a greater number of those , who now neither have herd any thing of the matter , as also of others , who presently make such 
 141 
 A.D. 
 Objection . 
 Answer . 
 The ewer of metal brought by M. Frobisher , caused two several supplies , the two years nextfollowing ; whereof the latter was of thirteene tall ships . 
 frivolous scruple , and will not otherwise be satisfied , then by the report of Saint Thomas . I speak not this by the Merchants whom for their freedoms of trade 1 would not have pressed to any further charge then this first preparation , but rather by such as have great affection to hazard the changing of their estates , and would be well content to go in the voyage if they might only be assured that there is such a Country , & that their money should not be wasted to nothing in the preparations . 
 The right examination of this point must be the contrary sequel of the common Proverb that is used , Nothing venture , nothing have : so on the other side by venturing , many great good profits are found out , to the wonderful benefit of the Common weal , and to those especially in private , who take on them the hazard of their life and travel , or substance in the first attempts : and therefore I would wish that they , who ( God be thanked ) are well able to spare that which is required of each one towards the undertaking of this adventure , be well content and willing to employ the same , since the sequel in good and substantiali reason does promise , not only a great commodity in particular to the Merchant , who shall here at home exercise the trade of Merchandise : but also to and infinite number of other , who presently live in poor estate , and may by taking the opportunity of this discovery , altar the same to a far better degree . Wherefore to make some conclusion upon this point of the Merchants misdoubt , who suspects lest this first disbursement without return of present gain , should not be all his charge , but that afterwards he might yet further be urged to continue the like again , as hath happened in the discovery of the Moscovian trade : It may suffice to consider , that this is not and actium which concerns only the Merchants particularly , but a great deal more the general sort of people throughout all England : And that when such relation shall be returned , as that it may be found a matter worthy the following , the whole generality will not refuse to contribute towards the furtherance 
 142 
 CHRISTOPHER CARLILE’S DISCOURSE a.d. 
 .. 1583* 
 thereof , rather then it should sink for want of any reasonable supply . 
 But as it is a very little time , since I have been thoroughly resolved to try my fortune in the matter , so it is more then time the preparation were in hand already , and therefore no fit time now to make any number of ignorant men to understand with reason the circumstance that belongeth to a matter of so great consideration and importance . 
 To those who have any forward minds in well doing to the generality of mankind , I say thus much more , that Christian charity does as greatly persuade the furtherance of this actium , as any other that may be laid before us , in as much as thereby we shall not only do a most excellent work , in respect of reducing the savage people to Christianitie and civility , but also in respect of our poor sort of people , which are very many among us , living altogether unprofitable , and often times to the great disquiet of the better sort . For who knoweth not , how by the long peace , happy health , and blessed plentifulness , wherewith God hath endued this Realm , that the people is so mightily increased , as a great number being brought up , during their youth in their parents houses , without any instruction how to get their livings after their parents decease , are driven to some necessity , whereby very often for want of better education they fallen into sundry disorders , and so the good sort of people , as I said before , are by them ordinarily troubled , and themselves led on to one shameful end or other , whereas if there might be found some such kind of employment as this would be , no doubt but a greater part of them would be withheld from falling into such vile ' deeds : and in stead thereof , prove greatly serviceable in those affairs , where they might be so employed . 
 This I speak of mine own experience , having seen Master Cardivers come over to the wars of the low Countries' ^es ™ ne during my residence in the same , who here had been very exPenence-evill and idle livers , and by some little continuance with 
 143 
 us , have grown to be very industrious in their faculty , which I can assure you , was a more painful manner of living then in this actium is like to fallen out , and withaU to a purpose of far less valve , in respect of their particular recompense , then with and assured kind of good hope is looked for in this . 
 Thus you see in every point that may be wished for in a good actium and voyage , there is matter and reason enough to satisfy the well disposed . But now to grow somewhat nearer the quick , and to show you some greater appearance , then hath been yet spoken of touching the trade which is the only subject wherewith I do mean to intermeddle at this time , because my address hereby , is chiefly to men of such like faculty : you may understand by that which follows , the circumstance of a little discourse , which doth concern these matters very directly . 
 In the year 1534. James Carthier , of S. Malo made his first discovery of those parts of America , which lie to the Westwards , and as it were on the backside of Newfoundland . In which voyage his principali intention was to seek out the passage , which he presumed might have been found out into the East Indian Sea , otherwise called the passage to Cathaya , but this year he went no higher then the Island of the Assumption in the great bay of S. Laurence , and so returned back into France . 
 The next year following he went with greater provision into the Grand bay again , where he keeping the Northerly shore , ran up the great River that comes down from Canada and other places , until at last with his small pinnaces , ( having left his great shipping by the way ) he arrived at Hochelaga town , being three hundreth leagues within the entrance of the Grand bay . In which travail he had spent so much of the year , that it was now the month of October , and therefore thought it convenient , for the better informing himself at large in this discovery , to winter it out in those parts , which he did at a place called by himself Holy Cross . 
 144 
 CHRISTOPHER CARLILE’S DISCOURSE a.d. 
 .. I583 - 
 This winter fell out to be a very long and hard winter , as many times the like happeneth with us in these parts , and the savage people , who for the most part make but a slender kind of provision , even as it were from hand to mouth , fell into some scarcity of victuals ; yet did they not refuse to serve the Frenchmen , with any thing they had all the winter long , albeit at somewhat higher princes towards the end when the need was most , as with our selves the like happeneth at such times . 
 But when the French had their wants served all the year , and that as yet they saw not any appearance of their intended matter , which was the discovery of the passage , and yet imagining by the signs wherewith the willing people endeavoured to declare their knowledge in that point , that some good matter might be had from them , if they might have been well understood , they resoulved with themselves to take some of the sufficientest men of that country home into France , and there to keep them so long , as that having once achieved the French tongue , they might declare more substantially their mind , and knowledge in the said passage , con-eluding this to be the mean of least charge , of least travail , and of least hazard . 
 And when they came to bethink themselves , who might be meetest for it , they determined to take the King , as the person who might be best informed of such parts as were somewhat remote from his own Country , as also that for the respect of him , the people would be always ready , and content to do them any further service , when it should happen them to return thither again about the discovery . 
 Thus the poor king of the Country , with two or three others of his chief companions coming aboard the French ships , being required thither to a banquet , was traitorously carried away into France , where he lived foure years , and then died a Christian there , as Thevet the French Kings Cosmographer doth make mention . This outrage and injurious dealing did put the whole vni 145 K 
 The Trenchmens trade re* newed in Canada , in the year 1581. 
 The South fart best fir inhabiting and traffic . 
 Country people into such dislike with the French , as never since they would admit any conversation or familiarity with them , until of late years , the old matter beginning to grow out of mind , and being the rather drawn on by gifts of many trifling things , which were of great valve with them , they are as ( I said ) within these two or three years content again to admit a traffic , which two years since was begun with a small bark of thirtie tons , whose return was found so profitable , as the next year following , being the last year , by those Merchants , who meant to have kept the trade secret unto themselves , from any others of their own Country men , there was hired a ship of fourescore tons out of the Isle of Jersey , but not any one Mariner of that place , saving a shipboy . This ship made her return in such sort , as that this year they have multiplied three ships , to wit , one of nine score tons , another of and hundreth tons , and a third of foure score tons : which report is given by very substantiali and honest men of Plimmouth , who saw the said ships in readiness to depart on their voyage , and were aboard of some of them . 
 Here is at this instant in the town a man of Gernesey , Lewis de Vike , who reporteth to have credibly herd , that by this last years voyage the Frenchmen god foureteene or fifteene hundreth for every one hundreth : But how soever it be , it carrieth good likelihood of some notable profit , in as as they do so greatly , and thus suddenly increase the burden and number of their ships this present year . 
 Now , if in so little as two years time this voyage of the Northern parts be grown to such good pass as hath been declared unto you : it is worth the thinking on to consider what may be hoped for from the Southern part , which in all reason may promise a great deal more . And so , as one who was never touched with any indirect meaning , I presume to wish and persuade you to some better taking of this matter to heart , as a thing which I 146 
 CHRISTOPHER CARLILE’S DISCOURSE a.d. 
 do verily think will turn to your greater and more assured commodity , then you receive by any other voyage , as yet frequented of so short and safe a course as this hath : dealing herein no otherwise with you for your several small sums , then I do with my self , both for more of mine own , then is required of any one of you : beside the hazard and travail of my person , and the total employment of my poor credit , which ( I thank God ) hath hitherto passed clear and unspotted in matters of greater importance and difficulty , then is like to fallen out in this matter between you and me . 
 . 