A brief note of the Morsse and the use thereof . 
 N the first voyage of Jaques Carthier , wherein he discovered the Gulf of S. Laurence and the ------ said Isle of Ramea , in the year 1534 , as you may read in page . 205 of this present volume , he met with these beasts , as he witnesseth in these words . About the said Island are very great beasts as great as oxen , which have two great teeth in their mouths like unto Elephants teeth , and live also in the sea . we saw one of them sleeping upon the bank of the water , and thinking to take it , we went to it with our boats , but so soon as he herd us , he cast himself into the sea . Touching these beasts which Jaques Carthier says to be as big as Oxen and to have teeth in their mouths like Elephants teeth : True it is that they are called in Latin Boves Marini , or Vaccas Marinas , & in the Russian tongue Morsses , the hides whereof I have seen as big as any Ox hide , and being dressed I have yet a piece of one thicker then any two Ox or Buis hides in England . The Leatherdressers take them to be excellent good to make light targets against the arrows of the Savages ; and I hold them far better then the light leather targets which the Moors use in Barbarie against arrows and lances , whereof I have seen diverse in her Majesties stately Armory in the tower of London . The teeth of the said fish , whereof I have seen a dryfat full at once , are a foot and some times more in length : & have be sold in England to the comb & knife-makers , at 8 groats and 3 shillings the pound weight , whereas the best Ivory is sold for half the money : the grain of the bone is somewhat more yellow then the Ivory . One M. Alexander Woodson of Bristoll my old friend , and excellent Mathematician and skilful Physician , showed me one of these beasts teeth which were brought from the Isle of Ramea in the first prize , which was half a yard long or very little less : and assured me that he 
 had made trial of it in ministering medicine to his patients , and had found it as sovereign against poison as any Unicorns horn . 
 . 