The description of the aforesaid River and Haven . 
 THe said River is small , not passed 50. pases broad , and ships drawing three fathoms water may enter in at a full sea : and at a low water there is nothing but a channel of a foot deep or thereabouts . On both sides of the said River there are very good and fair grounds , full of as fair and mighty trees as any be in the world , and diverse sorts , which are above tenne fathoms higher then Trees above ■ $. the rest , and there is one kind of tree above three fathoms fathms abQUt - 
 about , which they in the Country call Hanneda , which hath the most excellent virtue of all the trees of the world , whereof I will make mention hereafter . Moreover there are great store of Okes the most excellent that ever I saw in my life , which were so laden with Mast that they cracked again : beside this there are fairer Arables , Cedars , Beeches , and other trees , then grow in France : and hard unto this wood on the South side the ground is all covered with Vines , which we found laden with grapes as black as Mulberries , but they be not so kind as those of France because the Vines be not tilled , and because they grow of their own accord . Moreover there are many white Thorns , which bear leaves as big as oaken leaves , and fruit like unto Meddlers . To be short , it is as good a Country to blow and manure as a man should find or desire . We sowed seeds here of our Country , as Cabbages , Naveaus , Lettises and others , which grew and sprung up out of the ground in eight days . The mouth of the river is towards the South , and it windeth Northward like unto a snake : and at the mouth of it towards the East there is a high and steep cliff , where we made a way in manner of a pair of stairs , and aloft we made a Fort to keep the neither Fort and the ships , and all things that might pass aswell by the great as by this small river . Moreover a man may behold a great extension of ground apt for tillage , strait and handsome and somewhat inclining towards the South , as easy to be brought to tillage as 267 
 Hanneda the most excellent tree of the world . 
 Abundance of Vines full of grapes . 
 Fruit like Meddlers . 
 Seed sprung out of the ground within 8 days . 
 A greatplaine of very good arable ground . 
 I would desire , and very well replenished with fair Oaks and other trees of great beauty , no thicker then the Forests of France . Here we set twenty men to work , which in one day had laboured about and acre and and half of the said ground , and sowed it part with Naveaus or small Turnips , which at the end of eight days , as I said before , sprang out of the earth . And upon that high cliff we found a fair fountain very near the said Fort : adjoining whereunto we found good store of Diamonds of stones , which we esteemed to be Diamonds . On the Canada . other side of the said mountain and at the foot thereof , which is towards the great River is all along a goodly And ynn Mine of the best iron in the world , and it reaches even 
 Mtne ' hard unto our Fort , and the sand which we tread on is 
 perfect refined Mine , ready to be put into the furnace . Leaves of fine And on the waters side we found certain leaves of fine asthic e jj as hiekg as a men nail . And Westward of the nail found in said River there are , as hath be said , many fair trees : Canada . and towards the water a goodly Meadow full of as fair and goodly grass as ever I saw in any Meadow in France : and between the said Meadow and the Wood are great store of Vines : and beyond the said Vines the land Excellent and grows full of Hemp which grows of it self , which strong hemp . - s as gOOC [ as pOSSibly may be seen , and as strong . And at the end of the said Meadow within and hundred pases there is a rising ground , which is of a kind of slate stone black and thick , wherein are veins of mynerall matter , which show like gold and silver : and throughout all that stone there are great grains of the said Mine . And in some places we have found stones like Diamonds , the most fair , polished and excellently cut that it is possible for a man to see , when the Sun shines upon them , they glister as it were sparkles of fire . 
 . 