The third voyage of discovery made by Captain Jaques Cartier , 1540. unto the Countries' of Canada , Hochelaga , and Saguenay . 
 King Francis the first having herd the report of Captain Cartier his Pilot generail in his two former Voyages of discovery , as well by writing as by word of mouth , touching that which he had found and seen in the Wester ne parts discovered by him in the parts 
 of Canada and Hochelaga , and having also seen and talked with the people , which the said Cartier had brought out of those Countries' , whereof one was king of Canada , whose name was Donnacona , and others : which after that they had be a long time in France and Britaine , were baptised at their own desire and request , and died in the said country of Britaine . And albeit his Majesty was advertized by the said Cartier of the death and decease of all the people which were brought over by him ( which were tenne in number ) saving one little girl about tenne years old , yet he resolved to send the said Cartier his Pilot thither again , with John Francis de la Roche , Knight , Lord of Roberval , whom he appointed his Lieutenant and Governor in the Countries' of Canada and Hochelaga , and the said Cartier Captain generail and leader of the ships , that they might discover more then was done before in the former voyages , and attain ( if it were possible ) unto the knowledge of the Country of Saguenay , whereof the people brought by Cartier , as is declared , made mention unto the King , that there were great riches , and very good countries' . And the King caused a certain sum of money to be delivered to furnish out the said voyage with five ships : which thing was performed by the said Monsieur Roberval and Cartier . After that they had agreed together to rig the said five ships at Saint Malo in Britaine , where the two 263 
 Ten Savages brought into France . 
 John Francis de la Roche , lord of Roberval . 
 Great riches & very good soil in Saguenay , which is beyond you saults . 
 23. of May , 1540. 
 The great mischiefs of leesing the season . 
 former voyages had been prepared and set forth . And the said Monsieur Roberval sent Cartier thither for the same purpose . And after that Cartier had caused the said five ships to be built and furnished and set in good order , Monsieur Roberval came down to S. Malo and found the ships fallen down to the road , with their yards across full ready to depart and set sail , staying for nothing else but the coming of the general , and the payment of the furniture . And because Monsieur Roberval the kings lieutenant had not as yet his artillery , powder and munitions , and other things necessary come down , which he had provided for the voyage , in the Countries' of Champagne and Normandie : and because the said things were very necessary , and that he was loath to depart without them , he determined to depart from S. Malo to Roan , and to prepare a ship or two at Honfleur , whither he thought his things were come : And that the said Cartier should depart with the five ships which he had furnished , and should go before . Considering also that the said Cartier had received letters from the king , whereby he did expressly charge him to depart and set sail immediately upon the sighed and receipt thereof , on pain of incurring his displeasure , and to lay all the fault on him . And after the conclusion of these things , and the said Monsieur Roberval had taken muster and view of the gentlemen , soldiers , and mariners which were retained and chosen for the performance of the said voyage , he gave unto Captain Cartier full authority to depart and go before , and to govern all things as if he had be there in person : and himself departed to Honfleur to make his farther preparation . After these things thus dispatched , the wind coming fair , the foresaid five ships set sail together well furnished and victualed for two year , the 23. of May , 1540. And we sailed so long with contrary winds and continual torments , which fell out by reason of our late departure , that we were on the sea with our said five ships full three months before we could arrive at the Port and Haven 
 264 
 of Canada , without ever having in all that time 30 hours of good wind to serve us to keep our right course : so that our five ships through those storms lost companyone of another , all save two that kept together , to wit that wherein the Captain was , and the other wherein went the Viscount of Beaupre , until at length at the end of one month we met all together at the Haven of Carpont in Newfoundland . But the length of time which we were in passing between Britayne and Newfoundland was the cause that we stood in great need of water , because of the cattle , aswell Goats , Hogs , as other beasts which we carried for breed in the Country , which we were constrained to water with Sider and other drink . Now therefore because we were the space of three months in sailing on the sea , and staying in Newfoundland , waiting for Monsieur Roberval , and taking in of fresh water and other things necessary , we arrived not before the Haven of Saint Croix in Canada , ( where in the former voyage we had remained eight months ) until the 23. day of August . In which place the people of the Country came to our ships , making show of joy for our arrival , and namely he came thither which had the rule and government of the Country of Canada , nam Agona , which was appointed king there by Donacona , when in the former voyage we carried him into France : And he came to the Captains ship with 6. or 7. boats , and with many women and children . And after the said Agona had inquired of the Captain where Donacona and the rest were , the Captain answered him , That Donacona was dead in France , and that his body rested in the earth , and that the rest stayed there as great Lords , and were married , and would not return back into their Country : the said Agona made no show of anger at all these speeches : and I think he took it so well because he remained Lord and Governor of the country by the death of the said Donacona . After which conference the 
 A.D. 
 1540. 
 Carpont Haven . 
 Transporting of diverse sorts of cattellfir breed . 
 The 23. of August . 
 The new king of Canada . 
 said Agona took a piece of tanned leather of a yellow skin edged about with Esnoguy ( which is their riches and 265 
 the thing which they esteem most precious , as we esteem gold ) which was upon his head in stead of a crown , and he put the same on the head of our Captain , and took from his wrists two bracelets of Esnoguy , and put them upon the Captains arms , colling him about the neck and showing unto him great signs of joy : which was Great dis - all dissimulation , as afterwards it well appeared . The cap-simulatimt of tajne took his said crown of leather and put it again a UpOn his head , and gave him and his wives certain small 
 presents , signifying unto him , that he had brought certain new things , which afterwards he would bestow upon him : for which the said Agona thanked the Captain . And after that he had made him and his company eat and drink , they departed and returned to the shore with their boats . After which things the said Captain went with two of his boats up the river , beyond Canada and the Port of Saint Croix , to view a Haven and a small river , A good road which is about 4. leagues higher : which he found better +•f and more commodious to ride in and lay his ships , then “ croix . mnC 1 the former . And therefore he returned and caused all his ships to be brought before the said river , and at a low water he caused his Ordinance to be planted to place his ships in more safety , which he meant to keep and stay in the Country , which were three : which he did the day following , and the rest remained in the road in the midst of the river ( In which place the victuals and other furniture were discharged , which they had brought ) from the 26. of August until the second of September , what time they departed to return for S. Malo , in which ships he sent back Mace Jolloberte his brother in law , and Steven Noel his Nephew , skilful and excellent pilots , with letters unto the king , and to advertise him what had be done and found : and how Monsieur de Roberval was not yet come , and that he feared that by occasion of contrary winds and tempests he was driven back again into France . 
 . 