A letter written to M. John Growte student in Paris , by Jaques Noel of S. Malo , the nephew of Jaques Cartier , touching the foresaid discovery . 
 Aster Growte , your brother in law Giles Walter showed me this morning a Map printed at Paris , dedicated to one M. Hakluyt and English Gentleman : wherein all the West Indies , the kingdom of New Mexico , and the Countries' of Canada , Hochelaga and Saguenay are 
 contained . I hold that the River of Canada which is described in that Map is not marked as it is in my book , which is agreeable to the book of Jaques Cartier : and that the said Chart does not mark or set down The great Lake , which is above the Saults , according as the Savages have advertised us , which dwell at the said Saults . In the foresaid Chart which you sent me hither , the Great Lake is placed too much towards the North . The Saults or falls of the River stand in 44. degrees of latitude : it is not so hard a matter to pass them , as it is thought : The water falls not down from any high place , it is nothing else but that in the midst of the River there is bad ground . It were best to built boats above the Saults : and it is easy to march or travel ! by land to the end of the three Saults : it is not above five leagues journey . I have be upon the top 272 
 of a mountain , which is at the foot of the Saults , where I have seen the said River beyond the said Saults , which showed unto us to be broader then it was where we passed it . The people of the Country advertised us , that there are ten days journey from the Saults unto Ten this Great Lake . We know not how many leagues they make to a days journey . At this present 1 cannot write this great unto you more at large , because the messenger can stay Lake . no longer . Here therefore for the present I will end , saluting you with my hearty commendations , praying God to give you your hearts desire . For S. Malo in haste this 19 day of June . 1587. 
 Your loving Friend , 
 Jaques Noel . 
 COsin , I pray you do me so much pleasure as to send me a book of the discovery of New Mexico , and one of those new Maps of the West Indies dedicated to M. Hakluyt the English Gentleman , which you sent to your brother in law Giles Walter . I will not fail to inform my self , if there be any mean to find out those descriptions which Captain Cartier made after his two last voyages into Canada . 
 . 