The first voyage made to the coasts of America , with two barks , where in were Captains M. Philip Amadas , and M. Arthur Barlowe , who discovered part of the Country now called Virginia , Anno 1584. Written by one of the said Captains , and sent to sir Walter Ralegh knight , at whose charge and direction , the said voyage was set forth . 
 He 27 day of Aprill , in the year of our redemption , 1584 we departed the West of England , with two barks well furnished with men and victuals , having received our last and perfect directions by your letters , confirming the former instructions , and commandments de 
 livered by your self at our leaving the river of Thames . And I think it a matter both unnecessary , for the manifest discovery of the Country , as also for tediousness sake , to remember unto you the diurnal of our course , sailing thither and returning : only I have presumed to present unto you this brief discourse , by which you may judge how profitable this land is likely to succeed , as well to your self , ( by whose direction and charge , and by , whose servants this our discovery hath been performed ) as also to her Highness , and the Common wealth , in which we hope your wisdom will satisfied , considering that as much by us hath be brought to light , as by those small means , and number of men we had , could any way have be expected , or hoped for . 
 The tenth of May we arrived at the Canaries , and the tenth of June in this present year , we were fallen with the Islands of the West Indies , keeping a more South - 
 A Southerly course not 
 easterly course then was needful , because we doubted . .. 
 that the current of the Bay of Mexico , disbogging be - ^Virginia . tween the Cape of Florida and Havana , had be of 
 297 
 greater force then afterwards we found it to be . At which Islands , we found the air very unwholesome , and our men grew for the most part ill disposed : so that having refreshed our selves with sweet water , & fresh victuali , we departed the twelfth day of our arrival there . These Islands , with the rest adjoining , are so well known to your self , and to many others , as I will not trouble you with the remembrance of them . 
 A sweet smell The second of July , we found shoal water , where we from the land . smejt so sweet } anj so strong a smel , as if we had be in the midst of some delicate garden abounding with all kind of odoriferous flowers , by which we were assured , that the land could not be far distant : and keeping good watch , and bearing but slack sail , the fourth of the same month we arrived upon the coast , which we supposed to be a continent and firm land , and we sailed along the same a hundred and twentie English miles before we could find any entrance , or river issuing into the Sea. 
 The first The first that appeared unto us , we entered , though not 
 n^r - without some difficulty , & cast anchor about - three harque - 
 buz-shot within the havens mouth , on the left hand of the same : and after thanks given to God for our safe arrival thither , we manned our boats , and went to view “ July x^pos - the land next adjoining , and “ to take possession of the session taken . samej | n the right of the Queens most excellent Majesty , as rightful Queen , and Princess of the same , and after delivered the same over to your use , according to her Majesties grant , and letters patents , under her Highness great Seal . Which being performed , according to the ceremonies used in such enterprises , we viewed the land about us , being , whereas we first landed , very sandy and Abundance of low towards the waters side , but so full of grapes , as the grapes . very beating ancl surge of the Sea overflowed them , of which we found such plenty , as well there as in all places else , both on the sand and on the green soil on the hills , as in the plains , as well on every little shrub , as also climbing towards the tops of high Cedars , that I think in all the world the like abundance is not to be found : and 298 
 my self having seen those parts of Europe that most abound , find such difference as were incredible to be written . 
 We passed from the Sea side towards the tops of The Isle of those hills next adjoining , being but of mean highth , and from thence we beheld the Sea on both sides to the North , and to the South , finding no end any of both ways . This land lay stretching it self to the West , which after we found to be but and Island of twentie miles long , and not above sixe miles broad . Under the bank or hill whereon we stood , we beheld the valleys replenished with goodly Cedar trees , and having discharged our harquebus-shot , such a flock of Cranes ( the most part white ) arose under us , with such a cry redoubled by many echos , as if and army of men had shouted all together . 
 This Island had many goodly woods full of Dear , Conies , Hares , and Foul , even in the midst of Summer in incredible abundance . The woods are not such as you find in Bohemia , Moscovia , or Hercynia , barren and fruitless , but the highest and reddest Cedars of the world , Goodly far bettering the Ceders of the Azores , of the Indies , or ^ars ' _ Lybanus , Pynes , Cypress , Sassafras , the Lentisk , or the saphras^ ' tree that bears the Mastic , the tree that bears the rind of black Cinnamon , of which Master Winter brought from the straights of Magellan , and many other of excellent smell and quali tie . We remained by the side of this 
 Island two whole days before we saw any people of the Country : the third day we espied one small boat rowing towards us having in it three persons : this boat came to the Island side , foure harquebus-shot from our ships , and there two of the people remaining , the third came along the shoreside towards us , and we being then all within board , he walked up and down upon the point of the land next unto us : then the Master and the Pilot Conference of the Admiral , Simon Ferdinando , and the Captain wthaSavage . Philip Amadas , my self , and others rowed to the land , whose coming this fellow attended , never making any 
 299 
 show of fear or doubt . And after he had spoken of many things not understood by us , we brought him with his own good liking , aboard the ships , and gave him a shirt , a hat & some other things , and made him taste of our wine , and our meat , which he liked very well : and after having viewed both barks , he departed , and went to his own boat again , which he had left Abundance of in a little Cove or Creek adjoining : assoon as he was two bow shoot into the water , he fell to fishing , and in less then half and hour , he had laden his boat as deep , as it could swim , with which he came again to the point of the land , and there he divided his fish into two parts , pointing one part to the ship , and the other to the pinnace : which , after he had ( as much as he might ) requited the former benefits received , departed out of our sighed . 
 The arrival The next day there came unto us diverse boats , and nther^ * n one the Kings brother , accompanied with 
 ’ fortie or fiftie men , very handsome and goodly people , and in their behaviour as mannerly and civil as any of Europe . His name was Granganimeo , and the king is called Wingina , the country Wingandacoa , and now by her Majesty Virginia . The manner of his coming was in this sort : he left his boats altogether as the first man did a little from the ships by the shore , and came along to the place over against the ships , followed with fortie men . When he came to the place , his servants spread a long mat upon the ground , on which he sat down , and at the other end of the mat foure others of his company did the like , the rest of his men stood round about him , somewhat a far off : when we came to the shore to him with our weapons , he never moved from his place , nor any of the other foure , nor never mistrusted any harm to be offered from us , but sitting still he beckoned us to come and fit by him , which we performed : and being set he made all signs of joy and welcome , striking on his head and his breast and afterwards on ours , to show we 
 300 
 were all one , smiling and making show the best he could of all love , and familiarity . After he had made a long speech unto us , we presented him with diverse things , which he received very joyfully , and thankfully . None of the company durst speak one word all the time : only the foure which were at the other end , spoke one in the others ear very softly . 
 The King is greatly obeyed , and his brother's and children reverenced : the King himself in person was at our being there , soar wounded in a fight which he had with the King of the next country , called Wingina , and was shot in two places through the body , and once clean through the thigh , but yet he recovered : by reason whereof and for that he lay at the chief town of the country , being sixe days journey ofF , we saw him not at all . 
 After we had presented this his brother with such things as we thought he liked , we likewise gave somewhat to the other that sat with him on the mat : but presently he arose and took all from them and put it into his own basket , making signs and tokens , that all things ought to be delivered unto him , and the rest were but his servants , and followers . A day or two after this , we fell to trading with them , exchanging some things Traffickemth that we had , for Chamoys , Buff , and Dear skins : the Savages . when we showed him all our packet of merchandise , of all things that he saw , a bright tin dish most pleased him , which he presently took up and clapped it before his Tin much breast , and after made a hold in the brim thereof and hung it about his neck , making signs that it would defend him against his enemies arrows : for those people maintain a deadly and terrible war , with the people and King adjoining . We exchanged our tin dish for twentie skins , worth twentie Crowns , or twentie Nobles : and a copper kettle for fiftie skins worth fifty Crowns . They offered us good exchange for our hatchet's , and axes , and for knives , and would have given any thing for swords : but we would not 
 3oi 
 depart with any . After two or three days the Kings brother came aboard the ships , and drank wine , and eat of our meat and of our bred , and liked exceedingly thereof : and after a few days overpassed , he brought his wife with him to the ships , his daughter and two or three children : his wife was very well favoured , of mean stature , and very bashful : she had on her back a long cloak of leather , with the fiirre side next to her body , and before her a piece of the same : about her forehead she had a band of white Corail , and so had her husband many times : in her ears she had bracelets of pearls hanging down to her middle , ( whereof we delivered your worship a little bracelet ) and those were of the bigness of good peas . The rest of her women of the better sort had pendants of copper hanging in either ear , and some of the children of the kings brother and other noble men , have five or sixe in either ear : he himself had upon his head a broad plate of gold , or copper , for being unpolished we knew not what metal it should be , neither would he by any means suffer us to take it off his head , but feeling it , it would bow very easily . His apparel was as his wives , only the women wear their hair long on both sides , and the men but on one . They are of colour yellowish , and their hair black for the most part , and yet we saw children that had very fine aburne , and chestnut coloured hair . 
 After that these women had be there , there came down from all parts great store of people , bringing with them leather , coral , diverse kinds of die very excellent , and exchanged with us : but when Granganimeo the kings brother was present , none durst trade but himself : except such as wear read pieces of copper on their heads like himself : for that is the difference between the noble men , and the governors of countries' , and the meaner sort . And we both noted there , and you have understood since by these men , which we brought home , that no people in the world carry more respect to their King , Nobili tie , and Governors , then these doe . The 
 302 
 Kings brother's wife , when she came to us ( as she did many times ) was followed with forty or fifty women always : and when she came into the ship , she left them all on land , saving her two daughters , her nurse and one or two more . The Kings brother always kept this order , as many boats as he would come withal to the ships , so many fires would he make on the shore a far off , to the end we might understand with what strength and company he approached . Their boats are made of one tree , either of Pine or of Pitch trees : a Pitch trees . wood not commonly known to our people , nor found growing in England . They have no edge-tools to make them withal : if they have any they are very few , and those it seems they had twentie years since , which , as those two men declared , was out of a wrake which happened upon their coast of some Christian ship , being beaten that way by some storm and outrageous weather , whereof none of the people were saved , but only the ship , or some part of her being cast upon the sand , out of whose sides they drew the nails and the spikes , and with those they made their best instruments . The man - manner ner of making their boats is thus : they burn down some great tree , or take such as are wind fallen , and putting gum and rosen upon one side thereof , they set fire into it , and when it hath burned it hollow , they cut out the coal with their shells , and ever where they would burn it deeper or wider they lay on gums , which burn away the timber , and by this means they fashion very fine boats , and such as will transport twentie men . 
 Their oars are like scoops , and many times they set with long pools , as the depth serves . 
 The Kings brother had great liking of our armour , a sword , and diverse other things which we had : and offered to lay a great box of pearl in gage for them : but we refused it for this time , because we would not make them know , that we esteemed thereof , until we had understood in what places of the country the pearl grew : which now your Worship doth very well understand . 
 3°3 
 He was very just of his promise : for many times we delivered him merchandise upon his word , but ever he came within the day and performed his promise . He sent us every day a brase or two of fat Bucks , Conies , Hares , Fish the best of the world . He sent us diverse kinds of fruits , Melons , Walnuts , Cucumbers , Gourds , Peas , and diverse roots , and fruits very excellent good , and of their Country corn , which is very white , fair and well tasted , and grows three times in five months : in May they sow , in July they reap , in June they sow , in August they reap : in July they sow , in September they reap : only they cast the corn into the ground , breaking a little of the soft turf with a wooden mattock , or pickeaxe : our selves proved the soil , and put some of our Peas in the ground , and in tenne days they were of fourteene inches high : they have also Beans very fair of diverse colours and wonderful plenty : some growing naturally , and some in their gardens , and so have they both wheat and oats . 
 The soil is the most plentiful , sweet , fruitful and wholesome of all the world : there are above foureteene several sweet smelling timber trees , and the most part of their underwoods are Baize and such like : they have those Oaks that we have , but far greater and better . After they had be diverse times aboard our ships , my self , with seven more went twentie mile into the River , that runneth toward the City of Skicoak , which River they call Occam : and the evening following , we came to and koanoak Island , which they call Raonoak , distant from the harbour Island , by which we entered , seven leagues : and at the North end thereof was a village of nine houses , built of Cedar , and fortified round about with sharp trees , to keep out their enemies , and the entrance into it ' made like a turn pike very artificially ; when we came towards it , standing near unto the waters side , the wife of Granganimo the kings brother came running out to meet us very cheerfully and friendly , her husband was not then in the village ; some of her people she commanded to draw 
 3°4 
 1584-our boat on shore for the beating of the billoe : others 2% great she appointed to carry us on their backs to the dry ground , and others to bring our oars into the house for ers 
 fear of stealing . When we were come into the utter room , having five rooms in her house , she caused us to fit down by a great fire , and after took ofF our clothes and washed them , and dried them again : some of the women plucked off our stockings and washed them , some washed our feet in warm water , and she her self took great pains to see all things ordered in the best manner she could , making great haste to dress some meat for us to eat . 
 After we had thus dried our selves , she brought us A solemn into the inner room , where she set on the board stand - banquet . ing along the house , some wheat like furmentie , sodden Venison , and roasted , fish sodden , boiled , and roasted , Melons raw , and sodden , roots of diverse kinds , and diverse fruits : their drink is commonly water , but while the grape lasteth , they drink wine , and for want of casks to keep it , all the year after they drink water , but it is sodden with Ginger in it , and black Cinnamon , and sometime Sassafras , and diverse other wholesome , and medi-cinable herbs and trees . We were entertained with all love and kindness , and with as much bounty ( after their manner ) as they could possibly devise . We found the people most gentle , loving , and faithful , void of all guile and treason , and such as live after the manner of the golden age . The people only care how to defend themselves from the cold in their short winter , and to feed themselves with such meat as the soil affordeth : there meat is very well sodden and they make broth very sweet and savoury : their vessels are earthen pots , very large , white and sweet , their dishes are wooden platters of sweet timber : within the place where they feed was their lodging , and within that their Idol , which Their I dole . they worship , of whom they speak incredible things . 
 While we were at meat , there came in at the gates two or three men with their bows and arrows from hunting , vin 305 u 
 whom when we espied , we began to look one towards another , and offered to reach our weapons : but assoon as she espied our mistrust , she was very much moved , and caused some of her men to run out , and take away their bows and arrows and break them , and withal beat the poor fellows out of the gate again . When we departed in the evening and would not tarry all night , she was very sorry , and gave us into our boat our supper half dressed , pots and all , and brought us to our boat side , in which we lay all night , removing the same a pretty distance from the shore : she perceiving our jealousy , was much grieved , and sent diverse men and thirtie women , to fit all night on the bank side by us , and sent us into our boats five mats to cover us from the rain , using very many words to entreat us to rest in their houses : but because we were few men , and if we had miscarried , the voyage had be in very great danger , we durst not adventure any thing , though there was no cause of doubt : for a more kind and loving people there can not be found in the world , as far as we have hitherto had trial . 
 Beyond this Island there is the main land , and over against this Island falls into this spacious water , the great river called Occam by the inhabitants on which stands a town called Pomeiock , & sixe days journey from the same is situate their greatest city , called Skicoak , which this people affirm to be very great : but the Savages were never at it , only they speak of it by the report of their father's and other men , whom they have herd affirm it to be above one hours journey about . 
 Into this river falls another great river , called Cipo , in which there is found great store of Muscles in which there are pearls : likewise there descendeth into this Occam , another river , called Nomopana , on the one side whereof stands a great town called Chawanook , and the Lord of that town and country is called Pooneno : this Pooneno is not subject to the king of Wingandacoa , 306 
 but is a free Lord : beyond this country is there another king , whom they call Menatonon , and these three kings are in league with each other . Towards the Southwest , foure days journey is situate a town called Sequotan , which is the Southermost town of Wingandacoa , near unto which , sixe and twentie years passed there was a ship S^P cast cast away , whereof some of the people were saved , and aw^‘ those were white people , whom the country people preserved . 
 And after ten days remaining in and out Island unhabited , called Wocokon , they with the help of some of the dwellers of Sequotan , fastened two boats of the country together & made masts unto them , and sails of their shirts , and having taken into them such victuals as the country yielded , they departed after they had remained in this out Island 3 weeks : but shortly after it seemed they were cast away , for the boats were found upon the coast , cast a land in another Island adjoining : other then these , there was never any people appareled , or white of colour , either seen or herd of among these people , and these aforesaid were seen only of the inhabitants of Seco tan , which appeared to be very true , for they wondered marvelously when we were among them at the whiteness of our skins , ever coveting to touch our breasts , and to view the same . Beside they had our ships in marvelous admiration , & all things else were so strange unto them , as it appeared that none of them had ever seen the like . When we discharged any piece , were it but and hargubuz , they would tremble thereat for very fear , and for the strangeness of the same : for the weapons which themselves use are bows and arrows : the arrows are but of small canes , headed with a sharp shell or tooth of a fish sufficient enough to kill a naked man . Their swords be of wood hardened : likewise they Their wa-use wooden breastplates for their defence . They have Pans ' beside a kind of club , in the end whereof they fasten the sharp horns of a stag , or other beast . When they go to wars they carry about with them their idol , 
 307 
 of whom they ask counsel , as the Roman were wont of the Oracle of Apollo . They sing songs as they march towards the battle in stead of drums and trumpets : their wars are very cruel and bloody , by reason whereof , and of their civil dissensions which have happened of late years among them , the people are marvelously wasted , and in some places the country left desolate . 
 Adjoining to this country aforesaid called Secotan begins a country called Pomovik , belonging to another king whom they call Piamacum , and this king is in league with the next king adjoining towards the setting of the Sun , and the country Newsiok , situate upon a goodly river called Neus : these kings have mortali war with Wingina king of Wingandacoa : but about two years passed there was a peace made between the King Piemacum , and the Lord of Secotan , as these men which we have brought with us to England , have given us to understand : but there remains a mortali malice in the Secotanes , for many injuries & slaughters done upon them by this Piemacum . They invited diverse men , and thirtie women of the best of his country to their town to a feast : and when they were altogether merry , & praying before their Idol , ( which is nothing else but a mere illusion of the devil ) the captain or Lord of the town came suddenly upon them , and slew them every one , reserving the women and children : and these two have oftentimes since persuaded us to surprise Piemacum his town , having promised and assured us , that there will be found in it great store of commodities . But whither their persuasion be to the end they may be revenged of their enemies , or for the love they bear to us , we leave that to the trial hereafter . 
 Beyond this Island called Roanoak , are main Islands very plentiful of fruits and other natural increases , together with many towns , and villages , along the side of the continent , some bounding upon the Islands , and some stretching up further into the land . 
 When we first had sighed of this country , some thought 308 
 the first land we saw to be the continent : but after we entered into the Haven , we saw before us another mighty long Sea : for there lies along the coast a tract of Islands , two hundreth miles in length , adjoining to the Ocean sea , and between the Islands , two or three entrances : when you are entered between them ( these Islands being very narrow for the most part , as in most places sixe miles broad , in some places less , in few more ) then there appears another great Sea , containing in breadth in some places , forty , and in some fifty , in some twenty miles over , before you come unto the continent : and in this enclosed Sea there are above and hundreth Islands of diverse bignesses , whereof one is sixteene miles long , at which we were , finding it a most pleasant and fertile ground , replenished with goodly Cedars , and diverse other sweet woods , full of Corrants , of flax , and many other notable commodities , which we at that time had no leisure to view . Beside this Island there are many , as I have said , some of two , or three , of foure , of five miles , some more , some less , most beautiful and pleasant to behold , replenished with Dear , Conies , Hares and diverse beasts , and about them the goodliest and best fish in the world , and in greatest abundance . 
 Thus Sir , we have acquainted you with the particulars of our discovery , made this present voyage , as far forth as the shortness of the time we there continued would affbord us take view of : and so contenting our selves with this service at this time , which we hope hereafter to enlarge , as occasion and assistance shall given , we resolved to leave the country , and to apply our selves to return for England , which we did accordingly , and arrived safely in the West of England about the midst of September . 
 And whereas we have above certified you of the country taken in possession by us , to her Majesties use , and so to yours by her Majesties grant , we thought good for the better assurance thereof to record some of the particular Gentlemen , & men of account , who then were 3°9 
 Roanoak sixteen miles long . 
 present , as witnesses of the same , that thereby all occasion of cavil to the title of the country , in her Majesties behalf may be prevented , which otherwise , such as like not the actium may use and pretend , whose names are : 
 Master Philip Amadas , Master Arthur Barlow , 
 j - Captains . 
 ' William Greenevile , John Wood , James Browewich , 
 ! Henry Green , 
 ’ Benjamin Wood , Simon Ferdinando , Nicholas Petman , John Hewes , 
 ► Of the company . 
 We brought home also two of the Savages being lusty men , whose names were Wanchese and Manteo . 
 . 