The voyage made by Sir Richard Greenvile , for Sir Walter Ralegh , to Virginia , in the year 1585. 
 He 9. day of April , in the year abovesaid , we departed from Plymmouth , our Fleet consisting of the number of seven sails , to wit , the Tiger , of the burden of seven score tons , a Flyboat called the Roebuck , of the like burden , the Lion of a hundred tons or thereabouts , 
 the Elizabeth , of fiftie tons , and the Dorothie , a small bark : whereunto were also adjoined for speedy services , two small pinnaces . The principali Gendemen of our company , were these , M. Ralph Lane , M. Tomas Candish , M. John Arundell , M. Raymund , M. Stukeley , M. Bremige , M. Vincent , and M. John Clarke , and diverse others , whereof some were Captains , and other some Assistants for counsel , and good directions in the voyage . 
 The 14. day of Aprill we fell with Lancerota and Forteventura , Isles of the Canaries , and from thence 310 
 we continued our course for Dominica , one of the Antiles of the West India , wherewith we fell the 7. day of May , and the 10. day following we came to and anchor at Cotesa , a little Hand situate near to the Hand of S. John , where we landed , and refreshed our selves all that day . 
 The 12. day of May we came to and anchor in the Bay of Moskito , in the Hand of S. John , within a Falcon shot of the shore : where our general Sir Richard Greenevil , and the most part of our company landed , and began to fortify very near to the Sea side : the river ran by the one side of our fort , and the other two sides were environed with woods . 
 The 13. day we began to built a new pinnace within the Fort , with the timber that we then felled in the country , some part whereof we fetched three miles up in the land , and brought it to our Fort upon trucks , the Spaniard not daring to make or offer resistance . 
 The 16. day there appeared unto us out of the woods eight horsemen of the Spaniards , about a quarter of a mile from our Fort , staying about half and hour in viewing our forces : but assoon as they saw ten of our shot marching towards them , they presently retired into the woods . 
 The 19. day Master Candish , who had be separated from our fleet in a storm in the Bay of Portugall , arrived at Cotesa , within the sighed of the Tiger : we thinking him a far off to have been either a Spaniard or Frenchman of war , thought it good to weigh anchors , and to go room with him , which the Tiger did , and discerned him at last to be one of our consorts , for joy of whose coming our ships discharged their ordinance , and saluted him according to the manner of the Seas . 
 The 22. day twentie other Spanish horsemen showed themselves to us upon the other side of the river : who being seen , our general dispatched 20. footmen towards them , and two horsemen of ours , mounted upon Spanish horses , which we before had taken in the time 311 
 A.D. 
 I585 - 
 They land upon the Hand ofS . John’de Porto Rico. 
 of our being on the Hand : they showed to our men a flag of truce , and made signs to have a parley with us : whereupon two of our men went half of the way upon the sands , and two of theirs came and met them : the two Spaniards offered very great salutations to our men , but began according to their Spanish proud humours , to - expostulate with them about their arrival and fortifying in their country , who notwithstanding by our men's discreet answers were so cooled , that ( whereas they were told , that our principali intention was only to furnish our selves with water and victuales , and other necessaries , whereof we stood in need , which we craved might be yielded us with fair and friendly means , otherwise our resolution was to practise force , and to relieve ourselves by the sword ) the Spaniards in conclusion seeing our men so resolute , yielded to our requests with large promises of all courtesy , and great favour , and so our men and theirs departed . 
 The 23. day our pinnace was finished , and launched : which being done , our general with his Captains and Gentlemen , marched up into the Country about the space of 4. miles , where in a plain marsh they stayed expecting the coming of the Spaniards according to their promise , to furnish us with victuals : who keeping their old custom for perjury and breach of promise , came not , whereupon our general fired the woods thereabouts , and so retired to our Fort , which the same day was fired also , and each man came aboard to be ready to set sail the next morning . 
 The 29. day we set sail from Saint Johns , being many of us stung before upon shore with the Muskitos : but the same night we took a Spanish Frigate , which was forsaken by the Spaniards upon the sighed of us , and the next day in the morning very early we took another Frigate , with good and rich fraught , and diverse Spaniards of account in her , which afterwards we ransomed for good round sums , and landed them in S. Johns . 
 312 
 The 26. day our Lieutenant Master Ralph Lane went in one of the Frigates which we had taken , to Roxo bay upon the Southwest side of Saint Johns , to fetch salt , being thither conducted by a Spanish Pilot : as soon as he arrived there , he landed with his men to the number of 20. and entrenched himself upon the sands immediately , compassing one of their salt hills within the trench : who being seen of the Spaniards , there came down towards him two or three troops of horsemen and footmen , who gave him the looking , and gazing on , but durst not come near him to offer any resistance , so that Master Lane maugre their troops , carried their salt aboard and jaded his Frigate , and so returned again to our fleet the 29. day , which road at S. Germanes Bay. The same day we all departed , and the next day arrived in the Hand of Hispaniola . 
 June . 
 THe 1. day of June we anchored at Isabella , on the North side of Hispaniola . 
 The 3. day of June , the Governor of Isabella , and Captain of the Port de Plata , being certified by the reports of sundry Spaniards , who had been well entertained aboard our ships by our general , that in our fleet were many brave and gallant Gentlemen , who greatly desired to see the Governor aforesaid , he thereupon sent gentle commendations to our general , promising within few days to come to him in person , which he performed accordingly . 
 The 5. day the aforesaid Governor accompanied with a lusty Fryer , and twenty other Spaniards , with their servants , and Negroes , came down to the Sea side , where our ships road at anchor , who being seen , our general manned immediately the most part of his boats with the chief men of our Fleet , every man appointed , and furnished in the best sort : at the landing of our general , the Spanish governor received him very courteously , and the Spanish Gentlemen saluted 3X3 
 our English Gentlemen , and their inferior sort did also salute our Soldiers and Sea men , liking our men , and likewise their qualities , although at the first they seemed to stand in fear of us , and of so many of our boats , whereof they desired that all might not land their men , yet in the end , the courtesies that passed on both sides were so great , that all fear and mistrust on the Spaniards part was abandoned . 
 In the mean time while our English general and the Spanish Governor discoursed betwixt them of diverse matters , as of the state of the Country , the multitude of the Towns and people , and the commodities of the Hand , our men provided two banqueting houses covered with green boughs , the one for the Gentlemen , the other for the servants , and a sumptuous banquet was brought in served by us all in plate , with the found of trumpets , and consort of music , wherewith the Spaniards were more then delighted . Which banquet being ended , the Spaniardes in recompense of our courtesy , caused a great herd of white bulls , and kine to be brought together from the mountains , and appointed for every Gentleman and Captain that would ride , a horse ready saddled , and then singled out three of the best of them to be hunted by horsemen after their manner , so that the pastime grew very pleasant for the space of three hours , wherein all three of the beasts were killed , whereof one took the Sea , and there was slain with a musket . After this sport , many rare presents and gifts were given and bestowed on both parts , and the next day we played the Merchants in bargaining with them by way of truck and exchange of diverse of their commodities , as horses , mares , kine , bulls , goats , swine , sheep , bullhides , sugar , ginger , pearl , tobacco , and such like commodities of the Hand . 
 The 7. day we departed with great good will from the Spaniards from the Hand of Hispaniola : but the wiser sort do impute this great show of friendship , and courtesy used towards us by the Spaniards rather to the 
 314 
 force that we were of , and the vigilancy , and watchful - ness that was among us , then to any hearty good will , or sure friendly entertainment : for doubtless if they had be stronger then we , we might have looked for no better courtesy at their hands , then Master John Haukins received at Saint John de Ullua , or John Oxnam near the straights of Dariene , and diverse others of our Countrymen in other places . 
 The 8. day we anchored at a small Hand to take Seals , which in that place we understood to have be in great quantity , where the general and certain others with him in the pinnace were in very great danger to have been all cast away , but by the help of God they escaped the hazard , and returned aboard the Admiral in safety . 
 The 9 , day we arrived and landed in the He of Caycos , They land on in which Hand we searched for salte-pondes , upon the Pes °f advertisement and information of a Portugall : who in aiC0S ' deed abused our general and us , deserving a halter for his hire , if it had so pleased us . 
 The 12. we anchored at Guanima , and landed . Guanima . The 15. and 16. we anchored and landed at Cyguateo . Cyguateo . The 20. we fell with the main of Florida . 
 The 23. we were in great danger of a wrack on a breach called the Cape of Fear . 
 The 24. we came to anchor in a harbour , where we caught in one tIED so much fish as would have yielded us twentie pounds in London : this was our first landing They land In in Florida . Florida . 
 The 26. we came to anchor at Wocokon . 
 The 29. we weighed anchor to bring the Tiger into the harbour , where through the unskilfulness of the Master whose name was Fernando , the Admiral struck on ground , and sunk . 
 The 3. we sent word of our arriving at Wococon , to July . Wingina at Roanoak . 
 The 6. M. John Arundel was sent to the main , and Manteo with him : and Captain Aubry and Captain Boniten the same day were sent to Croatoan , where they 
 315 
 found two of our men left there with 30. other by Captain Reymond , some 20. days before . 
 The 8. Captain Aubry and Captain Boniten returned , with two of our men found by them , to us at Wocokon . 
 The 11. day the general accompanied in his Tilt boat with Master John Arundell , Master Stukeley , and diverse other Gentlemen , Master Lane , Master Candish , Master Hariot , and twentie others in the new pinnace , Captain Amadas , Captain Clarke , with ten others in a shipboat , Francis Brook , and John White in another ship-boat , passed over the water from Wococon to the main land victualed for eight days , in which voyage we first discovered the towns of Pomejok , Aquascogoc and Secotan , and also the great lake called by the Savages Paquipe , with diverse other places , and so returned with that discovery to our Fleet . 
 The 12. we came to the Town of Pomeiok . 
 The 13. we passed by water to Aquascogok . 
 The 15. we came to Secotan , and were well entertained there of the Savages . 
 The 16. we returned thence , and one of our boats with the Admiral was sent to Aquascogok , to demand a silver cup which one of the Savages had stolen from us , and not receiving it according to his promise , we burned , and spoiled their corn , and Town , all the people being fled . 
 The 18. we returned from the discovery of Secotan , and the same day came aboard our Fleet riding at Wococon . 
 The 21. our Fleet ankering at Wococon , we weighed anchor for Hatoraske . 
 The 27. our Fleet anchored at Hatorask , and there we rested . 
 The 29. Grangino brother to king Wingina came aboard the Admiral , and Manteo with him . 
 The 2. the Admiral was sent to Weapomeiok . 
 The 5. M. John Arundell was sent for England . 
 316 
 The 25. our general weighed anchor , and set sail for England . 
 About the 31. he took a Spanish ship of 300 tun richly loaded , boarding her with a boat made with boards of chests , which fell asunder , and sunk at the ships side , assoon as ever he and his men were out of it . 
 The 10. of September , by foul weather the general September . then shipped in the prize , lost sighed of the Tiger . 
 The 6. the Tiger fell with the Lands end , and the October . same day came to anchor at Falmouth . 
 The 18. the General came with the prize to Plymmouth , and was courteously received by diverse of his worshipful friends . 
 . 