I think there is none of you that is ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprise is , and also how acceptable it is unto our young King . Therefore my 
 friends ( as one desiring your honour and benefit ) I would not fail to advertise you all of the exceeding good happen which should fallen to them , which , as men of valour and worthy courage , would make trial in this our first discovery of the benefits and commodities of this new land : which should be , as I assure my self , the greatest occasion that ever could happen unto them , to arise unto the title and degree of honour . And for this cause I was desirous to propose unto you and set down before your eyes the eternal memory which of right they deserve , which forgetting both their parents and their country have had the courage to enterprise a thing of such importance , which even kings themselves understanding to be men aspiring to so high degree of 468 
 magnanimity and increase of their majesties , do not disdain so well to regard , that afterwards employing them in maters of weight & of high enterprise , they make their names immortali for ever . Howbeit , I would not have you persuade your selves , as many do , that you shall never have such good fortune , as not being known neither to the king nor the Princes of the Realm , and beside descending of so poor a stock , that few or none of your parents , having ever made profession of arms , have be known unto the great estates . For albeit that from my tender years I my self have applied all my industry to follow them , and have hazarded my life in so many dangers for the service of my prince , yet could I never attain thereunto ( not that I did not deserve this title and degree of government ) as I have seen it happen to many others , only because they descend of a noble raze , since more regard is had of their birth then of their virtue . For well I know that if virtue were regarded , there would more be found worthy to deserve the title , & by good right to be nam noble and valiant . I will therefore make sufficient answer to such propositions and such things as you may object against me , laying before you the infinite examples which we have of the Roman ; which concerning the point of honour were the first that triumphed over the world . For how many find we among them , which for their so valiant enterprizes , not for the greatness of their parentage , have obtained the honour to triumph ? If we have recourse unto their ancestors , we shall find that their parents were of so mean condition , that by labouring with their hands they lived very basely . As the father of / Elius - ^Rus Perti-Pertinax , which was a poor artisan , his Grandfather nfx^scend-likewise was a bound man , as the historiographers do parentage witness : and nevertheless , being moved with a valiant became Em-courage , • he was nothing dismayed for all this , but perour of rather desirous to aspire unto high things , he began Rome-with a brave stomach to learn feats of arms , and 
 469 
 Rusten Bassha of and herdsmans son through his valour became the great Turkes son in law . 
 Agathocles a potters son became king of SiciBe . 
 profited so well therein , that from step to step he became at length to be Emperor of the Roman . For all this dignity he despised not his parents : but contrariwise , & in remembrance of them , he caused his father's shop to be covered with a fine wrought marble , to serve for and example to men descended of base & poor lineages , to give them occasion to aspire unto high things notwithstanding the meanness of their ancestors . I will not pass over in silence the excellency & prowess of the valiant and renowned Agathocles the son of a simple potter , and yet forgetting the contemptible estate of his father , he so applied himself to virtue in his tender years , that by the favour of arms he came to be king of Sicilie : and for all this title he refused not to be counted the son of a Potter . But the more to eternise the memory of his parents and to make his name renowned , he commanded that he should be served at the Table in vessels of gold and silver and others of earth : declaring thereby that the dignity wherein he was placed came not unto him by his parents , but by his own virtue only . If I shall speak of our time , I will lay before you only Rusten Bassha , which may be a sufficient example to all men : which though he were the son of a poor herdsman , did so apply his youth in all virtue , that being brought up in the service of the great Turke , he seemed to aspire to great and high matters , in such sort that growing in years he increased also in courage , so far forth , that in fine for his excellent virtues he married the daughter of the great Turke his Prince . Howe much then ought so many worthy examples to move you to plant here ? Considering also that hereby you shall registered for ever as the first that inhabited this strange country . I pray you therefore all to advice your selves thereof , and to declare your minds freely unto me , protesting that I will so well imprint your names in the kings ears , and the other princes , that your re - 
 470 
 1587-nowme shall hereafter shine unquenchable through our Realm of France . He had scarcely ended his Oration , but the greatest part of our soldiers replied : that a soldiers greater pleasure could never betide them , perceiving ^eretori-well the acceptable service which by this means they should do unto their Prince : beside that this thing should be for the increase of their honours : therefore they besought the Captain , before he departed out of the place , to begin to built them a Fort , which they hoped afterwards to finish , and to leave them munition necessary for their defence , showing as it seemed that they were displeased , that it was so long in doing . Whereupon John Ribault being as glad as might be to see his men so well willing , determined the next day to search the most fit and convenient place to be inhabited . Wherefore he embarked himself very early in the morning and commanded them to follow him that were desirous to inhabit there , to the intent that they might like the beter of the place . Having sailed up the great river on the North side , in coasting and Isle which ended with a sharp point towards the mouth of the river , having sailed a while , he discovered a small river , which entered into the Island , which he would not fail to search out . Which done , & finding the same deep enough to harbour therein Galleys and Galliots in good number , proceeding further , he found a very open place , joining upon the brink thereof , where he went on land , and seeing the place fit to built a Fortress in , and commodious for them that were willing to plant there , he resolved incontinent to cause the bigness of the fortification to be measured out . 
 And considering that there stayed but sixe and twentie there , he caused the Fort to be made in length but The length and sixteene fathom , and thirteene in breadth , with flanks p^ak^by according to the proportion thereof . The measure being Laudonnier ? taken by " me and Captain Salles , we sent unto thee and Captain ships for men , and to bring shovels , pick-axes and other instruments necessary to make the fortification . 
 471 
 A Fort built We travailed so diligently , that in a short space the Fort in Port Royal was made in some sort defenciable . In which mean by Ribault . time john Ribault caused victuals and warlike munition to be brought for the defence of the place . After he had furnished them with all such things as they had need of , he determined to take his leave of them . But before his departure he used this speech unto Captain Albert , which he left in this place . 
 Ribaults Captain Albert , I have to request you in the speech to Cap - presence of a ] these men , that you would quit your tame ert . se | pe so w | sejy yOur charge , and govern so modestly your small company which I leave you , which with so good cheer remains under your obedience , that I never have occasion but to commend you , and to recount unto the king ( as I am desirous ) the faithful service which before us all you undertake to do him in his new France : And you companions , ( quoth he to the Soldiers ) I beseech you also to esteem of Captain Albert as if he were my self that stayed here with you , yielding him that obedience which a true soldier owes unto his general and Captain , living as brothers one with another , without all dissension : and in so doing God will assist you and bless your enterprises . Having ended his exhortation , we took our leaves of each of them , and sailed towards our ships , calling the Fort by the name of Charles-fort , and the River by the name Chenonceau . The next day we determined to depart from this place being as well contented as was possible that we had so happily ended our business , with good hope , if occasion would permit , to discover perfectly the river of Jordan . For this cause we hoised our sails about ten of the clock in the morning : after we were ready to depart Captain Ribault commanded to shoot ofF our Ordinance to give a farewell unto our Frenchmen , which failed not to do the like on their part . This being done we sailed towards the North : and then we nam this river Porte Royal , because of the largeness and excellent 
 472 
 The aforesaid Fort was called Charles-fort . 
 Port Royal . 
 fairness of the same . After that we had sailed about 15 leagues from thence , we espied a river , whereupon we sent our pinnace thither to discover it . At their return they brought us word that they found not passed ward of Port half a fathom water in the mouth thereof . Which Royal . when we understood , without doing any thing else , we continued our way , and called it the Base or Shallow river . As we still went on sounding we found not Shallow water . passed five or sixe fathom water , although we were sixe P^ ' good leagues from the shore : at length we found not passed three fathoms , which gave us occasion greatly to muse . And without making any farther way we strook our sails , partly because we wanted water , & partly because the night approached : during which time Captain John Ribault bethought with himself whither it were best for him to pass any farther , because of the eminent dangers which every hour we saw before our eyes : or whither he should content himself with that which he had certainly discovered , & also left men to inhabit the country . Being not able for that time to resolve with himself , he referred it until the next day . 
 The morning being come he proposed to all the company what was best to be done , to the end that with good advisement every man might deliver his opinion . Some made answer , that according to their judgement he had occasion fully to content himself , considering he could do no more : laying before his eyes , that he had discovered more in sixe weeks , then the Spaniards had done in two years in the conquest of their New Spaine : and that he should do the king very great service , if he did bring him news in so short a time of his happy discovery . Other showed unto him the loss and spoil of his victuals , and on the other side the inconvenience that might happen by the shallow water that they found continually along the coast . Which things being well and at large debated we resolved to leave the coast , forsaking the North , to take our way towards the East , which is the right way and course to our 
 473 
 Their arrwall France , where we happily arrived the twentieth day of in France July , the year 1562. 
 1562. ^20 7 7 J 
 of My . The state and condition of those which were 
 left behind in Charles-fort . 
 KingAudusta . 
 Note . 
 Mayon . Hoya . Touppa . Stalame . 
 OUr men after our departure never rested , but night and day did fortify themselves , being in good hope that after their fort was finished , they would begin to discover farther up within the river . It happened one day , as certain of them were in cutting of roots in the groves , that they espied on the sudden and Indian that hunted the Dear , which finding himself so near upon them , was much dismayed , but our men began to draw near unto him and to use him so courteously , that he became assured and followed them to Charles-fort , where every man sought to do him pleasure . Captain Albert was very joyful of his coming , which after he had given him a shirt and some other trifles , he asked him of his dwelling : the Indian answered him that it was farther up within the river , and that he was vassal of king Audusta : he also showed him with his hand the limits of his habitation . After much other talk the Indian desired leave to depart , because it drew towards night , which Captain Albert granted him very willingly . Certain days after the Captain determined to sail towards Audusta , where being arrived , by reason of the honest entertainment which he had given to the Indian , he was so courteously received , that the king talked with him of nothing else but of the desire which he had to become his friend : giving him beside to understand that he being his friend and ally , he should have the amity of foure other kings , which in might & authority were able to do much for his sake : Beside all this , in his necessity they might be able to succour him with victuals . One of these kings was called Mayon , another Hoya , the third Touppo , and the fourth Stalame . He told him moreover , that they would be very glad , when they should understand the news of his coming , and 
 474 
 therefore he prayed him to vouchsafe to visit them . 
 The Captain willingly consented unto him , for the desire that he had to purchase friends in that place . Therefore they departed the next morning very early , and first arrived at the house of king Touppa , and afterwards went into the other kings houses , except the house of king Stalame . He received of each of them all the amiable courtesies that might be : they showed themselves to be as affectioned friends unto him as was possible , and offered unto him a thousand small presents . After that he had remained by the space of certain days with these strange kings , he determined to take his leave : and being come back to the house of Audusta , he commanded all his men to go aboard their Pinnace : for he was minded to go towards the country of king Stalame , The country which dwelled towards the North the distance of 15 great leagues from Charles-fort . Therefore as they sailed up kagfus North-the river they entered into a great current , which they ward of ' followed so far till they came at the last to the house of Charles-fort . Stalame : which brought him into his lodging , where he sought to make them the best cheer he could devise . 
 He presented immediately unto Captain Albert his bow and arrows , which is a sign and confirmation of alliance between them . He presented him with Chamoys Chamoys skins . The Captain seeing the best part of the day s^nnes-was now past , took his leave of king Stalame to return to Charles-fort , where he arrived the day following . By this time the friendship was grown so great between our men and king Audusta , that in a manner all things were common between him and them : in such sort that this good Indian king did nothing of importance , but he called our men thereunto . For when the time drew The feast of near of the celebrating their feasts of Toya , which are ceremonies most strange to recite , he sent Ambassadors pjj j to our men to request them on his behalf to be there present . Whereunto they agreed most willingly for the desire that they had to understand what this might be . They embarked themselves therefore and sailed towards 
 475 
 The Indians trimming of themselves with rich feathers . 
 the kings house , which was already come forth on the way towards them , to receive them courteously , to bid them welcome & bring them to his house , where he sought to entreat them the best he might . In the mean while the Indians prepared themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after , and the king brought them to see the place , wherein the feast should be kept : where they saw many women round about , which laboured by all means to make the place clean & neat . This place was a great circuit of ground with open prospect and round in figure . On the morrow therefore early in the morning , all they which were chosen to celebrate the feast , being painted and trimmed with rich feathers of diverse colours , put themselves on the way to go from the kings house towards the place of Toya : whereunto when they were come they set themselves in order , & followed three Indians , which in painting and in gesture were differing from the rest : each of them bore a Tabret in their hand , dancing & singing in a lamentable tune , when they began to enter into the midst of the round circuit , being followed of others which answered them again . After that they had sung , danced , and turned 3 times , they fell on running like unbridled horses , through the midst of the thickest woods . And then the Indian women continued all the rest of the day in tears as sad & woeful as was possible : & in such rage they cut the arms of the young girls , which they lanced so cruelly with sharp shells of Muscles that the blood followed which they flang into the air , crying out three times , He Toya . The king Audusta had gathered all our men into his house , while the feast was celebrated , and was exceedingly offended when he saw them laugh . This he did , because the Indians are very angry when they are seen in their ceremonies . Notwithstanding one of our men made such shift that by subtle means he gat out of the house of Audusta , and secretly went and hid himself behind a very thick bush , where at his pleasure , he might easily descry the ceremonies of the feast . They three that began 
 476 
 1587-the feast are nam Jawas : and they are as it were three Jawas are Priests of the Indian law : to whom they give credit and their rtestes-beliefe partly because that by kindred they are ordained to be over their Sacrifices , and partly also because they be so subtle magicians that any thing that is lost is Maidans . straightway recovered by their means . Again they are Positions . not only reverenced for these things , but also because they heal diseases by I wot not what kind of knowledge and skill they have . Those that ran so through the woods returned two days after : after their return they began to dance with a cheerful courage in the midst of the fair place , and to cheer up their good old Indian father's , which either by reason of their too great age , or by reason of their natural indisposition and feebleness were not called to the feast . When all these dances were ended , they fell on eating with such a greediness , that they seemed rather to devour their meat then to eat it , for they had neither eaten nor drunk the day of the feast , nor the two days following . Our men were not forgotten at this good cheer , for the Indians sent for them all thither , showing themselves very glad of their presence . While they remained certain time with the Indians , a man of ours god a young boy for certain trifles , and inquired of him , what the Indians did in the wood during their absence : which boy made him understand by signs , that the Jawas had 
 made invocations to Toya , and that by Magical Characters Invocations of they had made him come that they might speak with the Jawas or him and demand diverse strange things of him , which for unt° fear of the Jawas he durst not utter . They have also y ’ many other ceremonies , which I will not here rehearse for fear of molesting the reader with a matter of so small importance . 
 When the feast therefore was finished our men returned unto Charles-fort : where having remained but a while their victuals began to wax short , which forced them Their victuals to have recourse unto their neighbours , and to pray them fail them . to succour them in their necessity : which gave them 
 477 
 The Indians manner of living in the Winter time of Mast and roots . 
 King Covexis mighty and renowned . 
 King Ovade . 
 King Maccou . 
 Ovades country in the river Belle . 
 part of all the victuals which they had , and kept no more unto themselves then would serve to sow their fields . They told them farther that for this cause it was needful for them to retire themselves into the woods , to live of Mast and roots until the time of harvest , being as sorry as might be that they were not able any farther to aid them . They gave them also counsel to go towards the countries' of King Covexis a man of might and renown in this province , which makes his abode towards the South abounding at all seasons and replenished with such quantity of mill , corn , and beans that by his only succour they might be able to live a very long time . But before they should come into his territories , they were to repair unto a king called Ovade the brother of Covexis , which in mill , beans , and corn was no less wealthy , and withal is very liberali , and which would be very joy full if he might but once see them . Our men perceiving the good relation which the Indians made them of those two kings resolved to go thither ; for they felt already the necessity which oppressed them . Therefore they made request unto king Maccou , that it would please him to give them one of his subject's to guide them the right way thither : whereupon he condescended very willingly , knowing that without his favour they should have much ado to bring their interprize to pass . Wherefore after they had given order for all things necessary for the voyage , they put themselves to Sea , and sailed so far that in the end they came into the country of Ovade , which they found to be in the river Belle . Being there arrived they perceived a company of Indians , which assoon as they knew of their being there came before them . Assoon as they were come near them , their guides showed them by signs that Ovade was in this company , wherefore our men set forward to salute him . And then two of his sons which were with him , being goodly and strong men saluted them again in very good sort , and used very friendly 
 entertainment on their part . The king immediately began to make and Oration in his Indian language of the great pleasure and contentment which he had to see them in that place , protesting that he would become so loyal a friend of theirs hereafter , that he would be their faithful defendor against all them that would offer to be their enemies . After these speeches he led them towards his house , where he sought to entreat them very courteously . His house was hanged about with Tapestry of feathers of diverse colours the height of a Tapistrieof pike . Moreover the place where the king took his rest was covered with white Coverlettes embroidered ietsedgedwlth with devises of very witty and fine workmanship , and read fringe . fringed round about with a Fringe died in the colour of Scarlet . They advertised the king by one of the guides which they brought with them , how that ( having herd of his great liberality ) they had put to the Sea to come to beseech him to succour them with victuals in their great want and necessity : and that in so doing , he should bind them all hereafter to remain his faithful friends and loyal defenders against all his enemies . This good Indian assoon ready to do them pleasure , as they were to demand it , commanded his subject's that they should fill our Pinnace with mil and beans . Afterwards he TheHberaHtie caused them to bring him sixe pieces of his Tapestry ofkingQvade . made like little coverlets , & gave them to lour men with so liberal a mind , as they easily perceived the desire which he had to become their friend . In recompense of all these gifts our men gave him two cutting hooks and certain other trifles , wherewith he held himself greatly satisfied . This being done , our men took their leave of the king , which for their farewell , said nothing else but that they should return if they wanted victuals , & that they might assure themselves of him , that they should Qvades coun-never want any thing that was in his power . Wherefore trey twenty-they embarked themselves , and sailed towards Charles-fort , which from this place might be some five and f^m^charles tcn&alCf leagues distant . But as soon as our men firt . 
 479 
 The fort set on fire by casualty . 
 The fort reedified by the Savages in the space of sz hours . 
 thought themselves at their ease , & free from the dangers whereunto they had exposed themselves night and day in gathering together of victuals here and there : Lo , even as they were asleep , the fire caught in their lodgings with such fury , being increased by the wind , that the room that was built for them before our men's departure , was consumed in and instant , without being able to save any thing , saving a little of their victuals . Whereupon our men being far from all succours , found themselves in such extremity , that without the aid of Almighty God , the only searcher of the hearts and thoughts of men , which never forsaketh those that seek him in their afflictions , they had be quite and clean out of all hope . For the next day betimes in the morning the King Audusta and King Maccou came thither , accompanied with a very good company of Indians , which knowing the misfortune , were very sorry for it . And then they uttered unto their subject's the speedy diligence which they were to use in building another house , showing unto them that the Frenchmen were their loving friends , & that they had made it evident unto them by the gifts and presents which they had received : protesting that whosoever put not his helping hand unto the work with all his might , should be esteemed as unprofitable , and as one that had no good part in him , which the Savages fear above all things . This was the occasion that every man began to endeavour himself in such sort , that in less then 12 hours , they had begun and finished a house which was very near as great as the former . Which being ended , they returned home fully contented with a few cutting hooks , and hatchet's , which they received of our men . Within a small while after this mischance , their victuals began to wax short : and after our men had taken good deliberation , thought and bethought themselves again , they found that there was no better way for them then to return again to the king Ovade and Covexis his brother . Wherefore they resolved to send thither some of their company the 480 
 next day following : which with and Indian Canoa sailed up into the country about io leagues : afterwards they found a very fair & great river of fresh water , which they failed not to search out : they found therein a great number of Crocodiles , which in greatness pass those of Crocodiles . the river Nilus : moreover , all along the banks thereof , there grow mighty high Cypresses . After they had Cypresses . stayed a small while in this place , they purposed to follow sec^he their journey , helping themselves so well with the tides , Countrey0of ‘ that without putting themselves in danger of the continual ! Ovade . peril of the Sea , they came into the country of Ovade : of whom they were most courteously received . They advertised him of the occasion wherefore they came again to visit him , and told him of the mischance , which happened unto them since their last voyages : how they had not only lost their household stuff by casualty of fire , but also their victuals which he had given them so bountifully : that for this cause they were so bold as to come once again unto him , to beseech him to vouchsafe to succour them in such need and necessity . 
 After that the king had understood their case , he sent messengers unto his brother Covexis , to request him upon his behalf to send him some of his mill and beans , which thing he did : and the next morning , they were come again with victuals , which the king caused to be born into their Canoa . Our men would have taken their leave of him , finding themselves more then satisfied with this liberality . But for that day he would not suffer them , but retained them , and sought to make them the best cheer he could devise . The next day very early in the morning , he took them with him to show them the place where his corn grew , and said unto them that they should not want as long as all that mil did last . Afterwards he gave . them a certain number of exceeding fair pearls , & two stones of fine Crystal , and certain silver oar . Our yne men forgotten not to give him certain trifles in recom - silver over , vin 481 2 H 
 The flace where crystal gp-oweth in very good quantity ten days journey from the river Belle . 
 Note . 
 Mutiny against the captain , and the causes thereof . 
 pence of these presents , and required of him the place whence the silver oar and the Crystal came . He made them answer , that it came ten days journey from his habitation up within the country : and that the inhabitants of the country did dig the same at the foot of certain high mountains , where they found of it in very good quantity . Being joyful to understand so good news , and to have come to the knowledge of that which they most desired , they took their leave of the king , and returned by the same saw , by which they came . 
 Behold therefore how our men behaved themselves very well hitherto , although they had endured many great mishaps . But misfortune or rather the just judgement of God would have it , that those which could not be overcome by fire nor water , should be undone by their own selves . This is the common fashion of men , which cannot continue in one state , and had rather to overthrow themselves , then not to attempt some new thing daily . We have infinite examples in the ancient histories , especially of the Romans , unto which number this little handful of men , being far from their country and absent from their countrymen , have also added this presents example . They entered therefore into partialities and dissensions , which began about a soldier nam Guernache , which was a drummer of the French bans : which , as it was told me , was very cruelly hanged by his own captain , and for a small fault : which captain also using to threathen the rest of his soldiers which stayed behind under his obedience , and peradventure ( as it is to be presumed ) were not so obedient to him as they should have be , was the cause that they fell into a mutiny , because that many times he put his threatenings in execution : whereupon they so chased him , that at the last they put him to death . And the principali occasion that moved them thereunto was , because he degraded another soldier nam La Cheer ( which he had banished ) and because he had not performed his 
 482 
 • .. 15871 promise : for he had promised to send him victuals , from 8 days to 8 days , which thing he did not , but said on the contrary , that he would be glad to hear of his death . He said moreover , that he would chastise others also , & used so evil sounding speeches , that honesty forbiddeth me to repeat them . The soldiers Captain . seeing his madness to increase from day to day , and Albert slain rearing to rail into the dangers or the other , resolved to SOul < liers . kill him . Having executed their purpose , they went to seek the soldier that was banished , which was in a small Island distant from Charles-fort about 3 leagues , where they found him almost half dead for hunger . When they were come home again , they assembled themselves together to choose one to be governor over them whose name was Nicolas Bar a man worthy of commendation , Nicolas and one which knew so well to quite himself of his Bar . > c ! t0 ! en charge , that all rancour and dissension ceased among ca^tain ' them , and they lived peaceably one with another . During this time , they began to built a small Pinnace , with hope to return into France , if no succours came unto them , as they expected from day to day . And though there were no man among them that had any skill , notwithstanding necessity , which is the mistress of all sciences , taught them the way to built it . After that it was finished , they thought of nothing else saving how to furnish it with all things necessary to undertake the voyage . But they wanted those things that of all other were most needful , as cordage and sails , without which the enterprise could not come to effect . Having no means to recover these things , they were in worse case then at the first , and almost ready to fallen into despair . But that good God , which never forsaketh the afflicted , did succour them in their necessity . 
 As they were in these perplexities king Audusta and Maccou came to them , accompanied with two hundred Indians at the least , whom our Frenchmen went forth to meet withal , and showed the king in what need of cordage they stood : who promised them to return 
 483 
 Cordage for tackle . 
 They put to the sea without sufficient victuals . 
 within two days , and to bring so much as should suffice to furnish the Pinnace with tackling . Our men being pleased with these good news & promises , bestowed upon them certain cutting hooks and shirts . After their departure our men sought all means to recover rosen in the woods , wherein they cut the Pine trees round about , out of which they drew sufficient reasonable quantity to bray the vessel . Also they gathered a kind of moss which grows on the trees of this country , to serve to calk the same withal . There now wanted nothing but sails , which they made of their own shirts and of their sheets . Within few days after the Indian kings returned to Charles fort with so good store of cordage , that there was found sufficient for tackling of the small Pinnace . Our men as glad as might be , used great liberality towards them , and at their leaving of the country , left them all the merchandise that remained , leaving them thereby so fully satisfied , that they departed from them with all the contentation of the world . They went forward therefore to finish the Brigandine , & used so speedy diligence , that within . a short time afterwards they made it ready furnished with all things . In the mean season the wind came so fit for their purpose that it seemed to invite them to put to the Sea : which they did without delay , after they had set all their things in order . But before they departed they embarked their artillery , their forge , and other munitions of war're which Captain Ribault had left them , and then as much mill as they could gather together . But being drunken with the too excessive joy , which they had conceived for their returning into France , or rather deprived of all foresight & consideration , without regarding the inconstancy of the winds , which change in a moment , they put themselves to sea , and with so slender victuals , that the end of their enterprise became unluckily and unfortunate . 
 For after they had sailed the third part ot their way , they were surprised with calms which did so much hinder them , that in three weeks they sailed not above 484 
 five and twentie leagues . During this ti’me their victuals consumed , and became so short , that every man was Their victuals constrained to eat not passed twelve grains of mill by the utterh con day , which may be in valve as much as twelve peason . fume ' Yea , and this felici tie lasted not long : for their victuals failed them altogether at once : and they had nothing for their more assured refuge but their shoes and leather jerkins which they did eat . Touching their beverage , some of them drank the sea water , others did drink their They drink own urine : and they remained in such desperate necessity a very long space , during the which part of water _ them died for hunger . Beside this extreme famine , which did so grievously oppress them , they fell every minute of and hour out of all hope ever to see France again , insomuch that they were constrained to cast the water continually out , that on all sides entered into their Bark . 
 . 