The fift voyage of M. John White into the West Indies and parts of America called Virginia , in the year 1590. 
 THe 20 of March the three ships the Hopewell , the John Evangelist , and the Little John , put to Sea from Plymmouth with two small Shallops . 
 The 25 at midnight both our Shallops were sunk being towed at the ships stearnes by the Boatswains negligence . 
 On the 30 we saw a head us that part of the coast of Barbary , lying East of Cape Cantyn , and the Bay of Asaphi . 
 The next day we came to the He of Mogador , where road , at our passing by , a Pinnace of London called the Moonshine . 
 Aprill . 
 ON the first of Aprill we ankored in Santa Cruz road , where we found two great ships of London lading in Sugar , of whom we had 2 shipboats to supply the loss of our Shallops . 
 406 
 On the 2 we set sail from the road of Santa Cruz , for the Canaries . 
 On Saturday the 4 we saw Alegranza , the East lie of the Canaries . 
 On Sunday the 5 of Aprill we gave chase to a double flyboat , the which , we also the same day fought with , and took her , with loss of three of their men slain , and one hurt . 
 On Munday the 6 we saw Grand Canary , and the next day we landed and took in fresh water on the Southside thereof . 
 On the 9 we departed from Grand Canary , and . framed our course for Dominica . 
 The last of Aprill we saw Dominica , and the same night we came to and anchor on the Southside thereof . 
 May . 
 THe first of May in the morning many of the Salvages came aboard our ships in their Canows , and did traffic with us ; we also the same day landed and entered their Town from whence we returned the same day aboard without any resistance of the Salvages ; or any offence done to them . 
 The 2 of May our Admiral and our Pinnace departed from Dominica leaving the John our Viceadmiral playing off and on about Dominica , hoping to take some Spaniard outwards bound to the Indies ; the same night we had sighed of three small Hands called Los Santos , leaving Guadalupe and them on our starboard . 
 The 3 we had sighed of S. Christophers Hand , bearing Northeast and by East off us . 
 On the 4 we sailed by the Virgins , which are many broken Hands , lying at the East end of S. Johns Hand : and the same day towards evening we landed upon one of them called Blanca , where we killed and incredible number of fowls : here we stayed 
 4°7 
 but three hours , & from thence stood into the shore Northwest , and having brought this Hand Southeast off us , we put towards night thorough and opening or swatch , called The passage , lying between the Virgins , and the East end of S. John : here the Pinnace left us and sailed on the South side of S. John. 
 The 5 and 6 the Admiral sailed along the Northside of S. John , so near the shore that the Spaniards discerned us to be men of war ; and therefore made fires along the coast as we sailed by , for so their custom is , when they see any men of war on their coasts . 
 The 7 we landed on the Northwest end of S. John , where we watered in a good river called Yaguana , and the same night following we took a Frigate of tenne Tun coming from Gwathanelo laden with hides and ginger . In this place Pedro a Mollato , who knew all our state , ran from us to the Spaniards . 
 On the 9 we departed from Yaguana . 
 The 13 we landed on and Hand called Mona , whereon were 10 or 12 houses inhabited of the Spaniards ; these we burned & took from them a Pinnace , which they had drawn a ground and sunk , and carried all her sails , masts , and rudders into the woods , because we should not take him away ; we also chased the Spaniards over all the Hand ; but they hid them in caves , hollow rocks , and bushes , so that we could not find them . 
 On the 14 we departed from Mona , and the next day after we came to and Hand called Saona , about 5 leagues distant from Mona , lying on the Southside of Hispaniola near the East end : between these two Hands we lay off and on 4 or 5 days , hoping to take some of the Domingo fleet doubling this Hand , as a nearer way to Spaine then by Cape Tyburon , or by Cape S. Anthony . 
 On Thursday being the 19 our Viceadmiral , from whom we departed at Dominica , came to us at Saona , 408 
 with whom we left a Spanish Frigate , and appointed him to lie off and on other five days between Saona and Mona to the end aforesaid ; then we departed from them at Saona for Cape Tyburon . Here I was informed that our men of the Viceadmiral , at their departure from Dominica brought away two young Salvages , which were the chief Caciques sons of that Country and part of Dominica , but they shortly after ran away from them at Santa Cruz Hand , where the Viceadmiral landed to take in ballast . 
 On the 21 the Admiral came to the Cape Tyburon , where we found the John Evangelist our Pinnace staying for us : here we took in two Spaniards almost starved on the shore , who made a fire to our ships as we passed by . Those places for and 100 miles in length are nothing else but a desolate and mere wilderness , without any habitation of people , and full of wild Bulls and Boars , and great Serpents . 
 The 22 our Pinnace came also to and anchor in 
 Aligato Bay at Cape Tyburon . Here we understood of M. Lane , Captain of the Pinnace ; how he was set William upon with one of the kings Galleys belonging to Santo Lane ' Domingo , which was manned with 400 men , who after he had fought with him 3 or 4 hours , gave over the fight & forsook him , without any great hurt done on either part . 
 The 26 the John our Vizadmirall came to us to cape Tyburon , and the Frigate which we left with him at Saona . This was the appointed place where we should attend for the meeting with the Santo Domingo Fleet . 
 On Whitsunday Even at Cape Tyburon one of our boys ran away from us , and at ten days end returned to our ships almost starved for want of food . In sundry places about this part of Cape Tyburon we found the bones and carcases of diverse men , who had perished ( as we thought ) by famine in those woods , being either straggled from their company , or landed there by some men of war . 
 409 
 ON the 14 of June we took a small Spanish frigate which fell among us so suddenly , as he doubled the point at the Bay of Cape Tyburon , where we road , so that he could not escape us . This Frigate came from Santo Domingo , and had but 3 men in her , the one was and expert Pilot , the other a Mountainer , and the third a Vintner , who escaped all out of prison at Santo Domingo , purposing to fly to Yaguana which is a town in the West parts of His-Spanishfap - paniola where many fugitive Spaniards are gathered together . 
 The 17 being Wednesday Captain Lane was sent to Yaguana with his Pinnace and a Frigate to take a ship , which was there taking in fraught , as we understood by the old Pilot , whom we had taken three days before . 
 The 24 the Frigate returned from Captain Lane at Yaguana , and brought us word to cape Tyburon , that Captain Lane had taken the ship , with many passengers and Negroes in the same ; which proved not so rich a prize as we hoped for , for that a Frenchman of war had taken and spoiled her before we came . Nevertheless her loading was thought worth 1000 or 1300 pounds , being hides , ginger , Cannafistula , Copper-pans , and Casavi . 
 July - 
 Edward t^he second of July Edward Spicer whom we left in Spicer . 1 England came to us at Cape Tyburon , accompanied with a small Pinnace , whereof one M. Harps was Captain . And the same day we had sighed of a fleet of 14 sail all of Santo Domingo , to whom we presently gave chase , but they upon the first sighed of us fled , and separating themselves scattered here and there : Wherefore we were forced to divide our selves and so made after them until 12 of the clock at night . 
 410 
 But then by reason of the darkness we lost sighed of each other , yet in the end the Admiral and the Moonlight happened to be together the same night at the fetching up of the Vizadmirall of the Spanish fleet , against whom the next morning we fought and This fight took him , with loss of one of our men and two hurt , and of theirs 4 slain and 6 hurt . But what was become of our Viceadmiral , our Pinnace , and Prize , and two Frigates , in all this time , we were ignorant . 
 The 3 of July we spent about rifling , rummaging and fitting the Prize to be sailed with us . 
 The 6 of July we saw Jamayca the which we left on our larboard , keeping Cuba in sighed on our starboard . 
 Upon the 8 of July we saw the Hand of Pinos , which lies on the Southside of Cuba nigh unto the West end or Cape called Cape S. Anthony . And the same day we gave chase to a Frigate , but at night we lost sighed of her , partly by the slow sailing of our Admiral , & lack of the Moonlight our Pinnace , whom Captain Cooke had sent to the Cape the day before . 
 On the 11 we came to Cape S. Anthony , where we found our consort the Moonlight and her Pinnace abiding for our coming , of whom we understood that the day before there passed by them 22 sail , some of them of the burden of 300 and some 400 tons loaded with the Kings treasure from the main , bound for Havana ; from this 11 of July until 22 we were much becalmed : and the wind being very scarce , and the weather exceeding hot , we were much pestered with the Spaniards we had taken : wherefore we were driven to land all the Spaniards saving three , but the place where we landed them was of their own choice on the Southside of Cuba near unto the Organs and Rio de Puercos . 
 The 23 we had sighed of the Cape of Florida , and the broken Hands thereof called the Martyrs . 
 411 
 The state of the currents from the cape of Florida to Vir^nia . 
 The 25 being S. James day in the morning , we fell with the Matan^as , a headland 8 leagues towards the East of Havana , where we purposed to take fresh water in , and make our abided two or three days . 
 On Sunday the 26 of July plying too and from between the Matan^as and Havana , we were espied of three small Pinnaces of S. John de Ullua bound for Havana , which were exceeding richly loaded . These 3 Pinnaces came very boldly up unto us , and so continued until they came within musket shot of us . And we supposed them to be Captain Harps pinnace , and two small Frigates taken by Captain Harp : wherefore we showed our flag . But they presently upon the sighed of it turned about & made all the sail they could from us towards the shore , & kept themselves in so shallow water , that we were not able to follow them , and therefore gave them over with expense of shot & powder to no purpose . But if we had not so rashly set out our flag , we might have taken them all three , for they would not have known us before they had be in our hands . This chase brought us so far to leeward as Havana : wherefore not finding any of our consorts at you Matan^as , we put over again to the cape of Florida , & from thence thorough the channel of Bahama . 
 On the 28 the Cape of Florida bore West of us . 
 The 30 we lost sighed of the coast of Florida , and stood to Sea for to gain the help of the current which runneth much swifter a far ofF then in sighed of the coast . For from the Cape to Virginia all along the shore are none but eddie currents , setting to the South and Southwest . 
 The 31 our three ships were clearly disbocked , the great prize , the Admiral , and the Moonshine , but our prize being thus disbocked departed from us without taking leave of our Admiral or consort , and sailed direcdy for England . 
 412 
 ON the first of August the wind scanted , and from thence forward we had very fowl weather with much rain , thundering , and great spouts , which fell round about us nigh unto our ships . 
 The 3 we stood again in for the shore , and at midday we took the height of the same . The height of that place we found to be 34 degrees of latitude . Towards night we were within three leagues of the Low sandy Hands West of Wokokon . But the weather Sandy Hands continued so exceeding foul , that we could not come to and anchor nigh the coast : wherefore we stood ofF ' again to Sea until Monday the 9 of August . 
 On munday the storm ceased , and we had very great likelihood of fair weather : therefore we stood in again for the shore : & came to and anchor at 11 fathom in 3 5 Tty in degrees of latitude , within a mile of the shore , where degrees , we went on land on the narrow sandy Hand , being one of the Islands West of Wokokon : in this Hand we took in some fresh water and caught great store of fish in the shallow water . Between the main ( as we supposed ) and that Hand it was but a mile over and three or foure foot deep in most places . 
 On the 12 in the morning we departed from thence and towards night we came to and anchor at the Northeast end of the Island of Croatoan , by reason of a breach 2 which we perceived to lie out two or three leagues into ° . rSagues the Sea : here we road all that night . tn ° ea ' 
 The 13 in the morning before we weighed our anchors , our boats were sent to found over this breach : our ships riding on the side thereof at 5 fathom ; and a ships length from us we found but 4 and a quarter , and then deeping and shallowing for the space of two miles , so that sometime we found 5 fathom , and by Great diverge by 7 , and within two casts with the led 9 , & then ! Ounci ' 8 , next cast 5 , & then 6 , & then 4 , & then 9 again , and deeper ; but 3 fathom was the last , 2 leagues off 
 413 
 from the shore . This breach is in 35 degr . & a half , & lies at the very Northeast point of Croatoan , whereas goes a fret out of the main Sea into the inner waters , which part the Islands and the main land . 
 The 15 of August towards Evening we came to and Hatorask in anchor at Hatorask , in 36 degr . and one third , in five 36 degr . y a fajom water , three leagues from the shore . At our ierce ’ first coming to anchor on this shore we saw a great smoke rise in the He Raonoak near the place where I left our Colony in the year 1587 , which smoke put us in good hope that some of the Colony were there expecting my return out of England . 
 The 16 and next morning our 2 boats went a shore , & Captain Cook , & Cap. Spicer , & their company with me , with intent to pass to the place at Raonoak where our countrymen were left . At our putting from the ship we commanded our Master gunner to make ready 2 Minions and a Falkon well laden , and to shoot them off with reasonable space between every shot , to the end that their reports might be herd to the place where we hoped to find some of our people . This was accordingly performed , & our twoe boats put off unto the shore , in the Admirals boat we sounded all the way and found from our ship until we came within a mile of the shore nine , eight , and seven fathom : but before we were half way between our ships and the shore we saw another great smoke to the Southwest of Kindrikers mounts : we therefore thought good to go to that second smoke first : but it was much further They land . from the harbour where we landed , then we supposed it to be , so that we were very soar tired before we came to the smoke . But that which grieved us more was that when we came to the smoke , we found no man nor sign that any had be there lately , nor yet any fresh water in all this way to drink . Being thus wearied with this journey we returned to the harbour where we left our boats , who in our absence had brought their cask a shore for fresh water , so we deferred our 
 414 
 i59°-going to Roanoak until the next morning , and caused some of those sailors to dig in those sandy hills for fresh water whereof we found very sufficient . That water 
 night we returned aboard with our boats and our tn san 
 whole company in safety . 
 The next morning being the 17 of August , our boats and company were prepared again to go up to Roanoak , but Captain Spicer had then sent his boat ashore for fresh water , by means whereof it was ten of the clock aforenoon before we put from our ships which were then come to and anchor within two miles of the shore . The Admirals boat was half way towards the shore , when Captain Spicer put off from his ship . The Admirals boat first passed the breach , but not without some danger of sinking , for we had a sea brake into our boat which filled us half full of water , but by the will of God and careful styrage of Captain Cook we came safe ashore , saving only that our furniture , victuals , match and powder were much wet and spoiled . For at this time the wind blue at Northeast and direct into the harbour so great a gale , that the Sea brake extremely on the bar , and the tide went very forcibly at the entrance . By that time our Admirals boat was hailed ashore , and most of our things taken out to dry , Captain Spicer came to the entrance of the breach with his mast standing up , and was half passed over , but by the rash and undiscreet styrage of Ralph Skinner his Master's mate , a very dangerous Sea brake into their boat and overset them quite , the men kept the boat some in it , and some hanging on it , but the next sea set the boat on ground , where it beatrice so , that some of them were forced to let go their hold , hoping to wade ashore ; but the Sea still beatrice them down , so that they could neither stand nor swim , and the boat twice or thrice was turned the keel upward , whereon Captain Spicer and Captain Skinner hung until they sunk , & were seen no more . 
 But foure that could swim a little kept themselves in ' deeper water and were saved by Captain Cooks means , 
 415 
 who so soon as he saw their oversetting , stripped himself , and foure other that could swim very well , & with all haste possible rowed unto them , & saved foure . They were a 11 in all , & 7 of the chiefest were drowned , whose names were Edward Spicer , Ralph Skinner , Edward Kelley , Thomas Bevis , Hance the Surgeon , Edward Kelborne , Robert Coleman . This mischance did so much discomfort the sailors , that they were all of one mind not to go any further to seek the planters . But in the end by the commandment & persuasion of me and Captain Cook , they prepared the boats : and seeing the Captain and me so resolute , they seemed much more willing . Our boats and all things fitted again , we put ofF from Hatorask , being the number of 19 persons in both boats : but before we could get to the place , where our planters were left , it was so exceeding dark , that we overshot the place a quarter of a mile : there we espied towards the North end of the Hand you light of a great fire thorough the woods , to the which we presently rowed : when we came right over against it , we let fallen our Grapnel near the shore , & sounded with a trumpet a Call , & afterwards many familiar English tunes of Songs , and called to them friendly ; but we had no answer , we therefore landed at daybreak , and coming to the fire , we found the grass & sundry rotten trees burning about the place . From hence we went thorough the woods to that part of the Hand directly over against Dasamongwepeuk , & from thence we returned by the water side , round about the North point of the Hand , until we came to the place where I left our Colony in the year 1586. In all this way we saw in the sand the print of the Salvages feet of 2 or 3 sorts troaden you night , and as we entered up the sandy bank upon a tree , in the very brow thereof were curiously carved these fair Roman letters C R O : which letters presently we knew to signify the place , where I should find the planters seated , according to a secret token agreed upon between them & me at my last departure 
 416 
 from them , which was , that in any ways they should not fail to write or carve on the trees or posts of the doors the name of the place where they should be seated ; for at my coming away they were prepared to remove from Roanoak 50 miles into the main . Therefore at my departure from them in An. 1587 I willed them , that if they should happen to be distressed in any of those places , that then they should carve over the letters or name , a Cross & in this form , but we found no such sign of distress . And having well considered of this , we passed towards the place where they were left in sundry houses , but we found the houses taken down , and the place very strongly enclosed with a high palisado of great trees , with cortynes and flankers very Fort-like , and one of the chief trees or posts at the right side of the entrance had the bark taken off , and 5 foot from the ground in fair Capitali letters was graved CROATOAN without any cross or sign of distress ; this done , we entered into the palisado , where we found many bars of Iron , two pigs of Led , foure iron fowlers , Iron sacker-shotte , and such like heavy things , thrown here and there , almost overgrown with grass and weeds . 
 From thence we went along by the water side , towards the point of the Creek to see if we could find any of their boats or Pinnisse , but we could perceive no sign of them , nor any of the last Falcons and small Ordinance which were left with them , at my departure from them . At our return from the Creek , some of our Sailors meeting us , told us that they had found where diverse chests had be hidden , and long since dug up again and broken up , and much of the goods in them spoiled and scattered about , but nothing left , of such things as the Savages knew any use of , undefaced . Presently Captain Cook and I went to the place , which was in the end of and old trench , made two years passed by Captain Amadas : wheere we found five Chests , that had be carefully hidden of the Planters , and of the same chests three were my own , and about the place 
 VIII 417 2D 
 many of my things spoiled and broken , and my books torn from the covers , the frames of some of my pictures and Maps rotten and spoiled with rain , and my armour almost eaten through with rust ; this could be no other but the deed of the Savages our enemies at Dasamongwepeuk , who had watched the departure of our men to Croatoan ; and assoon as they were departed , dug up every place where they suspected any thing to be buried : but although it much grieved me to see such spoil of my goods , yet on the other side I greatly joyed that I had safely found a certain token of their safe being at Croatoan , which is the place where Manteo was born , and the Savages of the Hand our friends . 
 When we had seen in this place so much as we could , we returned to our Boats , and departed from the shore towards our Ships , with as much speed as we could : For the weather began to overcast , and very likely that a foul and stormy night would ensue . Therefore the same Evening with much danger and labour , we god our selves aboard , by which time the wind and seas were so greatly risen , that we doubted our Cables and Anchors would scarcely hold until Morning : wherefore the Captain caused the Boat to be manned with five lusty men , who could swim all well , and sent them to the little Hand on the right hand of the Harbour , to bring aboard sixe of our men , who had filled our cask with fresh water : the Boat the same night returned aboard with our men , but all our Cask ready filled they left behind , unpossible to be had aboard without danger of casting away both men and Boats : for this night proved very stormy and foul . 
 The next Morning it was agreed by the Captain and my self , with the Master and others , to weigh anchor , and go for the place at Croatoan , where our planters were : for that then the wind was good for that place , and also to leave that Cask with fresh water on shore in the Hand until our return . So then 
 418 
 they brought 
 the cable to the Capston , but when the anchor was almost apecke , the Cable broke , by means whereof we lost another Anchor , wherewith we drove so fast into the shore , that we were forced to let fallen a third Anchor : which came so fast home that the Ship was almost aground by Kenricks mounts : so that we were forced to let slip the Cable end for end . And if it had not chanced that we had fallen into a channel 
 of deeper water , closer by the shore then we accounted of , we could never have gone clear of the point that lies to the Southwards of Kenricks mounts . Being thus clear of some dangers , and got into deeper waters , but not without some loss : for we had but one Cable and Anchor left us of foure , and the weather grew to be fouler and fouler ; our victuals scarce , and our cask and fresh water lost : it was therefore determined that we should go for Saint John or some other Hand to the Southward for fresh water . And it was further purposed , that if we could any ways supply our wants of victuals and other necessaries , either at Hispaniola , Sant John , or Trynidad , that then we should continue in the Indies all the Winter following , with hope to make 2. rich voyages of one , and at our return to visit our countrymen at Virginia . The captain and the whole company in the Admiral ( with my earnest petitions ) thereunto agreed , so that it rested only to know what the Master of the Moonlight our consort would do herein . But when we demanded 
 They leave the coast of Virpnia , 
 them if they would accompany us in that new determination , they alleged that their weak and leak Ship was not able to continue it ; wherefore the same night we parted , leaving the Moonlight to go directly for England , and the Admiral set his course for Trynidad , which course we kept two days . 
 On the 28. the wind changed , and it was set on 
 foul weather every way : but this storm brought the wind West and Northwest , and blew so forcibly , that we were able to bear no sail , but our forecourse 419 
 half mast high , wherewith we ran upon the wind perforce , the due course for England , for that we were driven to change our first determination for Trynidad , and stood for the Hands of Azores , where we purposed to take in fresh water , and also there hoped to meet with some English men of war about those Hands , at whose hands we might obtain some supply of our wants . And thus continuing our course for the Azores , sometime with calms , and sometime with very scarce winds , on the fifteenth of September the wind came South Southeast , and blew so exceedingly , that we were forced to lie atry all that day . At this time by account we judged our selves to be about twentie leagues to the West of Cuervo and Flores , but about night the storm ceased , and fair weather ensued . 
 On Thursday the seventeenth we saw Cuervo and Flores , but we could not come to anchor that night , by reason the wind shifted . The next Morning being the eighteenth , standing in again with Cuervo , we escried a sail ahead us , to whom we gave chase : but when we came near him , we knew him to be a Spanyard , and hoped to make sure purchase of him : but we understood at our speaking with him , that he was a prize , and of the Domingo fleet already taken by the John our consort , in the Indies . We learned also of this prize , that our Viceadmiral and Pinnace had fought with the rest of the Domingo fleet , and had forced them with their Admiral to flee unto Jamaica under the Fort for succour , and some of them ran themselves aground , whereof one of them they brought away , and took out of some others so much as the time would permit . And further we understood of them , that in their return from Jamaica about the Organs near Cape Saint Anthony , our Viceadmiral met with two Ships of the main land , come from Mexico , bound for Havana , with whom he fought : in which fight our Viceadmirals Lieutenant was slain , 
 420 
 and the Captains right arm strooken off , with foure other of his men slain , and sixteene hurt . But in the end he entered , and took one of the Spanish ships , which was so soar shot by us under water , that before they could take out her treasure she sunk ; so that we lost thirteene Pipes of silver which sunk with her , 13 - Pfa* °f beside much other rich merchandise . And in the stlver ’ mean time the other Spanish ship being pierced with nine shot under water , god away ; whom our Viceadmiral intended to pursue : but some of their men in the top made certain rocks , which they saw above water near the shore , to be Galleys of Havana and Cartagena , coming from Havana to rescue the two Ships ; Wherefore they gave over their chase , and went for England . After this intelligence was given us by this our prize , he departed from us , and went for England . 
 On Saturday the 19. of September we came to and Anchor near a small village on the North side of Flores , where we found riding 5. English men of war , of whom we understood that our Viceadmiral and Prize were gone thence for England . One of these five was the Moonlight our consort , who upon the first sighed of our coming into Flores , set sail and went for England , not taking any leave of us . 
 On Sunday the 20. the Marry Rose , Admiral of the Queens fleet , wherein was general Sir John Hawkins , stood in with Flores , and diverse other of the Queens ships , namely the Hope , the Nonpareilia , the Rainbow , the Swift-sure , the Foresight , with many other good merchant's ships of war , as the Edward Bonaventure , the Merchant Royal , the Amity , the Eagle , the Dainty of sir John Hawkins , and many other good ships and pinnaces , all attending to meet with the king of Spaines fleet , coming from Terra firma of the West Indies . 
 The 22. of September we went aboard the Rainbow , and towards night we spoke with the Swift-sure , and gave him 3. pieces . The captains desired our 
 421 
 company ; wherefore we willingly attended on them : who at this time with io . other ships stood for Faial . But the general with the rest of the Fleet were separated from us , making two fleets , for the surer meeting with the Spanish fleet . 
 On Wednesday the 23. we saw Gratiosa , where the Admiral and the rest of the Queen's fleet were come together . The Admiral put forth a flag of counsel , in which was determined that the whole fleet should go for the main , and spread themselves on the coasts of Spaine and Portugal , so far as conveniently they might , for the surer meeting of the Spanish fleet in those parts . 
 The 26. we came to Faial , where the Admiral with some other of the fleet anchored , othersome plied up and down between that and the Pico until midnight , at which time the Antony shot ofF a piece and weighed , showing his light : after whom the whole fleet stood to the East , the wind at Northeast by East . 
 On Sunday the 27. towards Evening we took our leave of the Admiral and the whole fleet , who stood to the East . But our ship accompanied with a Flyboat stood in again with S. George , where we purposed to take in more fresh water , and some other fresh victuals . 
 On Wednesday the 30. of September , seeing the wind hang so Northerly , that we could not attain the Hand of S. George , we gave over our purpose to water there , and the next day framed our due course for England . 
 October . 
 THe 2. of October in the Morning we saw S. Michaels Hand on our Star board quarter . 
 The 23. at 10. of the clock afore noon , we saw Ushant in Britaigne . 
 On Saturday the 24. we came in safety , God be thanked , to and anchor at Plymmouth . 
 . 