Laudonnieres A JY friends , you know the cause why our king sent ' muthtw oul us unto country ; you know that he is our jurs ’ natural Prince , whom we are bound to obey according to the commandment of God , in such sort , that we ought neither to spare our goods nor lives to do those things that concern his service : you know , or at least you cannot be ignorant , that beside this general and natural obligation , you have this also joined thereunto , that in receiving of him reasonable pay and wages , you are bound to follow those whom he hath established over you to be your governors , and to command you in his name , having for this purpose given him and oath of fidelity , which you cannot by any means revoke for any fair appearance which you have to do the contrary : for this is reason , that seeing you live upon his charges on this condition , ( this is reason I say ) that you should be faithful unto him . Notwithstanding you have had more regard unto your unbridled affections then unto virtue , which invited you to the observance of your oath , in such sort that being become contemners of all honesty , you have passed your bonds , and thought that all things were lawful for you . Whereupon it is fallen out , that while you thought to escape the justice of men , you could not avoid the judgement of God , which as a thing by no means to be avoided hath led you , and in spite of you hath made you to arrive in this place , to make you confess 46 
 how true his judgements are , and that he never suffers so foul a fault to escape unpunished . 
 After that I had used unto them these or the like speeches , following that which we had agreed upon in council , in respect of the crimes which they had committed , aswell against the kings Majesty as against me which was their Captain , I commanded that they should be hanged . Seeing therefore that there was no starting hold , nor means at all to save themselves from this arrest , they took themselves unto their prayers : yet one of the foure , thinking to raise a mutiny among my soldiers , said thus unto them : What , brothers and companions , will you suffer us to die so shamefully ? And taking the word out of his mouth , I said unto him , that they were not companions of authors of sedition and rebels unto the kings service . Hereupon the soldiers besought me not to hang them , but rather let them be shot thorough , & then afterwards , if I thought good , their bodies might be hanged upon certain gibbets along the havens mouth : which I caused presently to be put in execution . Loe here what was the end of my mutinous soldiers , without which I had always lived peaceably , and enjoyed the good desire which I had to make and happy and quiet voyage . But because 1 have spoken of nothing but their accidents and adventures which happened unto them after their departure , without making any mention of our fort , I will return to the matters from which I digressed , to declare that which fell out after their departure . First I began to consider to the end I might confirm and make my self more constant in mine affliction , that these murmurers could not ground their sedition upon want of victuals : for from the time of our arrival , every soldier daily unto this day , and beside until the eight and twentieth of February , had a loaf of bred weighing two and twenty ounces . Again I recounted with my self that all new conquests by sea or by land are ordinarily troubled with rebellions , which are 
 A.D. 
 1565. 
 The sentence of death . 
 Execution . 
 The continuation of the history . 
 New conquests subject to re - 
 . , . r „ . r , - - bellionsand 
 easy to be raised , aswell ! in respect or the distance of mutinies . 
 place , as in respect of the hope that the soldiers have to make their profit , as we may be well informed both by ancient histories and also by the troubles which lately happened unto Christopher Columbus , after his first discovery , to Francis Pizarro , & Diego de Almagro in Peru , & to Fernando Cortes . And hundred thousand other things came unto my mind , to encourage and confirm me . My Lieutenant Ottigny , and my Sergeant of my band came to seek me in the ship , where I was prisoner , and carried me from thence in a bark assoon Laudonniere as our rebels were departed . After I was come unto sets things the fort , I caused all my company that remained , to be ismurne^ut assembled in the midst of the place before the Corpse de of prison to the guard , and declared unto them the faults which they fort . that had forsaken us had committed , praying them to bear them in memory , to bear witness thereof when need should require . Forthwith I ordained new Captains to command the troops ; and prescribed them and order , according whereunto they were to govern themselves from thence forward , and to enter into their watch : for the greatest part of the soldiers , of whom I had the best opinion , were gone away with them . My declaration ended , they promised me all with one accord to obey me most humbly , and to do whatsoever I should command them , though it were to die at my feet for the Kings service ; wherein assuredly they never after failed : so that I dare say , after the departure of my mutinous companions I was as well obeyed as ever was Captain in place where he commanded . The next day after my return unto the fort , I assembled my men together again , to declare unto them that our fort was not yet finished , and that it was needful that all of us should put thereto our helping hands , to assure our selves against the Indians : wherein having willingly agreed unto me , they raised _ it all with turfs from the gate unto the river which is the Westside on the West side - This done , I set my Carpenters on of the fort . work to make another bark of the same bigness that 
 Fcuiddus mtadcus num Laudzonerus aide s' Florida , repnorunt conprendzc ^dmerica quar nunc ( Jduid minimum cuius Francis dirt ate ydbadtumy . ' Ferfida quern si non sociorum turpiter ho's'ti CEdcdio prodp^ec ( cuius tamen , omnibus vltis , Flapsus maxibus ) quas , qualia . , quantapatraflem tO 
 RENE LAUDONNIERE 
 the others were of : I commanded the Sawyers that they should prepare planks , the Smith's to prepare iron and nails , and certain others to make coals : so that the bark was finished in eighteene days . Afterwards I made another lesser then the first , the better to discover up the river . In this mean space the Indians visited me , and brought me daily certain presents , as Fish , Dear , Turki-cocks , Leopards , little Bears , and other things according to the place of their habitation . I recompensed them with certain Hatchet's , Knives , Beads of glass , Combes , and Looking-glasses . Two Indians came unto me one day to salute me on the behalf of their King , whose name was Marracou , KingMarra-dwelling from the place of our fort some forty leagues cou . 
 towards the South , and told me that there was one in 
 the house of King Onathaqua which was called Barbu King Onatha-or the bearded man , and in the house of King 9^ Mathiaca another man whose name they knew not , which was not of their nation : whereupon I conceived ' that these might be some Christians . Wherefore I sent to all the kings my neighbours to pray them , that if there were any Christian dwelling in their countries' , they would find means that he might be brought unto me , and that I would make them double recompense . 
 They which love rewards , took so much pain , that Twa Span-the two men , whereof we have spoken , were brought yards brought unto the fort unto me . They were naked , their hair long unto their hammes as the use to do , and were Spanyards born , yet accustomed to the fashion of the country the first sighed they found our manner of strange . After that I had questioned of 
 matters with them , I caused them to be appareled , and to cut their hair ; which they would not lose , but lapped it up in a linen cloth , saying that they would carry it into their country to be a testimony of the misery that they had endured in the Indies . In the hair of one of them was found a little gold hidden , to 
 ix 49 WORSER 
 unto Laudonniere by the Savages . 
 wearing Savages so well 
 that at apparel certain 
 Calos a place upon you Flats called The Martyrs near the Cape of Florida . 
 The King of Calos . 
 Great quantity ofgolde and silver . 
 Plataeae of g > ld as broad as a savicer . 
 the valve of five and twenty crowns , which he gave unto me . And examining them of the places where they had be , and how they came thither , they answered me that fifteene years past , three ships , in one of which they were , were cast away over against a place nam Calos upon the Flats which are called The Martyrs , and that the king of Calos recovered the greatest part of the riches which were in the said ships , traveling in such sort that the greatest part of the people was saved , and many women ; among which number there were three or foure women married , remaining there yet , and their children also , with this king of Calos . I desired to learn what this king was . They answered me , that he was the goodliest and the tallest Indian of the country , a mighty man , a warrior , and having many subject's under his obedience . They told me moreover , that he had great store of gold and silver , so far forth that in a certain village he had a pit full thereof , which was at the least as high as a man , and as large as a tun : all which wealth the Spanyards fully persuaded themselves that they could cause me to recover , if I were able to march thither with and hundred shot , beside that which I might get of the common people of the country , which had also great store thereof . They further also advertised me , that the women going to dance , did wear about their girdles plataeae of gold as broad as a sauncer , and in such number ; that the weight did hinder them to dance at their ease ; and that the men beware the like also . The greatest part of these riches was had , as they said , out of the Spanish ships , which commonly were cast away in this straight ; and the rest by the traffic which this king of Calos had with the other kings of the country : Finally , that he was had in great reverence of his subject's ; and that he made them believe that his sorceries and charms were the causes that made the earth bring forth her fruit : and that he might the easier persuade them that it was so , he retired himself once or twice a year to a certain 
 house , accompanied with two or three of his most familiar friends , where he used certain enchantments ; and if any man intruded himself to go to see what they did in this place , the king immediately caused him to be put to death . Moreover , they told me , that One of these every year in the time of harvest^ this Savage king Spanyards sacrificed one man , which was kept expressly for this n^^at purpose , and taken out of the number of the Spanyards Qomes-which by tempest were cast away upon that coast . 
 One of these two declared unto me , that he had served him a long time for a messenger ; and that often times by his commandment he had visited a king nam Oathcaqua , distant from Calos foure or King Oath-five days journey , which always remained his faithful friend : but that in the midway there was and Island Houat ca-situate in a great lake of fresh water , nam Sarrope , Sampe and about five leagues in bigness , abounding with many Island . sorts of fruits , specially in Dates , which grow on the Abundance of Palm trees , whereof they make a wondered traffic ; Dates . 
 yet not so great as of a kind of root , whereof they A root of great make a kind of meal , so good to make bred of , t0 that it is unpossible to eat better , and that for fifteene brea leagues about , all the country is fed therewith : which is the cause that the inhabitants of the Isle gain of their neighbours great wealth and profit : for they will not depart with this root without they be well paid for it . Beside that , they are taken for the most warlike men of all that country , as they made good proof when the king of Calos , having made alliance with Oathcaqua , was deprived of Oathcaquaes daughter , which he had promised to him in manage . He told me the whole matter in this sort : As Oathcaqua well accompanied with his people carried one of his daughters , exceeding beautiful , according to the colour of the country , unto king Calos , to give her unto him for his wife , the inhabitants of this Isle advertised of the matter , laid and ambush for him in a place where he should pass , and so behaved themselves , that Oathcaqua 
 The g-eatest victory among the Floridians . 
 The situation of Calos . 
 Cannaveral in 28 degrees . 
 The Floridians great traitors and dissemblers . 
 was discomfited , the betrothed young spouse taken , and all the damosels that accompanied her ; which they carried unto their Isle ; which thing in all the Indians country they esteem to be the greatest victory : for afterwards they marry these virgins , and love them above all measure . The Spanyard that made this relation , told me that after this defeat he went to dwell with Oathcaqua , and had be with him full eight years , even until the time that he was sent unto me . The place of Calos is situate upon a river which is beyond the Cape of Florida , forty or fifty leagues towards the Southwest : and the dwelling of Oathcaqua is on this side the Cape towards the North , in a place which we call in the Chart Cannaveral , which is in 28 degrees . 
 About the five and twentieth of January Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbour sent me certain presents by two of his subject's , to persuade me to join with him , and to make war upon Ouae Utina which was my friend : and further besought me to retire certain of my men which were with Utina ; for whom if it had not be , he had often times set upon him , and defeated him . He besought me herein by diverse other kings his allies , which for three weeks or a months space sent messengers unto me to this end and purpose : but I would not grant unto them that they should make war upon him ; yea rather contrariwise I endeavoured to make them friends ; wherein they condescended unto me , so far forth that they were content to allow of any thing that I would set down : whereupon the two Spanyards which of long time knew well the nature of the Indians , warned me that in any case I should not trust unto them , because that when they showed good countenance and the best cheer unto men , then was the time that they would surprise and betray them ; and that of their nature they were the greatest traitors and most deep dissemblers of the world . Beside I never trusted them but upon good ground , as one that had discovered a thousand of their crafts and subtleties , aswell 
 by experience as by reading of the histories of late years . Our two barks were not so soon finished , but I sent Captain Vasseur to discover along the coast lying towards the North , and commanded him to sail unto a river , the king whereof was called Audusta , which was lord of that place , where those of the year 1562 inhabited . I sent him two suits of apparel , with certain hatchet's , knives , and other small trifles , the better to insinuate my self into his friendship . And the better to win him , I sent in the bark with captain Vasseur a soldier called Aimon , which was one of them which returned home in the first voyage , hoping that king Audusta might remember him . But before they were embarked 
 I commanded them to make inquiry what was become of another called Rouffi , which remained alone in those parts when Nicolas Masson and those of the first voyage embarked themselves to return into France . They understood at their arrival there , that a bark passing that way had carried away the same soldier : and afterwards I knew for a certainty that they were Spaniards which had carried him to Havana . The king Audusta sent me back my bark full of mill , with a certain quantity of beans , two stags , some skins painted after their manner , and certain pearls of small valve , because they were burned : and sent me word that if I would dwell in his quarters , he would give me a great country : and that after he had gathered his mill , he would spare me as much as I would have . In the mean while there came unto our fort a flock of stock-doves in so great number , and that for the space of seven weeks together , that every day we killed with harquebus shot two hundred in the woods about our fort . After that Captain Vasseur 
 ' Nicolas Masson otherwise called Nicolas Bar . 
 King A adustas great humanity . 
 Pearls burned . 
 Peter Martyr write that cap . I. decade . 7. that the like flocks of pigeons are in the Isles oj 
 was returned , I caused the two barks to be furnished ikeLucayos . 
 again with soldiers & mariners , and sent them to carry a present from me unto the widow of king Hiocaia , whose dwelling was distant from our fort about twelve leagues Northward . She courteously received our men , sent me back my barks full of mill and acorns with 53 
 The widow of King Hioa-caia , or Hihou-hacara . 
 certain baskets full of the leaves of Cassine , wherewith they make their drink . And the place where this widow dwells is the most plentiful of mill that is in This queens all the coast , and the most pleasant . It is thought that name was Nia the queen is the most beautiful of all the Indians , and Cubacam . of they make most account : yea , and her subject's honour her so much , that almost continually they bear her on their shoulders , and will not suffer her to go on foot . Within a few days after the return of my barks , she sent to visit me by her Hiatiqui , which is as much Thefift voyage to say , as her interpreter . Now while I thought I was up the river furnished with victuals until the time that our ships of May . might come out of France ( for fear of keeping my 
 people idle ) I sent my two barks to discover along the river , and up towards the head thereof , which went so far up that they were thirty leagues good beyond a Mathiaqua . place nam Mathiaqua , and there they discovered thee The discovery entrance of a lake , upon the one side whereof no land can be seen , according to the report of the Indians , ride °whererf6 which had oftentimes climbed on the highest trees in no land can be the country to see land , and notwithstanding could not seen . discern any : which was the cause that my men went no further , but returned back ; and in coming home The Isle of went to see the Island of Edelano situated in the midst Edelano . of the river , as fair a place as any that may be seen thorough the world : for in the space of some three leagues , that it may contain in length and breadth , a man may see and exceeding rich country , and marvellously peopled . At the coming out of the village of Edelano to go unto the rivers side a man must pass thorough and alley about three hundred paces long and fifty paces broad : on both sides whereof great tres are planted , the boughs And excellent whereof are tied together like and arch , and meet together work of so artificially that a man would think it were and arbour 
 nature . made of purpose , as fair I say , as any in all christendome , 
 although it be altogether natural . Our men departing Patica ' . from this P^ace rowed to Eneguape , then to Chilily , from 
 Coya . thence to Patica , & lastly they came unto Coya : where 
 leaving their barks in a little creek of the river with men to guard them , they went to visit Utina , which received them very courteously : and when they departed from his house , he entreated them so earnestly , that sixe of my men remained with him ; of which number there was one gentleman , nam Groutaid , which after he had abided there about two months , and taken great pains to discover the country , with another which I had left a great while there to that intent , came unto me to the fort , and told me that he never saw a fairer country . Among other things , he reported unto me that he had seen a place nam Hostaqua , and that the king thereof was so mighty , that he was able to bring three or foure thousand Savages to the field ; with whom if I would join and enter into league , we might be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitants unto our obedience : beside that this king knew the passages unto the mountain of Apalatci , which the French men desired so greatly to attain unto , and where the enemy of Hostaqua made his abided ; which was easy to be subdued , if so be we would enter into league together . This king sent me a plate of a minerail that came out of this mountain , out of the foot whereof there runneth a stream of gold or copper , as the Savages think , out of which they dig up the sand with and hollow and dry cane of reed until the cane be full ; afterwards they shake it , and find that there are many small grains of copper and silver among this sand : which gives them to understand , that some rich mine must needs be in the mountain . And because 
 The king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or foure thousand Savages to the field . 
 The mountain of Apalatci . 
 There is a mine of gold or rich coper in the mountain of Apalatci . 
 the mountain was not passed five or sixe days journey from our fort , lying towards the Northwest , I determined assoon as our supply should come out of France , to remove our habitation unto some river more towards the North , that I might be nearer thereunto . One of my soldiers whose name was Peter Gamby , which had Peter Gamby remained a long space before in this country to learn the languages and traffic with the Indians , at the last The Mlage came to the village of Edelano , where having got Edelano . 
 Gold W together a certain quantity of gold and silver , and silver . purposing to return unto me , he prayed the king of the village to lend him a canoa ( which is a vessel ! made of one whole piece of wood , which the Indians use to fish withal , and to row upon the rivers ) which this lord of Edelano granted him . 6ut being greedy of the riches which he had , he commanded two Indians , which he had charged to conduct him in the canoa , to murder him & bring him the merchandise and the gold which he had . Which the two traitors villanously executed : for they knocked him on the head with and hatchet , as he was blowing of the fire in the canoa to seethe fish . 
 Utina sends The Paracoussy Utina sent certain days afterwards , to Pray me tO lend a dozen or fifteene of my shot , to jor is pe . jnvaje g enemy Potanou , and sent me word , that this enemy once vanquished , he would make me passage , yea , and would conduct me unto the mountains in such sort , that no man should be able to hinder me . Then I assembled my men to demand their advice , as I was A good note , wont to do in all mine enterprises . The greater part was of opinion , that I should do well to send succour unto this Paracoussy , because it would be hard for me to discover any further up into the country without his help : and that the Spanyards when they were employed in their conquests , did always enter into alliance with some one king to ruin another . Notwithstanding , because I did always mistrust the Indians , and that the more after the last advertisement that the Spanyards had given me , I doubted lest the small number which Utina demanded might incur some danger ; wherefore I sent him thirty shot under the charge of my Lieutenant Ottigny , which stayed not above two days with Utina , while he prepared victuals for his voyage , which ordinarily and according to the custom of the country are carried by women and young boys , and by hermaphrodites . 
 Threehundred Utina setting forward with three hundred of his subject's , Indians . having each of them their bow and quiver full of arrows , caused our thirty shot to be placed in the forward , and 56 
 1565-made them march all the day , until that the night approaching , and having not gone passed half the way , they were enforced to lie all night in the woods , never a great lake , and there to encamp themselves : they separated themselves by sixe and sixe , making each of them a fire about the place where their king lay , for whose guard they ordained a certain number of those archers , in whom he put most confidence . Assoon as day was come , the camp of the Indians marched within three leagues of Potanou : there king Utina requested my Lieutenant to grant him foure or five of his men to go and discover the country ; which departed immediately , and had not gone far , but they perceived upon a lake , distant about three leagues from the village of A lake three Potanou , three Indians which fished in a canoa . Now leagues distant the custom is that when they fish in this lake , they / w‘ have always a company of watchmen , armed with bows potanou . and arrows to guard the fishers . Our men being hereof advertised by those of the company , durst not pass any further , for fear of falling into some ambush : wherefore they returned towards Utina , which suddenly sent them back with a greater company to surprise the fishers , before they might retire and advertise their king Potanou of the coming of his enemies . Which they could not execute so politicly , but that two of them escaped ; the third also did the best he could to save himself by swimming , in which mean while he was stayed with shot of arrows , and they drew him stark dead unto the banks side , where our Indians flayed off the skin of his head , cut off both his arms in the high way , reserving his hair for the triumph , which their king hoped to make for the defeat of his enemy . Utina fearing least Potanou advertised by the fishers which were escaped , should put himself in arms to withstand him valiantly , asked counsel of his Jawa , which is as to say in their language as his Magician , whither it were best to go any further . Then his Magician . Magician made certain signs , hideous and fearful to 
 behold , and used certain words ; which being ended , he said unto his king , that it was not best to pass Potanou accom - any further , and that Potanou accompanied with two panied with thousand Indians at the least stayed in such and such Tndians^ a P^ace or to bid him battle : and beside this , ' that all the said Indians were furnished with cords to bind the prisoners which they made full account to take . 
 This relation caused Utina to be unwilling to pass any further : whereupon my Lieutenant being as angry as ever he might be , because he had taken so great pains without doing of any thing of account , said unto him , that he would never think well of him nor of his people , if he would not hazard himself : and that if he would not do it , at the least , that he would give him a guide to conduct him and his small company to the The prediction place where the enemies were encamped . Hereupon of the Ma - Utina was ashamed , and seeing the good affection of Monsieur de Ottigny determined to go forward : and ' he failed not to find his enemies in the very place which the Magician had nam : where the skirmish began , which lasted three long hours : wherein without doubt Utina had been defeated , unless our harquebusiers had not born the burden and brunt of all the battle , and slain a great number of the soldiers of Potanou , upon which occasion they were put to flight . Wherewithal ! Utina being content for the present , caused his people to retire and return homeward to the great discontentment of Monsieur de Ottigny , which desired Utina hath 18 nothing more , then to pursue his victory . After he or 20 ktngt to was Come home to his house he sent messengers to his Vassals . eighteene or twentie villages of other kings his vassals , and summoned them to be present at the feasts and dances which he purposed to celebrate because of his victory . In the mean while Monsieur de Ottigny refreshed himself for two days : and then taking his leave of the Paracoussi , and leaving him twelve of his men to see that Potanou , bethinking himself of his late loss 58 
 should not come to burn the houses of Utina , he set forward on his way to come unto me unto our Fort , where he up and told me how every thing had passed : and withal that he had promised the twelve soldiers , that he would come back again to fetch them . Then the kings my neighbours all enemies to Utina , being advertised of the return of my Lieutenant , came to visit me with presents and to inquire how things had passed , praying me all to receive them into my favour , and to become enemy to Utina , which notwithstanding I would not grant them for many reasons that moved me . 
 The Indians are wont to leave their houses and to retire themselves into the woods the space of three months , to wit January , February , and March : during which time by no means a man can see one Indian . For when they go on hunting , they make little cottages in the woods , whereunto they retire themselves , living upon that which they take in hunting . This was the cause that during this time , we could get no victuals by their means : and had it not been that I had made good provision thereof , while my men had store , until the end of Aprill ( which was the time when at the uttermost , we hoped to have had succour out of France ) I should have been greatly amazed . This hope was the cause that the soldiers took no great care to look well unto their victuals , although I divided equally among them that which I could get abroad in the country , without reserving unto my self any more then the least soldier of all the company . The month of May approaching and no manner of succour come out of France , we fell into extreme want of victuals , constrained to eat the roots of the earth and certain sorrel which we found in the fields . For although the Savages were returned by this time unto their villages , yet they succoured us with nothing but certain fish , without which assuredly we had perished with famine . Beside they had given us before the greatest part of their maiz and of their beans for our merchandise . This famine held us from the beginning 59 
 A custom of the Indians to leave their houses for 3 or 4 months and to live in the woods . 
 They look for succour out of France by the end of April at the uttermost . 
 Extreme famine for sixe weeks space . 
 Promise broken . 
 of May until the midst of June . During which time the poor soldiers and handicraftsmen became as feeble as might be , and being not able to work did nothing but go one after another in Centinel unto the clift of and hill , situate very near unto the Fort , to see if they might discover any French ship . In fine being frustrated of their hope , they assembled altogether , & came to beseech me to take some order that they might return into France , considering that if we let pass the season to embark our selves , we were never like to see our country , where it could not be chosen but that some troubles were fallen out , seeing they had broken their promise made unto us , and that no succour was come from thence . Thereupon it was consulted and resolved by all the company , that the bark Breton should be trimmed up , whereof Captain Vasseur had charge . But because the ship was not big enough to receive us all , some thought good to built the Brigandine two decks higher , which our mutinous soldiers had brought back , and that 25 men should hazard themselves to pass therein into France . The rest being better advised said that it should be far better to built a fair ship upon the keel of the Galiote which I had caused to be made , promising to labour courageously thereupon . Then I inquired of my shipwrights to know in what space they could make this ship ready . They assured the whole company that being furnished with all things necessary , they would make it ready by the 8. of August . Immediately I disposed of the time to work upon it , I gave charge to Monsieur de Ottigny my Lieutenant to cause timber necessary for the finishing of both the vessels to be brought , and to Monsieur de Arlac my Standart-bearer to go with a bark a league ofif from the Fort to cut down trees fit to make planks , and to cause the sawiers which he carried with him to saw them : and to my Sergeant of the company to cause fifteene or sixteene men to labour in making coals : and to Master Hance keeper of the Artillery , & to the gunner to gather 
 1565. store of rosen to bray the vessels : wherein he used such diligence , that in less then 3 weeks he gathered 2 hogs - Two hogsheads heads of the same together . There remained now but °frosen-the principal , which was to recover victuals to sustain us while our work endured : which I undertook to do with you rest of my company & the Mariners of the ship . 
 To this end I embarked my self making up the thirtieth in my great bark , to make a voyage of forty or fifty leagues , having with us no provision at all of victuals : whereby it may easily be gathered how simply those of our Fort were provided . True it is that certain soldiers being better husbands then the rest , and having made some provision of mast , sold a little measure thereof for fifteene and twentie sous unto their companions . During our voyage we lived of nothing else but raspices , of a certain round grain little and black , and of the roots of palmitos which we god by the river sides : wherein after we had sailed a long time in vain , I was constrained to return to the Fort : where the soldiers beginning to be weary of working , because of the extreme famine which did consume them , assembled themselves and declared unto me , that seeing we could get no victuals of the Indians , it was expedient for the saving of their lives , to seize upon the person of one of the Kings of the Country : assuring themselves that one being taken , the subject's would not suffer our men to want victuals . I made them answer that this enterprise was not rashly to be attempted : But that we ought to have good regard unto the consequence that might ensue thereof . Hereupon they replied unto me , that seeing the time was passed of our succour from France , & that we were resolved to abandon the Country , that there was no danger to constrain the Savages to furnish us with victuals : which for the present TO would not grant unto them , but promised them assuredly that I would send to advertise the Indians that they should bring me victuals for exchange of merchandise and apparel : which they also did for the space of certain days , during which 
 Pinocke a certain kind of fruit as big as cherries . 
 they brought of their mast and of their fish : which these Indians being traitorous , & mischievous of nature , and knowing our exceeding strange famine , sold us at so deer a price , that for less then nothing they had got from us all the rest of our merchandise which remained ; . And which was worse , fearing to be forced by us and seeing that they had got all from us , they came no nearer to our Fort then the shot of and Harquebus . Thither they brought their fish in their little boats , to which our poor soldiers were constrained to go , and oftentimes ( as I have seen ) to give away the very shirts from their backs to get one fish . If at any time they showed unto the Savages the excessive price which they took , these villains would answer them roughly & churlishly : if thou make so great account of thy merchandise , eat it , and we will eat our fish : then fell they out a laughing and mocked Us with open throat . Whereupon our soldiers utterly impatient , were oftentimes ready to cut them in pieces , and to make them pay the price of their foolish arrogancy . Notwithstanding considering the importance hereof , I took pains to appease the impatient soldier : for I would not by any means enter into question with the Savages , & it sufficed me to delay the time . Wherefore I devised to send unto Utina to pray him to deal so far forth with his subject's , as to succour me with mast and maiz : which he did very sparingly , sending me 12 or 15 baskets of mast , and two of pinocks , which are a kind of little green fruits which grow among the weeds in the river , and are as big as cherries : yea , & this was not but by giving of them in exchange twice as much merchandise and apparel as they were worth . For the subjects of Utina perceived evidently the necessity wherein we were , & began to use the like speech unto us , as the others did : as it is commonly seen that need altereth men's affections . While these things were in doing , a certain breathing space presented it self for Utina gave me to understand that there was a king his 
 1565. subject whose name was Astina , which he determined Astina a king . to take prisoner , and to chastise him for his disobedience : that for this cause , if I would give him aid with a certain number of my soldiers , he would bring them to the village of Astina , where there was means to recover mast and maiz . In the mean season he excused himself unto me because he had sent me no more maiz , and sent me word that the little store that he had left , was scarcely sufficient for his seed-corn . Now being somewhat relieved , as I thought , by the hope which I had of this offer , I would not fade to send him the men which he desired of me , which nevertheless were very evil entreated : for he deceived them , and in stead of leading them against Astina , he caused them to march against his other enemies . My Lieutenant which had the charge of this enterprise with Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant was determined to be revenged of Utina and to cut him in pieces 8c his people : and had it not be that they feared to do any thing against my will , without all doubt they would have put their enterprise in execution . Therefore they would not pass any further without advertising me thereof . Wherefore being come back again unto the Fort , angry 8c pricked deeply to the quick for being so mocked , they made their complaints unto me , declaring unto me that they were almost dead for hunger . They told the whole matter to the rest of the soldiers , which were very glad that they had not entered into that actium , 8c resolved , assembling themselves again together , to let me understand that they did persist in their first deliberation , which was , to punish the boldness and maliciousness of the Savages , which they could no longer endure , 8c were determined to take one of their kings prisoner : which thing I was inforced to grant unto them , to you end to avoid a greater mischief , and the sedition which I foresaw would ensue , if I had made refusal thereof . For , said they , what occasion have you to deny us , considering the necessity wherein we are , and the small account 
 that they make of us . Shall it not be lawful for us to punish them for the wrongs which they do unto us , beside that we know apparently how little they respect us ? Is not this sufficient although there were no necessity at all , since they thus delude us , and have broken promise with us ? After I had therefore resolved with them to seize on the person of Utina , which beside that he had given us occasion hereof , was also most able to help us to recover victuals , I departed with fiftie of my best soldiers all embarked in two Barks & we arrived in the dominions of Utina , distant from our Fort about 40 or 50 leagues : then going on shore we drew towards his village situated 6 great Utina taken leagues from the river , where we took him prisoner , prisoner in his howbeit not without great cries and alarms , and led r^mniere awaY our barks , having first signified unto and 50 of his is Father in law and his chief subject's , that in that soldiers . I had taken him , it was not for any desire that I had to do him any harm , but only to relieve my necessity and want of victuals which oppressed me , and that in case they would help me to some , I would find means to set him again at liberty : that in the mean space I would retire my self into my Barks ( for I feared lest they would there assemble themselves together , and that some mischief might thereof ensue ) where I would stay for him two days to receive his answer : notwithstanding that my meaning was not to have any thing without exchange of merchandise . This they promised they would do . And in very deed the very same evening , his wife accompanied with all the women of the village came unto the Rivers brink , and cried unto me to enter into the bark , to see her husband and her son , which I held both prisoners . I discovered the next Five os - sixe day five or sixe hundred Indian archers , which drew hundred In - near unto the river side , and came to me to dians - signify unto me how that during the absence of their king , their enemy Potanou , being thereof advertised , 64 
 1565. was entered into their village , and had set all on fire . 
 They prayed me that I would succour them : never - The deep dis-thelesse in the mean while they had one part of their troop in ambush , with intent to set upon me if I ln , ans‘ had come on land , which was easy for me to discern . For seeing that I refused so to do , they greatly doubted that they were discovered , and sought by all means to remove out of my mind that evil opinion which I had conceived of them . They brought me therefore fish in their little boats and of their meal of Mast , they made also of their drink which they call cassine , which they sent to Utina and me . 
 Now albeit I had got this point of them that I held their king prisoner , yet nevertheless I could not get any great quantity of victuals for the present : the reason was , because they thought that after I had drawn victuals from them , I would put their king to death . For they measured my will according to their custom , The Indians whereby they put to death all the men prisoners that hillallthemen they take in war . And thus being out of all hope of his liberty , they assembled themselves in the great house , war . and having called all the people together they proposed the election of a new King , at which time the Father The election in law of Utina set one of the kings young sons ofa king . 
 upon the Royal throne : and took such pains that every man did him homage by the major part of the voices . This election had like to have be the cause of great troubles among them . For there was a kinsman of the kings near adjoining , which pretended a Title to the kingdom , and in deed he had got one part of the subject's : notwithstanding this enterprise could not take effect , forasmuch as by a common consent of the chief , it was consulted and concluded , that the son was more meet to succeed the Father then any other . Now all this while I kept Utina with me , to whom I had given some of mine apparel to cloth him , as I had likewise done unto his son . But his subject's which before had and opinion that I would have killed him , 
 ix 65 e 
 The hatred among the Savage kings of Florida . 
 Note . 
 Note . 
 Roots . 
 Esquine . 
 being advertised of the good entertainment which I used towards him , sent two men which walked along the river , and came to visit him , and brought us some victuals . These two men at their coming were received by me with all courtesy , and entertained according to the victuals which I had . While these things thus passed , there arrived from all quarters many Savages of the countries adjoining , which came to see Utina , and sought by all means to persuade me to put him to death , offering that if I would do so , they would take order that 1 should want no victuals . There was also a King my neighbour whose name was Saturioua , a subtle and crafty man , and one that showed by proof that he was greatly practised in affairs . The King sent ordinarily messengers unto me , to pray me to deliver Utina unto him : and to win me the more easily , he sent twice seven or eight baskets of Maiz or of Mast , thinking by this way to allure me , & to make me come to composition with him : in the end notwithstanding when he saw he lost his time , he ceased to visit me with ambassages & victuals : 8c in the mean while I was not able with you same store of victuals which I had , so well to proportion out the travail upon the ships which we built to return into France , but that in the end we were constrained to endure extreme famine , which continued among us all the month of May : for in this latter season , neither Maiz nor Beans , nor Mast was to be found in the villages , because they had employed all for to sow their fields , insomuch that we were constrained to eat roots , which the most part of our men punned in the mortars which I had brought with me to beat gunnepowder in , and the grain which came to us from other places : some took the wood of Esquine , beat it , and made meal thereof , which they boiled with water , and eat it : others went with their harquebusies to seek to kill some foul . Yea this misery was so great , that one was found that gathered up among the filth of my house , all the fish bones that he could find , 
 which he dried and beat into powder to make bred thereof . The effects of this hideous famine appeared incontinently among us , for our bones eftsoons began to cleave so near unto the skin , that the most part of the soldiers had their skins pierced thorough with them in many parts of their bodies : in such sort that my greatest fear was , lest the Indians would rise up against us , considering that it would have be very hard for us to have defended our selves in such extreme decay of all our forces , beside the scarcity of all victuals , which failed us all at once . For the very river had not such plenty of fish as it was wont , and it seemed that the land and water did fight against us . Now as we were thus upon terms of despair , about the end of the month of May , and the beginning of June , I was New corn by advertised by certain Indians that were my neigh - en^ °f hours , that in the high Country up above the river , there was new Maiz , and that that country was most ' forward of all . This caused me to take upon me to go thither with a certain number of my men , and I went 
 up the river to a place called Enecaque : where I met The village of the sister of Utina in a village where she made us very Enecaque . good cheer and sent us fish . We found that which was told us to be true : for the maiz was now ripe : but by this good luck one shrewd turn happened unto me . For the most part of my soldiers fell sick with eating more of it then their weakened stomachs could digest . We had also been the space of foure days since we departed from our Fort , without eating any 
 thing , saving little pinockes , and a little fish , which we A little green god of the fishers which we met sometime along the fruit that river . And yet this was so little that certain soldiers eat privily little whelps which were newly whelped , cherries The next day I purposed to go into you lie of Edelano The He of to take the king which had caused one of my men to Edelano . be slain , as I have mentioned before : but being advertised of my departing out of my Fort , and of the way which I took up the river , he feared that I went forth 
 Two Carpen-ten killedfor gathering the Indians maiz . The village Athore . 
 Nia Cubacani a Queen . 
 with a purpose to be revenged of the evil turn which he played : so that when I came thither , I found the houses empty , for he was retired a little before with all his people : & I could not by any means keep my soldiers , being angry because they had lost one of their companions , from setting the village on fire . At my departure from thence I passed back again by Enecaque , where I gathered as much maiz as I could possibly : which with great diligence I conveyed to our Fort to succour my poor men , which I had left in great necessity . They therefore seeing me a far off coming , ran to that side of the river where they thought I would come on land : for hunger so pinched them to the heart , that they could not stay until the victuals were brought them to the Fort. And that they well showed assoon as I was come , and that I had distributed that little maiz among them , which I had given to each man , before I came out of the bark : for they eat it before they had taken it out of the husk . But seeing my self in this extreme need , I took pains day by day to seek some villages where there was some food . And as I travailed this way and that way , it happened that two of my Carpenters were killed by the two sons of king Emola , and by one whose name was Casti , as they went on walking to the village called Athore . The cause of this murder was , because they could not refrain themselves as they walked through the fields from gathering a little maiz , which as they were doing , they were taken in the manner : whereof I was presently advertised by and Indian which a little before had brought me a present from Nia Cubacani Queen of a village , and neighbour to our Fort. Upon receipt of this advertisement , I sent my Sergeant with a number of soldiers which found nothing else but the 2 dead corpses , which they buried and returned without doing any other exploit , because the inhabitants were fled away , fearing they should be punished for such a foul fact . As these things thus passed , & that by 
 this time we had almost driven out the month of May , two subject's of king Utina came unto me with and Hermaphrodite , which showed me that by this time the maiz was ripe in the greatest part of their quarters . Whereupon Utina signified unto me that in case I would carry him home to his house , he would take such good order that I should have plenty of maiz & beans : and withal , that the field which he had caused to be sown for me , should be reserved to my use . 
 I consulted with my men concerning this matter , and found by the advice of all my company , that it was best to grant him his request , saying , that he had means to succour us with food sufficient to serve our turns for [ III . 34.5 . ] our embarkement , and that therefore I might do well to carry him home . Wherefore I caused the two barks forthwith to be made ready , wherein I sailed to Patica , a Patica a place distant from his village 8 or 9 leagues , where I village . found no body , for they were got into the woods , and would not show themselves , albeit Utina showed himself unto them , for as much as they imagined that I should be constrained to let him go . But seeing no body to show themselves , I was constrained to hazard one of my men which had be acquainted with the state of the country , to whom I delivered the young son of Utina , and commanded him to go with diligence to the village of Utina , unto his father in law and his wife , to advertise them that if they would have their king again , they should bring me victuals unto the side of the little river whither I was gone . At my men coming every one made much of the little child , neither was there a man that thought not himself well appaide to touch him . His father in law and his wife hearing of these news came presently towards our barks , and brought bred which they gave unto my soldiers , they held me there three days , and in the mean while did all that they could to take me : which presently I discovered , and therefore stood diligently upon my guard . Wherefore perceiving they could not have their purpose , and that they were already 
 Desire of revenge rooted in the savages . 
 discovered , they sent to advertise me that as yet they could not help me to victuals , and that the corn was not yet ripe . Thus I was constrained to return and to carry back Utina home , where I had much ado to save him from the rage of my soldiers : which perceiving the maliciousness of the Indians , went about to have murdered him . Moreover it seemed they were content that they had got the son , & that they cared not greatly for the father . Now my hope failing me on this side , I devised to send my men to the villages where I thought the maiz was by this time ripe ; I went to diverse places , and continued so doing 15 days after , when as Utina besought me again to send him unto his village , assuring himself that his subject's would not stick to give me victuals : and that in case they refused so to do , he was content that I should do what I thought good with him . I undertook this voyage the second time with the two barks furnished as before . At my coming unto the little river , we found his subject's there , which failed not to come thither with some quantity of bred , beans , and fish , to give my soldiers . Nevertheless returning again to their former practice they sought all means to entrap me , hoping to cry quittance for the imprisonment of their king , if they might have got the victory of me . But after that they saw the small means , which they had to annoy me , they returned to entreaties , and offered that if I would give them their king with certain of my soldiers , they would conduct them unto the village , and that the subject's seeing him , would be more willing to give us victuals . Which thing notwithstanding I would not grant unto them ( mistrusting their subtility , which was not so covert , but that one might espy day at a little hold ) until they had first given me two men in pledge with charge that by the next day they should bring me victuals . Which thing they granted , and gave me two men which I put in chains for fear they should escape away , as I knew well they were instructed to do . Foure days were spent in these conferences , at the end 
 whereof they declared unto me , that they could not fully and wholly perform their promise : and that the uttermost that they could do for the present , was to cause each subject to bring his burden of mill . To conclude , they were content to do so on condition that I would send them their two pledges within ten days . As my Lieutenant was ready to depart , I warned him above all A necessary things to take heed he fell not into the Indians hands : admonition . because I knew them to be very subtle and crafty to enterprise and execute any thing to our disadvantage . He departed therefore with his troop , and came to the small river whereinto we were accustomed to enter to approach as near as we could unto the village of Utina , being sixe French leagues distant from thence . There he went on shore , put his men in good array , and drew straight towards the great house that was the kings , where the chief men of the country were assembled , which caused very great store of victuals to be brought now one and then another , in doing whereof they spent notwithstanding three or foure days : in which mean while they gathered men together , to set upon us in our retreat . They used therefore many means to hold The us still in breath . For one while they demanded their Floridians pledges , another while ( seeing my Lieutenant would not Stt ill yield to them , until such time as they had brought the victuals unto the boats ; according to the agreement passed between us ) they signified unto him that the women and young children were afiraide out of all measure to see fire in their matches so near their harquebusses : and that therefore they most earnestly besought them to put them out , that they might more easily get people enough to carry the victuals , and that they for their parts would leave their bows and arrows , and would be contented that their servants should carry them . This second request was as flatly denied them as the former : For it was and easy matter to smel out their intention . But while these things 
 were thus in handling , Utina by no means was to be 71 
 seen , but hid and kept himself secret in a little house apart , where certain chosen men of mine went to see him showing themselves aggrieved with him for the long delays of his subject's : whereunto he answered , that his subject's were so much incensed against us , that by no means possible he was able to keep them in such obedience as he willingly would have done , and that he could not hold them from waging of war against Monsieur de Ottigny . That he also called to mind , that even while he was prisoner , at what time our men led him into his Country to obtain some victuals , he saw along the high ways arrows stuck up , at the ends whereof long hairs were fastened , which was a certain sign of open war proclaimed , which arrows the Captain also carried with him to the fort . He said further that in respect of the good will he bore to the Captain , he forewarned his Lieutenant that his subject's were determined to cut down the trees , and cause them to fallen a thwart the little river where the boats were , to keep them from departing thence , that they might fight with them at their ease , and that if it thus fell out , he assured him for his part he would not be there to meddle in the matter . And that which much more augmented the suspicion of war was , that as my messengers departed from Utina , they herd the voice of one of my men , which during the voyage had always been among the Indians , and whom as yet they would never render , until they had got their pledges home . This poor fellow cried out a main because two Indians would have carried him into the woods to have cut his throat : whereupon he was succoured and delivered . These admonitions being well understood , after ripe deliberation thereof Monsieur de Ottigny resolved to retire himself the seven and twentieth of July . Wherefore he set his soldiers in order , and delivered to each of them a sack full of mill : and afterwards he marched towards his barks , thinking to prevent the enterprise of the savages . There is at the 
 And alley of 3 or 4 Hundred paces long . 
 coming forth of the village a great alley about three or foure hundred paces long , which is covered on both sides with great trees . My Lieutenant disposed his men in this alley and set them in such order as they desired to march : for he was well assured that if there were any ambush , it would be at the coming out of the trees . Therefore he caused Monsieur de Arlac mine Ensign to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusiers to discover whither there were any danger : beside he commanded one of my Sergeants & Corporals to march on the out side of the alley with foure harquebusiers while he himself conducted the rest of his company through it . Now as he suspected , so it fell out : for Monsieur de Arlac met with two or three hundred Indians at the end of the alley , which saluted him with and infinite number of their arrows , & with such fury that it was easy to see with what desire they sought to charge us . Howbeit they were so well sustained in the first assault which mine Ensign gave them , that they which fell down dead , did somewhat abate the choler of those which remained alive . This done my Lieutenant hasted to gain ground in such sort as I have already said . After he had marched about foure hundred paces , he was charged afresh with a new troop of Savages which were in number about 300 , which assailed him before , while the rest of the former set upon him behind . This second assault was so valiantly sustained , that I may justly say that Monsieur de Ottigny so well discharged his duty , as was possible for a good Captain to do . And so it stood them upon : for he had to deal with such kind of men , as knew well how to fight and to obey their head which conducted them , and which knew so well to behave themselves in this conflict , as if Ottigny had not prevented their practice , he had been in danger to have be defeated . Their manner in this fight was , that when two hundred had shot , they retired themselves and gave place to the rest that were behind , and all 
 A skirmish between the Savages and the French . 
 A second fresh charge of Savages . 
 TheFlorldians manner of fight . 
 the while had their eye and foot so quick and ready , that assoon as ever they saw the harquebus laid to the cheek , so soon were they on the ground , and eftsoon up to answer with their bows and to fly their way , if by chance they perceived we went about TheFloridians to take them : for there is nothing that they fear so Mefe fear . much , because of our swords and daggers . This conflict continued and lasted from nine of the clock in the morning , until the night departed them . And if Ottigny had not bethought himself to cause his men to break the arrows which they found in the way , & so to deprive the Savages of the means to begin again , without all doubt he should have had very much to do : for by this mean they lacked arrows , and so were constrained to retire themselves . During the time of the conflict they cried and made signs that they were the Captains and Lieutenants friends : and that they fought for none other cause but to be revenged on the soldiers , which were their mortali enemies . My Lieutenant being come unto his boats took a re-Two slalne . view of his company , and found two men wanting which were killed , of whom the one was called James Sale , and the others name was Mesureur . He found Two & twen - moreover 22 of them wounded , which with much ado ty wounded . causecj to be brought unto the boats . All the mill that he found among his company came but to two men's burdens , which he divided equally among them . For [ III . 34-7 - ] assoon as the conflict began , every man was constrained to leave his sack to put his hand to his weapon . In this mean while I remained at the Fort , and caused every man diligently to travel , hoping that my Lieutenant would bring us victuals . But seeing the time consume away , I began to suspect the truth of that which fell out , whereof I was assured immediately after at their return . Seeing therefore mine hope frustrate ant on at side , I made my prayer unto God , and thanked God for their him of his grace which he had showed unto my poor deliverance , soldiers which were escaped : Afterwards I thought 
 upon new means to obtain victuals , aswell for our return into France , as to drive out the time until our embarking . I was advertised by certain of our company , which usually went on hunting into the woods and through the villages , that in the village Sarauahi situated on the other side of the river , and two leagues distant from the Fort , and in the village Emoloa there were fields wherein the mill was very forward , and that there was thereof in those parts in great abundance . Wherefore I caused my boats to be made ready , and sent my Sergeant thither with certain soldiers , which used such diligence , that we had good store of mill . I sent also to the river which the Savages call Iracana , nam by Captain Ribault the River of Somme , where Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant arrived with two boats and their ordinary furniture , and found there a great assembly of the Lords of the country , among whom was Athore the son of Satourioua , Apalou , and Tacadocorou , which were there assembled to make merry : because that in this place are the fairest maids and women of all the country . Captain Vasseur in my name gave certain small trifles to all the Lords , to the Queen , to the maids and women of the villages . Whereupon the boats were forthwith laden with mill , after they had made our men as good cheer as they could devise . The Queen sent me two small Mats so artificially wrought as it was unpossible to make better . Now finding our selves by this mean sufficiently furnished with victuals , we began each of us in his place , to travail and use such diligence , as the desire to see our native country might move us . But because two of our Carpenters were slain by the Indians ( as heretofore I mentioned ) John de Hais , master Carpenter , a man very worthy of his vocation , repaired unto me , and told me that by reason of want of men he was not able to make me up the ship against the time that he had promised me : which speech caused such a mutiny among the soldiers that very hardly he escaped killing : howbeit I appeased them aswell as I 
 75 
 The village Sarauahi . 
 The village Emoloa . 
 The river of Iracana called by Ribault the river of Somme . 
 Courtesy and liberality the best means to deal with the savages . 
 Most artificiali mats . 
 The beating down of the houses without the fort , y the Palisade . 
 The cause why the French lost Florida . 
 Eight kings Laudonniers friends and allies . 
 The principali scope of planters in strange countries' . 
 Florida a rich country . 
 could , and determined to work no more from thenceforth upon the ship , but to content our selves to repair the Brigandine which I had . So we began to beat down all the houses that were without the Fort , and caused coals to be made of the timber thereof : likewise the soldiers beat down the palisade which was towards the waters side , neither was I ever able to keep them from doing it . I had also determined to beatrice down the Fort before my departure and to set it on fire , for fear lest some newcome guest should have enjoyed and possessed it . In the mean while there was none of us to whom it was not and extreme grief to leave a country , wherein we had endured so great travails and necessities , to discover that which we must forsake through our own countrymen's default . For if we had be succoured in time & place , & according to the promise that was made unto us , the war which was between us and Utina , had not fallen out , neither should we have had occasion to offend the Indians , which with all pains in the world I entertained in good amity , aswell with merchandise and apparel , as with promise of greater matters , and with whom I so behaved myself , that although sometime I was constrained to take victuals in some few villages , yet I lost not the alliance of eight Kings and Lords my neighbours , which continually succoured and aided me with whatsoever they were able to afford . Yea this was the principali scope of all my purposes , to win and entertain them , knowing how greatly their amity might advance our enterprise , and principally while I discovered the commodities of the country , and sought to strengthen my self therein . I leave it to your cogitation to think how near it went to our hearts , to leave a place abounding in riches ( as we were thoroughly informed thereof ) in coming whereunto , and doing service unto our Prince , we left our own country , wives , children , parents , and friends , and passed the perils of the sea , and were therein 
 arrived , as in a plentiful treasure of all our hearts desire . As each of us were much tormented in mind 
 with these or such like cogitations , the third of August dug . 1565. I descried foure sails in the sea , as I walked upon a little hill , whereof I was exceeding well paid : I sent immediately one of them which were with me to advertise those of the Fort thereof , which were so glad of those news , that one would have thought them to be out of their wits to see them laugh and leap for joy . After these ships had cast anchor , we descried that they sent one of their ship boats to land : whereupon I caused one of mine to be armed with diligence to send to meet them , and to know who they were . In the mean while , fearing lest they were Spaniards , I set my soldiers in order and in readiness , attending the return of Captain Vasseur and my Lieutenant , which where gone to meet them , which brought me word that they were Englishmen : and in truth they had in their company one whose name was Martine Atinas of Diepe , which at that time was in their service , which on the behalf of Master John Hawkins their general came to request me that I Hawkins you would suffer them to take fresh water , whereof they Qgnerau . stood in great need , signifying unto me that they had be above fifteene days on the coast to get some . He brought unto me from the general two flagons of wine , and bred made of wheat : which greatly refreshed me , forasmuch as for seven months space I never tasted a drop of wine : nevertheless it was all divided among the greatest part of my soldiers . 
 This Martine Atinas had guided the Englishmen unto our coast , wherewith he was acquainted : for in the year 1562 he came thither with me , and therefore the general sent him to me . Therefore after I had granted his request , he signified the same unto the general , which the next day following caused one of his small ships to enter into the river , and came to see me in a great shipboate , accompanied with gentle - 
 men honourably appareled , yet unarmed . He sent for great store of bred and wine , to distribute thereof to every one : On my part I made him the best cheer Sheep and I could possibly , and caused certain sheep and poultry ^int^FloFida^ to be killed , which until this present I had carefully ' preserved hoping to store the country withal . For notwithstanding all the necessities and sickness that happened unto me , I would not suffer so much as one chicken to be killed : by which means in a short time I had gathered together above and hundred pullets . Now three days passed , while the English General remained with me , during which time the Indians came in from all parts to see him , and asked me whither he And advantage were my brother : I told them he was so , and signified wisely taken . unto that he was come to see me and aid me with so great store of victuals , that from thence forward I should have no need to take any thing of them . The bruit hereof incontinently was spread over all the country , in such sort as Ambassadors came unto me from all parts , which on the behalf of the kings their master's desired to make alliance with me : and even they , which before sought to make war against me , came to offer their friendship and service unto me : Whereupon I received them and gratified them with certain presents . The General immediately understood the desire & urgent occasion which I had to return into France : whereupon he offered to transport me and all my company home : whereunto notwithstanding I would not agree , being in doubt upon what occasion he made so large and offer . For I knew not how the case stood between the French and the English : and although he promised me on his faith to put me on The Trench land in France , before he would touch in England , yet mistrusted that j stood jn doubt lest he would attempt somewhat in { men would ' Fkrida in the name of his mistress . Wherefore I flatly plant in refused his offer : whereupon there arose a great mutiny Florida . among my soldiers , which said that I sought to destroy 
 them all , and that the Brigandine , whereof I spoke before , 78 
 was not sufficient to transport them , considering the season of the year wherein we were . The bruit and mutiny increased more and more : for after that the general was returned to his ships , he told certain gentlemen and soldiers which went to see him , partly to make good cheer with him , he declared , I say unto them , that he greatly doubted that hardly we should be able to pass safely in those vessels which we had : and that in case we should enterprise the same , we should no doubt be in great jeopardy : notwithstanding , if I were so contented , he would transport part of my men in his ships , and that he would leave me a small ship to transport the rest . The soldiers were no sooner come home , but they signified the offer unto their companions , which incontinently consented together that in case I would not accept the same , they would embark themselves with him and forsake me , so that he would receive them according to his promise . They therefore assembled themselves all together and came to seek me in my chamber , and signified unto me their intention , whereunto I promised to answer within one hour after . In which mean space I gathered together the principali members of my company , which after I had broken the matter with them , answered me all with one voice , that I ought not to refuse this offer , nor contemn the occasion which presented it self , and that they could not think evil of it in France , if being forsaken , as we were , we aided our selves with such means as God had sent us . After sundry debatings of this matter , in conclusion I gave mine advice , that we ought to deliver him the price of the ship which he was to leave us , and that for my part I was content to give him the best of my stuff , and the silver which I had gathered Silver found in the country . Whereupon notwithstanding it was ™ determined that I should keep the silver , for fear lest the Queen of England seeing the same , should the rather Note . be encouraged to set footing there , as before she had desired : that it was far better to carry it into France 
 The great importance of this enterprise . 
 The great humanity and bounty of Master John Hawkins to the French . 
 to give encouragement unto our Princes not to leave off and enterprise of so great importance for our commonwealth , and that seeing we were resolved to depart , it was far better to give him our Artillery , which otherwise we should be constrained to leave behind us , or to hide it in the ground by reason of the weakness of our men , being not able to embark the same . This point being thus concluded and resolved on , I went my self unto the English general , accompanied with my Lieutenant , and Captain Vasseur , Captain Verdier , and Trenchant the Pilot , and my Sergeant , all men of experience in such affairs and knowing sufficiently how to drive such a bargain . We therefore took a view of the ship which the general would fell , whom we drew to such reason , that he was content to stand to mine own men's judgement , who esteemed it to be worth seven hundreth crowns , whereof we agreed very friendly . Wherefore I delivered him in earnest of the sum , two bastards , two minions , one thousand of iron , & one thousand of powder . This bargain thus made , he considered the necessity wherein we were , having for all our sustenance but mill and water : whereupon being moved with pity , he offered to relieve me with 20 barrels of meal , sixe pipes of beans , one hogshead of salt , and a hundred of wax to make candles . Moreover forasmuch as he saw my soldiers go barefoot , he offered me beside fifty pairs of shoes , which I accepted and agreed of a price with him , and gave him a bill of mine hand for the same , for which until this present I am indebted to him . He did more then this : for particularly he bestowed upon my self a great jar of oil , a jar of vinegar , a barrel of Olives , and a great quantity of Rice , and a barrel of white Biscuit . Beside he gave diverse presents to the principali Officers of my company according to their qualities : so that I may say that we received as many courtesies of the general , as it was possible to receive of any man living . Wherein doubtless he hath won 
 the reputation of a good and charitable man , deserving to be esteemed as of us all as if he had saved all our lives . Incontinent after his departure I spared The departure no pain to hasten my men to make biscuits of the meal which he had left me , and to hoop my cask ‘ to take in water needful for the voyage . A man may well think what diligence we used , in respect of the great desire we had to depart , wherein we continued so well , that the fifteenth day of August the biscuit , the August it , . greatest part of our water , & all the soldiers stuff was brought aboard : so that from that day forward we did nothing but stay for good winds to drive us into France : which had freed us from and infinite number of mischiefs which afterwards we suffered , if they had come as we desired : but it was not Gods good pleasure , as shall appear hereafter . Being thus in a readiness to set sail , we bethought our selves that it would do well to bring certain men and women of the country into France , to the end that if this voyage should be taken in hand again they might declare unto their Kings the greatness of our King , the excellency of our Princes , the goodness of our Country , and the manner of living of the Frenchmen : and that they might also learn our language , to serve our turns thereby in time to come . Wherein I took so good order , that I found means to bring away with me the goodliest persons of all the country , if our intentions had succeeded as I hoped they would have done . In the mean season the Kings my neighbours came often to see and visit me : which , after that they understood that I would return into France , demanded of me whither I meant to return again or no , and whither it should be in short time . 
 I signified unto them that within tenne Moons ( so they TheFloridians call their Months ) I would visit them again with measure their such force , that I would be able to make them Conquerors over all their enemies . They prayed me that the Moon . 
 I would leave them my house , that I would forbid my soldiers to beat down the Fort and their lodge - 
 ix 81 F 
 ings , and that I would leave them a boat to aid them withal in their war against their enemies . Which I made as though I would grant unto them , to the end I might always remain their friend until my last departure . 
 . 