The first and second discovery of the gulf of California , and of the Seacoast on the Northwest or back side of America , lying to the West of New Mexico , Cibola and Quivira , together with Sir Francis Drakes landing and taking possession upon Nova Albion in the behalf of the Crown of England , and the notable voyage of Francis Gaule ; Wherein among many other memorable matters is set down the huge breadth of the Ocean sea from China and Japan to the Northwest parts of America , in the 38. and 40. degrees . 
 A relation of the discovery , which in the Name of God the Fleet of the right noble Fernando Cortez Marques of the Valley , made with three ships ; The one called Santa Agueda of 120. tons , the other the Trinitie of 35. tons , and the thirde S. Thomas of the burden of 20. tons . Of which Fleet was Captain the right worshipful knight Francis de Ulloa born in the City of Merida . Taken out of the third volume of the voyages gathered by M. John Baptista Ramusio . 
 Chap. 1. 
 Francis Ulloa a captain of Cortez departeth with a Fleet from the port of Acapulco , and goes to discover unknown lands , he passes by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , and by tempest runneth to the river of Guajaval , from whence he crosseth over to the haven of Santa Cruz , along the coast whereof he discovereth 3. small Hands , and within two days and and half returning to the main land he discovereth the river called Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo , and not far distant from thence two other rivers as big or greater then that of Guadalquivir which runneth by Sivil , together with their head-springs . 
 E embarked our selves in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8. of July in the year J 7 ; degrees of of our Lord 1539 , calling upon almighty atitude-God to guide us with his holy hand unto such places where he might be served , and his holy faith advanced . And we sailed from the said port by the coast 
 of Sacatula and Motin , which is sweet and pleasant The coast of through the abundance of trees that grow thereon , and $acatfla rivers which pass through those countries , for the which Motin-wee often thanked God the creator of them . So sailing along we came to the haven of S. Iago in the province S - Iago de of Colima : but before we arrived there , the main mast of our ship called Santa Agueda was broken by a storm of wind that took us , so as the ship was forced to sail without her mast until we arrived in the said haven . From the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima we were sailing the space of 20. days . Here we stayed to mend our mast and to take in certain victuals , water , and wood , the space of 27. days . And we departed from the said haven the 23. of August , and The Isles of sailing by the Isles of Xalisco the 27. or 28. of the Xalisco . said month we were taken with and extreme tempest wherein we thought we should have perished , and being tossed and weatherbeaten , we ran as far as Guajaval . the river of Guajaval in the Province of Culiacan . In this storm we lost the pinnace called Sant Thomas , and because we had lost her we crossed over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California : for while we were ' cedifornla so beaten tbe f°rmer tempest , the pilot of the Bark signified unto us , that he perceived she began to leak , and that already she had received in much water , insomuch that she began to founder : whereupon , to help her need , and that we might meet together in a known haven , if by chance the tempest should separate us , as it did indeed , we willed him to repair to the haven of Santa Cruz , where we meant to repair his harms and our own . Wherefore being all arrived in this place of Santa Cruz , we stayed there five days and took in water , wherein we herd no news of our Bark which we had lost : Whereupon the Captain resolved to follow on our voyage ; wherefore we set sail the 12. of September , and as we sailed we Three Hands , saw along the coast of the said haven 3. Islands , whereof the Captain made no great account , thinking there could be no great good found in any of them . These Islands seemed not to be great ; wherefore he commanded the Master's and pilots to proceed on their voyage , and not to lose time without any profit . So sailing over the gulf of California , in two days and and half Rio de san we came to the river of S. Peter and S. Paul , finding Ppablo* ! and before we entered into the same a small Island in the a ° ' mouth of the River , being 4. or 5. miles distant from the main . On both sides of this River we beheld goodly and pleasant great plains full of many green and beautiful trees , and farther within the land we beheld certain exceeding high mountains full of woods very pleasant to behold . From this River we sailed still along the coast the space of 15. leagues , in which course we found two other Rivers in our judgement Two great as great or greater then Guadalquivir the River of nvers-Sivilia in Spaine . All the coast by these Rivers is plain as the other which we had passed , with many woods : likewise within the land appeared great mountains covered with woods very beautiful to behold , and beneath in the plain appeared certain lake's of water . From these Rivers we sailed 18. leagues , and found very pleasant plains , and certain great lake's whose Certainegreat mouths opened into the Sea : here our Captain thought la^es ' good thoroughly to discover what those lake's were , and to search whither there were any good haven for his ships to ride in , or to harbour themselves , if any tempest should arise ; and so he commanded a boat to be hoist out into the Sea , with a Master and five or sixe men to view them , and to found the depth , and bottom of them : who went thither , and found the coast very should , and the mouths of the lake's ; whereupon they made no account of them , only because the shore was so shallow , for otherwise the land was very pleasant . Here at evening we saw on the shore 10. or 12. Indians and fires . The aforesaid two Rivers are two leagues distant the one from the other little more or less , and are great , as I have said , and being in the last of them we went up to the ship-top , and saw many lake's , and one among the rest exceeding great , and we supposed that they had their springs out of this great lake , as other Rivers also have from other lake's , for we saw the course of them severally each by themselves , having goodly woods growing all along their banks . The currents of these Rivers might be discerned three leagues within the Sea : and at the mouths of them were many small stakes set up for marks : the shore here is plain and sandy , and the country very pleasant . 
 Chap. 2. 
 Sailing along the coast from the two aforesaid great Rivers , they discover three mouths of lake's and a goodly Country , they come unto Cabo Roxo , and take possession of those countries' for the Emperors Majesty . A discourse of the fair havens that are on those coasts , and of very many Islands which they saw , before they came to the Cape called Capo de las Plaias . 
 THis day we sailed along the coast the space of 16. leagues , and in the midst of this voyage there is a Bay very fair of 4. or 5. leagues , having certain banks or fences in it , in beholding whereof we took great pleasure . The night following we road in 20. radome water . The next day we followed our voyage towards the North , and having sailed 3. or 4. leagues we saw 3. mouths of lake's which entered into the land , where they became like standing pools . we road a league distance from these mouths in 6. fathom water , to see what they were , and sent our boat with certain men , to see if there were any entry for our ships : for half a league from shore we had not passed one or two fathom water . Here our men saw 7. or 8. Indians , and found sundry sorts of green herbs somewhat differing from those of Nueva Espanna . The Country is plain , but far within land they saw great and small hills extending themselves a great way , and being very fair and pleasant to behold . The day following we proceeded on our voyage , sailing always in sighed of the plain coast towards the Northwest , in 10. or 15. fathom water . And having sailed 6. good leagues we found a Bay on the coast within the land of about 5. leagues over , from whence the coast trended Northwest , and this day we sailed about 16. leagues . All this coast is plain , and not so pleasant as that which we had passed : here are certain small hills , but not so high as those which we had found before . Thus we sailed all night Northwest , and until the next day at noon , at which time we fell with a headland of white sand , where by the height which we took that day we found our selves to be in the latitude of 27. degrees and This cape we called Capo Roxo . All the coast is plain and fair and clean sand , and we saw within land some few trees not very great , with certain mountains 8c woods 3. or 4. leagues distant from the said cape : and here likewise appeared a mouth of a river , which ( as far as we could discern ) made certain lake's up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seemed to be very should , because the sea did break very much . Here we saw within the land 3. or 4. rivers . In this sort we sailed on our voyage to the Northward , 8c because we had not good weather we road that night in a great haven lying in our way , where on the shore we saw certain plains , and up within the land certain hills not very high : and continuing our course towards the North about 3. leagues from this haven we found and Hand of about one league in circuit lying before the mouth of the said haven . And sailing forward we found and haven which hath two mouths into the Sea , into which we entered by the Northermost mouth , which hath 10. or 12. fathom water , 8c so decreaseth till it come to 5. fathom , where we anckered in a pool which the Sea makes , which is a strange thing to behold , for there are so many entrances 8c mouths of streams and havens , that we were all astonished at the sighed thereof ; and these havens are so excellently framed by nature , as the like are not to be seen in the world , wherein we found great store of fish . Here we anckered , and the Captain went on shore , and took possession , using all such ceremonies as thereunto belong . Here also we found certain wears to catch fish made by the Indians , and certain small cottages , wherein were diverse pieces of earthen pots as finely made as those in Spaine . Here by commandment of the Captain a Cross was erected upon and hill , and it was set up by Francis Preciado . In this place we saw the Country full of fresh and green grass , howbeit differing from that of New Spaine , and up within the Country we saw many great and very green mountains . This Country seemed very goodly and delightsome to all of us , in regard of the greenness and beauty thereof , and we judged it to be very populous within the land . From this haven we departed and kept our way towards the Northwest with good weather , and began to find hard by the seashore exceeding high mountains spotted with white , and in them we saw many fowls which had their nests in certain holes of those rocks , and sailed io . leagues until night , all which night we were becalmed . The next day we followed our course Northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we began to see on the Western shore ( whereon the foresaid haven of S. Cruz stands ) certain Islands or high lands , whereat we rejoiced not a little . And so sailing And Island . forward we met with and Island about two leagues in bigness , and on the East shore having still the main land and Islands in sighed , we sailed 15. leagues until the evening , always finding hard by the seacoast exceeding high mountains bore of trees , the land appearing still more plainly unto us on the Western shore . Where-Some take thee upon we began to be of diverse opinions , some thinking lfomiaafe ' that coast of Santa Cruz was a firm land , and nothing but that joined with the continent of Nueva Espanna , Islands . others thought the contrary , and that they were nothing else but Islands , which were to the Westward . And in this sort we proceeded forward , having the land on both sides of us , so far , that we all began to wonder at it . This day we sailed some 15. leagues , and called this Cape Capo de las Plaias . 
 Capo Roxo . 
 The coast runneth ' Northward . 
 Fishingweares like those of Virginia . 
 Of the Straight which they discovered on the coast of Capo de las Plaias , and of the pleasant Country which they found before they came to the rocks called Los diamantes . Of the wonderful whiteness of that Sea , and of the ebbing and flowing thereof : and of the multitude of Islands and lands , which extend themselves Northward from the haven of Santa Cruz. 
 THe day following we sailed until night with so good weather , that we ran about 20. leagues . All this coast along the shore is full of little hills without grass or trees : and that night we anckered in 20. fathom water . The next day we followed our voyage beginning to sail before break of day Northwestward , and we came into the midst of a Straight or mouth which was Straight of 12 leagues broad from one land to the other , which Straight had two Hands in the midst thereof being 4. Ceding depth leagues distant the one from the other : and here we discerned the country to be plain , and certain mountains , 8c it seemed that a certain gut of water like a brook ran through the plain . This straight ( as far as we could perceive ) was very deep , for we could find no bottom : and here we saw the land stretching afar off from the one shore to the other , and on the Western shore of the haven of S. Cruz , the land was more high with very bore mountains . The day following we passed on our way towards the North , and sailed some The Straight 15. leagues , and in the midst of our way we found a ^re rumeth circuit or bay of 6. leagues into the land with many Northward . cooves or creeks , and the next day following continuing our course we sailed some 10. leagues , and the coast in this days journey was all of high mountains naked and bore without any tree . It is very deep hard by the shore , and that night we were constrained to stay by reason of the contrary wind . The next morning before break of day we sailed still along the coast to the Northwest until evening , and ran about some 15. leagues . All along this shore we saw very goodly mountains within the land , and many plains and downs with some few trees , & the sea shore was all sandy . In the midst of this days course we found certain small rocks in the sea 4. leagues distant from the main , were the said land makes a great point into the sea , and here we stayed the rest of the night , where we had a very great shower of rain . The day following we proceeded on our voyage , and sailed until night by a compass or turning , some 8. or 9. leagues , and saw within land a few mountains having no trees upon them , but the Sun shining always very clear , as far as we could descry , they were very great , on the Western shore of the haven of Santa Cruz. Here we stayed all night because we found very shallow water and saw the sea very white , and in a manner like to chalk , so that we all began to marveile thereat . The day following we went forward again along the coast Northwestward , and sailed eight leagues , and saw another land which stretched Northwest , and was full of high mountains . And still continuing this course we searched very diligently to see if there were any passage through between both the lands , for right forward we saw no land . And thus sailing we always found more shallow water , and the Sea thick , black , and very muddy , and came at length into five fathom water ; and seeing this , we determined to pass over to the land which we had seen on the other side , and here likewise we found as little depth and less , whereupon we road all night in five fathom water , and we perceived the Sea to run with so great a rage into the land , that it was a thing much to be marveilled at , and with the like fury it returned back again with the ebb ; during which time we found 11. fathom water , and the flood and ebb continued from sixe to sixe hours . 
 The day following the Captain and Pilot went up to the ships top , and saw all the land full of sand in a great round compass , and joining it self with the other shore , and it was so low , that whereas we were a league from the same we could not well discern it , and it seemed that there was and inlet of the mouths of certain lake's , whereby the Sea went in and out . There were diverse opinions among us , and some thought that that current entered into those lake's , and also that some great River there might be the cause thereof . And when we could perceive no passage through , nor could discern the country to be inhabited , the Captain accompanied with certain of us went to take possession thereof . The same day with the ebb of the Sea we fell down from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna , though always we had in sighed the firm land on the one side of us , and the other Islands on our left hand , on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the Western shore : for on that side there are so many Islands and lands , so far as we could descry , that it was greatly to be wondered at : for from the said haven of Santa Cruz , and from the coast of Culiacan we had always in a manner land on both sides of us , and that so great a country , that I suppose if it should so continue further inward , there is country enough for many years to conquer . This day we had the wind contrary , and cast anchor until the flood increased , which was in the afternoon , and then we set sail likewise with contrary wind until midnight , and then cast anchor . 
 The next day we departed , shaping our course along the coast Southwest , until midnight with little wind , and we saw within the land high mountains with some openings , and we made way some three leagues , and all the next night we were becalmed , and the next day we continued our course but a little while , for we sailed not above five leagues , and all the night were becalmed , and saw the land full of bore and high mountains , and on our left hand we descried a plain country , and saw in the night certain fires . 
 Chap 4. 
 They land upon and Island to discover the same , and there they see many fires , which issue out of certain mountains , and many Seal-fishes . Here they take and Indian , and can not understand his language . Running along they discover another Island , and take possession thereof for the Emperors Majesty , and a great haven in the firm land , which they call Ancon de Sant Andres , or The haven of S. Andrew . 
 THe next day following our course we saw a great haven with and Hand in the sea , within a crossbow shoot of the firm land , and in this Island and on the firm land were seen many smokes by the judgement of all the company ; wherefore the captain thought good that we should go on land to know the certainty of these smokes and fires , himself taking ten or twelve of us with a boat in his company : and going on shore in the Island , we found that the smokes proceeded out of Burning certain mountains and breaches of burned earth , where-mountaines . out ascended into the air certain cinders and ashes which mounted up to the middle region of the air , in such great quantity , that we could not esteem less then twenty loads of wood to be burned for the causing of every of those smokes , whereat we were all not a little amazed . 
 In this Island were such abundance of Seals , as it was wondered . Here we stayed that day , and killed a great number of these Seals , with whom we had some trouble : for they were so many , and aided one another so well , that it was strange to behold ; for it fell out , that while we were occupied in killing some of them with staves , they assembled twentie or thirty together , and lifting Abundance of themselves up assailed us with their feet in a squadron , Seals . and overthrew two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon letting go those which they had in their hands , they and the others escaped us and went into the sea , howbeit we killed good store of them , which were so fat as it was wonderful : and when we opened some of them to have their livers , we found certain small b'lacke stones in their bodies , whereat we much marveiled . The next day we road at anchor here for lack of good weather to sail withal : whereupon the Captain determined to go on shore with nine or ten in his company , to see whither there were any people there , or any sign of people that had be there , and they found on the main land seven or eight Indians like to Chichimecas , which were gone a fishing , and had a raft rafi °f of canes ; who so soon as they espied us ran away and betook themselves to flight , but being pursued by us , in the end we took one of them , whose language was so strange that we could by no means understand him ; his clothing was nothing at all , for he was stark naked . These people carried their water in bottles made of beasts skins , they fished with hooks of bone , and we found good store of their fish , whereof we took three or foure dozen . 
 The Indian which we had taken seeing himself in our hands did nothing but weep , but the Captain called him , and made much of him , giving him certain beads , with a hat and certain hooks of ours , and then let him go . And it seemed that after he was returned to his companions , he declared unto them how we had done him no harm at all , showing them the things which we had given him : whereupon they also determined to come unto us to our boat , but because it was now night , and that our ships were far from us , we forced not to stay for them , especially because it was a bad place and a dangerous . This country hath on the seacoast high and bore mountains with certain grass in some places like unto our brooms , or like unto woods of rosemary . 
 Bottles of beasts skins and fishhooks of bone 
 Ancon de S. Andres , or The haven of S. Andrew in 32 degrees . 
 Two Indians of exceeding huge stature . 
 The next day we sailed near to the coast on the same side , with very scarce wind , and in a manner calm , and ran not above five leagues , and all the night following we lay becalmed , and we saw on the shore five or sixe fires . The land is high with very-high mountains without grass , having certain caves in them : the next day also , and part of the night following we were becalmed : and the morrow after we followed our course along the said coast , and passed between a great Island full of exceeding high mountains , and the main land , where we saw a very great haven in the firm land in which we anchored to see what it was , and being come to and anchor , the Captain and some of us went on land the same day to see if there were any people and fresh water , and we found certain small cottages covered with dry grass , with certain little staves laid overthwart , and we went a little way into the country which was very baren , by certain small and straight paths , and found a little pond or pit , but dry and without water ; and here the Captain took possession for the Marks of the valley in the name of his Majesty , and after this we returned to our ship , and that night we saw foure or five fires on the land . The next day the Captain determined , because he had seen these fires , to go on shore , and so with our two boats we went fifteene or twenty of us unto certain crooked strands two leagues from the place where our ships road , and where we had seen the fires , and we found two Indians of exceeding huge stature , so that they caused us greatly to wonder ; they carried their bows and arrows in their hands , and as soon as they saw us leap on shore they ran away , and we followed them unto their dwellings and lodgings , which were certain cottages and bowers covered with boughs , and there we found great and small steps of many people , but they had no kind of victuals but only cuttle-fishes which we found there . The country towards the sea side seemed but barren , for we saw neither trees nor green grass there , yet were there certain small paths not well beaten , and along the seacoast we saw many tracts of dogs , hares , and conies , and in certain small Islands near unto the main we saw Seal-fishes . This haven is called Ancon Ancon de Zant de Sant Andres . Andres . 
 Chap. 5. 
 They discover a mountainous Island very great , and near unto it certain other Islands with a goodly green and pleasant country . They have sighed of certain Indians in Canoas of canes , whose language sounded like the Flemish tongue , with whom they could not have any traffic . 
 THe next day we proceeded on our voyage , sailing between the main and and Island , which we suppose to be in circuit about a hundreth or eighty leagues , sailing sometime within one , and sometime within two leagues of the main . The soil of this Island is of certain mountains not very steep with caves in them , and as far as we could descry by the coast , there appeared no sign of any plain country . Here from this day forward we began to be afraid , considering that we were to return to the port of Santa Cruz ; for it was supposed , that all along this mighty gulf from the entrance in at Culiacan until the returning back unto the said haven , was all firm land , and also because we had the firm land always on our right hand and it goes round circlewise unto the said haven ; but many thought and hoped that we should find some mouth or outlet , whereby we might pass through unto the other coast . What our success was we will declare in the relation following . 
 The next day being Thursday we sailed with scant wind , for it was almost calm , and passed beyond that great Island , having firm land always on our right hand , and coasting ( as I said ) very near unto it . The next day likewise we sailed with little wind , it being in a manner calm , and passed near unto the shore by certain round bays , and certain points which the land made , which was pleasant to behold being somewhat green , and there seemed to be some 
 A great Island . 
 They return from the bot-tomeofthegulf of California . 
 219 
 creek there . This Friday at night we sailed altogether with a fresh gale , and at break of day we Another were between the main land , and and Island on our Island . | eft hand , which was somewhat big , as far as we could discern . There was a great bay in the firm land , and before it was a point which stretched far into the sea . The firm land seemed to be much fresher and pleasanter then those lands which we had passed , having many banks and hills of indifferent height , and beautiful to behold . 
 The country ( as far as we could discern ) was so pleasant and delightful , that we all desired to go on shore , and to search up into it two or three days journey , to see whither it were inhabited or not . we saw within the land of that bay two fires . The night following being Saturday we sailed continually with a prosperous and fresh gale , and the wind was so great that we drew our bonnet to our main sail , and sailed so till the morning . 
 On Sunday the twelfth of October we found our selves altogether enclosed with land , on the right hand with the main , which compassed us before and behind , and on the left hand with and Island of a league and a half ; and between the main and the Island in the midst of the sea there lay a small Islet , and also between the said main and the Island there were two mouths , through which there appeared a passage whereby afterwards we passed through . This main was much more fresh and green then the other which we had passed , and had certain plains and points of mountains of pleasant view , and full of green grass . Here all this night we saw two or three villages which were very great , and at break of day we saw a Canoa or boat made of canes , which came from the land out of a creek , and we stood still until it came near unto us in the ship , and they began to speak in their language which no man understood , whose pronunciation was like to the Flemings , and being 220 
 called they returned with great haste unto the shore , and we were very sorry because our boat had not followed them . 
 Here happened unto us a very strange thing , which was , that as this Indian returned to the shore in certain of these creeks where a number of his fellow Indians were , as we viewed that part , we saw five Canoas issue forth , which came towards us : whereupon we stayed to see what they would do . In the mean while our Admiral came up unto us , which was near the shore , for she also had seen them , and so being come together we cast anchor , expecting what those Canoas would do . In the mean while our general commanded us to make ready our boat , and to furnish the same with oars and men , to try if we could by any means take some of them , that we might come to some knowledge of them , and that we might give them some of our trifles , and specially of our hooks and beads to win their friendship . The Indians with their five Canoas approached within one or two stones cast of us , and then began to speak very loud unto us in a very strange language , always standing upon their guard to retire themselves with speed . When our Captain saw this , and that they would not come near us , but rather retired , he commanded sixe mariners to go into the boat from the stern of the ship , and himself also went with them with all possible haste towards the Indians . The Indians returned to the shore with so great celerity , that they seemed to fly in those little Canoas of canes . Nevertheless our men used such diligence that one of the Canaos was boarded & taken ; but the Indian in the Canoa seeing himself now taken leapt into the water , and our men followed with their boat to take him , but seeing himself within their reach , he ducked with his head under their boat , and so deceived them , and then rose up again , and with their oars and with staves they gave 
 221 
 him certain blows , to amaze him , but nothing would serve them ; for as they were about to lay hands upon him he still dived under water , and with his hands and feet god near to the shore : and as he rose up above the water , he called to his fellows which stood on the shore to behold , crying Belen with a loud voice , and so they pursued him , and struck him sometime being very near the shore , and he always went calling the rest of his fellows to come and help him , whereupon within a short while after three other Canoas came forth to succour him , being full of Indians with bows and arrows in their hands , crying with a loud voice , that we should come on shore : these Indians were of great stature and salvage , fat also and well set , and of a brown colour . Our Captain perceiving this , lest they should wound any of our people with their arrows , returned back , and commanded us immediately to set sail , and so forthwith we departed . 
 This day the wind skanted , and we returned to anchor in the foresaid place , and our Admiral road from the firm land towards the Island , and we which were in the ship called The Trinitie lay near unto the main , and before break of day we departed with a fresh gale . And before we disemboqued out of that channel we saw certain grass very high and green upon the main : whereupon a mariner , and the Pilot went up into the top , and saw the mouth of a river which ran through that green country into the sea . But because our Admiral was under all her sails far from us , we could not tell them of this river , where we would have taken water , whereof we had some need , and because it was a very good haven to go on shore to take it , and therefore without watering we followed our course . On munday we departed from this haven which is like unto a lake , for on all sides we were compassed with land , having the continent before , behind us , and on our right side , and the Island on our left side , and we passed forth 
 222 
 1539 ' at those mouths beforementioned , which showed and outlet into the open sea . Thus we sailed along still viewing the situation of the country , rejoicing all of us at the sighed thereof , for it always pleased us more and more , still appearing more green and pleasant , and the grass which we found near unto the shore was fresh and delectable , but not very high , being ( to all our judgements ) not passed a span long . Likewise the hills which we saw , which were many , and many downs made a very pleasant prospect , especially because we judged , that there were many valleys and dales between them . 
 Chap. 6. 
 They discover a very great bay with foure small Islands in it , whereas they take possession . As they sail along and discover diverse Islands they come at length to the port of Santa Cruz , where not being able to get any knowledge of those Indians , although they lay in wait for them at a place called The well of Grijalva , they departed thence . They have a perilous and long tempest , which ceased , after they had seen a light on their shrowds . 
 AT our coming out of these openings we began to great find a Bay with a very great haven , environed with havendivers small hills having upon them green woods and pleasant to behold . In this bay and strand were two small Islands near unto the shore , one of the which was like unto a table about half a league in bigness , and the other was a round hill almost as big as the former . These Islands served us only to content our sighed , for we passed by them without staying , having but a slack wind on Munday morning : all which day we followed our course with the foresaid slack wind , and within a while after it became flat contrary , so that we were constrained to anchor at the said point of the said haven ; and on Tewesday at break of day we set sail , but made but little away all the day , because 
 223 
 the wind continued contrary , although but very weak . The night following we were becalmed a little beyond the point of this haven ; but about midnight we began to have a fresh gale , and on Wednesday in the morning we were seven leagues distant from that point . This country showed ( as it was indeed ) more plain then the rest , with certain small woody hills , and within the other point which was before descried , the situation seemed to be more pleasant and delightsome then the rest which we had passed . And at the uttermost end of the point were two small Islets . The said Wednesday about nine of the clock the wind blew a good gale , and we sailed by evening between seven and eight leagues , and came over against a land not very high , where we saw certain creeks or breaches not very ragged , into every of which a river seemed to fallen , because the soil was very green , and had certain trees growing on it far bigger then those which we had found before . Here the Captain with five or sixe men went on shore , and taking possession passed up one of those rivers , and found the footing of many Indians upon the sand . On the banks of that river they saw many fruitful trees , as cherry-trees and little appletrees , and other white trees : they found also in the wood three or foure beasts called Adibes , which are a kind of dogs . The same night we set sail with the wind off - the land , which blew so freshly , that it made us to strike our foresail ; and on the sixeteenth of October at nine of the clock we came near unto a point of certain high mountains , on which day being Thursday we made little way , because the wind ceased , but it rose again in the night , whereupon by the break of day on Friday we came before the said point being sixe or seven leagues off . The land seemed to be very mountainous with certain sharp points not greatly clad with grass , but somewhat bore . On our left hand we saw two Islands , the one of a league and a half , the other not so much , and it seemed that we drew near 
 224 
 to the port of Santa Cruz , whereat we were sorry , because we were always in good hope to find some outlet into the main Ocean in some place of that land , and that the same port was the same outlet , and also that by the said coast we might return to the foresaid haven of Santa Cruz , and that we had committed a great error , because we had not certainly sought out the secret , whither that were a Strait or a river , which we had left behind us unsearched at the bottom of this great sea or gulf . 
 All Friday and the night following we sailed with a scant wind , and on Saturday at break of day we were between two points of land which make a bay , wherein - A bay with 4 we saw before and behind foure or five great and small or 5 Inlands . Islands . The land was very mountainous , part whereof was covered with grass , and part was void . Within the land appeared more mountains and hills , and in this place we were come near unto the haven of Santa Cruz , which is all firm land , except it be divided in the very nook by some streite or great river which parts it from the main , which because we had not thoroughly discovered , all of us that were employed in this voyage were not a little grieved . And this main land stretcheth so far in length , that I cannot well express it : for from the haven of Acapulco , which stands in seventeen degrees and twenty minutes of latitude , we had always the coast of the firm land on our right hand , until we came to the great current of the white & read sea : This current and here ( as I have said ) we knew not the secret of this u in 32 Ae-current , whither it were caused by a river or by a strait : and so supposing that the coast which we had on our and read . right hand was closed up without passage , we returned back again , always descending Southward by our degrees , until we returned unto the said haven of This return Santa Cruz , finding still along the coast a goodly and u pleasant country , and still seeing fires made by the ca$ ' Indians , and Canoas made of Canes . We determined to take in fresh water at the haven of Santa Cruz , to 
 ix 225 p 
 run along the outward Western coast , and to see what it was , if it pleased God . Here we rested our selves , and eat of the plums and fruits called Pithaias : They arrive and we entered into the port of Santa Cruz on Sunday ‘ ot^San^’1 th® * 8 °f October and stayed there eight days to take Qruz in wood and water resting our selves all that while , that our men might strengthen and refresh themselves . Our captain determined to divide among us certain garments of taffeta , with cloaks and says , and a piece of taffeta , and likewise ordained , that we should go on land to catch a couple of Indians , that they might talk with our interpreter , and that we might come to the knowledge of their language . Whereupon thirteene of us went out of our ship by night , and lay in ambush in a place which 
 is called The well of Grijalva , where we stayed until noon between certain secret ways , and could never see or descry any one Indian : wherefore we returned The Spaniards to our ships , with two mastive-dogs which we carried with 
 US tO catc^ th® Indians with more ease : and in our Indians return we found two Indians hidden in certain thickets , 
 ' which were come thither to spy what we did : but 
 because we and our dogs were weary , and thought not on them , these Indians issued out of the thickets , and fled away , and we ran after them , and our dogs saw them not : wherefore by reason of the Read more of thickness of the wild thistles , and of the thorns and these staves briars , and because we were weary , we could never cat - I0 - overtake them : they left behind them certain staves so finely wrought that they were very beautiful to behold , considering how cunningly they were made with a handle and a cord to fling them . 
 The nine and twentieth of October being Wednesday , we set sail out of this haven of Santa Cruz with little wind , and in sailing down the channel our ship called the Trinitie came on ground upon certain sholdes : this was at noon at a low water , and with all the remedy that we could use we could not draw her off , whereupon we were constrained to underprop her , and to stay 226 
 the next tide : and when the tide began to increase we used all diligence to draw her off , and could not by any means , whereat all the company and the Captain were not a little grieved : for we thought we should have lost her there , although we ceased not with all our might to labour with both our boats , and with our cable and capsten . In the end it pleased God about midnight at a full sea with the great force which we used to recover her , that we drew her off the sand , for which we gave God most hearty thanks , and road at anchor all the rest of the night , waiting for daylight for fear of falling into any further danger or mishap . When day was come , we set forward with a fresh gale , and proceeded on our voyage , directing our prows to the main sea , to see whither it would please God to let us discover the secret of this point . But whither it pleased not his great goodness , or whither it were for our sins , we spent eight days from this port , before we could double the point , by reason of contrary winds , and great rain , and lightning and darkness every night : also the winds grew so raging and tempestuous , that they made us all to quake , and to pray continually unto God to aid us . And hereupon we made our cables and anchors ready , and the chief Pilot commanded us with all speed to cast anchor , and in this sort we passed our troubles : and whereas we road in no security , he caused us forthwith to weigh our anchors , and to go whither the wind should drive us . And in this sort we spent those eight days , turning back by night the same way that we had gone by day , and sometime making good in the night that which we had lost in the day , not without great desire of all the company to have a wind which might set us forward on our voyage , being afflicted with the misery's which we endured by reason of the thunders , lightnings , and rain , wherewith we were wet from top to toe , by reason of the toil which we had in weighing and casting of our anchors , as need required . 
 And on one of these nights , which was very dark 227 
 and tempestuous with wind and rain , because we thought we should have perished , being very near the shore , we prayed unto God that he would vouchsafe to aid and save us without calling our sins to remembrance . And straightway we saw upon the shrowds of the Trinity as it were a candle , which of it self shined , and gave a light , whereat all the company greatly rejoiced , in such sort that we ceased not to give thanks unto God . Whereupon we assured our selves , that of his mercy he would guide and save us , and would not suffer us to perish , as indeed it fell out ; for the next day we had good weather , and all the mariners said , that it was the light of Saint Elmo which appeared on the shrowds , and they saluted it with their songs and prayers . These storms took us between the Isles of Saint Iago and Saint Philip , and the Isle called Isla de perlas lying over against the point of California supposed to be firm land . 
 Chap. 7. 
 Sailing on their way they discover a pleasant Country , and in their judgement greatly inhabited , and find the Seacoast very deep . They went to discover or view the Isle of pearls . And by a current one of their ships is separated from the other , and with great joy after three days they had sighed again of her , and following their voyage they discover certain great , green , and pleasant plains . 
 WE began to sail along the coast the seventh or eight of November , the land always showing very green with grass pleasant to behold , and certain plains near the shore , and up within the country many pleasant hills replenished with wood , and certain valleys , so that we were delighted above measure , and wondered at the greatness and goodly view of the country : & every night we saw fires , which showed that the country is greatly inhabited . Thus we proceeded on our voyage until the tenth of the said month of November , having 228 
 1539-alwayes the coast of the main Ocean on our right hand , From hence and the farther we sailed , we always found the country more delightsome and pleasant , as well in beholding the greens thereof , as also in that it showed certain plains backside of and deep valleys , through which rivers did fallen down California . into the land , within certain mountains , and hills full of great woods which were not very high , and appeared within the country . Here we were 54 leagues distant from California little more or less , always towards the California . Southwest , seeing in the night three or foure fires , whereby it appears that the country is inhabited , and full of people , for the greatness of the country argue no less : and we supposed that there must needs be great towns inhabited within the land , although in this point we were of diverse opinions . The sea is so deep on all this coast that we could scarce find ground in 54 fathoms . On the greatest part of the coast there are hills of very white sand , and it seems to be a dangerous coast , because of the great and swift tides which go there , for the sand shows so much for the space of ten or twelve leagues , for so the Pilots affirmed . This day being Saturday 
 the wind increased , and we had sighed of the Isle of Isla de perlas . pearls , which on this side of the gulf appears with a deep valley all covered over with trees , and shows much fairer then on the other side , and we entered into the Porte of Santa Cruz. From the ninth of November to the fifteenth we sailed not above tenne leagues , because we had contrary winds , and great showers : and beside this we had another mischance which did not a little grieve us : for we lost company of the ship called The Trinitie , and could never see her for the space of three days , whereupon we suspected that she was returned home unto New Spaine , or that she was severed from our company : wherefore we were grieved out of measure to see our selves so left alone , and the Captain of all others was most sad , though he ceased not to encourage us to proceed on our voyage , saying that notwithstanding all this we ought 
 229 
 not to leave off this enterprise which we had begun , and that though we were left alone we should deserve the greater commendation and credit : whereupon we all answered him , that we would not have him think that any of us would ever be discouraged , but that we would follow him until he should think it reasonable that we should not proceed any further in the enterprise , and that we were in danger of perishing , and that until then we would be at his commandment : but withal we persuaded him that after he had seen any great difficulty to proceed any further , he should do well to return back to make relation of our success to the R. H. lord the Marks de valle . Hereupon he made and Oration unto us wherein he told us , that he could not believe , much less could imagine , wherefore the ship called the Trinitie should return into New Spaine , nor why she should willingly depart from us , and go unto any other place , and that he thought by all reason , that some current had carried her out of our sighed , and that through contrary weather and tempests she could not fetch us up , and that notwithstanding all that which we had done in the voyage , he had and instruction , that if by chance we were separated one from the other , we were to take this course to meet again together , namely to return back eight or tenne leagues to seek one another , beyond certain headlands which lay out into the sea , and that therefore we should do well to return to seek her up . This sentence pleased us all , and so returning to seek her , we espied her two leagues distant from us , coming towards us with a fresh gale of wind , whereat we greatly rejoiced . 
 Thus being come together we anchored for that day , because the weather seemed very contrary , and the Captain chid them for their negligence in sailing , because they had in such sort lost our company ; and they excused themselves , that they could do no less , because a current had carried them away above three leagues , whereby they could never reach unto us . The next day 230 
 being the sixeteenth of November we set forward , but sailed very little , for the North and Northwest winds were against us . Here we discovered certain plains , in my judgement very great and green , and right before us we could not discern any mountains or woods , whereat we marveiled to see so great a country . And we met and Indian in a Canoa on the shore whereon the sea did break , who stayed to behold us a great while , and oftentimes he lifted up himself to view us the better , & then returned back along the coast : we used all diligence to see whither he would come out further from the shore , to give him chase , and to try whither we could catch him , but he very cunningly viewed us without coming near unto us , and returned to the shore with his Canoa . Here we saw in the evening but one fire , and wist not whither it were done by the cunning of the Indians , because they would not have us know that there were people there , or that it was so indeed . From the said 16 day of November until the 24 of the same month we could not proceed on our way above 12 or 15 leagues : and looking into our Sea-chart , we found our selves distant from the 
 Xaguges of the Port of Santa Cruz about 70 leagues . They are 70 Now on the 24 being munday very early in the morn - teagtuffrom ing we began to take very good view of that SantaCruz Country , and all along the coast we saw many fair plains with certain furrows made in the midst like unto half plains , the said plain still appearing up into the Country , with pleasant champions , because the grass which grew there was very beautiful , short , and green , and good pasture for cattle . Howbeit because we road so far off , we could not perfectly judge what kind of grass it was , but it showed very short and green , and without thorns . These plains on the right hand made a bay into a valley which seemed to be a piece of a mountain : the rest showed to be all plains without any thistles or weeds , but full of grass good for cattle very green and fair , as I have said . 
 231 
 One of their ships by tempest was separated from the other , and afterwards meeting with her consort she reporteth that the land stretcheth to the West by the mouth of the great lake . The Pilots are of diverse judgements touching the state of this coast inhabited by Chichimecas . They enter into and haven to take in fresh water , and are suddenly assailed by two squadrons of Indians . They defend themselves valiantly , and the Captain with some of his soldiers are grievously wounded . 
 THe 26 of this month being Wednesday at night the North wind took us , which still increased more and more so greatly that it put us to much trouble , for it continued two days , in which the Sea was always boisterous ; and this night again we lost the Trinity being beaten with the North wind aforesaid ( and we had sighed of her on munday the 24 ) wherewith we were all of us greatly aggrieved , both Captains , Soldiers and Mariners , because we saw we were left alone , and our ship call Santa Agueda wherein we were , was but badly conditioned , and this grieved us more then the trouble which we had with the boisterousness of the Sea , imagining that if we should lose the Trinity , or if any mishap should fallen unto us , we should not be able to follow our voyage according to our Captains and our own Land running desire . This said 24 day being munday we saw a the Country with high mountains towards the Northwest , 
 oit west . anj seemed that the land stretched on still forward , 
 whereat we exceedingly rejoiced , because we judged that the land grew always broader and broader , and that we should meet with some speciali good thing . Whereupon we desired that it would please God to send us good weather for our voyage , which hitherto we Note . found always contrary , so that in 26 days we sailed not above 70 leagues , and that with much trouble , sometime riding at anchor and sometime sailing , and seeking 232 
 the remedies and benefit of the shore to avoid perils . In this Country which we discovered the 26 day we always saw ( as I have said ) along the shore , and within the land , goodly plains without any tree , in the midst whereof was a lake or gathering together of the Seawater , which ( to our judgement ) was above 12 leagues in compass , and the seacoast reached to the mountains before mentioned . And this day we saw our ship called the Trinitie , which road 2 leagues distant from us , which so soon as she saw us , set sail , and we came together and rejoiced greatly . They brought us great quantity A wonderful of grey fish , and of another kind : for at the point fi^nSPlace of those mountains they found a fishing which was very wonderful , for they suffered themselves to be taken by hand : and they were so great that every one had much ado to find room to lay his fish in . They found also on the said point a fountain of fresh water which descended from those hills , and they told us that at the same place they had found a narrow passage , whereby the Sea entered into the said lake . They comforted us much with the report of these things , and in telling us that the land trended to the West ; for the chief Pilot thought , and the other Pilot was of the same opinion , that we should find a good Country . This night we set sail to go to that point to take in fresh water which we wanted , and to see this lake , and to put some men on shore : and after midnight the wind came upon us so forcibly at the North that we could not stay there : whereupon we were constrained to put further into the Sea , and returned the same way back again unto the shore with much ado , and came to and anchor a great way short of the place from whence we were driven : and there we road until Thursday at noon with this bitter North wind , and on Friday about noon , when we most thought it would have ceased , it began to increase again , which grieved us not a little seeing the weather so contrary , hoping always that it would cease , and that some wind would blow from the shore , whereby 
 233 
 we might recover the point of land to take in fresh water , and to search whither there were any people about that lake . Here we lay from the 26 of the said month till the 29 , driving up and down the Sea , winding in by little and little until we had got under the shelter of those mountains : which being obtained we road the said 29 of the month half a league from those woody mountains , which we had seen in the Sea. We stayed in this place at our ease all the Sunday , and Juan Castilio the chief Pilot went that day in the boat on shore with seven in his company , and they landed near the Sea , and on a certain low ground they found foure or five Indians Chichimecas of great stature , and went towards them , who fled away like Dear that had been chased . After this the Pilot went a little way along the Seashore , and then returned to his boat , and by that time he was entered thereinto , he saw about fifteene Indians of great stature also , with their bows and arrows which called unto him with a loud and strong voice , making signs with their bows ; but the Pilot made no account of their gesture , but rather returned to the ships , and declared what had passed between him and the Indians . The same day the Captain commanded that our cask should be made ready against the next morning to take in water , for in both the ships there were about five and twentie buttes empty . The first of December , and the second day in the morning the Captain went with both the barks on shore with some dozen soldiers , and the greatest part of the Mariners which laboured in filling of water , leaving in the ships as many as were needful , and as soon as we were come on shore at the watering place the Captain caused the buttes to be taken out , to the end they might be filled with water , and while they returned to fetch the barrels and hogsheads of the ship , the Captain walked a turn or two upon the shore for the space of one or two crossbow shoots , and afterward we went up to certain of those 
 234 
 mountains , to view the disposition of the country , and in truth we found it in that place very bad to our judgement , for it was very ragged , full of woods and caves , and so stony , that we had much ado to go . Being come unto the top we found certain small hills full of woods , and cliffs that were not so craggy , although very troublesome to climb up ; and while we looked from these little hills , we could not discern any more mountains , but rather judged that from that place forward there were great plains . The Captain would not suffer us to go any further , because in those places we had seen certain Indians which seemed to be spies , and warning us thereof he commanded us to retire unto the shore , where we were to take in water , and to dispatch our business quickly , and appointed us to make certain pits , that our buts might more easily be filled with water . And setting our Guards or Centinels , we began to fill water . In the mean while the Captain took certain soldiers , and went to the top of and high hill , from whence he descried a great part of the Sea , and a lake which is within the land : for the Sea entereth in the space of a league , and there is a good fishing place round about : and the lake was A fishingplace so great , that it seemed unto us to be very near 30 °f 
 leagues in compass , for we could not discern the end thereof . Then we came down with no less trouble ’ then we had mounted up unto the hill , by reason of the steepenesse of the place , and some tumbled down with no small laughter of the rest . And being come somewhat late to our watering place ( for it was then past noon ) we set our selves to dinner , always appointing some of our company in Centinel , until we were called to dinner , and when some were called two others were appointed in their rooms . And about two of the clock after dinner , the Captain and the rest suspecting no danger of assault of Indians , both because the place seemed not to be fit for it , as also for that we had set our Centinels at the passages ; two squadrons of Indians 
 235 
 A sudden assault of the Indians with stones , arrows , and staves . 
 came upon us very secretly and covertly , for one came by the great valley through which the water ran which we took , and the other came by a part of that great hill which we had ascended to see the lake , and all of them came so covertly , that our Centinels could neither see nor hear them ; and we had not perceived them , if a soldier by chance lifting up his eyes had not said , Arm , Arm , my masters , for many Indians come upon us . When we herd this the Captain leapt up in a great rage , because the guards were changed out of their place : and with his sword and target , being followed by a soldier , whose name was Haro , and afterwards by the rest , he and the said soldier went towards a little gate of certain stones , whither the rest of us were to follow him : for if the Indians had got that place from us , we should have incurred great danger , and the greatest part of us had like to have been slain , and none could have escaped but such as by chance could have leapt into the boats , and the tide went so high , that none could be saved but such as were most excellent swimmers . But at length the Captain bestirred himself very nimbly , using all celerity that was possible . Therefore when he and Haro had won the gate , the rest of the soldiers gate up after them , and the Captain and Haro turned themselves to the Indians and made head against them , and the Indians assailed them with such numbers of stones , arrows , & javelins ( which was a very strange thing ) that they brake in pieces the target which the Captain had on his arm , and beside that wounded him with and arrow in the bending of his knee , and though the wound was not great , yet was it very painful unto him . While they thus stood to withstand their assault , they struck Haro which was on the other side so forcibly with a stone , that they threw him flat upon the ground : and by and by another stone lighted upon him which shivered his Target , and they hit the Captain with another arrow , and shot him quite through one of his ears . Another arrow came and struck a 
 236 
 soldier called Graviello Marques in the leg , of which he felt great pain and went halting . In the mean space Francis Preciado , and certain other soldiers came up and joined himself with the rest on the left hand of the Captain , saying unto him , Sir , withdraw your self , for you be wounded , but be you not dismayed , for they are but Indians and cannot hurt us . In this wise we began to rush in among them upon the side of a rock always gaining ground of them , which greatly encouraged our minds , and when we began to enforce them to retire , we won a small woody hill , where we sheltered our selves , whereas before they shot upon us from aloft , for they were on the higher ground under covert in safety , & then by no means we could offend them , but by running forcibly upon them with our targets on our arms , and our swords in our hands . On the other side , to approach and seek to overtake them was a vain thing , seeing they were as swift as wild goats . By this time Haro was got up on foot , and having clapped a woollen cloth upon his head , which had bled extremely , he joined himself unto us , of whom we received no small aid . In the mean space the Indians fortified themselves on the crag of a rock , from whence they did not a little molest us , & we likewise fortified our selves upon and hillock , whereby we descended into their Fort , and there was a small valley between them & us , which was not very deep from the upper part . There we were 6 soldiers & two Negroes with the Captain , & all of us were of opinion that it was not good to pass that place , lest you Indians being many might destroy us all , for the rest of our soldiers which were beneath at the foot of the hill , making head against the other squadron of the Indians , kept them from hurting those which took in water on the strand and from breaking the buts of water , and being but few , we concluded to stay here , and so we stood still fortifying our selves as well as we could , especially considering that we had no succour on any side ; for Berecillo our Mastive-dogge which should have 
 237 
 A.D. 
 1539 - 
 The Spaniards use mastiffs in their warns against the Indians . Reade more hereof cap . 12. 
 aided us was grievously wounded with 3 arrows , so that by no means we could get him from us : this mastive was wounded in the first assault when the Indians came upon us , who behaved himself very well , & greatly aided us ; for he set upon them , and put 8 or 10 of them out of array , 8c made them run away , leaving many arrows behind them : but at length ( as I have said ) he was so wounded , that by no means we could get him to go from us to set any more upon the Indians , 8c the other two mastiffs did us more harm then good : for when they went against them , they shot at them with their bows , and we received hurt and trouble in defending them . The Captains leg when he waxed cold was so swollen , that we lapped it up in a woollen cloth , and he halted much of it : and while the Indians thus stood still , one part of them began to dance , sing , and shout , and then they began all to lade themselves with stones , and to put their arrows into their bows , and to come down towards us very resolutely to assault us , and with great outcries they began to fling stones and to shoot their arrows . Then Francis Preciado 
 turned him to the Captain and said : Sir , these Indians know or think , that we be afeard of them , 8c in itrueth it is a great fait to give them this encouragement , it were better for us resolutely to set upon them with these dogs , 8c to assault them on this hill , that they may know us to be no dastards , for they be but Indians and dare not stand us ; and if we can get their Fort upon the hill , God will give us victory in all the rest . The Captain answered , that he liked well of the motion , and that it was best so to do , although for any further pursuit up the hill , he thought we were to take another course . By and by Francis Preciado getting his target on his arm , and his sword in his hand , ran unto the other side of the valley , which on that part was not very steep , crying S. Iago , upon them my master's , and after him leapt Haro , Teresa , Spinosa , and a Crossebow-man called Montanno , and after them followed the Captain , 238 
 1539-though very lame , with a Negro and a soldier which accompanied him , encouraging and comforting them , willing them not to fear . Thus we drave them to the place where they had fortified themselves , and from whence they descended , and we took another hill over against them within a darts cast of them . And having breathed our selves a little , the Captain came unto us , and said , Go too my masters , upon them before they strengthen themselves on this hill , for now we see plainly that they be afeard of us , seeing we chase them continually from their Forts : & suddenly 3 or 4 of us went towards them well covered with targets , unto the foot of their Fort where they were assembled , and the rest of our company followed us : the Indians began to make head against us , and to fling many stones upon us , and shoot many arrows , and we with our swords in our hands rushed upon them in such sort , that they seeing how furiously we set upon them , abandoned the fort , and ran down the hill as swift as Dear , and fled unto another hill over against us , where the other squadron of the Indians stood , of whom they were rescued , and they began to talk among themselves , but in a low voice , and joined together 6 and 6 and 8 8c 8 in a company , and made a fire and warmed themselves , and we stood quietly beholding what they did . 
 239 
 [ Chap. 9 
 After the skirmish the Captain being wounded , and the rest of the soldiers seeing the Indians depart , returned unto their ships . The next day taking in fresh water at the said place he sent mariners to found the mouth of the lake . Departing thence they came to the port called Baya de Sant Abad , and endured a dangerous storm at sea . And afterwards coming near the shore to take fresh water in the said haven , they see certain peaceable Indians . 
 BY this time it was late and the night approached , and the Indians seeing this , within a short while after determined to get them packing , and each of them or the greatest part took firebrands in their hands , & god them away into craggy places . When the Captain saw this he commanded us to return aboard our boats , it being now dark night , thanking us all for the good service we had done him . And being not able to stand upon his leg , he leaned with his arm upon Francis Preciado ; and thus we returned to our boats , where with much ado we god aboard , by reason of the great tide and roughness of the sea , so that our boats were filled with every wave . Thus very weary , wet , & some wounded ( as is aforesaid ) each man returned unto his ship , where our beds which we found , and our refreshing , & the cheer we had at supper did not greatly comfort us in regard of our former travels . We passed that night in this sort , and the next day being Tuesday the Captain found himself greatly pained with his wounds , & chiefly with that on his leg , because it was greatly swollen with his going upon it . We lacked 12 buts to fill with water , and the barrels in both the ships , and the Captain would have gone out to cause them to be filled , but we would not suffer him , and therefore we left ofF the business for that day . But he appointed that the crossbows should be made ready , and two speciali good 
 240 
 harquebusses , & the next day being Wednesday very early , he commanded Juan Castilio chief Pilot to go out with both the boats and with all the soldiers and mariners that he could make , having the day before commanded the Trinitie to go as near the shore as she might , & to make ready some of her ordinance , that if the Indians should show themselves , they might affright them , & do them as much hurt as they could . Wherefore on the Wednesday all we that were soldiers , saving the wounded persons , went on shore with certain mariners in the best order that we could , and took the first hill , where we had fortified our selves , standing all upon our guard until the water was filled , and until we were called , during which time not one Indian showed himself . Thus we went aboard when we thought good our selves , at least without any suspicion of the Indians , although the tide of the Sea went so high y‘ it put us to great trouble , for oftentimes with great waves it beatrice into our boats . This was on the Wednesday the 3 of December . And to avoid loss of time the Captain commanded Juan Castilio the chief Pilot to take a boat and certain mariners as he should think good , and to view the mouth of the lake to see whither the entrance were deep enough for to harbour the ships . He taking the boat of the Admiral with 8 mariners , and ours of the Trinity , went and sounded the mouth , & on the shallowest place of the bar without they found 3 fathom A special good depth , and farther in 4 , & up higher 5 , always increasing unto 10 or 12 fathoms , when they were come into the two points of the said lake , which was a league broad from one point to the other , and all their sounding was exceeding good ground . Then they went over to the southeast point , & there they saw a great boat or raft which they endeavoured to take to carry unto their ships . In you mean while they espied certain cottages , which the Pilot determined to go and see , and being come near they saw 3 other rafts with 3 Indians on them distant from the cottages one or two cross-bowes shot , 
 ix 241 Q 
 and he leapt on land with 4 or 5 mariners in his company : and while they beheld those cottages , they saw many Indians descending down a small hill in warlike manner with their bows and arrows , whereupon they determined to retire to their boats , and to return to their ships , and they were not gone from the seashore scarce a stones cast , but the Indians were come upon them to shoot at them with their arrows , and because they were unarmed , they would not fight with them , having gone on shore for no other purpose , but to found the mouth and entrance of that lake . On Thursday the 4 of December we set sail with a fresh gale of wind , and sailed some 8 or 10 leagues , and came unto certain mouths or inlets which seemed to all of us as though they had been Hands , and we entered into one of them , Baya deal and came into and haven which we called Baya deal Abad Abad it100 ap inc [ ose ( l anj compassed with land , being one of thee the point of fairest havens that hath been seen : and about the same , California . especially on both sides the land was green and goodly to behold ; we descried certain rivers on that part which seemed green , & therefore we returned back , going out at that mouth whereby we came in , always having contrary wind : yet the Pilots used their best endeavour to make way : and we saw before us certain woody hills , and beyond them certain plains ; this we saw from the Friday the 5 of the said month , until the Tuesday , which was the ninth . As we drew near to these woods they seemed very pleasant , and there were goodly and large hills and beyond them towards the sea were certain plains , and through all the country we saw these woods . Many great From the day before , which was the Conception of our tmokes , of Lady , we saw many great smokes , whereat we much 
 Francis Gualle marveled , being or diverse opinions among our selves , makes men - whither those smokes were made by the inhabitants of cion . the country or no . Over against these woods there fell every night such a due , that every morning when we rose , the deck of the ship was so wet , that until the sun was of a good height , we always made the 
 242 
 deck dirty with going upon it . We road over against these woods from the Tuesday morning when we set sail , until Thursday about midnight , when a cruel Northwest wind took us , which , whither we would or no , enforced us to way our anchor ; and it was so great , that the ship Santa Agueda began to return back , until her cable broke , and the ship hulled , and suddenly with a great gust the trinket and the mizzen were rend asunder , the Northwest wind still growing more and more : within a short while after the main sail was rend with a mighty flaw of wind , so that we were enforced , both soldiers , captain , and all of us , to do our best endeavour to mend our sails ; and the Trinitie was driven to do the like , for she going round upon her anchor , when she came ahead of it , her cable broke , so that there we lost two anchors , each ship one . We went back to seek Baya deal Abad , for we were within 20 leagues of the same , and this day we came within foure leagues of it , and being not able to reach it by reason of contrary winds , we road under the lee of certain mountains and hills which were bore , and almost void of grass , near unto a strand full of sandy hills . Near unto this road we found a fishingplace under a point Afishingplace . of land , where having let down our led to see what ground was there , a fish caught it in his mouth , and began to draw it , and he which held the sounding-lead crying and showing his fellows that it was caught , that they might help him , as soon as he had god it above the water , took the fish , and loosed the cord of the sounding-lead , and threw it again into the sea , to see whither there were any good depth , and it was caught again , whereupon he began to cry for help , and all of us made a shout for joy ; thus drawing the fish the rope of the sounding-lead being very great was cracked , but at length we caught the fish which was very fair . Here we stayed from Friday when we arrived there , until the Munday , when as it seemed good to our Captain , that we should repair to the watering place , from whence 
 243 
 we were some sixe leagues distant , to take in 12 buttes of water , which we had drunk and spent , because he knew not whither we should from thenceforth find any water , or no ; and though we should find water , it was doubtful whither we should be able to take it by reason Great tides of the great tide that goes upon that coast . We drew upon this coast . near to that place on Munday at night , when as we 
 saw certain fires of the Indians . And on Tuesday 
 morning our general commanded that the Trinitie 
 should come as near our ship & to the shore as it could , that if we had need , they might help us with their great ordinance : and having made 3 or 4 bourds to draw near the shore , there came 4 or 5 Indians to the seaside ; who stood and beheld while we put out our boat and anchor , marking also how our bwoy floated upon the water ; and when our boat returned to the ship , two of them leapt into the sea , and swam unto the bwoy , and beheld it a great while ; then they took a cane of and arrow , and tied to the said bwoy a very fair and shining sea-oyster of pearls , and then returned to the shore , near to the watering place . 
 Chap. 10. 
 They give unto the Indians many trifles which stand upon the shore to see them , and seek to parley with them by their interpreter , which was a Chichimeco , who could not understand their language . They go to take fresh water . Francis Preciado spendeth the time with them with many signs , and trucking and being afeard of their great multitude , retireth himself wisely with his companions , returning with safety to the ships . 
 WHen the Captain and we beheld this , we judged these Indians to be peaceable people ; whereupon the Captain took the boat with 4 or 5 mariners carrying with him certain beads to truck , and went to speak with them . In the mean while he commanded the Indian interpreter our Chichimeco , to be called out of 244 
 the Admiral that he should parley with them . And the Captain came unto the boy , and laid certain things upon it for exchange , & made signs unto the Savages to come and take them ; and and Indian made signs unto our men with his hands , his arms , and head , that they understood them not , but signified that they should go aside . Whereupon the Captain departed a small distance from that place with his boat . And they made signs again that he should get him further ; whereupon we departing a great way off , the said Indians leapt into the water , came unto the boy , and took those beads , and returned back again to land , and then came unto the other three , and all of them viewing our things , they gave a bow and certain arrows to and Indian , and sent him away , running with all haste on the shore , and made signs unto us that they had sent word unto their lord what things we had given them , and that he would come thither . Within a while after the said Indian returned , running as he did before , and began to make signs unto us , that his Lord was coming . And while we stayed here , we saw on the shore ten or twelve Indians assemble themselves , which came unto the other Indians , apd by and by we saw another company of 12 or 15 more appear , who assembled themselves all together . And again they began to make signs unto us , to come forthwith to our boats , and showed us many Oysters of pearls on the top of certain canes , making signs that they would give them us . When we beheld this , the Captain commanded us to make ready our boat , and went aboard it with the said mariners , and rowed to a certain stone in form of a rock , which lay in the sea near unto the shore . And hither came first 2 or 3 Indians and laid down one of those Oysters , and a garland made of Parats feathers , or sparrows feathers painted read ; they laid down also certain plumes of white feathers , and others of blue colour . In the mean while we saw continually Indians assemble to the shore by tenne and tenne , and so by little and little they came in squadrons ; 
 245 
 and one of them assoon as he saw the boat began to leap forward and backward with so great nimbleness , that doubtless he seemed to all of us a man of great agility , and we took no small pleasure while we beheld him fetching those gambols : but the rest of the Indians which stood at the mouth of the fresh water ran towards him , and cried unto him , forbidding him to use those gestures , because we were come thither in peaceable sort , and by this means he came with the rest to the watering place , where by little and little in this manner there assembled above a hundred of them all in order , with certain staves with cords to fling them , and with their bows and arrows , and they were all painted . In the mean while our Chichimeco-interpreter born in the He of California , was come unto us , and the Captain again commanded a mariner to strip himself , and to swim and say upon the said rock certain bells , and more beads , and when he had laid them there , the Indians made signs that he should go away ; and so they came thither and took them , and our men drew near with their boat . The Captain commanded the Indian our Chichimeco to speak unto them , but they could not understand him , so that we assuredly believe , that they understand not the language of the He of California . This day being Tuesday until night the Indians stayed at this watering place , taking some of our beads , and giving unto us their feathers and other things , and when it was very late they departed . The morrow following being Wednesday very early the Captain commanded that our buttes should be made ready , that before break of day , and before the Indians should take the hill , which stood over the watering place , we might be landed in good order : which was put in execution : for we went on shore with as many as could go , saving those that had charge to take in the water , and such as were to stay on shipboard , which in all were about fourteene or fifteene persons , in as good order as we could devise : for we were foure crossbows , two 246 
 ... I539 ' harquebuziers , and eight or nine targets , and the most part of us carried very good slings , and every one eighteene river stones , which weapon the Captain invented , because the Indians at the first had handled us very shrewdly with the multitude of stones which they flang at us : we had nothing to defend us saving our targets , and to seek to win the forts from whence they endamaged us ; he therefore thought with these slings , that we might offend them , and we likewise thought well of his opinion , for making trial of them , we threw very well with them , and much farther than we thought we could have done : for the slings being made of hemp , we flung very far with them . Now being come to the watering place the said Wednesday by break of day we took the fort of the fountain , which were certain crags or rocks hanging over the same , between which there was and opening or deep valley through which this water runneth , which is no great quantity , but a little brook not passed a fathom broad . So standing all in order , other foure or five Indians came thither , who as soon as they saw us to be come on shore , and to have got the top of the watering place , they retired unto a small hill on the other side , for the valley was between them and us : neither stayed they long before they began to assemble themselves as they had done the day before by 10 and 10 , and 15 and 15 , ranging themselves on this high hill , where they made signs unto us . And Francis Preciado craved license of the general to parley with these Indians , and to give them some trifles ; wherewith he was contented , charging him not to come too near them , nor to go into any place where they might hurt him . Whereupon Francis went unto a plain place , under the hill where the Indians stood , and to put them out of fear he laid down his sword and target , having only a dagger hanging down at his girdle , and in a scarf which he carried at his neck , certain beads to exchange with them , combs , fishinghooks and comfits . And he began to go up the hill , and 
 247 
 Truck W traffic with the Indians fir mother ofpearle , and other things . 
 to show them diverse of his merchandise . The Indians as soon as he had laid those things on the ground , and gone somewhat aside , came down from the hill and took them , and carried them up , for it seemed that their Lord was among them , to whom they carried those trifles . Then they came down again , and laid to give unto him in the said place , and oyster of pearls , and two feathers like hawks feathers , making signs to Preciado that he should come and take them ; which he did , and again laid there a string of bells , and a great fishhook , and certain beads ; and they taking the same , laid there again another oyster of pearl , and certain feathers : and he laid down other beads , two fishhooks , and more comfits , and the Indians came to take them up , and approached much nearer unto him , then at other times , and so near that a man might have touched them with a pike , and then they began to talk together : and 7 or 8 more came down , unto whom Francis Preciado made signs , that they should come down no lower , and they incontinently laid their bows and arrows on the ground , and having laid them down came somewhat lower , and there with signs , together with them which came first , they began to parley with him , and required mariners breeches & apparel of him , and above all things a read hat pleased them highly , which the said Francis beware on his head , and they prayed him to reach it unto them , or to lay it in the place ; and after this certain of them made signs unto him to know whither he would have a harlot , signifying with their fingers those villainies and dishonest actions , and among the rest they set before him and Indian of great stature died wholly with black , with certain shells of the mother of pearl at his neck , and on his head , and speaking by signs to Francis Preciado touching the foresaid act of fornication , thrusting their finger through a hold , they said unto him , that if he would have a woman , they would bring him one ; and he answered , that he liked well of it , and that therefore they should bring him one . In the mean space 248 
 on the other side where the general stood with his company , another squadron of Indians showed themselves , whereupon the general and his company made a stir , and put themselves in battle array : whereupon Francis Preciado was enforced to come down from them , to joy ne with the general & his company : and here the Indians which came last began to make signs that we should lay down something to truck , and that they would give us some of their shells of mother of pearl , which they brought upon certain small sticks , and herewithal they came very near unto us , wherewith we were not well content . And Francis Preciado said unto the Captain , that if it pleased him , he would cause all the Indians to come together and to stay upon that high hill ; and he answered , that it was best to draw them all together , for by this time our men had taken in all their water , and stayed for the boat : whereupon Francis taking a crown of beads went towards the valley , through which the water ran towards the Indians , and . made signs unto them to call the rest , and to come all together , because he would go to the old place , to lay things on the ground for exchange , as at the first ; and they answered that he should do so , and that they had called the others , and that they would do , as he would have them , and so they did , for they caused them to come unto them , which they did , and Francis likewise went alone towards them , in which mean space the general commanded his people to get into the boat . Francis coming unto the place began to lay down his merchandise of traffic , and afterwards made signs unto them to stay there , because he would go to the ships to bring them other things , and so he returned to the place where the Captain was , and found them all god into the boats , saving the general and three or foure others , and the general made as though he had given other trifles to Preciado to carry unto the Indians , and when he was gone a little from him , he called him back again , and all this while the 
 249 
 Indians stood still , and being come unto him , we went fair and softly to our boats , and god into them at our ease , without any thronging , and thence we came aboard our ship . 
 The Indians seeing us thus gone aboard came down to the strand where the brook of water was , and called unto us to come forth with our boats , and to come on shore , and to bring our beads , and that they would give us of their mother of pearls : but we being now set at [ III . 4.14 . ] dinner made no account of them : whereupon they began to shoot arrows at the ship , and although they fell near us , yet they did not reach us . In the mean season certain mariners went out in the boat , to weigh the anchor , whereupon the Indians seeing them coming towards them , 8c bringing them nothing , they began in scorn to show them their buttocks , making signs that they should kiss their bums : and these seemed to be those that came last . The general seeing this , commanded a musket to be once or twice shot off , and that they should take their just aim . They seeing these shot to be made ready , some of them rose and went to shoot their arrows at our mariners , which were gone to weigh the anchors , then the general commanded the great ordinance speedily to be shot off , whereupon three or foure bullets were discharged , and we perceived that we had slain one of them , for we assuredly saw him lie dead upon the shore ; and I think some of the rest were wounded . They hearing this noise , and seeing him dead ran away as fast as ever they could , some along the shore , and some through the valleys , dragging the dead Indian with them , after which time none of them appeared , save ten or twelve , which peeped up with their heads among those rocks ; whereupon another piece of ordinance was discharged aloft against the place where they were , after which time we never saw any more of them . 
 250 
 At the point of the Trinitie they spend three days in fishing , and in other pastime : after which setting sail they discover pleasant countries , and mountains void of grass , and and Hand afterwards called Isla de los Cedros , or the He of Cedars , near which they suffer sharp cold and rain , and to save themselves they return thither . 
 Immediately we set sail to join with the ship Santa Agueda , which was above half a league in the high sea from us , and this was on the Wednesday the seventeenth of December . Being come together because the winds were contrary , we drew near to a headland , which we called Punta de la Trinidad , and here we stayed fishing , and solacing our selves two or three days , although we had always great store of rain . Afterwards we began to sail very slowly , and at night we road over against those mountains where we had left our anchors , and upon knowledge of the place we received great contentment seeing we had sailed some five and thirtie leagues from the place where we had taken in water : neither was it any marvel that we so rejoiced , because that the fear which we had of contrary winds caused us to be so well apayed of the way which we had made . The day of the holy Nativity of our Lord , which was on the Thursday the five and twentieth of the said month , God of his mercy began to show us favour in giving us a fresh wind almost in the poop , which carried us beyond those mountains , for the space of tenne or twelve leagues , finding the coast always plain : and two leagues within the land , which we coasted along , and between these mountains , there was a great space of plain ground , which we might easily discern with our eyes , although others were of another opinion . We began from Christmas day to sail slowly with certain small land-winds , and 
 251 
 Great apparent of gold and silver . 
 January 1540. 
 Forty leagues . 
 sailed from morning to night about seven or eight leagues , which we esteemed no small matter , always praying to God to continue this his favour towards us , and thanking him for his holy Nativity , and all the days of this feast the Friar said mass in the Admiral , and the father Frier Raimund preached unto us , which gave us not small comfort , by encouraging us in the service of God . 
 On Saturday at night being the 27 of the said month we ankored near unto a point which seemed to be plain land all along the shore , and within the country were high mountains with certain woods , which woods and mountains ran overthwart the country , and continued along with certain small hills sharp on the top , and certain little valleys are between those mountains . And in truth to me which with diligent eyes beheld the same both in length and in the breadth thereof , it could not choose but be a good country , and to have great matters in it , as well touching the inhabiting thereof by the Indians , as in gold and silver ; for there was great likelihood that there is store thereof . This night we saw a fire far within the land towards those mountains , which made us think that the country was thoroughly inhabited . The next day being Sunday and Innocents day , the 28 of the said month at break of day we set sail , and by nine or ten of the clock had sailed three or foure leagues , where we met with a point which stretched toward the West , the pleasant situation whereof delighted us much . From the eight and twentieth of December we ran our course until Thursday being Newyeares day of the year 1540 , and we ran some 40 leagues , passing by certain inlets and bays , and certain high mountains covered with grass in colour like rosemary : but towards the seaside very bore and burned , and towards the top were certain crags somewhat of a read colour , and beyond these appeared certain white mountains , and so all the country showed unto a point which appeared beyond 252 
 those burned white and read mountains which have neither any grass nor tree upon them , whereat we marveled not a little . This Newyeares day we saw near the main two small Hands , and rejoiced greatly to see them ; for we stood in great fear , that contrary winds would drive us as far back in one day , as we had sailed in tenne , which if they had taken us , we could not have withstood them . we ran from the first of January until Munday which were five days , and the land always stretched Northwest from the mountains aforesaid . 
 And on the Sunday we saw a far off " ahead of us a high land somewhat severed from the main shore , and all of us began to dispute whither it were the land which trended towards the Northwest , for that way the Pilots hoped to discover a better country : and the said Munday the fift of Januarie we came to this high land beforesaid , and it was two Hands the one a small one and the other a great one : we coasted these two Hands some sixe leagues , which were green , and had on the top of them many high slender trees ; and the great Hand was twentie leagues in compass . We coasted in 6 leagues in length without seeing or discovering any other things , but we saw before us high land which stretched eight or tenne leagues Northward , where we road on Munday at night . From Thursday being Newyeares day until the next Munday we sailed about 35 leagues . And in this course we felt great cold , which grieved us much , especially being assailed by two or three windy showers which pinched us much with cold . We road over against this land two or three nights , having it near unto us , always keeping watch by equal hours , one while mariners , and another soldiers , all the night long with great vigilancy . On Tuesday being Twelfe day we came within two or three leagues of this land , which we had descried the day before , seeming to us very pleasant for it showed green with green trees of and ordinary bigness , and we saw 
 253 
 Two small Islets near the main . 
 Isla de Ids Cedros mentioned in the 13 chap. 
 The land trendeth here Northwest 35 leagues . 
 Thistle degrees of Northerly latitude . 
 many valleys , out of which certain small mists arose , which continued in them for a long time , whereupon we gathered , that they rose out of certain rivers . The same morning , to our great comfort we saw great smokes , though we were above foure leagues distant from them , and the Captain made no great reckoning to approach near unto them , nor to seek nor search what the matter was , and perchance because he was not then in the Santa Agueda , but was aboard the Trinitie , as his manner was to come and stay there two or three days , as well to pass the time , as to give order for things that were needful . In this country the winter and rain seemed to be like that of Castile . We road all night two or three leagues distance from shore , and towards evening we saw five or sixe fires , whereat we all rejoiced , but did not marvel thereat , because the situation of that country showed to be habitable , being fair , pleasant , and all green , and likewise because the Hand which we had left behind us being ( as I have said ) twenty leagues in circuit , made show that it was well peopled . On the Wednesday we were 3 or 4 leagues at sea from the land , and began to see two fires more , & therefore we assured our selves that the country was very well inhabited ; and the farther we sailed , we always found it more civil . And for the space of fifty leagues before we came hither we always found swimming on the sea certain floats of weeds of a ships length , and of the breadth of two ships , being round and full of gourds , and under these weeds were many fish , and on some of them were store of fowls like unto white sea-meawes . We supposed that these floating weeds did grow upon some rock under the water . We were now in 30 degrees of Northerly latitude . We sailed from the 7 of January until the 9 still with contrary winds : and on Fry day about noon there rose a North and Northeastern wind , which forced us to return under the shelter of that Hand which we left behind us , from whence we had sailed above 254 
 twentie leagues . And that Friday at night somewhat Twentie late we had sailed back above twelve leagues of the same , and because it was night we stayed in the sea , ofQedars . where we and our ships were not a little troubled , so that all that night none of us slept a wink , but watched every one . The next morning betimes being Saturday we proceeded on our voyage , and gate under the shelter of the said Hand , riding in thirtie fathom water : and on that side where we ankored , we found high and closed mountains , with heaps of a certain earth which was all ashes and burned , and in other places scorched and as black as coals , and like the rust of iron , and in other places whitish , and here and there small black hills , whereat we marveled exceedingly , considering that when we passed by , it seemed unto us and habitable country full of trees , and now we saw not a stick growing on this side . 
 All of us supposed that on the other side towards the firm land the trees grew which we saw , although ( as I have said ) we sailed foure or five leagues distant from the same . 
 We stayed here under the shelter of these mountains Saturday , Sunday , and Munday , always having the Northern wind so strong , that we think if it had caught us in the sea , we should have be cast away . 
 Chap. 12. 
 They environ and land upon the Hand of Cedars , to discover the same , and to seek water and wood . They are assailed of the Indians , and many of them wounded with stones : but at length getting the upper hand , they go to their cottages , and ranging farther up into the Island they find diverse things which the Indians in their flight had left behind them . 
 ON Friday the 13 of January the Captain commanded us to hoist out our boats , and to go on shore , which was done accordingly , and we did row along the shore for the space of a good half league and 
 255 
 entered into a valley : for ( as I said ) all this country was full of high and bore hills , of such quality as I mentioned before : and in this and other small valleys we found some water which was brackish , and not far from thence certain cottages made of shrubs like unto broom ; likewise we found the footing's of Indians both small and great , whereat we much marveled that in so rough and wild a country ( as far as we could discern ) there should be people . Here we stayed all day , making foure or five pits to take in water which we wanted , which though it were bad , and in small quantity we refused not ; and so the evening being come , we returned to our boats , and so came unto our ships which road a good league from the shore . The next day being Wednesday the fourteenth of the said month our general commanded us to set sail , and we sailed about the said Hand on the same side which we coasted when we came from Nueva Espanna : for when we arrived on the coast we saw five or sixe fires ; wherefore he desired to see and learn whither it were inhabited ; and at the farthest end of this inlet or bay where we road there came out before us a Canoa , wherein were foure Indians which came rowing with certain small oars , and came very near us to see what we were : whereupon we told our general , that it were best to send some of us out with our boats to take these Indians or some one of them to give them something that they might think us to be good people : but he would not consent thereto , because he minded not to stay , having then a pretty gale of wind , whereby he might sail about this Hand , hoping that afterwards we might find and take some others to speak with them , and give them what we would to carry on shore ; and as we sailed near the land , we saw a great hill full of goodly trees of the bigness of the trees and Cypresses of Castile . We found in this Hand the footing of wild beasts and conies , and saw a piece of pine tree-wood , whereof we gathered , that there was store 256 
 of them in that country . Thus sailing near unto the shore , we saw another Canoa coming towards us with other foure Indians , but it came not very near us , and as we looked forward , we saw towards a point which was very near before us , three other Canoas , one at the head of the point among certain flattes , and the other two more into the sea , that they might descry us without coming over near us . Likewise between certain hills which were near the point , there appeared here three and there foure of them , and afterwards we saw a small troop of some twentie of them together , so that all of us rejoiced greatly to behold them . On this side the land showed green with pieces of plain ground which was near the sea , and likewise all those coasts of hills showed green , and were covered with many trees , although they grew not very thick together . Here at evening we road near the shore hard upon the said point , to see if we could speak with those Indians , and likewise to see if we could get fresh water , which now we wanted , and still as soon as we were come to and anchor , we saw the Indians show themselves on land 
 coming likewise to 
 in a Canoa , by sixe and seven at a time , whereat we marveled , because we never thought that one of those Canoas would hold so many men . In this wise we stayed looking still what would be the success , and in the place where we road we were two small leagues distant from the shore , where we found these Indians in their Canoas : whereupon we marveled not a little to see so great and alteration in so small a distance of country , as well because we still discovered pleasant land with trees ( whereas on the other side of the isle there were none ) as also because it was so well peopled with Indians , which had so many Canoas made of wood , as we might discern , and not rafts or Balsas , for so they Balsa is a call those floats which are made all flat with canes . flat raft made 
 The next day being Thursday the fifteenth of the said canes ' month about break of day foure or five Indians showed 
 ix 257 R 
 near unto their lodgings , 
 themselves at the head of that point , who as soon as they had spied us retired behind the point , and hid themselves among the bushes upon certain small hills that were there , from whence they issued forth , and covered all the green hills and mountains , which were along that coast ; whereupon we gathered that they had their dwellings there , in regard of the commodity of the water and the defence against ill weather and the benefit of fishing . At sunrising we saw the Indians appear in greater companies , going up unto the hills in small troops , and from thence they stood and beheld us . Immediately we saw five or sixe Canoas come out into the sea a good distance from us , and those which were in them stood often on their tiptoes , to view and descry us the better . On the other side we stirred not at all for all these their gestures , but stood still riding at anchor ; and the general seemed not to be very willing to take any of them , but this day in the morning very early commanded the Master's mate to convey him to our other ship called The Trinitie . Things passed in this sort , when about ten of the clock we saw three Canoas launch far into the sea to fish very near unto us , whereat we took great pleasure . At 12 of the clock the general returned from the Trinitie and commanded the boat & men to be made ready , as well soldiers as mariners , and that we should go on shore to see if we could get any wood and water , and catch one of those Indians to understand their language if it were possible : and so all the men that were ready went into the Admirals boat , and went towards the Trinitie which by this time with the other ship had a small gale of wind , wherewith they entered farther within the point , and we discovered the lodgings and houses of the Indians , & saw near the waters side those five or sixe Canoas which at the first came out to view us , drawn on shore , and over against this place the ships cast anchor in 30 and 35 fathom water , and we were very near the land ; whereat we marveled much to find so great 258 
 depth of water so near the shore . Being gone aboard our boats , we made towards the shore over against a village of the Indians , who as soon as they saw us village of about to come on land , left and hill whereon they stood the Indians-to behold what we did , & came down to the shore , where we were prepared to come on land : but before they came against us they caused their women and children to fly into the mountains with their goods , & then came directly towards us , threatening us with certain great staves which they carried in their hands some 3 yards long and thicker then a men wrest : but perceiving that for all this we ceased not to come near the sea shore to come on land , they began to charge us with stones and to fling cruelly at us , and they hit skirmish of 4 or c men , among whom they smote the general with Ilians two stones . In the mean while the other boat landed stones . a little beneath , whereupon when they saw that they were forced to divide themselves to keep the rest of our company from coming on land , they began to be discouraged , and did not assail the Generals boat so fiercely , who began to cause his people to go on shore with no small trouble ; for albeit he was near the land , yet as soon as they leapt out of the boat they sunk down , because they could find no fast footing ; and thus swimming or otherwise as they could , first a soldier called Spinosa god on land , and next to him the General , and then some of the rest , and began to make head against the Indians , and they came hastily with those staves in their hands , for other kinds of weapons we saw none , saving bows and arrows of pinetree . After a short combat they brake in pieces the targets of the general , and of Spinosa . In the mean while those of the other boat were got on land , but not without much difficulty , by reason of the multitude of stones which continually reigned down 
 upon them , and they stroke Terazzo on the head a use 
 very shroud blow , and had it not be for our targets , against arrows many of us had been wounded , and in great distress , and stones . 
 2.59 
 although our enemies were but few in number . In this manner all our company came on shore with swimming and with great difficulty , and if they had not helped one another , some of them had be drowned . Thus we landed , and within a while after those of the other boat were come on land , the Indians betook themselves to flight , taking their way towards the mountains , whither they had sent their women , children and goods : on the other side we pursued them , & one of those Indians which came to assail the Generals boat , was slain upon the strand , & two or three others were wounded , and some said more . While we pursued them in this manner our mastive dog Berecillo overtook one of them not far from us ( who because we were so wet could not run very Theuseofmas - fast ) and pulled him down , having bitten him cruelly , arr ” Gainst and doubtless he had held him till we had come , Indians . unless it had happened that another of his companions had not followed that Indian which the dog had pulled down , who with a staff which he had in his hands gave the dog a cruel blow on the back , and without any staying drew his fellow along like a Dear , and Berecillo was feign to leave him for pain , neither had he scarce taken the dog off on him , but the Indian god up , and fled so hastily toward the mountain , that within a short while he overtook his fellow which had saved him from the paws of the dog , who ( as it appeared ) betook him lustily to his heals , and thus they came unto their fellows which descended not down to the shore being about some twentie , and they were in all about fiftie or sixtie . 
 After we had breathed our selves a while , we viewed their houses where they stood , which were certain cottages covered with shrubs like broom and rosemary , with certain stakes pight in the ground ; and the general willed us to march all together without dispersing of our selves , a little way up those mountains , to see if there were any water and wood , because we 260 
 stood in great need of them both . And while we marched forward , we saw in certain little valleys the goods which the women had left there behind them in their flight : for the Indians as soon as they saw us pursue them overtook the women , and for fear charged them to fly away with their children leaving their stuff in this place . We went unto this booty , and found good store of freshfish , and dried fish , and certain bags containing above 28 pound weight full of dried fish ground to powder , and many seal-skins , the most part dressed with a fair white grain upon them , and others very badly dressed . There were also their instruments to fish withal , as hooks made of the pricks of certain shrubs and trees . Here we took the said skins without leaving any one in the place , and then we returned to the sea , because it was now night , or at least very late , and found our boats waiting for us . 
 Chap. 13. 
 A description of the Canoas of the Indians of the He of Cedars , and how coasting the same to find fresh water they found some , and desiring to take thereof they went on shore , and were diversely molested with the weapons of the Indians . They christen and old Indian , and return unto their ships . 
 THe Canoas which they had were certain thick trunks of Cedars , some of them of the thickness of two men , and three fathom long , being not made hollow at all , but being laid along and fastened together , they shove them into the sea , neither were they plained to any purpose , for we found no kind of edge-tool , saving that there were certain sharp stones , which we found upon certain rocks that were very keen , wherewith we supposed that they did cut & flay those seals . And near the shore we found certain water , wherewith we filled certain bottles made of the skins of those seals , containing each of them above a great pail of water . The next day our general commanded us to 261 
 Seale-skws well dressed with a white grain . 
 Isla de Ids Cedros , or the lie of Cedars in 28 deg . and a quarter . 
 set sail , whereupon sailing with a fresh gale about 2 leagues from the shore of this Hand , trending about the same to see the end thereof , and also to approach near the firm land , to inform our selves of the state thereof , because we had seen 5 or 6 fires , we compassed the same about : for by this means we performed 2 or 3 good actions , namely , we returned to our right course , and searched whither any river fell out of the coast of the firm land , or whither there were any trees there , or whither any store of Indians did show themselves or no . 
 In this manner proceeding on our way all the Friday being the 16 of January at evening , and seeking to double the point of the Hand , so fierce and contrary a Northern wind encountered us , that it drave us back that night over against the lodgings and habitations of the Indians , and here we stayed all Saturday , what time we lost the Trinitie again , but on Sunday-night being the 18 we saw her again , and began to proceed on our way to compass that Hand , if it pleased God to send us good weather . 
 On Sunday , Munday , and Tuesday ( which was the twentieth of the said month of Januarie ) we sailed with scarce and contrary winds , and at length came to the cape of the point of the Hand , which we called Isla de los Cedros or the He of Cedars , because that on the tops of the mountains therein , there grows a wood of these Cedars being very tall , as the nature of them is to be . This day the Trinitie descried a village or town of the Indians , and found water : for on Sunday night we had newly lost her , and had no sighed of her until Tuesday , whenas we found her riding near the shore , not far from those cottages of the Indians . And as soon as we had descried her , we made towards her , and before we could reach her , we espied three Canoas of Indians which came hard aboard the said ship called the Trinitie , so that they touched almost the side of the ship , and gave them of their fish , and our people 262 
 on the other side gave them certain trifles in exchange , and after they had spoken with them , the Indians went back to the shore , and at the same instant we came up unto the Admiral and road by them , and they all saluted us , saying that the Indians were near them , and telling what had passed between them , whereat the general and we received great contentment . They told us moreover , that they had found fresh water , whereby they increased our great joy , because we stood in much need thereof , for at the other place of the Indians we could get but a little . 
 While we thus road at anchor , we saw a Canoa with 3 Indians put out into the sea from their cottages , and they went unto a fishing place , among certain great and high weeds , which grow in this sea among certain rocks , the greatest part of which weeds grows in 15 or 20 fathom depth ; and with great celerity they caught seven or eight fish , and returned with them unto the Trinity , and gave them unto them , and they in recompense gave the Indians certain trifles . After this the Indians stayed at the stern of the ship , viewing the same above three hours space , and taking the oars of our boat they tried how they could row with them , whereat they took great pleasure ; and we which were in the Admiral stirred not a whit all this while , to give them the more assurance , that they should not fly away , but should see , that we meant to do them no harm , & that we were good people . As soon as we were come to anchor , & beheld all that had passed between the Indians and those of the Trinity , after the Indians were gone to the shore in their Canoas made of the bodies of trees , the General commanded the boat which was without to be 
 These mighty deep and high weeds are described in the end of this treatise . 
 brought unto him : and when it was come , he , and Francis Preciado , and two others went into it , and so we went aboard the Trinity . The Indians seeing people coming out of the other ship into the Trinitie , sent two Canoas unto the stern of the ship , and brought us a bottle of water , and we gave unto them certain 263 
 beads , and continued talking with them a little while ; but evening approaching the air grew somewhat cold . The Indians returned on shore to their lodgings , and the General and we to our ship . The next day being Wednesday in the morning , the General commanded certain of us to take the boat and go ashore , to see if we could find any brook or well of fresh water in the houses of the Indians , because he thought it unpossible for them to dwell there without any water to drink . The father friar Raimund likewise went out in our company , because the day before seeing the Indians came to the stern of the ship and parleying with us , he thought he might have spoken a little with them , with the like familiarity . In like sort many mariners and soldiers went out in the boat of the Trinity , and going altogether with their weapons towards the shore , somewhat above the lodgings of the Indians , very early in the morning they watched the boats , and perceived that we would come on land , whereupon they sent away their women & children with certain of them , who carried their goods up into certain exceeding steep mountains and hills , and 5 or 6 of them came towards us , which were excellently well made , and of a good stature . Two of them had bows and arrows , and other two 2 bastinades much thicker then the wrist of a men hand , and other two with 2 long staves like javelins with very sharp points , and approached very near us being now come on shore . And beginning by signs very fiercely to brave us , they came so near us , that almost they struck with one of those staves one of our soldiers called Garcia a man of good parentage , but the General commanded him to withdraw himself , and not to hurt any of them . In the mean season the General and friar Raimund stepped forth , the friar lapping a garment about his arm , because they had taken up stones in their hands , fearing that they would do them some mischief . Then began both of them to speak unto them by signs & words , to be quiet , signifying , that they meant them no 
 264 
 1540-harme , but only were come to take water ; and the friar showed them a drinking-cup ; but nothing would serve to make them leave that bragging , and flinging of stones : and the General continuing still in a mind not to hurt them , commanded his men gently to come near unto them , and that by signs they should all show them , that they meant in no wise to hurt them , but that we were come on land only to take water . On the other side refusing utterly to take knowledge of these things they still insulted more and more : whereupon Francis Preciado counseled the General to give him leave to kill one of them , because all the rest would flee away , whereby at our ease we might take water : but he replied that he would not have it so , but willed them to looze the two mastiffs Berecillo and Achillo : wherefore the dogs were let lose , and as soon as they saw them , they vanished immediately , betaking them to their heals , and running up those clifFes like goats . Also others which came The great use from the mountains to succour them , betook them - °fmas^ve^^ selves to flight . The dogs overtook two or them , and indans . bit them a little , and we running after , laid hold on them , and they seemed as fierce as wild & untamed beasts , for 3 or 4 of us held either of them , to cherish & pacific them , and to seek to give them some thing : but we availed not , for they bit us by the hands , and stooped down to take up stones for to strike us with them . We led them a while in this manner , & came unto their lodgings , where the general gave a charge , that no man should touch any thing of theirs , commanding Francis Preciado to see that this order were observed , in not taking any thing from them , although in very deed there was little or nothing there , because the women and Indians which were fled had carried all away . Here we found and old man in a cave so extremely aged as it was wondered , which could neither see nor go , because he was so lame and crooked . The father friar Raimund said , it were good ( seeing he was so aged ) to make him a Christian ; whereupon we christened him . The captain 
 265 
 gave the Indians which we had taken two pair of earrings , and certain counterfeit diamonds , and making much of them , suffied them to depart at their pleasure , and in this sort fair and softly they returned to the rest of their fellows in the mountain . We took the matter of that village which was but a small quantity , and then the general commanded us to return to our ship , because we had eaten nothing as yet , and after our repast we sailed towards a bay which lay beyond that village , where we saw a very great valley , and those of the Trinitie said , that they had seen there good store of water , and sufficient for us ; wherefore we anchored near unto that valley . And the general went on shore with both the boats , and the men that went on land in the morning with the two father's friar Raimund , and friar Antony : and passing up that valley a crossebow-shot , we found a very small brook of water which nevertheless supplied our necessity for we filled two buts thereof that evening , leaving our vessels to take it with on shore until the next morning : and we rejoiced not a little that we had found this water , for it was fresh , and the water which we had taken up before was somewhat brackish , and did us great hurt both in our bodies and in our taste . 
 Chap. 14. 
 They take possession of the Isle of Cedars for the Emperors Majesty , and departing from thence they are greatly tossed with a tempest of the sea , and return to the Island , as to a safe harbour . 
 THe next day being the two and twentieth of January very early the General commanded us to go on shore , and that we should have our dinner brought us , and should take in the rest of our water , which we did , and filled 17 buts without seeing any Indian at all The next day going out to fill 8 or 9 vessels which were not yet filled , a great wind at Northwest took us , whereupon they made signs to us from the ships , that with all haste we should come on board again , for the wind grew 266 
 .... I54°‘ still higher , and higher , and the Master's were afraid that our cables would break , thus we were in the open sea . Therefore being come aboard again not without great trouble , we returned back over against the village of the Indians , * where we had slain the Indian , and be - Cap. 12. cause the wind grew more calm about midnight , the Pilots did not cast anchor , but hulled under the shelter 
 of this Island , which ( as I have said ) is called The Isle of IsladehsGe-Cedars , and is one of the 3 Isles of S. Stephan , the greatest & chiefest of them , where the General took possession . While we hulled here , about midnight , the Stephan . next Friday being the 23 of the month , without our expectation we had a fresh gale of wind from the Southeast , which was very favourable for our voyage , & the longer it continued , the more it increased : so that between that night and the next day being Saturday the 24 of the said month we sailed 18 great leagues . While Read cap . 11. we were thus on our way , the wind grew so contrary a^out the end-and so tempestuous , that to our great grief we were constrained to coast about with our ships , and returned twenty leagues back again , taking for our succour the second time , the point of the lodgings of the Indians , where the foresaid Indian was slain , and here we stayed Munday , Tewsday , and Wednesday , during which time the Northwest and the North wind blew continually , whereupon we determined not to stir from thence until we saw good weather , and well settled for our voyage : for in this climate these winds do reign so greatly , that we feared they would stay us longer there then we would ; and we were so weary of staying , that every day seemed a month unto us . Under this shelter we road Thursday , Friday , and Saturday until noon , which was the last of January in the year 1540. 
 About noon the wind began to blow softly at Southwest , whereupon the General told the Pilots , that we should do well to put over to the main land , where with some wind off the shore we might by the grace of God sail somewhat farther . Thus we hoist our sails , February . 
 267 
 and sailed until evening three or foure leagues , for the wind scanted , and we remained becalmed . The night being come there arose a contrary wind , and we were enforced of necessity to retire the third time to the same shelter of the Isle of Cedars , where we stayed from the first of February until Shrovesunday , in the which mean time we took in two buts of water which we had spent . During the space of these eight days we sought to make sail two or three times , but as we went out a little beyond the point of this Isle , we found the wind so boisterous and contrary , and the sea so grown , that of force we were constrained to return under the succour of the Island , and often times we were in great fear that we should not be able to get in thither again . During this time that we could not proceed on our journey , we employed our selves in catching a few fish for the Lent. From Shrovesunday being the 8 of February , on which day we set sail , we sailed with a very scant wind , or rather a calm , until Shrove-tewsday , on which we came within ken of the firm land , from whence we were put back these twenty leagues ( for in these two days and a half we sailed some 20 small leagues ) and we lay in sighed of the said point of the firm land . And on the Tewsday we were becalmed , waiting till God of his mercy would help us with a prosperous wind to proceed on our voyage . 
 On Shrovesunday at night , to make good cheer withal we had so great wind and rain , that there was nothing in our ships which was not wet , and a very cold air . On Ashwednesday at sunrising we struck sail near a point which we fell somewhat short withal in a great bay running into this firm land : and this is the place where we saw five or sixe fires , and at the rising of the sun being so near the shore that we might well descry and view it at our pleasure we saw it to be very pleasant , for we descried as far as we could discern with our eyes , fair valleys and small hills , with green shrubs very pleasant to 268 
 behold , although there grew no trees there . The situation showed their length and breadth . This day was little wind , it being in a manner calm , to our no small grief : and the father friar Raimund said us a dry mass , and gave us ashes , preaching unto us according to the time and state wherein we were : with which sermon we were greatly comforted . After noontide we had contrary wind , which still was our enemy in all our journey , at the least from the point of the port of Santa Cruz. Here we were constrained to anchor in five fathom water , and after we road at anchor we began to view the country , and took delight in beholding how goodly and pleasant it was , and near unto the sea we judged that we saw a valley of white ground . At evening so great a tempest came upon us of wind and rain , that it was so fearful and dangerous a thing that a greater cannot be expressed ; for it had like to have driven us upon the shore , and the chief Pilot cast out another great anchor into the sea , yet all would not serve , for both these anchors could not stay the ship . Whereupon all of us cried to God for mercy , attending to see how he would dispose of us ; who of his great goodness , while we were in this danger , vouchsafed a little to slake the tempest , and with great speed the chief Pilot commanded the mariners to turn the capsten , and the general commanded and prayed all the soldiers to help to turn the capsten , which they were nothing slow to perform : and thus we began to weigh our anchors , and in weighing of one which was far greater then the other , the sea was so boisterous that it forced the capsten in such sort , that the men which were at it could not rule the same , and it struck a Negro of the Generals such a blow , that it cast him down along upon the deck , and did the like unto another mariner and one of the bars struck our fire-furnace so violently , that it cast it overboard into the sea . Yet for all these troubles we weighed our anchors , and set sail , and albeit we had great tempests at sea , yet made we not 269 
 The point of Santa Cruz otherwise called Punta de Balenas . 
 account thereof in respect of the joy which we conceived to see our selves freed of the peril of being cast on that shore with our ships , especially seeing it fell out at midnight , at which time no man could have escaped , but by a mere miracle from God . 
 we sailed up and down the sea all Thursday , and until Friday in the morning being the fourteeneth day of February , and the waves of the sea continually came raking over our decks . At length , on Saturday morning at break of day we could find no remedy against the contrary winds , notwithstanding the general was very obstinate to have us keep out at sea , although it were very tempestuous , lest we should be driven to put back again , but no diligence nor remedy prevailed : for the winds were so boisterous and so contrary , that they could not be worse , and the sea went still higher , and swelled more and more , and that in such sort , that we greatly feared we should all perish . Whereupon the Pilot thought it our best course to return to the Isle of Cedars , whither we had repaired three or foure times before by reason of the self same contrary winds , for we took this Island for our father and mother , although we received no other benefit thereby save this only , namely , to repair thither in these necessities , and to furnish our selves with water , and with some small quantity of fish . 
 Being therefore arrived at this Island , and riding under the shelter thereof , the contrary winds did always blow very strongly , and here we took water which we drunk , and wood for our fuel , and greatly desired , that the winds would be more favourable for proceeding on our journey . And though we road under the shelter of the Isle , yet felt we the great fury of those winds , and the rage of the sea , and our ships never ceased rolling . 
 At break of day the twentieth of February we found the cable of our Admiral cracked , whereupon , to our great grief , we were constrained to set sail , to fallen down lower the space of a league , and the Trinitie came and road in our company . 
 270 
 They go on land in the isle of Cedars , and take diverse 
 wild beasts , and refresh and solace themselves . They are strangely tossed with the Northwest wind , and 
 seeking often to depart they are forced , for the avoiding of many mischiefs , to repair thither again for harbour . 
 THe two and twentieth of February being the second 
 Sonday in Lent , the General went on shore with the greatest part of his people and the friars , near unto a valley which they saw before them . And hearing mass on land , certain soldiers and mariners , with certain dogs which we had in our company went into the said valley , and we met with certain deer , whereof we took a female , which was little , but fat , whose hair was liker the hair of a wild goat then of a deer , and we found her not to be a perfect deer , for she had foure dugs like unto a cow full of milk , which made us much to marveile . And after we had flayed ofF her skin , the flesh seemed more like the flesh of a goat , then of a deer . We killed likewise a grey conie , in shape like unto those of Nueva Espanna , and another as black as heben-wood . In the cottages at the shelter above , where we brake our cable , we found many pinenuts opened , which ( in mine opinion ) the Indians had gathered together to eat the kernels of them . On Munday the 23 of the said month we road at anchor , taking our pleasure and pastime with fishing . And the Northwest wind began to blow , which waxed so great a little before midnight , as it was wonderful : so that although we were under the shelter of the Island , and greatly defended from that wind , yet for all that it was so furious , and the sea became so raging and boisterous , that it greatly shook our ships , and we were in great fear of breaking our cables , whereof ( to say the truth ) we had very much need : for having spent longer time in this voyage then we looked for , we had broken two , and 
 271 
 lost two of our best anchors . This furious wind continued until the next day being Tewsday the 24 when as we went on shore with the friars , who said us mass , recommending our selves to God , beseeching him to vouchsafe to succour and help us with some good weather that we might proceed on our voyage , to the advancement of his service . And still the winds were so high and outrageous , that the devil seemed to be loosed in the air . Whereupon the Pilots caused all the masts to be let down , lest they should be shaken with the wind , and took off all the shrowds , and likewise caused the cabbens in the stern to be taken away , that the winds might have more free passage , for the safety of the ships : yet for all this they ceased not to be in great trouble . On Tewsday the second of March , about midnight or somewhat after , riding under the Island in this distress , there came a gust of Northwest wind , which made the cable of the Admiral to slip , and the Trinitie brake her cable , and had be cast away , if God of his mercy had not provided for us , together with the diligence which the Pilots used , in hoisting the sails of the trinkets and mizzen , wherewith they put to sea , and road by another anchor until day , when the men of both the ships went with their boats to seek the anchor until noon , which at length they found and recovered , not without great pains & diligence which they used in dragging for it , for they were till noon in seeking the same , and had much ado to recover it . After this we set up our shrowds , and all things necessary to sail , for to proceed on our voyage , if it pleased God , and not to stay always in that place , as lost and forlorn . Thus on the Wednesday two or three hours after dinner we set sail , with a scarce wind at Southeast , which was favourable for our course and very scant ; and our Pilots 8c all the rest of us were in no small fear , that it would not continue long . We began therefore to set forward , although we seemed to see before our eyes , that at the end of the 
 272 
 Island we should meet with contrary wind at North and Northwest . This day about evening when our ships had discovered the point of this Isle of Cedars , we began to perceive those contrary winds , and the sea to go so loftily , that it was terrible to behold . And the farther we went , the more the winds increased , so that they put us to great distress , sailing always with the sheates of our mainesaile and trinket warily in our hands , and with great diligence we loosed the ties of all the sails , to save them the better , that the wind might not charge them too vehemently . For all this the mariners thought it best to return back , and that by no means we should run far into the sea , because we were in extreme danger . Whereupon we followed their counsel , turning back almost to the place from whence we departed , whereat we were all not a little grieved , because we could not prosecute our voyage , and began to want many things for the furniture of our ships . The 8 of March being Munday about noon the general commanded us to set sail , for a small gale of wind blew from the West , which was the wind whereof we had most need , to follow our voyage , whereat we were all glad for the great desire which we had to depart out of that place . Therefore we began to set sail , & to pass towards the point of the Island , and to shape our course towards the coast of the firm land , to view the situation thereof . And as we passed the Island , and were betwixt it and the main , the Northwest being a contrary wind began to blow , which increased so by degrees , that we were constrained to let fallen the bonnets of our sails , to save them , striking them very low . 
 And the Trinitie seeing this bad weather returned forthwith unto the place from whence we departed , and the Admiral cast about all night in the sea , until the morning ; and the chief Pilot considering that by no means we could proceed farther without danger , if we should continue at sea any longer , resolved that we should retire our selves again to that shelter , where we road at 
 ix 273 s 
 anchor until Thursday . And on Friday about noon we set sail again with a scarce wind , & in coming forth unto the point of the Island , we met again with contrary wind at Northwest : whereupon running all night with the firm land , on Saturday in the morning being S. Lazarus day and the 13 of march , we came in sighed thereof , in viewing of the which we all rejoiced , and we soldiers would very willingly have gone on shore . This night fell great store of rain like the rain in Castilia , and we were all well wet in the morning , & we took great pleasure in beholding the situation of Thefirmeland that firm land , because it was green , and because we very green and discovered a pleasant valley and plains of good ^goMy valleys largenesJ which seemed to be environed with a garland and plains . of mountains . At length for fear of misfortunes , 
 seeing the sea so high , we durst not stay here or approach near the land , & because we had great want of cables and anchors , we were again constrained to put to sea ; and being in the same , and finding the said contrary winds , the Pilots judged that we had none other remedy , but again to retire our selves to our wonted shelter . And thus we returned , but somewhat above the old place . On Sunday we road here to the great grief of all the company , considering what troubles we endured , & could not get forward ; so that this was such a corrasive , as none could be more intolerable . This day being come to and anchor we had a mighty gale of wind at Northwest , which was our adversary and capital enemy , and when day was shut in , it still grew greater and greater , so that the ships rolled much . And after midnight , towards break of day , the Trinitie brake her two cables , which held the two anchors which she had , and seeing her self thus forlorn , she turned up and down in the sea until day , and came & road near us , by one anchor which she had left . This day all of us went to seek these lost anchors , and for all the diligence which we used , we could find but one of them . We road at anchor all day until night , when 
 274 
 the Trinitie again brake a cable , which certain rocks had cut asunder : whereupon the General commanded that she should ride no longer at anchor , but that she should turn up and down , as she had done before in sighed of us , which she did all day long , and at night she came to and anchor over against a fresh water somewhat lower , and we went and road hard by her . On Palme-sunday we went on shore with the father's , which read the passion unto us and said mass , and we went in procession with branches in our hands . And so being comforted , because we had received that holy Sacrament , we returned to our ships . 
 Chap. 16. 
 Returning to the Isle of Cedars weatherbeaten , and with their ships in evil case , they conclude , that the ship called Santa Agueda or Santa Agatha should return unto Nueva Espanna . Of the multitude of whale's which they found about the point of California : with the description of a weed , which grows among the Islands of those seas . 
 HEre we continued until the Wednesday before Easter being the foure and twentieth of March , on which day we consulted together , that because the ships were ill conditioned , and wanted necessary furniture to proceed any further , it were best for us to return back to New Spaine , as also because our clothes were consumed : but the general seemed not willing to return , but to proceed on his voyage : and in fine it was resolved , that seeing both the ships could not proceed forward , as well because they had lost their necessary furnitures , as also that the Santa Agatha had need of calking , because she received much water , and was the worst furnished of the twaine , that she should return back to advertise the Marks of our success in this voyage , and what hindered our proceeding , and in what case we stood , and how we were bereft of our necessary furniture . And because the Trinitie was 
 275 
 A.D. 
 J54O . 
 the swifter ship , and better appointed then the other , it was concluded , that it should be provided in the best manner that might be , & that the General should proceed on his journey in her with such company as he should make choice of , and that the rest should return at their good leisure . Wherefore upon this determination we went under a point of this Island , because it was a fit place to carene the ship : & in recovering the same we spent Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday till noon , and yet for all that we could not well double it , until Easter day about noon . Here we anchored very near the shore , and in a valley we found very excellent fresh water , whereof we made no small account , & here stayed all the Easter-holidays , to set our selves about the furnishing up of the Trinity : and after the work was taken in hand by the two Master's which were very sufficient calkers ( one of which was Juan Castiliano chief Pilot , and the other Peruccio de Bermes ) they finished the same so well in fives days , as it was wonderful ; for no man could perceive how any drop of water could enter into any of the seams . Afterwards they mended the other ship from Saturday till Munday , during which time all those were shriven that had not confessed , and received the communion , and it was resolved by charge of the confessors , that all those seal-skins which they had taken from the Indians should be restored again ; and the general gave charge to Francis Preciado to restore them all , charging him on his conscience so to do . Thus they gathered them together , and delivered them into the hands of the father's , to be kept until they returned to the place , The Santa where they were to restore them . After this manner on 
 Munday before noon we took our leaves of the New-spaine general Francis Ulloa , and of the people that stayed the 5. of with him , who at our departure shed no small number April . of tears , and we chosen for our captain in the Santa 
 Agueda master Juan Castiliano the chief pilot , as well of the ship , as of us all , and set sail the same day 276 
 being the fift of April , having our boat tied at our stern , till we came over against the cottages , whence we had taken the seal-skins . From the country of The °f the Christians and the port of Colima we were now distant some three hundreth leagues , which is the first port where we determined to touch at . And having sailed a league from the Trinitie the captain Juan Castiliano commanded us to salute them with three pieces of great Ordinance , and she answered us with other three , and afterwards we answered one another with two shot apiece . 
 We sailed on Munday & * Tewsday till noon with ThesixtoJ contrary wind in sighed of the Island , and at noon we had a fresh gale in the poop , which brought us over against the cottages of the Indians where we took away those seal skins ; & there certain soldiers & mariners with the father friar Antony de Melo leapt on shore with the boat , carrying the skins with them , & flung them into the said cottages out of which they were taken , and so returned to their ship . This day the The q of weather calmed , whereupon we were driven to cast anchor , ^P^ fearing that we should forthwith be distressed for want of victuals , if we should stay there any long time : but God which is the true helper provided better for us then we deserved or imagined ; for as we road here , They sail after midnight the Wednesday following before ten the clock we had a favourable gale of wind from thee the point of Southeast , which put us into the sea ; whither being Santa Cruz driven , we had the wind at Northwest so good and con - or California stant , that in sixe days it brought us to the cape of the tn stxe point of the port of Santa Cruz : for which so great blessing of God we gave unto him infinite thanks . And here we began to allow our selves a greater proportion of victuals then we had done before , for we had eaten very sparingly for fear lest our victuals would fail us . Before we came to this point of the haven of Santa Cruz by sixe or seven leagues we saw on shore between certain valleys diverse great smokes . And having passed 
 277 
 Read more of these vieedes cap . 13. 
 Sant Iago de Buena esfer-anza in 19 degrees . 
 Cabo deal En-gtinno in 30 degrees y a half . 
 the point of this port , our captain thought it good to launch forth into the main Ocean : yet although we ran a swift course , above 500 whale's came athwart of us in 2 or 3 skulls within one hours space , which were so huge , as it was wonderful , and some of them came so near unto the ship , that they swam under the same from one side to another , whereupon we were in great fear , lest they should do us some hurt , but they could not because the ship had a prosperous and good wind , and made much way , whereby it could receive no harm , although they touched and struck the same . 
 Among these Islands are such abundance of those weeds , that if at any time we were enforced to sail over them they hindered the course of our ships . They grow fourteene or fifteene fathom deep under the water , their tops reaching foure or five fathom above the water . They are of the colour of yellow wax , & their stalk grows great proportionably . This weed is much more beautiful then it is set forth , and no marvel , for the natural painter and creator thereof is most excellent . 
 This relation was taken out of that which Francis Preciado brought with him . 
 After this ship the Santa Agueda departed from the general Ulloa , and returned back the 5 of April , she arrived in the port of Sant Iago de buena esperan^a the 18 of the said month , and after she had stayed there foure or five days , she departed for Acapulco : howbeit until this present seventeenth of May in the year 1540 , I have herd no tidings nor news of her . 
 Moreover after the departure of the Santa Agueda for Nueva Espanna , the General Francis Ulloa in the ship called the Trinitie proceeding on his discovery coasted the land until he came to a point called Cabo deal Enganno standing in thirty degrees and a half of Northerly latitude , and then returned back to Newspaine , because he found the winds very contrary , and his victuals failed him . 
 . 