A letter of Bartholomew Canon from Mexico the 30. of May 1590. to Francis Hernandes of Sivil , concerning the speedy building of two strong Forts in S. John de Ullua , and in Vera Cruz , as also touching a notable new and rich discovery of Cibola or New Mexico 400. leagues Northwest of Mexico . 
 TO may please you Sir , to be advertised that I have received your letters , whereby I understand that our ship with the treasure is safely arrived , God be praised therefore . The frigate arrived here in safety which brought the letters of Advice from the King to the Viceroy . 
 She arrived in S. John de Ullua the 29. of May , & departed from S. Lucar in Spaine the 6. of April . By which his Majesty writeth unto the Viceroy , what time the Fleet shall depart from hence , and what course they shall take , not as they had wont for to do ; by reason that 204 
 1590. there are great store of men of war abroad at the sea , which mean to encounter with the Fleet . I pray God send them well to Spaine : for here we were troubled very soar with men of war on this coast . His Majesty hath sent express commandment unto the Marks of The marks Villam Manrique his cousin , Viceroy of Nova Hispania , that immediately upon sighed of his letters he shall command ’of^^aHis-to be built in S. John de Ullua , & in Vera Cruz two pania . strong Forts for the defence of these countries , of his Majesties charges : And that there shall garrisons in both the Forts for the defence of the ships which ride there , and for the strength of the country . 
 There are departed out of Mexico and other towns hereabout by the commandment of the Viceroy 500. soldiers Spaniards , under the conduct of Rodorigo deal Rio the governor of Nueva Biscaia which are gone to win a great City called Cibola , which is 400. leagues 5°° - pani-beyond Mexico to the Northwest , and stands up in the main land . It is by report a very great city , as great Me of big as Mexico , and a very rich country both of gold Cibola which Mines and silver Mines : and the King of the country 15 4°°-is a mighty King , and he will not become subject to his Majesty . There were certain Spaniards sent to westward . that king from the Viceroy in and ambassage : It is thought that they are slain , for we can hear no news of them . 
 The other news that I can certify you of at this instant is , that there is a Judge of the city of Guadalajara called dONE Nunno de villam Inscensia lately married . Also the kings Attorney of Guadalajara married his daughter of 8. years old with a boy of 12. years old . But the Viceroy says that he hath a warrant from his Majesty , that if any Judge whatsoever dwelling in that kingdom of Guadalajara should marry any son in that jurisdiction , that then the said Viceroy is to deprive him of his office . And therefore he went about to deprive the Judge & the kings Attourney of their offices . Whereupon the people of that province would 
 205 
 A dangerous rebellion In Guadalajara a province of Nova Hispania . 
 not thereunto consent , nor suffer them to be dismissed of their offices , nor to be arrested , nor carried prisoners to Mexico . When the viceroy had intelligence thereof , & that the Country did resist his commandment , and would not suffer them to be apprehended , he sent certain Captains with soldiers to go and apprehend the Judge , the kings Attourney , and as many as did take their parts . So the citizens of Guadalajara withstood the viceroys forces , & put themselves in defence ; and are up in arms against the viceroy : yet they do not rebel against the king , but say : God save king Philip , and will submit themselves to his Majesty , but not to the viceroy . So that all the kingdom of Guadalajara is up in arms , and are all in a mutiny against us of Mexico . I beseech Almighty God to remedy it , and that it may be qualified in time : or else all Nova Spania will be utterly spoiled . I write this thing , because it is publicly known in all places . And thus I rest , from Mexico the 30. of May 1590. 
 Bartholomew Canon . 
 . 