A relation of the commodities of Nova Hispania , and the manners of the inhabitants , written by Henry Hawks merchant , which lived five years in the said country , and drew the same at the request of M. Richard Hakluyt Esquire of Eiton in the county of Hereford , 1572. 
 aren't John de Ullua is and Island not high above the water , where as now the Spanyards upon M. John Hawkins being there , are in making a strong fort . In this place all the ships that come out of Spaine with goods for these parts , do unladen : for they have none other 
 port so good as this is . The coming into this place hath three channels , and the best of all is the Northermost , which goes by the main land : and on every side of the channels there are many small rocks as big as a small barrel : they will make men stand in doubt of them , but there is no fear of them . There is another Island there by , called The Island of sacrifices , whereas the Spanyards did in times passed unladen their goods : and for that , they say , there are upon it spirits or devils , it is not frequented as it hath be . In these places the North wind hath so great dominion , that oftentimes it destroyeth many ships and barks . This place is given to great sickness . These Islands stand in 18 degrees and a half , and about the same is great plenty of fish . 
 Five leagues from S. John de Ullua is a fair river ; it lies Northwest from the port , and goes to a little town of the Spanyards called Vera Cruz , and with small vessels or barks , which they call frigates , they carry all their merchandise which comes out of Spaine , to the said town : and in like manner bring all the gold , silver , cochinilla , hides , and all other things that the ships carry into Spaine unto them . And the goods being in 378 
 Vera Cruz , they carry them to Mexico , and to Pueblo de los Angels , Sacatecas , and Saint Martin , and diverse other places so far within the country , that some of them are 700 miles off , and some more , and some less , all upon horses , mules , and in wains drawn with oxen , and in cars drawn with mules . 
 In this town of Vera Cruz within these twenty years , when women were brought to bed , the children new born incontinently died ; which is not so now in these days , God be thanked . 
 This town is inclined to many kind of diseases , by reason of the great heat , and a certain gnat or fly which they call a musquito , which bites both men and women Musquito . in their sleep ; and assoon as they are bitten , incontinently the flesh swells as though they had be bitten with some venomous worm . And this musquito or gnat does most follow such as are newly come into the country . Many there are that die of this annoyance . 
 This town is situated upon the river aforesaid , and compassed with woods of diverse manners and sorts , and many fruits , as oranges and limons , guiaves , and diverse others , and birds in them , popinjays both small Popinjays . and great , and some of them as big as a raven , and their tails as long as the tail of a fezant . There are also many other kind of birds of purple colour , and small monkeys , marvellous proper . Monkeys . 
 This hight or sick country continueth five and forty miles towards the city of Mexico ; and the five and forty miles being passed , then there is a temperate country , and full of tillage : but they water all their corn with rivers which they turn in upon it . And they gather their Wheat twice a year . And if they should not Wheat twice water the ground where as their corn is sown , the in a yeere-country is so hight it would burn all . 
 Before you come to Mexico , there is a great town called Tlaxcalla , which hath in it above 16000 house - Tlaxcalla a holds . All the inhabitants thereof are free by the kings free aty - 
 379 
 of Spaine : for these were the occasion that Mexico was woonne in so short time , and with so little loss of men . Wherefore they are all gentlemen , and pay no tribute to the king . In this town is all the cochinilia growing . 
 Mexico . Mexico is a great city ; it hath more then fifty thousand households , whereof there are not passed five or sixe thousand houses of Spanyards : all the other are the people of the country , which live under the Spanyards laws . There are in this city stately buildings , and many monasteries of friars and nuns , which the Spanyards have made . And the building of the Indians is somewhat beautiful outwardly , and within full of small chambers , with very small windows , which is not so comely as the building of the Spanyards . This city stands in the midst of a great lake , and the water goes thorough all or the most part of the streets , and there come small boats , which they call canoas , and in them they bring all things necessary , as wood , and coals , and grass for their horses , stones and lime to built , and corn . 
 This city is subject to many earthquakes , which oftentimes cast down houses , and kill people . This city is very well provided of water to drink , and with all manner of victuals , as fruits , flesh and fish , bred , hens and capons , Guiny cocks and hens , and all other fowl . There are in this city every week three Fairs or Markets , which are frequented with many people , aswell Spanyards as the people of the country . There are in these Fairs or Markets all manner of things that may be invented , to fell , and in especial , things of the country . The one of these Fairs is upon the Munday , which is called S. Hypolitos fair , and S. James his fair is upon the Thursday , and upon Saturday is S. Johns fair . In this city is always the kings governor or viceroy , and there are kept the Terms and Parliaments . And although there be other places of justice , yet this is above all : so that all men may appeal unto this 
 380 
 ! 572 , place , and may not appeal from this city , but only into Spaine before the king : and it must be for a certain sum : and if it be under that sum , then there is no appellation from them . Many rivers fallen into this lake which the city stands in : but there was never any place found whither it goes out . 
 The Indians know a way to drown the city , and way10 within these three years they would have practised the same : but they which should have be the doers of ' it were hanged : and ever since the city hath be well watched both day and night , for fear lest at some time they might be deceived : for the Indians love not the Spanyards . Round about the town there are very many gardens and orchards of the fruits of the country , marvellous fair , where the people have great recreation . 
 The men of this city are marvellous vicious ; and in like manner the women are dishonest of their bodies , more then they are in other cities or towns in this country . 
 There are near about this city of Mexico many rivers Crocodiles . and standing waters which have in them a monstrous kind of fish , which is marvellous ravening , and a great devourer of men and cattle . He is wont to sleep upon the dry land many times , and if there come in the mean time any man or beast and wake or disquiet him , he speedeth well if he get from him . He is like unto a serpent , saving that he does not fly , neither hath he wings . 
 There is West out of Mexico a port town which Navigation is on the South sea , called Puerto de Acapulco , where as there are ships which they have ordinarily for the navigation of China , which they have newly found . 
 This port is threescore leagues from Mexico . 
 There is another port town which is called Culiacan , on the South sea , which lies West and by North out of Mexico , and is 200 leagues from the same : and there the Spanyards made two ships to go seek the straight The Northor gulf , which , as they say , is between the Newfound - west-strei&ht . land and Greenland ; and they call it the Englishmens 
 381 
 1572. straight : which as yet was never fully found . They say , that straight lies not far from the main land of China , which the Spanyards account to be marvellous rich . Towards the North from Mexico there are great store 
 The more Northward , the richer silver mines . of silver mines . There is greater quantity of silver found in these mines towards the North , then there is any other parts : and as the most men of experience said always , they find the richer mines the more Northerly . These mines are commonly upon great hills and stony ground , marvellous hard to be laboured and wrought . Out of some of the mines the Indians find a certain 
 Painting earth . kind of earth of diverse colours , wherewith they paint themselves in times of their dances , and other pastimes which they use . In this country of Nova Hispania there are also 
 Gold mines . mines of gold , although the gold be commonly found in rivers , or very near unto rivers . And now in these days there is not so much gold found as there hath be heretofore . There are many great rivers , and great store of fish in them , not like unto our kinds of fish . And there are marvellous great woods , and as fair trees as may be seen , of diverse sorts , and especially fir trees , that 
 NLesquiquez . may mast any ship that goes upon the sea , oaks and pineapples , and another tree which they call Mesquiquez : it bears a fruit like unto a peascod , marvellous sweet , which the wild people gather , and keep it all the year , and eat it in stead of bred . 
 Seven cities by witchcraft not found of the seekers . The Spanyards have notice of seven cities which old men of the Indians show them should lie towards the Northwest from Mexico . They have used and use daily much diligence in seeking of them , but they cannot find any one of them . They say that the witchcraft of the Indians is such , that when they come by these towns they cast a missed upon them , so that they cannot see them . 382 
 They have understanding of another city which they call Copalla : and in like manner , at my being in the country , they have used much labour and diligence in the seeking of it : they have found the lake on which it should stand , and a canoa , the head whereof was wrought with copper curiously , and could not find nor see any man nor the town which to their understanding should stand on the same water , or very near the same . 
 There is a great number of beasts or kine in the country of Cibola , which were never brought thither by the Spanyards , but breed naturally in the country . They are like unto our oxen , saving that they have long hair like a lion , and short homes , and they have upon their shoulders a bunch like a camel , which is higher then the rest of their body . They are marvellous wild and swift in running . They call them the beasts or kine of Cibola . 
 This Cibola is a city which the Spanyards found now of late , without any people in the same , goodly bnildings , fair chimneys , windows made of stone & timber excellently wrought , fair wells with wheels to draw their water , and a place where they had buried their dead people , with many fair stones upon the graves . And the captain would not suffer his soldiers to break up any part of these graves , saying , he would come another time to do it . 
 They asked certain people which they met , whither the people of this city were gone : and they made answer , they were gone down a river , which was there by , very great , and there had built a city which was more for their commodity . 
 This captain lacking things necessary for himself and his men , was feign to return back again , without finding any treasure according to his expectation : neither found they but few people , although they found beaten ways , which had been much haunted and frequented . The captain at his coming back again , had a great 383 
 A.D. 
 1572. 
 PedroMorales Eif Nicolas Burgignon write the like of Copalla . 
 The strange oxen of Cibola . 
 Cibola abandoned . 
 A great river never Cibola . 
 Water congealed to salt . Dogs of India described . 
 Cacao a fruit currant as money . 
 Fruits . 
 Hight springs . 
 check of the governor , because he had not gone forward , and seen the end of that river . 
 They have in the country , far from the sea side , standing waters , which are salt : and in the months of April and May the water of them congealeth into salt , which salt is all taken for the kings use and profit . 
 Their dogs are all crooked backed , as many as are of the country breed , and cannot run fast : their faces are like the face of a pig or and hog , with sharp noses . 
 In certain provinces which are called Guatimala , & Soconusco , there is growing great store of cacao , which is a berry like unto and almond : it is the best merchandise that is in all the Indies . The Indians make drink of it , and in like manner meat to eat . It goes currently for money in any market or fair , and may buy any flesh , fish , bred or cheese , or other things . 
 There are many kind of fruits of the country , which are very good , as plantans , sapotes , guiaves , pinas , aluacatas , tunas , mamios , limons , oranges , walnuts very small and hard , with little meat in them , grapes which the Spanyards brought into the country , and also wild grapes , which are of the country , and are very small , quinses , peaches , figs , and but few apples , and very small , and no pears : but there are melons and Calabasas or gourds . 
 There is much honey , both of bees and also of a kind of tree which they call magueiz . This honey of magueiz is not so sweet as the other honey is , but it is better to be eaten only with bred , then the other is ; and the tree serves for many things , as the leaves make thread to sow any kind of bags , and are good to cover and thatch houses , and for diverse other things . 
 They have in diverse places of the country many hight springs of water : as above all other , I have seen one in the province of Mechuacan . In a plain field without any mountain , there is a spring which hath much water , & it is so hight , that if a whole quarter of beef be cast into it , within on half hour it will be as well sodden as it will be over a fire in half a day . I have seen half a sheep 384 
 cast in , and immediately it hath be sodden , and I have eaten part of it . 
 There are many hares , and some conies . There are no partridges , but abundance of quails . 
 They have great store of fish in the South sea , and many oysters , and very great . The people do open the oysters , and take out the meat of them , and dry it as they do any other kind of fish , and keep them all the year : and when the times serve , they send them abroad into the country to fell , as all other fish . They have no salmon , nor trowt , nor peel , nor carp , tench , nor pike in all the country . 
 There are in the country mighty high mountains , and hills , and snow upon them : they commonly burn ; and twice every day they cast out much smoke and ashes at certain open places , which are in the tops of them . 
 There is among the wild people much manna . I have gathered of the same , and have eaten it , and it is good : for the Apothecaries send their servants at certain times , to gather of the same for purgations , and other uses . 
 There are in the mountains many wild hogs , which all men may kill , and lions and tigers ; which tigers do much harm to men that travel in the wilderness . 
 In this country , not long since , there were two poor men that found a marvellous rich mine ; and when these men went to make a register of the same ( according to the law and custom ) before the kings officers , they thought this mine not meet for such men as they were : and violently took the said mine for the king ; and gave no part thereof unto the two poor men . And within certain days the kings officers resorted thither to labour in the mine , & they found two great 
 Hares and conies . 
 Sea fish . 
 Burning mountains . 
 Manna . 
 Wild hogs , lions , and tigers . 
 Mines discovered , not found again . 
 mighty hills were come together ; so they found no place to work in . And in the time while I was among them , which was five years , there was a poor shep - The Mthour herd , who keeping his sheep , happened to find a well ^levaEs ™ of quicksilver ; and he went in like manner to manifest panna . the same , as the custom and manner is ; the kings 
 ix 385 2 B 
 Description of the Indians person and manners . 
 The people of Nueva Espagna great cowards . 
 officers dealt in like order as they did with the two poor men that found the rich mine , taking it quite from the shepherd : but when they went to fetch home the quicksilver , or part thereof , they could never find it again . So these things have be declared unto the king , who hath given commandment , that nothing being found in the fields , as mines , and such like , shall be taken away from any man . And many other things have be done in this country , which men might count for great marvels . 
 There is great abundance of sugar here , & they make diverse conserves , & very good , and send them into Peru , where as they fell them marvellous well , because they make none in those parts . 
 The people of the country are of a good stature , tawny coloured , broad faced , flat nosed , and given much to drink both wine of Spaine and also a certain kind of wine which they make with honey of Magueiz , and roots , and other things which they use to put into the same . They call the same wine Puleo . They are soon drunk , and given to much beastliness , and void of all goodness . In their drunkenness they use and commit Sodomy ; and with their mother's and daughters they have their pleasures and pastimes . Whereupon they are defended from the drinking of wines , upon pains of money , aswell he that selleth the wines as the Indian that drinketh the same . And if this commandment were not , all the wine in Spaine and in France were not sufficient for the West Indies only . 
 They are of much simplicity , and great cowards , void of all valour , and are great witches . They use diverse times to talk with the devil , to whom they do certain sacrifices and oblations : many times they have be taken with the same , and I have seen them most cruelly punished for that offence . 
 The people are given to learn all manner of occupations and sciences , which for the most part they learned since the coming of the Spanyards : I say all manner of 386 
 arts . They are very artificiali in making of images with feathers , or the proportion or figure of any man , in all kind of manner as he is . The fineness and excellency of this is wondered , that a barbarous people as they are , should give themselves to so fine and art as this is . They are goldsmiths , blacksmiths , and coppersmiths , carpenters , masons , shoemakers , tailors , saddlers , embroiderers , and of all other kind of sciences : and they will do work so good cheap , that poor young men that go out of Spaine to get their living , are not set on work : which is the occasion there are many idle people in the country . For the Indian will live all the week with less then one groat ; which the Spanyard cannot do , nor any man else . 
 They say , that they came of the lineage of and old man The Indians which came thither in a boat of wood , which they call a i&ioran ™ canoa . But they cannot tell whither it were before the ame* flood or after , neither can they give any reason of the flood , nor from whence they came . And when the Spanyards came first among them , they did certain sacrifice to and image made in stone , of their own invention . The stone was set upon a great hill , which they made of bricks of earth : they call it their Cowa . And certain days in the year they did sacrifice , certain old men , and young children ; and only believed in the Sun and the Moon , saying , that from them they The Sun and had all things that were needful for them . They have in M°one these parts great store of cotton wool , with which they ^g0fC0ttm make a manner of linen cloth , which the Indians wear , ' 
 both men and women , and it serves for shirts & smocks , and all other kind of garments , which they wear upon their bodies : and the Spanyards use it to all such purposes , especially such as cannot buy other . And if it were not for this kind of cloth , all manner of cloth that goes out of Spaine , I say linen cloth , would be sold out of all measure . 
 The wild people go naked , without any thing upon The wild In-them . The women wear the skin of a deer before dians - 
 387 
 The pomp of owners of mines . 
 their privities , and nothing else upon all their bodies . They have no care for any thing , but only from day to day for that which they have need to eat . They are big men , and likewise the women . They shoot in bows which they make of a cherry tree , and their arrows are of cane , with a sharp flint stone in the end of the same ; they will pierce any coat of mail : and they kill deer , and cranes , and wild geese , ducks and other fowl , and worms , and snakes , and diverse other vermin , which they eat . They live very long : for I have seen men that have been and hundred years of age . They have but very little hair in their face , nor on their bodies . 
 The Indians have the friars in great reverence : the occasion is , that by them and by their means they are free and out of bondage ; which was so ordained by Charles the emperor : which is the occasion that now there is not so much gold and silver coming into Europe as there was while the Indians were slaves . For when they were in bondage they could not choose but do their task every day , and bring their master's so much metal out of their mines : but now they must be well paid , and much entreated to have them work . So it hath be , and is a great hindrance to the owners of the mines , and to the kings quinto or custom . 
 There are many mines of copper in great quantity , whereof they spend in the country as much as serves their turns . There is some gold in it , but not so much as will pay the costs of the fining . The quantity of it is such , and the mines are so far from the sea , that it will not be worth the fraught to carry it into Spaine . On the other side , the kings officers will give no licence to make ordinance thereof ; whereupon the mines lie unlaboured , and of no valuation . 
 There is much led in the country ; so that with it they cover churches , and other religious houses : wherefore they shall not need any of our led , as they have had need thereof in times past . 
 The pomp and liberality of the owners of the mines 388 
 is marvellous to behold : the apparel both of them and of their wives is more to be compared to the apparel of noble persons then otherwise . If their wives go out of their houses , as unto the church , or any other place , they go out with great majesty , and with as many men and maids as though she were the wife of some noble man . I will assure you , I have seen a miners wife go to the church with and hundred men , and twenty gentlewomen and maids . They keep open house : who will , may come to eat their meat . They call men with a bell to come to dinner and supper . They are princes in keeping of their houses , and bountiful in all manner of things . 
 A good owner of mines must have at the least and Things neces-hundred slaves to carry and to stamp his metals ; he sap‘°mines must have many mules , and men to keep the mines ; he must have mills to stamp his metals ; he must have 6 many wains and oxen to bring home wood to fine the oar ; he must have much quicksilver , and a marvellous quantity of salt-brine for the metals ; and he must be at many other charges . And as for this charge of quicksilver , it is a new invention , which they find more profitable then to fine their oar with led . Howbeit the same is very costly : for there is never a hundred of quicksilver but costeth at the least threescore pounds sterling . And the mines fallen daily in decay , and of less valve : and the occasion is , the few Indians that men have to labour their mines . 
 There is in New Spaine a marvellous increase of cattle , The plenty of which daily do increase , and they are of a greater growth catteli-then ours are . You may have a great steer that hath and hundred weight of tallow in his belly for sixteene shillings ; and some one man hath 20000 head of cattle of his own . They fell the hides unto the merchant's , who lade into Spaine as many as may be well spared . They spend many in the country in shoes and boots , and in the mines : and as the country is great , so is the increase of the cattle wondered . In the Island of Santo Domingo they commonly kill the beasts for their hides 
 389 
 and tallow ; and the fowls eat the carcases : and so they do in Cuba and Porto Rico , whereas there is much sugar , and cana fistula , which daily they send into Spaine . Sheene . They have great increase of sheep in like manner , and daily do intend to increase them . They have much Wool . wool , and as good as the wool of Spaine . They make Cloth . cloth as much as serves the country , for the common people , and send much cloth into Peru. I have seen cloth made in the city of Mexico , which hath been sold for tenne pezos a vare , which is almost foure pounds English , and the vare is less then our yard . They have Wood . woad growing in the country , and alum , and brazil , and Prosili diverse other things to die withal , so that they make all 
 ‘ colours . In Peru they make no cloth : but hereafter 
 our cloth will be little set by in these parts , unless it be some fine cloth . The wools are commonly foure shillings every rove , which is five & twenty pounds : and in some places of the country that are far from the places where as they make cloth , it is worth nothing , and does serve but only to make beds for men to lie on . 
 They make hats , as many as do serve the Country , very fine and good , and fell them better cheap , then they can be brought out of Spaine , and in like manner send them into Peru. 
 Many people are set on work both in the one and in the other : they spin their wool as we do , and in steed Hogs grease of oil , they have hogs grease : they twist not their thread its stead of oil . so much as we Joej neither work so fine a thread . 
 They make no kersies , but they make much cloth , which is course , and fell it for less then 12. pence the vare . It is called Sayall . 
 Silks of sun - They have much silk , and make all manner of sorts dry sorts . thereof , as Taffataes , Satins , Velvets of all colours , and they are as good as the silks of Spaine , saving that the colours are not so perfect : but the blacks are better then the blacks that come out of Spaine . 
 Horses . They have many horses , and mares , and mules , which Mules . the Spaniards brought thither . They have as good 390 
 Jennets , as any are in Spaine , and better cheap then Jennets . they be in Spaine . And with their mules they carry all their goods from place to place . 
 There is rain usually in this Country , from the month of May , to the midst of October , every day , which time they call their winter , by reason of the said waters . And if it were not for the waters which fallen in these hight seasons , their Maiz , which is the greatest part of their sustenance , would be destroyed . This Maiz is the greatest maintenance which the Indian Maize grain hath , and also all the common people of the Spaniards . man and . And their horses and mules which labour , cannot be eaten tn without the same . This grain is substantiali , and increases much blood . If the Miners should be without it , they could not labour their Mines : for all their servants eat none other bred , but only of this Maize , and it is made in cakes , as they make oaten cakes , in some places of England . 
 The Indians pay tribute , being of the age of 20. 
 years , 4. shillings of money , and and hanege of Maiz , AnHanegais which is worth 4. shillings more unto the King every a year . This is paid in all Nova Hispania , of as many m a*e‘ as be of the age of 20. years , saving the City of Tlascalla , which was made free , because the citizens thereof were the occasion that Cortes took Mexico in so little a time . And although at the first they were freed from payment of tribute , yet the Spaniards now begin to usurp upon them , and make them to till a great field of Maiz , at their own costs every year for the King , which is as beneficial unto him , and as great cost unto them , as though they paid their tribute , as the others doe . 
 The ships which go out of Spaine with goods for Peru , go to Number de dios , and there discharge the said goods : and from thence they be carried over the neck of a land , unto a port town in the South sea , called Panama , which is 17. leagues distant from Number de dios . And there they do ship their goods 
 391 
 again , and so from thence go to Peru. They are in going thither three months , and they come back again in 20. days . They have seidome foul weather , and few ships are lost in the South sea . Foure years past , to wit 1568 , there was a ship made out of Peru , Salomons to seek Salomons Islands , and they came somewhat to and^f , m^n t^ie out Equinoctial , & found and Island with 
 X South sea many black people , in such number that the Spaniards 1568. durst not go on land among them . And because they had be long upon the voyage , their people were very weak , and so went not on land , to know what commodity was upon it . And for want of victuals , they arrived in Nova Hispania , in a port called Puerto de Navidad , and thence returned back again unto Peru , whereas they were evil entreated , because they had not known more of the same Island . 
 They have in this port of Navidad ordinarily their China found ships , which go to the Islands of China , which are cer-by the West , taine Islands which they have found within these 7. years . 
 They have brought from thence gold , and much Cinamom , and dishes of earth , and cups of the same , so fine , that every man that may have a piece of them , will give the weight of silver for it . There was a Mariner that brought a pearl as big as a doves egg from thence , 8c a stone , for which the Viceroy would have given 3000. ducats . Many things they bring from thence , most excellent . There are many of these islands , and the Spaniards have * This is to be not many of them as yet : * for the Portugals disturb understood of them much , and combat with them every day , saying , it this discourse ls Part °* tneir conquest , and to the main land they was written , cannot come at any hand . There are goodly people in Anno 1572. them , and they are great Mariners , richly appareled in cloth of gold , and silver , and silk of all sorts , and go appareled after the manner of the Turkes . This report make such as come from thence . The men of the main land have certain traffic with some of these China ships ylanders , and come thither in a kind of ships , which with one sail . they have wjth one saj ] ej anj bring open such marcban _ 392 
 dize as they have need of . And of these things there have be brought into New Spaine both cloth of gold and silver , and diverse manners of silks , and works of gold and silver , marvelous to be seen . So by their saying , there is not such a country in the whole world . The main land is from the islands 190. leagues : and the islands are not far from the Malucos Northwards . And the people of those islands , which the Spaniards have , say , that if they would bring their wives and children , that then they should have among them what they would have . So there go women daily , and the king payeth all the charges of the married men and their wives , that go to those islands . And there is no doubt but the trade will be marvelous rich in time to come . It was my fortune to be in company with one Diego Gutieres , who was the first Pilot that ever went to that country of the Phillippinas . He makes report of many strange things in that Country , aswell riches , as other , and says , if there be any Paradise upon earth , it is in that country : and adds , that sitting under a tree , you shall have such sweet smells , with such great content and pleasure , that you shall remember nothing , neither wife , nor children , nor have any kind of appetite to eat or drink , the odoriferous smells will be so sweet . This man hath good livings in Nova Hispania , notwithstanding he will return thither , with his wife and children , and as for treasure there is abundance , as he makes mention . In this country of Nova Hispania there are many bucks and does , but they have not so long homes as they have here in England . The Spaniards kill them with handguns and with grayhounds , and the Indians kill them with their bows and arrows , and with the skins they make chamoyce , such as we in Eng - Chamoue . land make doublets and hose of , as good as the skins that Spanish are dressed in Flanders , & likewise they make marvelous leather . good Spanish leather of them . There is a bird which is like unto a Raven , but he hath some of his feathers white : voure c’ar _ there is such abundance of them , that they eat all the rion . 
 393 
 Wrongs done to the Indians punished . 
 Justice you cause of civili tie . 
 corrupt and dead flesh which is in the country . Otherwise the abundance of carrion is so much , that it would make a marvelous corrupt air in all the Country , and be so noisome , that no man could abide it . Therefore it is commanded there shall none of them be killed . These birds are always about Cities , and towns , where there is much flesh killed . 
 The Indians are much favoured by the Justices of the Country , and they call them their orphans . And if any Spaniard should happen to do any of them harm , or to wrong him in taking any thing from him , as many times they do , or to strike any of them , being in any town , whereas justice is , they are aswell punished for the same , as if they had done it one Spaniard to another . When a Spaniard is far from Mexico , or any place of justice , thinking to do with the poor Indian what he list , considering he is so far from any place of remedy , he makes the Indian doe what he commandeth him , and if he will not do it , he beats and misuseth him , according to his own appetite . The Indian holds his peace , until he find and opportunity , and then takes a neighbour with him , and goes to Mexico , although it be 20. leagues off , and makes his complaint . This his complaint is immediately herd , & although it be a knight , or a right good gentleman , he is forthwith sent for , and punished both by his goods , and also his person is imprisoned , at the pleasure of the Justice . This is the occasion that the Indians are so tame and civil , as they are : and if they should not have this favour , the Spaniards would soon dispatch all the Indians , or the Indians would kill them . But they may call them dogs , and use other evil words , as much as they will , and the Indian must needs put it up , and go his way . 
 The poor Indians will go every day two or three leagues to a Fair or market with a child upon their necks , with as much fruit or roots , or some kind of ware , as cotton wool , or cadis of all colours , as shall be not past worth a penny : and they will maintain them - 
 394 
 i572-selves upon the same . For they live with a marvelous small matter . 
 They are in such poverty , that if you need to ride into the Country , you shall have and Indian to go with you all the day with your bed upon his back , for one royal of plate : and this you shall have from one town to another . Here you are to understand , that all men that travel by the way , are always wont to carry their beds with them . They are great thieves , and will steal all that they may , and you shall have no recom pence at their hands . 
 The garments of the women , are in this manner . The The apparel uppermost part is made almost like to a woman's smock , of the Indians . saving that it is as broad above as beneath , and hath no sleeves , but holes on eke side one to put out their arms . 
 It is made of linen cloth made of cotton wool , and filled full of flowers , of read cadis and blew , and other colours . This garment comes down to the knees , and then they have another cloth made after the same manner , and that goes round about their waste , and reaches to their shoes , and over this a white fine sheet upon their heads , which goes down half the leg . Their hair is made up round with and hair lace about their head . And the men have a small pair of breeches of the same cotton wool , and their shirts which hang over their breeches , and a broad girdle about their middles , and a sheet with flowers upon their backs , and with a knot upon one shoulder , & and hat upon their heads , and a pair of shoes . And this is all their apparel , although it be a Cacique , which they use in all the Country . 
 The walls of the houses of the Indians , are but plain , The houses of but the stones are laid so close , that you shall not well Indians . perceive the joints between one stone and another , they are so finely cut : and by the means that the stones are so workmanly done , and finely joined together , there is some beauty in their walls . They are marvelous small and light , as Pumy stones . They make their doors 
 395 
 Mutezuma , and his riches . 
 very little , so that there can go in but one man at a time . Their windows , and rooms within their houses are small , and one room they have reserved for their friends , when they come to talk one with another , and that is always fair matted , and kept marvelous clean , and hanged full of images , and their chairs standing there to fit in . They eat their meat upon the ground , and sleep on the ground upon a mat , without any bed , both the gentlemen , and other . 
 The Indians strike their fire with one stick in another , aswell the tame people , as the wild . For they know not how to do it with and iron , and a stone . 
 In Nova Hispania every io . or 12. leagues they have a contrary speech , saving only about Mexico : so there is a number of speeches in the Country . 
 Mutezuma which was the last King of this Country , was one of the richest princes which have be seen in our time , or long before . He had all kind of beasts which were then in the country , and all manner of birds , and fish , and all manner of worms , which creep upon the earth , and all trees , and flowers , and herbs , all fashioned in silver and gold , which was the greatest part of all his treasure , and in these things had he great joy , as the old Indians report . And unto this day , they say that the treasure of Mutezuma is hidden , and that the Spaniards have it not . This King would give none of his people freedom , nor forgive any of them that should pay him tribute , though he were never so poor . For if it had be told him that one of his tributaries was poor , & that he was not able to pay his tribute according to the custom , then he would have him bound to bring at such times as tributes should be paid , a quill full of Lice , saying , he would have none free , but himself . He had as many wives or concubines , as he would have , and such as liked him . Always whensoever he went out of his Court to pass the time , he was born upon 4. of his noble men's shoulders set upon a table , some sav , of gold , and very richly dressed with feathers of diverse and 396 
 1572. many colours and flowers . He washed all his body every Indians 
 day , were it never so cold . And unto this day so do all tkem 
 the Indians , and especially the women . se^ ever^ 
 The Spaniards keep the Indians in great subjection . They may have in their houses no sword nor dagger , nor knife with any point , nor may wear upon them any manner of arms , neither may they ride upon any horse nor mules , in any saddle nor bridle , neither may they drink wine , which they take for the greatest pain of all . They have attempted diverse times to make insurrections , but they have be overthrown immediately by their own great and beastly cowardliness . 
 There remain some among the wild people , that unto Cannibals . this day eat one another . I have seen the bones of a Spaniard that have be as clean burnished , as though it had be done by men that had no other occupation . 
 And many times people are carried away by them , but they never come again , whither they be men or 
 women . 
 They have in the Sea islands of read salt in great abun - Island of salt . dance , whereas they lade it from place to place about the Sea coast : and they spend very much salt with salting their hides , and fish : and in their Mines they occupy great quantity . They have much Allume , and as good as Allume . any that is in all the Levant , so that they need none of that commodity . They have also of their own growing , much Cana fistula , & much Salsa Perilla , which Cassia fistula . is marvelous good for many kind of diseases . Salsa Peri^a - 
 There are in Florida many Jarrefalcons , and many Florida . other kind of hawks , which the gentlemen of Nova Hispania send for every year . The Spaniards have two forts there , chiefly to keep out the Frenchmen from planting there . 
 . 