Diverse voyages made by Englishmen to the famous City of Mexico , and to all or most part of the other principali provinces , cities , towns and places throughout the great and large kingdom of New Spaine , even as far as Nicaragua and Panama , & thence to Peru : together with a description of the Spaniards form of government there : and sundry pleasant relations of the manners and customs of the natural inhabitants , and of the manifold rich commodities & strange rarities found in those parts of the continent : & other matters most worthy the observation . 
 The voyage of Robert Tomson Merchant , into Nova Hispania in the year 1555. with diverse observations concerning the state of the Country : And certain accidents touching himself . 
 Obert Tomson born in the town of Andover in Hampshire began his travail out of England in An. 1553. in the month of March : who departing out of the city of Bristoll in a good ship called The bark young , in company of other Merchants of the said city , within 
 8. days after arrived at Lisbone in Portugall , where the said Robert Tomson remained 15. days , at the end of which he shipped himself for Spaine in the said ship , and within 4. days arrived in the bay of Cadiz in Andalusia , which is under the kingdom of Spaine , & from thence went up to the city of Sivil by land , which is 20. leagues , and there he repaired to one John Fields house and English Merchant , who had dwelled in the said city of Sivil 18. or 20. years married with wife and 338 
 children : In whose house the said Tomson remained by the space of one whole year or thereabouts , for two causes : The one to learn the Castillian tongue , the other to see the order of the country , and the customs of the people . At the end of which time having seen the fleets of ships come out of the Indies to that city , with such great quantity of gold & silver , pearls , precious stones , sugar , hides , ginger , and diverse other rich commodities , he did determine with himself to seek means and opportunity to pass over to see that rich country from whence such great quantity of rich commodities came . And it fell out that within short time after , the said John Field ( where the said Tomson was lodged ) did determine to pass over into the West Indies , himself , with his wife , children , and family , and at the request of the said Tomson , he purchased a licence of the King to pass into the Indies , for himself , his wife and children , and among them also for the said Tomson to pass with them : so that presently they made preparation of victuali and other necessary provision for the voyage . But the ships which were prepared to perform the voyage being all ready to depart , upon certain considerations by the kings commandment were stayed and arrested till further should be known of the Kings pleasure . Whereupon the said John Field , with Robert Tomson departed out of Sivil and came down to S. Lucar 15. leagues off , and seeing the stay made upon the ships of the said fleet , & being not assured when they would depart , determined to ship themselves for the Isles of the Canaries , which are 250. leagues from S. Lucar , and there to stay till the said fleet should come thither : for that is continually their port to make stay at 6. or 8. days , to take in fresh water , bred , flesh , & other necessaries . 
 So that in the month of February in An. 1555. the said Robert Tomson with the said John Field and his company , shipped themselves out of the town of S. Lucar in a carvel of the ci tie of Cadiz , and within 6. 
 339 
 days they arrived at the port of the Grand Canaria , where at our coming the ships that road in the said port began to cry out of all measure with loud voices , in so much that the castle which stood fast by began to shoot at us , and shot 6. or 7. shot at us , and struck down our main mast , before we could hoist out our boat to go on land , to know what the cause of the shooting was , seeing that we were Spanish ships , and were coming into his country . So that being on land , and complaining of the wrong and damage done unto us ; they answered , that they had thought we had be French rovers , that had come into the said port to do some harm to the ships that were there . For that 8. days passed there went out of the said port a carveil much like unto ours , laden with sugars and other merchandise for Spaine and on the other side of the point of the said Hand , met with a Frenchman of war , who took the said carvell , & unladed out of her into the said French ship both men & goods . And being demanded of the said Spaniards what other ships remained in the port whence they came , they answered that there remained diverse other ships , & one laden with sugars ( as they were ) & ready to depart for Spaine : upon the which news the Frenchmen put 30. tall men of their ship well appointed into the said carvel which they had taken , and sent her back again to the said port from whence she had departed the day before . And somewhat late towards the evening came into the port , not showing passed 3. or 4. men , and so came to and anchor hard by the other ships that were in the said port , and being seen by the castle and by the said ships , they made no reckoning of her , because they knew her , & thinking that she had found contrary winds at the sea , or had forgotten something behind them , they had returned back again for the same , and so made no account of her , but let her alone riding quietly among the other ships in the said port : So that about midnight the said carvel with the Frenchmen in her went aboard the other ship that lay 
 340 
 hard by laden with sugars , and drove the Spaniards that were in her under hatches , & presently let slip her cables and anchors , and set sail & carried her clean away , and after this sort deceived them : And they thinking or fearing that we were the like , did shoot at us as they did . This being passed , the next day after our arrival in the said port , we did unbark our selves and went on land up to the city or head town of the great Canaria , where we remained 18. or 20. days : and there found certain Englishmen merchants servants of one Anthony ^ngUshfactors Hickman and Edward Castelin , merchants of the city the Grand or . London that lay there in traffic , or whom we received great courtesy and much good cheer . After the which 20. days being passed , in the which we had seen the country , the people , and the disposition thereof , we departed from thence , and passed to the next He of the Canaries 18. leagues ofF , called TenerifFe , and being come on land , went up to the city called La Laguna , where we remained 7. months , attending the coming of the whole fleet , which in the end came , and there having taken that which they had need of , we shipped our selves in a ship of Cadiz , being one of 
 the said fleet , which was belonging to and Englishman John Sweating married in the city of Cadiz in Spaine , whose name was 
 John Sweating , and there came in the said ship for Cadiz , sends captain also and Englishman married in Cadiz , and son a ship of his in law to the said John Sweating , whose name was own int0 Leonard Chilton : there came also in the said ship another Englishman which had be a merchant of dust of his the city of Exeter , one of 50. years or thereabouts , whose son in law name was Ralph Sarre . So that we departed from Leonard Chil-the said Hands in the month of October the before - rre^^ said year , 8. ships in our company , and so directed ’ our course towards the bay of Mexico , and by the way towards the Hand of S. Domingo , otherwise called Hispaniola . So that within 32. days after we departed from the Isles of Canaries we arrived with our ship at the port of S. Domingo , and went in over the 
 341 
 Many of our men died of these noormes at the taking of Puerto rico . 
 bar where our ship knocked her keel at her entry : and there our ship rid before the town , where we went on land , 8c refreshed our selves 16. days , where we found no bred made of wheat , but biscuit brought out of Spaine , and out of the bay of Mexico : for the country it self doth yield no kind of bred to make grain withal . But the bred they make there , is certain cakes made of roots called Cassavi , which is something substantiali , but it hath but and unsavoury taste in the eating thereof . Flesh of beef and mutton they have great store : for there are men that have 10000. head of cattle , of oxen , bulls and kine , which they do keep only for the hides : for the quantity of flesh is so great , that they are not able to spend the hundreth part . Hogs flesh is there good store , very sweet and savoury , and so wholesome , that they give it to sick folks to eat in stead of hens and capons , although they have good store of poultry of that sort , as also of Guinycocks 8c Guinyhens . At the time of our being there , the city of S. Domingo was not of above 500. households of Spaniards , but of the Indians dwelling in the suburbs there were more . The country is most part of the year very hight , 8c very full of a kind of flies or gnats with long bills , which do prick 8c molest the people very much in the night when they are asleep , in pricking their faces and hands , and other parts of their bodies that lie uncovered , 8c make them to swell wonderfully . Also there is another kind of small worm which creeps into the soles of men's feet 8c especially of the black Moors and children which use to go barefoot , 8c makes their feet to grow as big as a men head , 8c does so ache that it would make one run mad . They have no remedy for the same , but to open the flesh sometime 3. or 4. inches 8c so dig them out . The country yields great store of sugar , hides of oxen , bulls and kine , ginger , Cana fistula 8c Salsa perillia : mines of silver 8c gold there are none , but in some rivers there is 
 342 
 found some small quantity of gold . The principal coin that they do traffic withal in that place , is black money made of copper & brass : and this they say they do use not for that they lack money of gold and silver to trade withal out of the other parts of India , but because if they should have good money , the merchants that deal with them in trade , would carry away their gold and silver , and let the country commodities lie still . And thus much for S. Domingo . So we were coming from the isles of Canaries to S. Domingo , & there staying until the month of December , which was 3. months . About the beginning of January we departed thence towards the bay of Mexico & new Spaine , towards which we set our course , and so sailed 24. days till we came within 15. leagues of S. John de Ullua , which was the port of Mexico of our right discharge : And being so near our said port , there rose a storm of Northerly winds , which came off from Terra Florida , which caused us to cast about into the sea again , for fear lest that night we should be cast upon the shore before day did break , and so put our selves in danger of casting away : the wind and sea grew so foul and strong , that within two hours after the storm began , eight ships that were together were so dispersed , that we could not see one another . One of the ships of our company being of the burden of 500. tun called the hulk of Carrion , would not cast about to sea as we did , but went that night with the land , thinking in the morning to purchase the port of S. John de Ullua , but missing the port went with the shore and was cast away . There were drowned of that ship 75. persons , men , women and children , and 64. were saved that could swim , and had means to save themselves : among those that perished in that ship , was a gentleman who had be present the year before in S. Domingo , his wife and 4. daughters with the rest of his servants & household . We with the other 7. ships cast about into the sea , the storm 
 343 
 A.D. 
 1556. 
 during 10. days with great might , boisterous winds , fogs & rain : our ship being old and weak was so tossed , that she opened at the stern a fathom under water , and the best remedy we had was to stop it with beds and pilobiers , and for fear of sinking we threw and lightened into the sea all the goods we had or could come by : but that would not serve . Then we cut our main mast and threw all our Ordinance into the sea saving one piece , which early in a morning when we thought we should have sunk , we shot off , and as pleased God there was one of the ships of our company near unto us , which we saw not by means of the great fog , which hearing the found of the piece , & understanding some of the company to be in great extremity , began to make towards us , and when they came within hearing of us , we desired them for the love of God to help to save us , for that we were all like to perish . They willed us to hoist our foresail as much as we could & make towards them , for they would do their best to save us , and so we did : And we had no sooner hoist our foresail , but there came a gale of wind & a piece of a sea , struck in the foresail , and carried sail & mast all overboard , so that then we thought there was no hope of life . And then we began to embrace one another , every man his friend , every wife her husband , and the children their father's and mother's , committing our souls to Almighty God , thinking never to escape alive : yet it pleased God in the time of most need when all hope was passed , to aid us with his helping hand , and caused the wind a little to cease , so that within two hours after , the other ship was able to come aboard us , & took into her with her boat man , woman and child , naked without hose or shoe upon many of our feet . I do remember that the last person that came out of the ship into the boat , was a woman black More , who leaping out of the ship into the boat with a young sucking child in her arms , leapt too short and fell into the sea , and was a good while under 
 344 
 the water before the boat could come to rescue her , and with the spreading of her clothes rose above water again , and was caught by the coat & pulled into the boat having still her child under her arm , both of them half drowned , and yet her natural love towards her child would not let her let the child go . And when she came aboard the boat she held her child so fast under her arm still , that two men were scant able to get it out . So we departed out of our ship & left it in the sea : it was worth foure hundreth thousand ducats , ship & goods when we left it . And within three days after we arrived at our port of S. John de Ullua in New Spaine . I do remember that in the great and boisterous storm of this foul weather , in the night , there came upon the top of our main yard and main mast , a certain little light , much like unto the light of a little candle , which the Spaniards called the 
 Cuerpo santo , and said it was S. Elmo , whom they Cuerpo Santo . take to be the advocate of Sailors . At the which sighed the Spaniards fell down upon their knees and worshipped it , praying God and S. Elmo to cease the torment , and save them from the peril that they were in , with promising him that at their coming on land , they would repair unto his Chapel , and there cause Masses to be said , and other ceremonies to be done . The friars cast relics into the sea , to cause the sea to be still , and likewise said Gospels , with other crossings and ceremonies upon the sea to make the storm to cease : which ( as they said ) did much good to weaken the fury of the storm . But I could not perceive it , nor gave no credit to it , till it pleased God to send us the remedy & delivered us from the rage of the same , His Name be praised therefore . This light continued aboard our ship about three hours , flying from mast to mast , & from top to top : and sometime it would be in two or three places at once . I informed my self of learned men afterwards what that light should be , and they said , that it was but a congelation of the wind and vapours of the Sea congealed with the ex - 
 345 
 tremitie of the weather , which flying in the wind , many times doth chance to hit on the masts and shrowds of the ships that are at sea in foul weather . And in truth I do take it to be so : for that I have seen the like in other ships at sea , and in sundry ships at once . By this men may see how the Papists are given to believe and worship such vain things and toys , as God , to whom all honour does appertain , and in their need and necessities do let to call upon the living God , who is the giver of all good things . 
 The 16. of April in Anno 1556. we arrived at the port of S. John de Ullua in new Spaine , very naked and distressed of apparel , and all other things , by means of the loss of our foresaid ship and goods , and from 
 His arrival at thence we went to the new Town called Vera Cruz , five 
 yera Cruz , leagues from the said port of S. John de Ullua , marching 
 still by the sea side , where we found lying upon the 
 sands great quantity of mighty great trees with roots and all , some of them of foure , five , and sixe cart load by our estimation , which , as the people told us , were in the great stormy weather , which we endured at sea , Florida 300. rooted out of the ground in Terra Florida , which is leagues from three hundreth leagues over by Sea , and brought thither . ^Ullua^ $° we carnem to the said Town of Vera cruz , where we remained a month : and there the said John Field chanced to meet with and old friend of his acquaintance in Spaine , called Gongalo Ruiz de Cordova , a very rich man of the said Town of Vera cruz : who hearing of his coming thither with his wife and family , and of his misfortune by Sea , came unto him and received him and all his household into his house , and kept us there a whole month , making us very good cheer , and giving us good entertainment , and also gave us that were in all eight persons of the said John Fields house , double apparel new out of the shop of very good cloth , coats , cloaks , hose , shirts , smocks , gowns for the women , hose , shoes , and all other necessary apparel , and for our way up to the City of Mexico , horses , moiles , 346 
 and men , and money in our purses for the expenses by the way , which by our account might amount unto the sum of 400. Crowns . And after we were entered two days journey into the Country , I the said Robert Tomson fell so sick of and ague , that the next day I was not able to fit on my horse , but was feign to be carried upon Indians backs , from thence to Mexico . And when we came within half a days journey of the City of Mexico , the said John Field also fell sick , and within three days after we arrived at the said City , he died : And presently sickened one of his children , and two more of his household people , and within eight days died . So that within tenne days after we arrived at the City of Mexico , of eight persons that were of Mexico . us of the said company , there remained but foure alive , and I the said Tomson was at the point of death of the sickness that I god upon the way , which continued with me the space of sixe months . At the end of which time it pleased Almighty God to restore me my health again , although weak and greatly disabled . And being some thing strong , I procured to seek means to live , and to seek a way how to profit my self in the Country , seeing it had pleased God to send us thither in safety . Then by friendship of one Thomas Blake a Scottishman born , who had dwelled and had be married in the said City above twentie years before I came to the said City , I was preferred to the service of a gentleman a Spaniard dwelling there , a man of great wealth , and one of the first conquerors of the said Ci tie , whose name was Gongalo Cerezo , with whom I dwelled twelve months and a half . At the end of which I was maliciously accused by the Holy house for matters of Religion , and so apprehended and carried to prison , where I lay close prisoner seven months , without speaking to any creature , but to the Jailer that kept the said prison , when he brought me my meat and drink . In the mean time was brought into the said prison one Augustin Boacio and Italian of Genoua also for matters 
 347 
 of Religion , who was taken at Sacatecas 80. leagues to the Northwest of the City of Mexico : At the end of the said seven months , we were both carried to the high Church of Mexico , to do open penance upon and high scaffold , made before the high Altar , upon a Sunday , in the presence of a very great number of people , who were at the least five or sixe thousand . For there were that came one hundreth mile ofF , to see the said Auto ( as they call it ) for that there were never none before , that had done the like in the said Country , nor could not tell what Lutherans were , nor what it meant : for they never herd of any such thing before . We were brought into the Church , every one with a S. Benito upon his back , which is half a yard of yellow cloth , with a hold to put in a men head in the midst , and cast over a men head : both flaps hang one before , and another behind , and in the midst of every flap , a S. Andrewes cross , made of read cloth , sowed on upon the same , and that is called S. Benito . The common people before they saw the penitents come into the Church , were given to understand that we were heretics , infidels , and people that did despise God , and his works , and that we had be more like devils then men , and thought we had had the favour of some monsters , or heathen people . And when they saw us come into the Church in our players coats , the women and children began to cry out , and made such a noise , that it was strange to see and hear , saying , that they never saw goodlier men in all their lives , and that it was not possible that there could be in us so much evil as was reported of us , and that we were more like Angels among men , then such persons of such evil Religion as by the Priests and friars we were reported to be , and that it was great pity that we should be so used for so small and offence . So that being brought into the said high Church , and set upon the scaffold which was made before the high Altar , in the presence of all the people , until high Mass was done , and the sermon 
 348 
 made by a friar , concerning our matter , they did put us in all the disgrace they could , to cause the people not to take so much compassion upon us , for that we were heretics , & people that were seduced of the devil , & had forsaken the faith of the Catholic Church of Rome , with diverse other reproachful words , which were too long to recite in this place . High Mass and Sermon being done , our offences , as they called them , were recited , every man what he had said and done , and presently was the sentence pronounced against us . That was , that the said Augustine Boacio was condemned to wear his S. Benito all the days of his life , and put into perpetuali prison , where he should fulfil the same , and all his goods confiscated and lost . And I the said Tomson to wear the S. Benito for three years , and then to be set at liberty . And for the accomplishing of this sentence or condemnation , we must be presently sent down from Mexico , to Vera Cruz , and from thence to S. John de Ullua , and there to be shipped for Spaine , which was 65. leagues by land , with strait commandment , that upon pain of 1000. ducats , the Master's every one should look straitly unto us , and carry us to Spaine , and deliver us unto the Inquisitors of the Holy house of Sivill , that they should put us in the places , where we should fulfil our penances that the Archbishop of Mexico had enjoined unto us , by his sentence there given . For performance of the which , we were sent down from Mexico , to the Sea side , which was 65. leagues , with fetters upon our feet , and there delivered to the Master's of the ships , to be carried for Spaine , as before is said . And it was so , that the Italian , fearing that if he had presented himself in Spaine before the Inquisitors , that they would have burned him , to prevent that danger , when we were coming homeward , and were arrived at the island of Ter ? era , one of the ysles of the Azores , the first night that we came into the said port to and anchor , about midnight he found the means to get him naked out of the ship into the sea , & swam 349 
 naked a shore , and so presently god him to the further side of the island , where he found a little Carvel ready to depart for Portugal , in the which he came to Lisbone , and passed into France , and so into England , where he ended his life in the City of London . And I for my part kept still aboard the ship , and came into Spaine , and was delivered to the Inquisitors of the Holy house of Sivill , where they kept me in close prison , till I had fulfilled the three years of my penance . Which time being expired , I was freely put out of prison , and set at liberty : and being in the City of Sivil a casher of one Hugh Typton , and English merchant of great doing , by the space of one year , it fortuned that there came out of the City of Mexico , a Spaniard , called John de la Barrera , that had be long time in the Indies , and had god great sums of gold and silver , and with one only daughter shipped himself for to come for Spaine , and by the way chanced to die , and gave all that he had unto his only daughter , whose name was Marry de la Barrera , and being arrived at the City of Sivil , it was my chance to marry with her . The marriage was worth to me 2500. pounds in bars of gold and silver , beside jewels of great price . This I thought good to speak of , to show the goodness of God to all them that put their trust in him , that I being brought out of the Indies , in such great misery and infamy to the world , should be provided at Gods hand in one moment , of more then in all my life before I could attain unto by my own labour . 
 After we departed from Mexico , our S. Benitoes were set up in the high Church of the said City , with our names written in the same , according to their use and custom , which is and will be a monument and a remembrance of us , as long as the Romish Church does reign in that country . The same have be seen since by one John Chilton , and diverse others of our nation , which were left in that country long since , by Sir John Hawkins . And because it shall known wherefore it was 
 35° 
 that I was so punished by the Clergies hand , as before is mentioned , I will in brief words declare the same . 
 It is so , that being in Mexico at the table , among many principali people at dinner , they began to inquire of me being and Englishman , whither it were true , that in England they had overthrown all their Churches and houses of Religion , and that all the images of the Saints of heaven that were in them were thrown down , broken , and burned , and in some places high ways stoned with them , and whither the English nation denied their obedience to the Pope of Rome , as they had be certified out of Spaine by their friends . To whom I made answer , that it was so , that in deed they had in England put down all the Religious houses of friars and monks that were in England , and the images that were in their Churches and other places were taken away , and used there no more : for that ( as they say ) the making of them , and putting of them where they were adored , was clean contrary to the express commandment of Almighty God , Thou shalt not make to thy self any graved image , etc. and that for that cause they thought it not lawful that they should stand in the Church , which is the house of adoration . One that was at the declaring of these words , who was my master Gonsalo Cereso , answered and said , if it were against the commandment of God , to have images in the Churches , that then he had spent a great deal of money in vain , for that two years passed he had made in the monastery of Santo Domingo , in the said city of Mexico , and image of our Lady of pure silver & gold , with pearls and precious stones , which cost him 7000. and odd pesos , and every peso is 4. S. 8.d . of our money : which indeed was true , for that I have seen it many times my self where it stands . At the table was another gentleman , who presuming to defend the cause more then any other that was there , said , that they knew well enough that they were made but of stocks and stones , and that to them was no worship given , but that there was a certain veneration due unto them 
 351 
 after they were set up in the Church , and that they were set there to a good intent : the one , for that they were books for the simple people , to make them understand the glory of the saints that were in heaven , & a shape of them to put us in remembrance to call upon them , to be our intercessors unto God for us , for that we are such miserable sinners , that we are not worthy to appear before God , & that using devotion to saints in heaven , they may obtain at Gods hands the sooner , the thing that we demand of him . As for example , said he , imagine that a subject hath offended his king upon the earth in any kind of respect , is it for the party to go boldly to the king in person , & to demand pardon for his offences ? No , says he , the presumption were too great , & possibly he might be repulsed , and have a great rebuke for his labour . Better it is for such a person to seek some private man near the king in his Court , and make him acquainted with his matter , & let him be a mediator to his Majesty for him , & for the matter he hath to do with him , and so might he the better come to his purpose , and obtain the thing which he doth demand : even so says he , it is with God and his saints in heaven : for we are wretched sinners : and not worthy to appear nor present our selves before the Majesty of God , to demand of him the thing that we have need of : therefore thou hast need to be devout , and have devotion to the mother of God , and the saints of heaven , to be intercessors to God for thee , and so mayest thou the better obtain of God the thing that thou dost demand . To this I answered , & said , sir , as touching the comparison you made of the intercessors to the king , how necessary they were , I would but ask you this question . Set the case that this king you speak of , if he be so merciful , as , when he knoweth that one , or any of his subject's hath offended him , he send for him to his own town , or to his own house , or palace , & say unto him , come hither , I know that thou hast offended 
 352 
 many laws , if thou dost know thereof , and dost repent thee of the same , with full intent to offend no more , I will forgive thy trespass , and remember it no more : said I , if this be done by the kings own person , what then hath this man need to go seek friendship at any of the kings private servants hands , but go to the principal , seeing that he is readier to forgive thee , then thou art to demand forgiveness at his hands ? Even so is it with our gracious God , who calls and cries out unto us throughout all the world , by the mouth of his Prophets , Apostles , and by his own mouth , saying , Come unto me all you that labour and are over laden , and I will refresh you : beside 1000. other offers and proffers which he does make unto us in his holy Scriptures . What then have we need of the saints help that are in heaven , whereas the Lord himself does so freely offer himself unto us ? At which sayings , many of the hearers were astonished , and said , that by that reason , I would give to understand , that the in - vocation of Saints was to be disannulled , and by the Laws of God not commanded . I answered , that they were not my words but the words of God himself : look into the Scriptures your self , and you shall so find it . The talk was perceived to be prejudicial ! to the Romish doctrine , and therefore it was commanded to be no more entreated of , and all remained unthought upon , had it not be for a villainous Portugal that was in the company , who said , Basta ser Ingles para saber todo esto y mass : who the next day , without imparting any thing to any body , went to the Bishop of Mexico , and his Provisor , and said , that in a place where he had be the day before , was and Englishman , who had said , that there was no need of Saints in the Church , nor of any invocation of Saints , upon whose denomination I was apprehended for the same words here rehearsed , and none other thing , and thereupon was used , as before is written . 
 Now to speak somewhat of the description of the country , you shall understand , that the port of S. John de Sant Juan de Ullua is a very little Island low by the water side , the ullua - 
 ix 353 z 
 broadest or longest part thereof not above a bow shoot over , and stands within two furlongs of the firm land . In my time there was but one house , and a little Chapel to say Mass in , in all the Island : the side to the land wards is made by men hands , with freestone and gravel , and is 4. fathom deep down right , wherefore the great ships that come in there do ride so near the shore of the Island , that you may come and go aland upon their beak noses . They use to put great chains of iron in at their halsers , and and anchor to the landward , and all little enough to more well their ships for fear of the Northerly winds , which come off the coast of Florida , that sometime have carried ships , & houses , and all away to the shore . The king was wont to have 20. great mighty Negroes , who did serve for nothing else , but only to repair the said Island , where the foul weather doth hurt it . The Country all thereabouts is very plain ground , & a mile from the sea side a great wilderness , with great quantity of read Dear in the same , so that when the mariners of the ships are disposed , they go up into the wilderness , and do kill of the same , and bring them aboard to eat , for their recreation . 
 The way and From this port to the next town , which is called distance from yera q 
 are c . leagues almost by the Sea side , till San Juan de ’ ... J 7 r . J , j 
 Ullua to Vera you come within one league or the place , and then you Cruz , is five turn up towards the land , into a wood , till you come leagues . to a Iide river hard by the said towns side , which sometime of the year is dry without water . The town of Vera Cruz in my time , had not passed 300. households , and served but for the folk of the ships , to buy and bring their goods aland , and deliver it to their owners , as also the owners and their factors to receive their goods of the Master's of the ships . This town stands also in a very plain on the one side the river , and the other side is environed with much sand blown from the sea side with the tempest of weather , many times coming upon that coast . This town also 
 354 
 • • .. 15581 is subject to great sickness , and in my time many of the Mariners & officers of the ships did die with those diseases , there accustomed , & especially those that were not used to the country , nor knew the danger thereof , but would commonly go in the Sun in the heat of the day , & did eat fruit of the country with much disorder , and especially gave themselves to women's company at their first coming : whereupon they were cast into a burning ague , of the which few escaped . 
 Half a days journey from Vera Cruz , towards Penta de Rin-Mexico , is a lodging of five or sixe houses , called the cona^°-Rinconado , which is a place , where is a great pinnacle made of lime and stone , fast by a river side , where the Indians were wont to do their sacrifices unto their gods , and it is plain and low ground betwixt that and Vera Cruz , and also subject to sickness : but afterwards half a days journey that you do begin to enter into the high land , you shall find as fair , good , and sweet country , as any in the world , and the farther you go , the goodlier and sweeter the country is , till you come to Pueblo de los Angels , which may be some 43 leagues Ruebh de las from Vera Cruz , which was in my time a town of 600. Angeles . households , or thereabouts , standing in a goodly soil . Between Vera Cruz and that you shall come through many towns of the Indians , and villages , and many goodly fields of meadow grounds , Rivers of fresh waters , forests , and great woods , very pleasant to behold . From Pueblo de los Angels , to Mexico , is 20. leagues of very fair way and country , as before is declared . Mexico Mexico . was a City in my time , of not above 1500. households of Spaniards inhabiting there , but of Indian people in the suburbs of the said city , dwelled above 300000. as it was thought , and many more . This City of Mexico is 65. leagues from the North sea , and 75. leagues from the South sea , so that it stands in the midst of the main land , betwixt the one sea and the other . It is situated in the midst of a lake of standing water , and environed round about with the same , saving in many places , going 
 355 
 This is to be understood of his second coming into Spaine . 
 out of the City , are many broad ways through the said lake or water . This lake and City is environed also with great mountains round about , which are in compass above thirtie leagues , and the said City , and lake of standing water , doth stand in a great plain in the midst of it . This lake of standing water doth proceed from the shedding of the rain , that falls upon the said mountains , and so gather themselves together in this place . 
 All the whole proportion of this City doth stand in a very plain ground , and in the midst of the said City is a square place of a good bow shoot over from side to side : and in the midst of the said place is the high Church , very fair and well built all through , at that time not half finished , and round about the said place , are many fair houses built : on the one side , are the houses where Mutezuma the great king of Mexico that was , dwelled , and now there lie always the viceroys that the King of Spaine sends thither every three years . And in my time there was for viceroy a gentleman of Castil , called DONE Luis de Velasco . And on the other side of the said place , over against the same , is the Bishops house , very fair built , and many other houses of goodly building . And hard by the same , are also other very fair houses , built by the Marks de Valle , otherwise called Hernando Cortes , who was he that first conquered the said City and Country , who after the said conquest which he made with great labour and travail of his person , and danger of his life , and being grown great in the Country , the King of Spaine sent for him , saying that he had some particular matters to impart unto him . And when he came home , he could not be suffered to return back again , as the King before had promised him . With the which , for sorrow that he took , he died ; and this he had for the reward of his good service . 
 The said City of Mexico hath the streets made very broad , and right , that a man being in the high place , 356 
 at the one end of the street , may see at the least a good mile forward , and in all the one part of the streets of the North part of their City , there runneth a pretty lake of very clear water , that every man may put into his house as much as he will , without the cost of any thing , but of the letting in . Also there is a great cave or ditch of water , that comes through the City , even unto the high place , where come every morning at the break of the day twentie or thirtie Canoas , or troughs of the Indians , which bring in them all manner of provision for the city , which is made , and grows in the Country , which is a very good commodity for the inhabitants of that place . And as for victuals in the said City , of beef , mutton , and hens , capons , quails , Guiny-cocks , and such like , all are very good cheap : To say , the whole quarter of and ox , as much as a slave can carry away from the Butchers , for five Tomynes , that is , five Royals of plate , which is just two shillings and sixe pence , and a fat sheep at the Butchers for three Royals , which is 18. pence and no more . Bred is as good cheap as in Spaine , and all other kind of fruits , as apples , pears , pomegranates , and quinces , at a reasonable rate . The City goes wonderfully forward in building of Friaries and Nunneries , and Chapels , and is like in time to come , to be the most populous Ci tie in the world , as it may be supposed . The weather is there always very temperate , the day differeth but one hour of length all the year long . The fields and the woods are always green . The woods full of popinjays , and many other kind of birds , that make such and harmonic of singing , and crying , that any man will rejoice to hear it . In the fields are such odoriferous smells of flowers and herbs , that it gives great content to the senses . About the City of Mexico two , three , or foure leagues ofF , are diverse towns of Indians , some of 4000. or 6000. households , which do stand in such a goodly soil , that if Christians had the inhabitation thereof , it would be put to a further benefit . In my time were 
 357 
 dwelling and alive in Mexico , many ancient men that Mexico were of the conquerors at the first conquest with conquered Hernando Cortes : for then it was about 36. years ^ ” 1520^ a§oe ’ at sa^ Country was conquered . 
 About Mexico there are diverse Mines of silver , and also in other places there about , but the principali Mines that are in all New Spaine are in Sacatecas , 80. leagues from Mexico , and the Mines of S. Martin , thirtie leagues , both to the Northwestward of Mexico , where is great store of gold and silver . Also there is a place called the Misteca , fiftie leagues to the Northwest , which does yield great store of very good silk , and Cochinilla . Wine and oil there is none growing in the Country , but what comes out of Spaine . Also there are many goodly fruits in that Country , whereof we have none such , as Plantanos , Guyaves , Sapotes , Tunas , and in the wilderness great store of black cherries , and other whol-Cochinilla is some fruits . The Cochinilia is not a worm , or a fly , not a worm as some say ft is > but a berry that grows upon certain beny bushes in the wild field , which is gathered in time of the year , when it is ripe . Also the Indico that doth come from thence to die blue , is a certain herb that grows in the wild fields , and is gathered at one time of the year , and burned , and of the ashes thereof , with Indico . other confections put thereunto , the said Indico is made . 
 Balm , Salsa perilla , Cana fistula , sugar , ox hides , and many other good and serviceable things the Country doth yield , which are yearly brought into Spaine , and there sold and distributed to many nations . 
 Robert Tomson . 
 . 