The damage which may be done bypassing by the river of Jenero into the South sea . 
 The opinion of DONE Alvaro Ba^an , Marks of Santa Cruz , and high Admiral of Spaine , touching the army of sir Francis Drake lying at the Isles of Bayona in Galicia , written in Lisbon the 26 of October after the account of Spaine in the year 1585. 
 THat which it seems unto me , that the English army may do , if they seek to pass unto the West Indies , and enter into the South sea ( as Francis Drake hath done once before ) with their thirty ships and galleons , and many pinnaces and shalops with oars , which they have with them , and 5000 men of war , which they of Bayona think to be in the fleet , is as follows . 
 They may take their course to the river of Jenero , which is on the coast of Brasil in 23 degrees to the 92 
 South of the Equinoctial line . It is and haven capable of many ships and very safe , where there is water , wood and flesh : and likewise Drake may have corn of Maiz in a town two or three leagues from the said haven , which is called S. Vincente . 
 And because the course is by the Isles of Madera , the Canaries , and Cape verde , he may sack those Islands , the time serving him for that purpose . 
 From Bayona to the Isle of Madera , with the Northern winds which now will begin to blow , when the Western winds be passed , which presently do blow because that it begins to rain on the coast of Spaine , the fleet may run in 6 days , and from thence to the Canaries in foure , and from the Canaries to the Isles of Cape Verde in eight , which all together make eighteene days : and he may stay as much time more as shall serve him to sack the Islands in . 
 He may sail from Cape Verde to the river of Jenero in 40 days , which in the whole amount unto two months . So that the fleet remaining all this month of October on the coast of Galicia , it may come to the river of Jenero in the end of December . 
 At the entry of the bay of the river of Jenero there is a flat low Island where a fort may very easily be made , wherein above 500 men may be left : and placing his artillery therein , he may keep the haven , & the fort will be able to hold out all assault , because that on the Southwest and Northeast sides are two channels whereby the ships come into the haven : wherein Francis Drake may repair his army , and leave there some people , and depart with so much of the rest as shall seem good unto him to enter into the South sea , & go on upon his voyage to the straight of Magelan , which is 550 leagues from the foresaid haven , and stands in 52 degrees & a half towards the South , and may enter by the straight into the South sea all the month of February , & so may to go to the city of Lima , otherwise called the city de los Reys , which stands on the sea coast 
 93 
 Madera . 
 The Isles of Cape Verde . 
 The river of Jenero . 
 A fort may be built on and Island in the mouth of the river of Jenero . 
 The straight of Magelan . The city of Lima easy to be taken , though it have 2000 inhabitants . 
 1585. having two thousand inhabitants in it . But in respect that they be no warlike people nor exercised in arms , and because the place is open and without fortress & artillery , he may take and sack it , and make himself 
 The ships in the South sea may be burned . master on the land , & afterwards taking those ships which are in that sea , our people can have no succour of ships out of Spaine , but by the straight of Magelan , which 
 Panama may be taken . The second course which indeed Drake took . is a long way about . It is also very credible that he will be able to take Panama . If he seek not to take this course he may divide his army into two parts , & sack the Isle of S. Domingo , Puerto Rico , the coast of Tierra firma unto Cartagena and Number de Dios. 
 And from the river of Chagre , which is fifteene leagues from Number de Dios , he may send his footmen in shalops with oars and in the vessels which carry goods up and down the river , whereof there are above fiftie there , and pass up to the lodging of the Crosses , called 
 Panama being and open place is easy to be taken . Havana easy to be taken . in Spanish Venta de Cruzes , which is five leagues from Panama , which because it is and unwalled town may easily be taken . And Havana also will be in great danger , which albeit it have a fortress , yet it is but little and weak , and bringing his great ordinance on shore he may take the same with great facility . And beside these domages which he may do , according to this discourse , it will not be the least to cut ofF 
 The Indian fleet may be taken . the navigation of the Indies , to take the West Indian fleet , if they chance to be there . What course is to be taken to prevent these mischiefs . r I ' ' Oh dispatch Caravels with all possible diligence to the A viceroys and governors of the Indias , advertising them of the news of the English army , that they may be provided , and make themselves ready for them . Albeit , considering the number of ships which have be set 94 
 1585. forth out of England , I assure my self , that some part Sir Barnard of them are gone out of those parts unto Newfoundland Drake took For the Queen hath taken careful order to send to intercept the ships of the fishermen that go to Baccalaos . Jugali And it is likewise to be thought that she hath done fishers re-the like for the intercepting of the fleet of the Indies , turningfrom 
 And considering that according to our intelligence out of England , above fourescore ships , and the army of Drake His’lntM-have be set forth from thence , it is meet that his gence was too majesty should prepare another army to seek the English as s‘Me fleet , and to fight with it , commanding that the Galleons which belong to the crown of Portugall , and those of his Admiralty . majesty which lie in the river of Sivill be prepared to send against them , and to give them the Carena , that they may be in a readiness for any voyage how long soever it be : And likewise to arrest a Galeon of the Duke of Florence , which is very well armed and furnished with great ordinance , and passed lately from Alicante towards Cadiz , and to make up the number of fortie great ships , Fortie great which are to be had in Biscay and Guipuscoa : and that being rigged , armed and set in good order , they be r ' victualed for eight months , and that forthwith there be levied a thousand mariners of Catalunna and Genoa to be divided among the Fleet , and be conducted , as they were for the Fleet of Ter^era : furthermore that sixe G8 ? - Ter-thousande soldiers be levied , giving commandment marks to press a greater number , to the end that these may ofSantaCruz . be able men for service . 
 Moreover it is needful for this army that 20. pataches be brought from Biscay , and 20. Azabras from Castro . That the pataches be from 50. to 60. tons : and that the Azabras be like those which were in the expedition to Terser a. 
 That sufficient provision be made of artillery , powder , match , and led , and harquebusses , muskets , and chosen pikes for the keeping of the coast . 
 It is also meet to provide another army of two ships Another army of 400. tons apiece , and other foure of 200. tons , SM es‘ 
 and foure pataches and a thousand soldiers , beside mariners . 
 The Indian Having seen and considered that the Englishmen with hened merchant's ships only that traverse these seas have with 4. ships made such havoc in two months , and that it is to be ofwarre . thought that they will do the like against the fleets which go and come from the Indies : it is expedient , that as by order in time of peace the fleet hath and Admiral and Viceadmiral , that now it should have two more at the least in eke Fleet : and nevertheless they are to be wafted home with and army . 
 In mine opinion all these provisions ought to be made only in regard of the English army , and the rest of the ships which have be set out of that kingdom . 
 But in case that DONE Antonio should come with and army , and should seek to invade this kingdom , these provisions following would be needful . 
 What pro - r ■ 5Hat warning be given to the Cond de Beneventa , to ma^lf^on the Marks de Soria , to the Cond of Altamira , Antonio should to the Cond of Monterey , to the Marquess of Zerraluo , come with an and to the rest of the Lords and Knights , which are to have order to be in a readiness , against he come unto this kingdom . 
 That the people also be trained of the cities of Toro , Zamora , and Salamanca , to be ready to succour the country between the rivers of Doro and Minno : and the people of Estremadura and Sivilla are likewise to be trained to be ready to succour the city of Lisbon , and the country about the same . 
 Also that the castles of this city , river and territory be victualed and provided of gunpowder , match and led , and all things else belonging to the artillery , as I have And army of recluested in the relations which I sent unto his majesty 14. galleys to the 7. of March of this present year 1585. 
 be provided . That the galleys be furnished for foure months : and 
 that sixe more be brought from Spaine to this river of Lisbon with and hundred and twentie soldiers for each galley , that they may be divided among the eight galleys which remain here . 
 And in case it fallen out that the army of the English go not for the Indies , but occupy themselves upon this kingdom , ( for there may be English ships , which may attend the one and the other ) we shall be inforced to make another army , beside that for the Indies , of twelve ships , foure pataches , and a thousand five hundred soldiers . 
 In mine opinion all this is meet for his majesties service to be foreseen to be made ready with great diligence and care , and to provide money needful for the same , without neglecting the one or the other , but that all these things be done without delay : Referring my self in all things to those of wiser judgement . Written in Lisbon the 26 of October , 1585. 
 Another army of 12. great ships , 4 pataches , andi$oo soldiers . 
 . 