The voyage of John Oxnam of Plimmouth , to the west India , and over the straight of Dariene into the South sea . Anno 1575. Written by the foresaid Lopez Vaz in the said discourse . 
 Here was another Englishman , who hearing of the spoil that Francis Drake had done upon the coast of Nueva Espanna , and of his good adventure and safe return home , was thereby provoked to undertake the like enterprise , with a ship of 140 tons , and 70 men , and came 
 thither , and had also conference with the foresaid 
 Negroes : and hearing that the gold and silver which came upon the Mules from Panama to Number de Dios , was now conducted with soldiers , he determined to do that which never any man before enterprised : and landed in that place where Francis Drake before had had his conference with the Negroes . This man covered his ship after he had brought her aground with boughs of trees , and hid his great Ordinance in the ground , and so not leaving any man in his ship , he took two small pieces of ordinance , and his calivers , and good store of victuals , and so went with the Negroes about twelve leagues into the main land , to a river that goes to the South sea , and there he cut wood and made a 
 Pinnace , which was five and fortie foot by the keel , and having made this Pinnace , he went into the South sea , carrying sixe Negroes with him to be his guides , and so went to the Hand of Pearls , which is five 8c twentie leagues from Panama , which is in the way that they come from Peru to Panama , and there he was ten days without showing himself to any man , to 
 A.D. 
 1575 - 
 The Hand of pearls 25. leagues from Panama . 
 see if he might get any ship that came from Peru : At last there came a small Bark by , which came from Peru from a place called Quito , which he took and found in her sixtie thousand pezos of gold , and much victuals . But not contenting himself with this prize , he stayed long without sending away his prize or any of the men , and in the end of sixe days after , he took another Bark which came from Lima , in which he took and hundred thousand pezos of silver in bars , with the which he thought to have gone , & entered the river , but first he went into the Islands to see if he could find any pearls : where he found a few , and so returned to his pinnace again , & so sailing to the river from whence he came , and coming near to the mouth of the said river , he sent away the two prizes that he took , and with his pinnace he went up the river . The Negroes that dwelled in the Island of pearls , the same night that he went from them , went in Canoas to Panama , and the Governor within two days sent foure barks 100 men , 25 in every one , and Negroes to row with the captain John de Ortega , which went to the Island of pearls , and there had intelligence , which way the English men were gone , and following them he met by the way the ships which the English men had taken , of whom he learned , that the English men were gone up the river , and he going thither , when he came to the mouth of the river , the captain of Panama knew not which way to take , because there were three partitions in the river to go up in , and being determined to go up the greatest of the three rivers , he saw coming down a lesser river many feathers of hens , which the Englishmen had pulled to eat , and being glad thereof , he went up that river where he saw the feathers , and after that he had be in that river foure days , he descried the Englishmens pinnace upon the sands , and coming to her , there were no more then sixe Englishmen , whereof they killed one , and the other five escaped away , and in the pinnace he found 
 nothing but victuals : but this captain of Panama not herewith satisfied , determined to seek out the Englishmen by land , and leaving twenty men in his pinnaces , he with 80 shot went up the country : he had not gone half a league , but he found a house made of boughs , where they found all the Englishmens goods , and the gold and silver also , and carrying it back to their pinnaces , the Spaniards were determined to go away , without following the English men any further . 
 But at the end of three days , the English captain came to the river with all his men , and above 200 Negroes , and set upon the Spaniards with great fury : But the Spaniards having the advantage of trees which they stood behind , did easily prevail , and killed eleven Englishmen , and five Negroes , and took other seven Englishmen alive , but of the Spaniards , two were slain and five soar hurt . 
 Among other things , the Spaniards inquired of the Englishmen which they took , why they went not away in fifteene days liberty which they had . They answered , that their captain had commanded them to carry all that gold and silver which they had , to the place where they had left their ship , and they had promised him to carry it , although they made three or foure journeys of it , for he promised to give them part of it beside their wages , but the mariners would have it by and by , and so their Captain being angry because they would not take his word , fell out with them , and they with him , in so much that one of the company would have killed the Captain , so that the Captain would not have them to carry the treasure , but said he would seek Negroes to carry it , and so he went and sought for Negroes , and bringing those Negroes to carry it , he met with the five English men that he had left in his pinnace which ran from the Spaniards , and the rest also which ran from the house , and they told him what the Spaniards had done , and then making friendship with all his men , he promised them half of all the treasure if they god 79 
 A.D. 
 I575 - 
 A skirmish between the English men , and . the Spaniards . 
 it from the Spaniards , and the Negroes promised to help him with their bows and arrows , and thereupon they came to seek the Spaniards , and now that some of his company were killed and taken , he thought it best to return to his ship , and to pass back for England . The Spanish captain hearing this , having buried the dead bodies , and having got all things into his barks , and taking the English men and their pinnace with him , he returned to Panama : so the voyage of that English man did not prosper with him , as he thought it would have done . 
 Now when the foure barks were come to Panama , they sent advice also to Number de dios , and they of Number de dios sent also from them other foure barks which ( as the Spaniards say ) found the English ship where she was hid , and brought her to Number de dios : and that the Viceroy of Peru not thinking it good to suffer fiftie English men to remain in the country , sent a servant of his called Diego de Frees , with a hundreth and fifty shot into the mountains to seek them out , who found them making of certain Canoas to go into the North sea , and there to take some bark or other : some of them were sick , and were taken , 
 betrayed to thee and the rest fled with the Negroes , who in the end 
 Spaniards . ' ' ' . _ .... - - 
 betrayed them to the Spaniards , so that they were brought to Panama . And the Justice of Panama asked the English captain whither he had the Queens licence , or the licence of any other Prince or Lord for his attempt . And he answered he had none , whereupon he and all his company were condemned to die , and so were all executed , saving the Captain , the Master , the Pilot , and five boys which were carried to Lima , and there the Captain was executed with the other two , but the boys be yet living . 
 The King of Spaine having intelligence of these matters , sent 300 men of war against those Negroes which had assisted those English men , which before were slaves unto the Spaniards , and as before is said , 80 
 ! 575-fled from their master's unto those mountains , and so joined themselves to the Englishmen , to the end they might the better revenge themselves on the Spaniards . 
 At the first coming of these 300 soldiers , they took many of the Negroes , and executed great justice upon them : But after a season , the Negroes grew wise and wary , and prevented the Spaniards , so that none of them could be taken . 
 The Spaniards of that country marveiled much at this one thing , to see that since the conquering of this land , there have be many Frenchmen , that have come to those Countries' , but never saw English men there but only those two of whom I have spoken . And although there have many Frenchmen be on the coast , yet never durst they put foot upon land , only those two English men adventured it , and did such exploits , as are before remembered . 
 All these things coming to the hearing of the The English king of Spaine , he provided two Galleys well appointed to keep those coasts : and the first year they took ’ 
 sixe or seven French ships . And after that this was king of Spaine known , there were no more Englishmen or Frenchmen to built galleys of war that durst adventure to approach the coast , the until this present year 1586 , that the aforesaid Francis ' Drake , with a strong fleet of 24 ships arrived there , and made spoil of Santo Domingo , Carthagena , and S. Augustine , things that are known to all the world . But it is likely that if the King of Spaine live , he will in time provide sufficient remedy , to keep his countries' and subject's from the invasion of other nations . 
 x 
 81 
 . 