A true report of a voyage undertaken for the West Indies by M. Christopher Newport general of a fleet of three ships and a pinnace , viz. The golden Dragon Admiral , whereof was Captain M. Newport himself ; The Prudence Viceadmiral , under the conduct of Captain Hugh Merrick ; The Margaret under Captain Robert Fred ; and The Virgin our pinnace under Captain Henry Kidgil : Begun from London the 25. of Januarie 1591. Written by M. John Twit of Harewich , Corporali in the Dragon . In which voyage they took and burned upon the coast of Hispaniola , within the bay of Honduras , and other places , 3. towns , and 19. sail of ships and frigates . 
 He 12. day of Februarie An. 1591. we set sail from Dover road , and having a prosperous wind , the 27. day of the same month we fell with Cape Cantin on the coast of Barbarie , and on the 28. we arrived at Santa Cruz road , where having refreshed our selves some 3. or 4. 
 days , we put off to sea again , and about the 5. of March we passed by the Hands of the Canaries : and having a favourable wind , the 4. of April An. 1592. we fell with Dominica in the West Indies : where making stay a day or two , we bartered with the Salvages for certain commodities of theirs , viz. Tobacco , hens , Potato roots , etc. 
 Passing from thence to a watering place on the other side of the clifFe , we took a Portugall ship of Lisbone of 300. tons , which came from Guinie , and was bound for Cartagena , wherein were 300. Negros young and old . Which ship we took along with us to S. Juan de Puerto 184 
 rico , where we landed the merchant and one Spaniard more within a league of the town , and landing some 20. or 30. musketeers , some 20. horsemen made towards us ; but we retired to our boats without any service done . 
 The 9. we lay hovering all day before the town , the castle making a shot or two at us . 
 The reason why we set the Portugall merchant aland there was , for that he hoped to help us to some money for his Negroes there , but he falsified his word with us , so that passing along to the Westermost end of the said Hand , about some 9. or 10. leagues from the town we landed the Negroes , and sunk their ship . 
 The 11. of Aprill we passed from thence to Mona some 15. leagues ofF , where we landed : there were on the Hand about 19. souls , the children of and old Portugal ! , and his wife who afforded us such fruits as their Hand yielded , viz. swines flesh , Potato roots , etc. 
 From thence along we passed to Saona , a long Hand and very fruitful , replenished with store of wild beasts and swine , where we landed , hunted , and trained our men . 
 Passing from hence Westward along the South coast of Hispaniola , we descried a frigate , which we chased and took : wherein were 22. jars of copper-money , being bound for S. Juan de Puerto rico , to buy wine there . 
 The next day we took 2. small frigates more , but nothing of any valve in them . 
 The 15. of Aprill at night we sacked a town in the said Hand of Hispaniola called Ocoa , where was and Ingenio , wherein we found sugar 8c poultry great store , but the people had discovered our ships over night , and were fled into the mountains . This town stands a league from the seaside , consisting of some fortie or fiftie houses . They brought us much cattle , and two wain loads of sugar , to ransom the town . While this actium was performed , Robert Freed of Harwich , captain of the Margaret , took two frigates with certain Spaniards on the other side of the bay , which came to lade sugar there at and Ingenio . 
 185 
 This town stands from the waters side a league . 
 After we had here refreshed our selves , we stood along for Cape Tiburon , where we watered : and making no stay there , about the 23. of Aprill we left our ships in a fair roadstead under and Hand not inhabited , and with our frigates which we had taken before , wherein we shipped all our strength which possibly we could afford , leaving only so few aboard our ships as could hardly if need had be , have wrought them ; we passed along by the said Hand to the Northwest part of Hispaniola , to a town called Yaguana ; where the 27. in the morning 2. hours before day we landed ; but we were discovered by means of a frigate that lay laden with victuals , bound for Carthagena , the men of which frigate recovering on land before us , gave and alarm to the town , who were presently up in arms to the number of a hundred & fiftie horses . we marched notwithstanding along to the town , having a Spaniard for our guide , where by that time the day brake , we were before the town , where upon a fair green making a stand , we were encountered by the horsemen having no strength of foot , but certain few lose shot which lay in a low valley at the entry of the town . The horsemen charged us very fiercely , but seeing they could not prevail , brought in a drove before them of two hundred beasts or more : and so forcibly thinking to have broken our array , it pleased God to cause their cattle to return back upon themselves : and thus their own device sorted out to their own detriment . In this skirmish we slew their governor , a man very hardy , and of great valour . 
 In the end , by reason of the Spaniards brags which they gave out , ( as by the life of their wives and children , etc. that not one of us should go aboard again ) a greater doubt of intercepting of us and of our boats was stroken into our captains hearts then needed : and so for that time we retired to our boats not entering the town , and so passed with our boats to our ships again ; where the same night our captain determined to go up with our ships , but it fell so calm , that all the next day until 186 
 night we could not get up , and they having discovered us , barricadoed up their way , and conveyed all that they had into the mountains , leaving their houses only bore and naked , notwithstanding we landed , and with great difficulty we passed their barricados with the loss of two men at both conflicts , entered their town and fired it , leaving not and house unburnt , being a town of three streets having about 150. households . 
 The same night we passed with our boats to a small village called Aguava , where we found excellent fruits of the country , which by reason of their cowardly brags we also set on fire . 
 Being thus frustrated of our pretended voyage , we stood for the bay of Honduras , and about the ninth of May we discovered in the afternoon a sail thwart of the bay of Truxillo , with whom we stood , and having a Spanish flag out , they mistrusted us not , until we had almost fetched them up : and then we went off with our boat , and took them within shot of the castle , and with our boats we went and fetched three or foure frigates which T& ? thought road afore the town , the castle playing upon us with somefieete their ordinance .. _ from^aine , 
 Our captain having understanding by the Spaniards , fir so they that there were three ships more at Puerto de Cavallos , expected . stood along that night for that place , but it fell out to be so calm , that it was the fifteenth day of May or ever we came there , the ships having peradventure discovered us , stole alongst the shore towards Truxillo , so that being void of that hope , we landed ; the inhabitants forsaking the town , fled into the mountains . we remained in the town all night , and the next day till towards night : where we found 5. or 6. tons of quick silver , 16. tons of old sack , sheep , young kids , great store of poultry , some store of money , & good linen , silks , cotton-cloth , and such like ; we also took three bells out of their church , and destroyed their images . 
 The town is of 200 houses , and wealthy ; and that year there were foure rich ships laden from thence : but we 187 
 spared it , because we found other contentment . And having taken our pleasure of the town , as aforesaid , we returned aboard our ships , standing back again for Truxillo , we discovered one of the ships which was laden at Puerto de Cavallos : but they had espied us before , as it should seem ; for they had conveyed away as much as possibly they could ashore , and set their ship on fire ; which so soon as we had descried , we made to her with our boats , and quenched the fire , and loaded up with hides the ship which we took at our first coming ; for she had but a thousand hides in her , and certain jars of balsamum : which being accomplished , we sunk the ship with the rest of the goods , and so stood alongst again for Truxillo . It fell out to be so calm , that we were two and twenty days sailing back that we had sailed in sixe days , which was about forty leagues : so that when we came before Truxillo , which was about the sixth of June , we found another of the ships there , but close under the castle , her ruther unhanged , her sails taken from the yards , etc. notwithstanding we entered her , but they had placed such a company of musketeers under a rampire , which they had made with hides and such like , that it was too hight for us to abide , and so betaking us to our ships again , and standing out of the bay into the sea , we discovered great store of shot entrenched in those places where they suspected we would have landed . That night there fell such a storm of rain , thunder , lightning and tempestuous weather , that our ships were dispersed either from other . And having determined all of us to meet at a certain Island , where we purposed to water and refresh our selves ; by means of the storm and other contagious weather which followed , we were frustrated of that hope . 
 We had lost our prize , and certain frigates with the men . Two of our ships went to seek our prize and our men : and other two of us came homeward . And so we parted , not hearing either of other until we came into England . 
 188 
 Our place of meeting should have been at the Tortuga's near unto the point of Florida , but the Golden dragon and the Prudence were put to leeward of this place : nevertheless we fell with certain islands within the point of Florida , where the captain of the Dragon M. Christopher Newport sent his pinnace on shore with certain shot to seek for fresh water , where we found none ; but found the Savages very courteous unto us , who came breast high into the sea , and brought us a line to hall in our boat on shore , and showed us that up into the land Northward was fresh water , and much gold . And one Michael Bag of Ipswich boatswains mate of the Dragon , had given him by one of the Savages for and old rusty hatchet , a piece of gold wound hollow , and about the bigness and valve of and English angel , which the Savage ware hanging about his knee , with two pieces of fine silver plate , whereof one the said Savage gave John Lock , master's mate of the Dragon , being foureteene groats in valve , for and old knife : the other piece he gave to one William Wright a sailer , for and old knife : which pieces of silver were in form like unto the boss of a bridle . These Savages were far more civil than those of Dominica : for beside their courtesy , they covered their privities with a plaited mat of green straw , about three handfuls deep , which came round about their waste , with the bush hanging down behind . 
 The next day in the morning very early , there came a frigate of the island of Cuba of 30 tons , put in by weather , which was bound for Havana , wherein were fifty hogs ; to which we gave chase all that day , passing the gulf of Bahama , and about five of the clock in the afternoon , after a shot or two made at her , she yielded unto us : we hoist out our boat , and went aboard , where we found some five Spanyards , five and fifty hogs , and about some two hundred weight of excellent tobacco rolled up in seynes . We lightened them of their hogs and tobacco , and sent the men away with their frigate . 
 In this voyage we took and sacked foure towns , 189 
 seventeene frigates , and two ships , whereof eight were taken in the bay of the Honduras ; of all which we brought but two into England : the rest we sunk , burned , and one of them we sent away with their men . And to make up the full number of twenty , the Spanyards themselves set one on fire in the bay of the Honduras , lest we should be master's of it . 
 We shaped our course from Florida homeward by the isle of Flores one of the Azores , where we watered , finding sir John Burgh there , who took us to be Spanyards , and made up unto us ; with whom we joined in the taking the mighty Portugall carrack called Madre de Dios , and our captain M. Christopher Newport with diverse of us was placed in her as captain by the general sir John Burgh to conduct her into England , where we arrived in Dartmouth the seventh of September 1592. 
 . 