The voyage made to the bay of Mexico by M. William King Captain , M. Moore , M. How , and M. Boreman Owners , with the Salomon of 200 tons , and the Jane Bonaventure of 40 tons of Sir Henry Palmer , from Ratcliffe the 26 of January 1592. 
 He Salomon was manned with and hundred men , all mariners , and the Jane with sixe and twenty , all like wise mariners . we came first to the Downs in Kent , and never struck sail in passing thence , until we came to Cape S. Vincent on the coast of Portugall . From thence we 
 shaped our course to Lancerota one of the Canary islands , where we landed threescore men , and fetched a caravel out of and harbour on the South side , and from a small Island we took a demy-canon of brass in despite of the inhabitants , which played upon us with their small shot at our first landing : of whom we slew three ; and gave them the repulse . Thence we went to the Grand 
 190 
 Canaria , where we boarded a bark lying at anchor : out of which we were driven by great store of shot from the Island . From thence we directed our course for the West Indies , and fell with the isle of Dominica about the tenth of April . There at a watering place we took a ship of and hundred tons come from Guiny , laden with two hundred and seventy Negroes , which we carried with us to S. Juan de Puerto Rico , and there coming thorough El passaje , we gave chase to a frigate which went in to S. Juan de Puerto Rico , and in the night we sent in our shallope with foureteene men . And out of the harbour we took away and English ship of seventy tons , laden with threescore tons of Canary-wines , in despite of the castle and two new bulwarks , being within caliver shot . These two prizes we carried away to the Westermost part of the island , and put the Negroes , except fifteene , all on land in a Spanish caravel which the Jane Bonaventure took : and we carried away one of the former prizes , and set fire on the other . We passed thence by the isle of Mona , where we watered , and refreshed our selves with potatos and plantans , and so came to the isle of Saona : and from thence arrived at the mouth of the river of Santo Domingo . And as we sailed to Cape Tiburon , three leagues to the Westward of Santo Domingo we took a boat of fifteene tons , which had certain jars of malosses or unrefined sugar , with three men ; which men with their boat we carried with us to Cape Tiburon , which , in respect of service done unto us in furnishing us with fresh water , we dismissed . Thus contrary to other Englishmens courses we shaped ours to the Southward of Jamaica , and our shallop with Jamaica . 12 men ranged the coast but found nothing . Thence we ranged the three islands of the Caimanes , and landed at Grand Caiman , being the Westermost , where we found no people , but a good river of fresh water ; and there we mw turned up threescore great tortoises ; and of them we took our choice , to wit , fifteene of the females , which caima „ tO are the best and fullest of eggs , whereof two served and 
 191 
 hundred men a day . And there with stones we might kill turtle doves , wild geese , & other good fowls at our pleasures . Thence we came to Cape de Corrientes on Cuba to water , and from thence to Cape S. Antonio , and so went over for the Tortugas , without taking of any new prize : and thence cut over to Rio de puercos on the coast of Cuba . There we took a small bark of twenty tons , with foure men and forty live hogs , with certain dried pork cut like leather jerkins along , and dried hogs tongues and neats tongues , and 20 ox hides . Then passing thence , within foure days we took a ship of 80 tons laden with hides , indico , & salsa perilla , North of and headland called Corugna : thence the current set us to the East to the old channel . There we took a frigate of 20 tons , having certain pieces of Spanish broad cloth & other small pillage : there continuing ofF the Matan$as 12 days , with the wind so Westerly that we could hardly recover Havana in the month of May . Here we took two boats laden with tortoises , which we sunk , saving some of the tortoises , & setting the men on shore . Then at length we recovered up to Havana , where we came so near to the forts , that for one hours fight they overreached us with their long ordinance . Then came out the two galleys , having 27 banks on a side , and fought with us another hour ; which for that time left us by reason of the increasing of the wind . Then passing alongst nine leagues to the Westward we found out and excellent harbour , having three fathom water at the flood , able within to receive a thousand sail , where we found hog-houses , which they term coralles , and took away certain hogs and pigs . As we came out of this harbour , the weather being calm , we were encountered by the galleys , which had followed us , and fought with them three hours , oftentimes within caliver shot : but we made such spoil of their men and oars , that they began to be weary , and gave us over , with their great loss . Here within foure days after , as we lay to the Northward sixe leagues ofF this harbour of Cavannas , we met with 
 192 
 I592 > master captain Lane , general of master Wats his fleet , and captain Roberts , in the Exchange , a ship of Bristol , of and hundred and forty tons , and master Benjamin Wood with his foure ships which were set out by my lord Thomas Howard with captain Kenel of Limehouse captain of the Cantar of Weymouth . All we being here together espied a ship of some 50 tun , which we chased with their boats ; but my shallope first boarded her , and took her : which had in her sack , Canary-wine , muscadel , tent in jars , and good store of oil in jars . The ship we unladed and burned : the men ran on shore . Hence we came all together , being about 13 sails , before Havana ; but passing by we gave chase to a ship of 60 tun , which entered into and harbour a league to the Northwest of Havana , which with boats was boarded , and found to be of Puerto de Cavallos in the bay of Honduras , laden with tanned hides , salsa perilla , Indico , raw hides , and good store of balsamum : and she had foure chests of gold , which they god on land before we could come to them . We brought this ship into England . Thus spending a sevennight in lying ofF and on for purchase , and finding nothing come , I set sail for England , and arrived at Dover about the tenth of November 1592. 
 x 
 . 