A voyage of the honourable Gentleman M. Robert Duddeley , now knight , to the isle of Trinidad , and the coast of Paria : with his return home by the Isles of Granata , Santa Cruz , Sant Juan de puerto rico , Mona , Zacheo , the shoalds called Abreojos , and the isle of Bermuda . In which voyage he and his company took and sunk nine Spanish ships , whereof one was and armada of 600 tons . Written at the request of M. Richard Hakluyt . 
 Aving ever since I could conceive of any thing be delighted with the discoveries of navigation , I fostered in my self that disposition till I was of more years and better ability to undertake such a matter . To this purpose I called to me the advice of sufficient seamen , 
 and principally undertook a voyage for the South seas ; but by reason that many before had miscarried in the same enterprise , I could not be suffered to hazard more of her Majesties subject's upon so uncertain a ground as my desire : which made me by constraint ( great charges already by me defrayed ) to prepare another 
 203 
 course for the West Indies , without hope there to do any thing worth note : and so common is it indeed to many , as it is not worth the registering . Neyer-thelesse , I have yielded to your former importunity , and sent you this my journal to supply a vacant room among your more important discourses . 
 Now being provided for this last enterprise , rather to see some practice and experience , then any wonders or profit , I weighed anchor from Southampton road the sixth of November 1594. But the wind falling scant , it was the 17. day of the same month before I could put into the Sea. Upon this day my self in the Bear a ship of 200. tons my Admiral , and Captain Munck in the Bears whelp viceadmiral , with two small pinnaces called the Frisking and the Earwig passed through the Needles , and within two days after bore in with Plimmouth . My business at this port-town dispatched , I set sail ; whither again by contrary winds to my great misfortune , I was enforced to return back . I might call it misfortune ; for by this means I utterly ( for all the voyage ) lost my viceadmiral ; which was the cause likewise of losing mine own pinnace , which three were the principali stay of my voyage . For at this last leaving of England in a storm I lost mine own pinnace , as is before said . Notwithstanding all these crosses all alone I went wandering on my voyage , sailing along the coast of Spaine within view of Cape Finister , and Cape S. Vincent , the North & South capes of Spaine . In which space having many chases , I could meet with none but my countrymen or countries' friends . Leaving these Spanish shores I directed my course the 14. of December towards the isles of the Canaries . Here I lingered 12 days for two reasons : The one , in hope to meet my viceadmiral : The other , to get some vessel to remove my pestered men into , who being 140. almost in a ship of 200. tons , there grew many sick . The first hope was frustrated , because my viceadmiral was returned into 
 204 
 England with two prizes . The second expectation fell out to our great comfort : for I took two very fine Caravels under the calms of Tenerif and Palma , which both refreshed and amended my company , and made me a Fleet of 3. sails . In the one Caravel 
 This M. Ben - 
 called The Intent , I made Benjamin Wood Captain , -------- in the other , one Captain Wentworth . Thus cheered as a desolate traveller with the company of my small ftheyeere and new erected Fleet , I continued my purpose for 1596. sent 
 the West Indies , and first for Cape Blanco in Africa with two upon the deserts of Libya . My last hope was to meet my lost ship , and withal to renew my victuals upon u^on pa the Canthers , which are Portugal fishermen : but the fir the South Canthers had be so frighted by Frenchmen , as I seas and fir could get none . Riding under this White Cape two es^ / this days , and walking on shore to view the country , I S 
 found it a waste , desolate , barren , and sandy place , gentleman 
 the sand running in drifts like snow and being very stony ; for so is all the country sand upon stone ( like Arabia deserta , and Petrea ) and full of black venomous lizards , with some wild beasts and people which be tawny Moors , so wild , as they would but call to my Caravels from the shore , who road very near it . But not desirous to make any longer abode in this place , by reason of the most infectious serenas or dews that fallen all along these coasts of Africa , I caused my Master Abraham Kendall to shape his course directly for the isle of Trinidad in the West Indies ; which after 22. days we descried , and the first of February came to and anchor under a point thereof called Curiapan , in a bay which was very full of pelicans , and I called it Pelicans bay . About 3. leagues to the Eastwards of this place we found a mine of Marcazites which glister like gold ( but all is not gold that glistereth ) for so we found the same nothing worth , though the Indians did assure us it was Calvori , which signifies gold with them . These Indians are a fine shaped and a gentle people , all naked & painted read , their com-205 
 Sir Robert Dudley . 
 A description ofCapeBlanco in Africa . 
 The ysle of Trinidad descried . 
 Punta de Curiapan . 
 1595 - manders wearing crowns of feathers . These people did often resort unto my ship , & brought us hens , hogs , plantans , potatoes , pinos , tobacco , & many other pretty commodities , which they exchanged with us for hatchet's , knives , hooks , bells , and glass buttons . From this 
 Paracoa , or Parico . bay I fell down lower to a place called Paracoa , where I desired rather to ride , because it was a convenient 
 They inskonce themselves . place to water , ballast , ground , & grave my Caravels . Then I commanded all my men to lie on shore , after I had caused to be made for them a little sconce like and half moon for their defence , being jealous of the Spaniards , of whose estate I could gather no certainty , till from Margarita Antonie Berreo for his defence had got some 300. soldiers , a greater number then I was able to encounter withal , having then but 50. men , because my Caravels before their coming were sent away . The Simerones of the island traded with me still in like 
 A treasonable practice of the Spaniards . sort . And the Spaniards now provided for me , began to send messengers to me in kindness . Notwithstanding though I had no reason to assault them , because they were both poor 8c strong , yet for my experi - 
 They march from one side of the island to the other . ence and pleasure I marched 4. long marches upon the island , 8c the last from one side of the island to the other , which was some 50. miles : going and coming through a most monstrous thick wood ( for so is most part of the island ) 8c lodging my self in Indian towns . The country is fertile , and full of fruits , strange beasts , and fowls , whereof munkeis , babions 8c parats were in great abundance . Being much delighted with this island , and meaning to stay here some time about discovering the main right against the same ( the entrance into the 
 Captalne Harpers Intelligence of Guiana . empire of Guiana ) being showed the discovery thereof by Captain Popham , who received the discovery of the said empire from one captain Harper , which being a prisoner learned of the Spaniards at the Canaries in the self same manner almost , as sir Walter Ralegh very discreetly hath written . The intelligence of Harper , I conceive , the Captain hath yet to show 206 
 in Spanish . This discovery of Guiana I greatly desired : yet lest I should adventure all occasions upon it only , I sent my two Caravels from me the 17. day of HistwoCara-February , to try their fortune's in the Indies not appointing any other place to meet but England , fur - e nishing them with all the provision that I could spare , and dividing my victuals equally with them , knowing they were able to do more good in the Indies then greater ships . The Caravels being gone , I began to inquire privately of the Savages concerning the main over against us , and learned that the names of the kingdoms joining to the Seacoast were in order these . The kingdom of Morucca , the kingdom of Seawano , the Seawano called kingdom of Waliame , the kingdom of Caribes , the filter in str kingdom of Yguirie , and right against the Northermost s _ part of Trinidad , the main was called The high land of covery Cia-Paria , the rest a very low land . Morucco I learned to want . be full of a green stone called Tacarao , which is good ^Walter for the stone . In Seawano I herd of a Mine of gold ff^aima to be in a town called Wackerew , the Captains name andWikeri’in Semaracon . Of Waliame I will speak last , because his discovery . therein I made most discovery . The Caribes I learned to be man-eaters or Canibals , and great enemies to the Islanders of Trinidad . The kingdom of Yguiri I herd to be full of a metal called by the Indians Arara , which is either copper ( as I could learn ) or very base gold . 
 In the high land of Paria I was informed by diverse of these Indians , that there was some Perota , which with them is silver , and great store of most excellent Cane-tobacco . But lasdy to come to Waliame , it is the first kingdom of the empire of Guiana . The great wealth which I understood to be therein , and the assurance that I had by and Indian , mine interpreter , of a golden Mine in a town of this kingdom called Orocoa , in the River ( as he called it ) of Owrinoicke was much to be esteemed . This Indian spoke Spanish , and whatsoever he knew , he revealed it to my self only by a private interpreter , not in words alone , but offered upon pain of life to be guide 207 
 This Indians name was Balthasar , who afterwards gave our men the slip at their greatest need . 
 The river of Amana and the kingdom of TivlAvas are both mentioned by Sir Walter Ralegh . 
 A people sprinkled with poulder of gold . 
 himself to any place that he spoke of . This discovery of the Mine I mentioned to my company , who altogether mutined against my going , because they something feared the villainy of Abraham Kendal , who would by no means go . I then wanted my lost pinnace , and was constrained to send 14. men in my shipboat for this discovery , with most of the discreetest men in my ship , & gave them their directions to follow , written under mine own hand . They went from me , and entered into one of the mouths by the broken lands , which river goes under the name of the great River Orenoque , the foreland whereof was called Capulio bearing South & by West , wanting a fourth part , from the point of Curiapan aforesaid , being 4. leags distant . They found the main ( as China is reported ) full of fresh Rivers running one into another , abounding with fish , and a land all woody , seeming to have great store of strange beasts and fowls , & very populous . They entered into a small river called Cabota , the people nam Veriotaus , a courteous people . The next river they passed was called Mana in the kingdom of Tivitivas , where the king offered to bring a Canoa full of this golden oar , and to this purpose sent a Canoa , which returned and brought my men this answer , that Armago Captain of the town of Orocoa and the Mine refused them , but if they would come thither , he himself would make them answer . Upon this my boat went , and at his appointed place he met them with some 100. men in Canoas , and told them that by force they should have nothing but blows , yet if they would bring him hatchet's , knives , and Jewes-harps , he bid them assure me , he had a Mine of gold , and could refine it , & would trade with me : for token whereof , he sent me 3. or 4. Croissants or half moons of gold weighing a noble a piece or more , and two bracelets of silver . Also he told them of another rich nation , that sprinkled their bodies with the poulder of gold , and seemed to be gilded , and far beyond them a great town called El 208 
 Dorado , with many other things . My men being satisfied , and thinking their company too few to stay among these Savages , and their victuali spent , returned . This Balthazar my Indian their guide ran from them : which distress caused them to borrow of Armago new guides , who brought them home another way through a River called Braha by the high land of Paria , and so to my ship . They accounted Orocoa 150. miles distant , so they rowed in my boat above 250. miles . Their absence from me was 16. days , making but one nights abode any where . The report of this made me attempt my company to go with them again . But now they were worse then before ; for unless I would have gone my self alone , not one man would go with me ( not albeit I had had commission to hang or kill them ) for my men came home in very pitiful case almost dead for famine ; and indeed such was their misery , as they drank not in three days , for so long they were out of the fresh Rivers , before they recovered the ship , and yet the boat was filled with as much victuali , as it could hold . 
 In this time of my boats absence there came to me a pinnace of Plimmouth , of which Captain Popham Captain Pop-before nam was chief , who gave us great comfort . hams arrival . And if I had not lost my pinnaces , wherein I might have carried victuals and some men , we had discovered further the secrets of those places . Also this Captain and I stayed some sixe or eight days longer for Sir Walter Ralegh ( who , as we surmized , had some purpose for this discovery ) to the end , that by our intelligence and his boats we might have done some good : but it seemed he came not in sixe or eight weeks after . So Captain Popham and I held it not convenient to stay They depart any longer : therefore new watering our selves at Paracoa , fr ™ we set sail to see further of the Indies , leaving the isle nnt a ' of Trinidad the 12. day of March . The 13. I took a A prize taken small prize of sacks 25. leagues to the Northward of and North of the island which I sailed by , called Granata . This prize ranata . 
 x 209 oh 
 The isles of Santa Cruz and Inferno . Cape Roxo . 
 They disemboque by the isle of Zacheo . 
 The sholds called Abreojos , that is , Open thine eyes , or Look out . Bermuda . 
 Flores and Cuervo . 
 A fight of two days with a Spanish Armada of 600 tons . 
 They arrive at S. Ives in Cornwall in May 1595. 
 refreshed us well : yet meaning to sei her at the isle of Sant Juan de Puerto rico , and shaping our course thither by the islands of Santa Cruz and Infierno , I coasted all the South side of the said isle of S. John , till I came to and anchor at Cape Roxo : where riding 14. days to expect S. Domingo men , which oftentimes fallen with the island of Mona , and finding none ( neither would the Spaniards of S. Juan de puerto rico buy my prize ) I unladed her , took in the goods , and after burned her . This ended , I disemboqued ( where few Englishmen had done before , by reason of the great dangers between this island of S. Juan de puerto rico and Hispaniola ) by a little island called Zacheo . And after carefully doubling the shouldes of Abreojos , I caused the Master , ( hearing by a Pilot , that the Spanish fleet meant now to put out of Havana ) to bear for the Meridian of the isle of Bermuda , hoping there to find the fleet dispersed . The fleet I found not , but foul weather enough to scatter many fleets ; which companion left me not in greatest extremity , till I came to the isles of Flores and Cuervo : whither I made the more haste , hoping to meet some great Fleet of her Majesty my sovereign , as 1 had intelligence , and to give them advice of this rich Spanish fleet : but finding none , and my victuals almost spent , I directed my course for England . 
 Returning alone , and worse manned by half then I went forth , my fortune was to meet a great Armada of this fleet of some 600. tons well appointed , with whom I fought board and board for two days , being no way able in all possibility with fiftie men to board a man of war of sixe hundreth tons . And having spent all my powder I was constrained to leave her , yet in such distress without sails and masts , and hull so often shot through with my great Ordinance between wind and water , that being three hundred leagues from land , I dare say , it was impossible for her to escape sinking . Thus leaving her by necessity in this miserable estate , I made for England , where I arrived at S. Ives in Cornewall 210 
 about the latter end of May 1595 , escaping most dangerously in a great fog the rocks of Silly . 
 Thus by the providence of God landing safely , I was kindly entertained by all my friends , and after a short time learned more certainty of the sinking of that great ship , being also reputed rich by diverse intelligences out of Spaine : which we then supposed not , & were doubtful whither she had been of Biscay or S. John de Luz in France laden with fish only from Newfoundland . 
 In this voyage I and my fleet took , sunk and burned nine Spanish ships ; which was loss to them , though I god nothing . 
 . 