A true relation of the voyage undertaken by Sir Anthony Sherley Knight in Anno 1596. intended for the He of San Tome , but performed to S. Iago , Dominica , Margarita , along the coast of Tierra firma , to the He of Jamaica , the bay of the Honduras , 30 leagues up Rio Dolce , and homeward by Newfoundland . With the memorable exploits achieved in all this voyage . 
 E departed from Hampton the 23 of Aprill with nine ships and a galley . The Bevice Admiral being 300 tons , the Galeon Viceadmiral being 240 tons . The George Rearadmiral being 160 tons . The Archangel being 250 tons . The Swan 200 tons , the 
 George Noble being 140 tons , the Wolf 70 tons , the Mermaid 120 tons , the Little John 40 tons the Galley and a Pinnace . All which ships we sufficiently victualed and furnished for ten months , with all necessaries fit for the voyage . They were also manned with soldiers and sailors , exceeding well appointed with all furniture necessary for the intended purpose of our general to the full number of 900. ratably & orderly distributed into every ship . We arrived at Plimmouth the 29 of Aprill , where we found the Right honourable Earl of Essex ready for the attempt of his Cadiz Actium , with whom our general left three ships and 500 soldiers well victualed and furnished . So the 21 of May we departed from Plimmouth with the Bevice , the Gallion , the George , the George Noble , the Wolf and the Galley and Pinnace , determining our voyage for the He of S. Tom6 . But if our whole force had remained with us our Generals purpose was to have first sacked the Madera He , and 266 
 so to have proceeded for S. Tome . The 27 of May we arrived upon the coast of Spaine , coasting all the shore , hoping to meet with some of the kings ships . From thence we passed in sighed of the coast of Barbary , and came to Masagant , within shot of the Fort , which The Fort of our general reported to be and excellent fortification , Masagant . where the Spaniard is in strong garrison . And bending our course for the Canary Isles there purposing to water , our galley lost her rudder ; so our general directed the George Noble to go for the lie Mogador , there to repair the Galleys wants . Between which place and the Canary Isles we took a flyboat of two Flyboat 
 hundred tons bound for Brasill , having nothing aboard ta^en‘ her but some small portion of victuals for their relief . The Captain of this Flybote took upon him to be a perfect Pilot of S. Tome , and willingly consented to stay with us , being a Fleming . Having watered at the Canaries , by the counsel of this Fleming we shaped our course for the Isles of Cape Verde , he assuring us that we should there meet the fleet of Saint Tome , for the year was so far passed , that we knew they were all departed from S. Tome . 
 The first of July we fell with the Isle Maio , where we saw small hope of any fleet to be expected , & therefore departed for Cape Verde , the appointed place * for the George noble to meet us : where we arrived the fift of July , and there found him . And so instantly we proceeded for our voyage , because the year was far spent . At this place most unfortunately our General fell exceeding sick , and we wanting water were inforced to go with a place nam Pescadores in 10 degrees of North latitude , where we had many skirmishes with the barbarous Negroes . Our general now hopeless of life , and we all dismayed and comfortless through that his exceeding extremity , having his memory very perfect , he called all his Captains , Master's , and officers unto him , unto whom he made a very pithy and brief speech , tending to this purpose : That as we 
 267 
 were Christians and all baptised and bred up under one and the true faith , so we should live together like Christians in the fear and service of God : And as we were the subject's of our most excellent sovereign , and had vowed obedience unto her : so we should tend all our courses to the advancement of her dignity , and the good of our country , and not to enter into any base or unfit actions . And because we came for his love into this actium that for his sake we would so love together as if himself were still living with us , and that we would follow ( as our chief commander ) him , unto whom under his hand he would give commission to succeed himself : all which with solemn protestation we granted to obey . Then for that the year was passed , and finding the cost of Guinea most tempestuous , he saw in reason that the bay of . / Ethiopia would be our utter overthrow , and infect us all to death : whereupon he advised us to be respective of our selves , and to divert our purpose from S. Tome , either for Brasil or the West India , yielding many reasons that it was our best course : but we all with one voice desired to proceed for S. Tome . And so departing from this contagious filthy place , we directed our course for S. Tome , but could by no means double the sholds of Madrabomba , but very dangerously ran into should water , still hoping of the best . In fine we were inforced to bear up & take some other course ; for the time wasted , our men fell sick , and the coast was contagious always raging & tempestuous . The water falling from the heavens did stink , and did in 6 hours turn into maggots where it fell either among our clothes , or in wads of Ocombe . 
 So by a general consent it was held to be our best course to go for the West India ; & so much the rather , because we had good pilots for that place , who undertook more then was after performed . So we bent our course for the Isles of Cape Verde , & arriving at the Isle of S. Iago the 30 of August , we presently landed at Praia , 
 268 
 1596. where we found a small bark in the road laden with wine and meal . 
 After we were departed from this vile coast of Guyny our general to our great comforts began to recover strength ; so that being now at Praia , he was able to The town of land with us . In our landing the people made a show $ 
 of great resistance , but we entered the town without ta^n _ ‘ hindrance , being a very pretty town , having a small fort in it , with 6 or 8 cast pieces . 
 Being here on shore , and finding nothing left in the town , diverse of our company were very importunate with our general , that he would go to the city of S. Iago being 6 miles off : through their importunity he yielded consent , and so we marched towards the city with 280 soldiers . As we passed by the Negroes and herdsmen , they would cry unto us Guarda S. Iago . That night we lost our way , & lay under a hedge . The next morning the Ordinance of S. Iago was shot off to give us notice where the town was : so we marched towards it at the break of the day . The country then being all spread over with people made show of fear only to draw us into the town : but we farther marched with our colours flying by the drum . The gentlemen would come galloping by us and viewing us very much . But when we came in sighed of the town , we could see no way how to get into it , but by one little path down a very steep hill , only man by man to go down . The strength A description and situation of this town was sufficient to have daunted town °f a man of very good courage , for it stands between two ? ' ' taken 
 steep cliffs strongly housed , & three exceeding good Drake forts commanding the whole , the chiefest and best standing upon the top of the hill right over the town : so that from thence with muskets they command every street , the other 2 forts standing by the waters side , all three commanding the road , and these two every street in the town . Upon the front of the town the sea beats , the rest stands between two mighty cliffs , not accessible 
 269 
 but by one small path , by which we were inforced to go . Our general seeing himself thus straighted , and perceiving the drift of the Portugals was to draw him into this trench , and knowing well that he could not return as we came , by reason of many straights and advantageable places , with and excellent resolution ( like unto himself ) cried out , all courage my hearts : assure your selves that the device of the Portugals shall serve our turn this day ; for they will suffer us quietly to pass down into their supposed trap , and then will pursue us , then which nothing can happen better . The day is ours now show your selves as I know you will : and so presently we descended into the trench . And being down the enemy pursued with a mighty cry , and all the cliffs on both sides were beset full of men ; shot , and stones we wanted none from them on every side in great plenty ; for this natural trench was not half a musket shot over . Those that attempted our Rearward by our Generals policy were so received that they made a stand , and never more came near us . We had now half a mile to the town , into the which when we came , we were received with the streets full of soldiers , who joined with us at the push of the pike . But their captain and diverse of them being slain ( fear possessing them ) The town of they fled : and our general pursuing with such furious * ien speed , did so dismay them that they fled the town , and Sherle^ the third of August we possessed both the lower forts . 
 Being now master's of the town , we presently by the Generals direction ( whose skill , spirit , and diligence can never have sufficient commendation ) barricadoed up all the streets , and brought our selves into a very convenient strength . After we had be sixe hours in the town the Portugals still coming in great multitudes to the upper fort , began to sally down upon us , and to assault us at every barricado : so that in the first assault they slew and wounded eighty of our men , to our very great weakening . But they had small cause of triumph , for their loss was thrice more then ours : but they still 270 
 .... I596 ’ prosecuted their assault , not giving us time either to sleep or eat , so that we were in exceeding extremity ; for their forces did daily increase to the number of three thousand persons : but we daily lost of our poor number . Whilst we were thus keeping the town , our ships came about unto us , who received many dangerous shot from the upper castle . Our general finding himself thus straighted , & discreetly looking into the policy and strength of the enemy , and scarce able to defend any one assault more , sent to the forts and to his ships that about ten of the clock in the dark of the night they should shoot at the upper fort with all possible diligence , and send all the boats ashore , which was accordingly performed . And we likewise keeping a tumult in the town , the enemy supposing that our purpose was to assault the upper fort , ( which God knows was most impregnable for us ) retired from their plotted purpose for the defence thereof . So we in a soldierlike order with very good safety departed the town , although the Portugals having espied our Generals policy came very furiously upon the back of us , after we had kept it two days and two nights . 
 In the road of S. Iago we took a ship with wine and cloth , which did greatly refresh our men . From hence we sailed to and Isle called Fuego , being a very Isla deal Fuego . small Isle , with a very high hill in the midst of it , which continually burns : this Isle is invincible by nature , high cliffed round about , yet by diligent search we found a small path where we landed our men with exceeding much difficulty , and so were master's of the Isle the eleventh of September , where we took in water , but the Isle yielded us nothing but miserable infection . One night we had a shower of ashes which fell so thick into our ships from that burning hill of Fuego , that you might write your name with your finger upon the upper deck . 
 Departing from this place the twentieth of September , we shaped our course for Dominica and Isle in the 
 271 
 West India : but before we came thither our men fell generally down , so that the hold could not relieve the sick , the disease was so vile that men grew loathsome unto themselves , frantic and desperately raving , among whom our good Generals part was not the least ; for his disease was vehement , the grief of his mind , the lamentation of his men , and the loss of those whom he loved were to him torments more then durable : all which with patience and humility in prayer he humbled himself unto . But had not his mind be invincible and his desires above the ordinary course of men , it had be impossible that life should now have rested in him : but God ( I hope ) hath preserved him to some exceeding good purpose . 
 Dominica . Arriving at Dominica the seventeenth of October , with Two excellent all our men sick and feeble , we found there two hight hight baths . baths , wherein our weak men washing themselves were greatly comforted : and the Indians of this place used us with great kindness , so that we were all perfectly well before we departed from this place . For here we stayed Margarita . until the 2 5 of November . From Dominica we sailed to Margarita , between the Isle and the main , thinking to meet with the pearl dredgers , but we found them not . And coming to the point of Araia in the road of Cumana , we saw a Flemish ship riding ; the merchant and men whereof came aboard us , and brought with them my lord Admirals pass . By which means our General would in no sort meddle with them , yet they were very rich . Departing thence by Cape Coadera , going for Cape de la Vela at the Isle Buenaire our Fliboat was cast away , & some of the men lost , but the most part saved . Coasting all the shore from Cape de la Vela , being bound for S. Martha , we took a small frigate laden with Guiny corn , the eleventh of September : she had in her money to the value of 500 pound , linen cloth and China silk , all which our General bestowed upon his company to comfort them after their long sustained misery's : Out of which 
 272 
 ANTONIVS SCHERLEYNS ANGLVS , E-qucs aurat . Magni Sophi Perfarum ad Cxfarem 6s Chriftianos Principes exteros , Legate us . 
 SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY 
 frigate we had 2 good pilots for those coasts : for our pilot , that promised many things before we came thither , was now absent in the Wolf , who , we think , did wilfully lose us . Arriving at S. Martha , two Santa Marta leagues West from the town in a fair bay , we landed the 12 of September , & so marched to the town being often times encountered by the way , and in a narrow way at our descent down a hill , they had placed two cast pieces of brass , which we recovered , and so entered the town , the enemy flying before us . While we abided in this town , there came one DONE Martin de Castilla , a gentleman of good education and a very great traveller , who knew the whole state of the West India , Malucos , & Philippinas : he had be in China , and made many relations to our general , his purpose was to save the town from burning , wherein he prevailed , but ransom I know of none we had : for this gentleman made many great protestations of great poverty to be in that place . 
 So we departed , only taking their ordinance , and a prisoner lost there by sir Francis Drake , with some relief of victuals . Having stayed there all the time of Christmas , we departed thence on Newyeres day , with terms of great content to our General in the Spaniards great submission unto him , for they were now within a league of us with 700 soldiers . And being challenged by him to defend their town like men of worth , they did notwithstanding entreat favour with great humility . Whilst we were at S. Martha , the Wolf came again unto us : so we shaped our course for Jamaica , and missing the road , were constrained to sail round about the Isle , a thing not before done . In this place the Wolf absolutely again forsook us with the small bark that we took at S. Iago , and returned for England with hard news of our ruin , but by Gods favourable help we arrived in the road of Jamaica the 29 of January , which is very dangerous to enter by reason of the sholds and rocks that lie before it . Here we landed and marched 6 miles into the country , where the town stands ; 
 x 273 s 
 The I'll and chief town oj Jamaica taken . 
 the people all on horseback made show of great matters , but did nothing . Now being master's of the town and whole Isle , the people submitted themselves to our Generals mercy : and here they provided for us great store of dried beef , and Cassavi meal , a base food , yet the best that the country yields , to continue at sea . This Isle is a marvelous fertile Isle , & is as a garden or store house for diverse parts of the main . It is full of plain champion ground , which in the rest of the Indies we have not seen : it aboundeth with beeves and Cassavi , beside most pleasant fruits of diverse sorts . We have not found in the Indies a more pleasant and wholesome place . During the time that we remained in this Isle the captain of the Isle came often aboard us , we having pledges for the security of their promise . They were in fine at our Generals devotion , to dispose of all things , and in all things as he pleased , so that now we were as one people & in one peace together . Being almost ready to depart , M. captain Parker of Plimmouth came into the road in his ships boat the second of March , with whom our general consorted to go for the bay of Honduras , where by his persuasion we had great hope of a very good voyage . And departing from Jamaica the 6 of March , we sailed to Cape de Corrientes in Cuba , to look for a bark of M. Parkers for our better strength : but not finding her , we went for the cape of Honduras , where we purposed to entrap the watch , & so to sack the town of Truxillo , but the watch discovering us , made great fires , and the town presently shot off a great piece , and answered with fires . Notwithstanding the next day being the 31 of March we brought our ships under the fort , and landed our men , but it was a vain purpose : for the town is not to be taken but by exceeding multitudes , for it is invincible by nature . It stands upon the top of a very steep hill , bordering close to the sea : so environed with woods of such exceeding thickness , that there is no passage among the 
 274 
 trees , which if they were gone , yet there is no climbing up the hill , only having one narrow lane to go into the town ; at the end whereof is a great gate very strongly fortified , so that it is not to be approached unto , so that with the loss of some few men , we retired from this enterprise , being altogether impossible to be achieved by our few and weak men . 
 We departed from Truxillo the second of April and Puerto de went for Puerto de Cavallos lower down in the bay , ken^ still nourishing our hope of good success : and come - ‘ ming thither found it reasonably fortified , but we presently prevailed and took it the 7 of April , being the most poor and miserable place of all India . Now our hope's were all frustrate and no likelihood remaining how we could by any means make a voyage : our General reserving unto himself his silent inward impatience , laboured to do some memorable thing . And in fine concluded by Rio Dolce to search with his boats some narrow passage or Isthmos for the South sea , alleging that if he could but find a boat there , it should serve him to great purpose ; against which there could be no reasonable contradiction . All his 
 chiefest sea men consented hereunto , but especially the Captain of the Admiral . So sailing with the ships to Cape de tres puntas in the bottom of the bay , there leaving the ships well mored the tenth of Aprill he departed with his boats for Rio Dolce , which in many Charts hath his passage through the land . Up this river by many uncertain windings we passed 30 leagues and better , where we found a strong built fort , a town , and diverse storehouses : but for money or merchandise we found none . we learned by the miserable people that we took , that the South sea was 
 20 leagues from the nearest of that river , and that it was 50 leagues to Guatimala , 40 leagues to Sonsonate , and 30 leagues to Sacatocaluca , being towns which we hoped to march unto : so that now we were in worse case then before : for we were fallen sick with the 
 Guatemala , Sanson ate , and Sacatocaluca . 
 275 
 unholsomenesse of this air , and our victuals so wasted , as that we were desperate how to recover our country . Theirreturne . Whereupon with most unwilling minds we returned to our shipping , and with all possible expedition weighed , & so laboured upon the tack to turn out of this very deep bay , being 60 leagues within the point of land . Being out of the bay , we shaped our course for Cape S. Anthony . Our General , whose restless spirit continually laboured to avoid the frowns of fortune , had now plotted with the Bevice and Galeon to go for Newfoundland , and there to revictual , and to have fresh men , of which we stood in good assurance , & so to depart for the Streits of Magellan , and so by his very good policy would have concluded his voyage in the East India , which plate I think it unnecessary here to reveal , being put in principali trust by him . 
 Being thwart Havana , by what chance I know not , but all his ships forsook him the 13 of May , and here in a desperate place he was left desperately alone . The George departed by consent with his letters , the Galeon I know not how : but our misery in the Admiral was very great , for there was not one in the ship that was ever before in the Indies , beside our miserable want of victuals , the danger of the place , and the furious current of the channel . Notwithstanding we were inforced without stay to disemboque : which happily being performed , we shaped our course for Newfoundland . And by Gods mercy we arrived there the fifteenth of June , not having one hours victuals to spare , and there by our countrymen we were well refreshed : where we stayed till the 24 of June , still expecting the Galeon , for the execution of this his last purpose : but she not coming , and that plate overthrown , we returned for England , where we found the right honourable the Earl of Essex bound to the seas , with whom we presently departed in his lordship's ship , to do him our humble service . 
 . 