A Relation of the second Voyage to Guiana , performed and written in the year 1596. by Laurence Keymis Gent. 
 To the approved , Right Valorous , and worthy Knight , Sir Walter Ralegh , Lord warden of the Stanneries , Captain of her Majesties Guard , and her Highness Lieutenant generail of the County of Cornewall . 
 Have here briefly set down the effect of this your second Discovery without any enlargement of made words : for in this argument , single speech best beseems a simple truth . Where the affinity of the matter with your person , leads me to write of your self , unto your self , 
 that small liberty which I have therein used , shall , I doubt not , without offence or sinister construction , be given to the cause in hand : which , whither it suffer not detriment , by attributing less then of right belongeth ; the judgement be theirs , that uprightly and indifferently shall weigh the consequents of their evil purpose , who in seeking to detract from the Author of these Discoveries , do so much as in them lies , wound , deface , & tread under foot the thing it self . But this is no novelty , nor proper only to these our days . For long since it hath been said , Laudes eo usque sunt Pericles . tolerabiles , donec ea dicuntur , quse auditores se quoque 
 441 
 facere posse existimant : simajora proferantur , invident , non credunt . The fervent zeal & loyalty of your mind in labour with this birth of so honourable expectation , as it hath deserved a recompense far different , so needs it not my poor suffrage to endear the { III . 667. ] toil , care , and danger that you have willingly undergone for the good and advancement of our weal public . The praiseworthiness thereof doth approve it self , and is better read in your living doings , then in my dead unregarded papers . All that I can wish , is that my life were a sufficient pledge , to justify , how much more easy , and more materiali , the course for Guiana would be then others , which requiring greater charge , yield not so large benefit , and are subject to more doubtful events . If unto their wisdoms who fit in place and authority , it shall appear otherwise , and that in following of other attempts there is less difficulty , certainer profit , and needfuller offence unto the enemy : the cost and travail which you have bestowed , shall not , I hope , be altogether lost , if unto your Honour I can prove how , and where the amends is to be had , maugre the force and prevention of all Spaniards . 
 Your Lordship's to be commanded in all service , Laurence Keymis . 
 To the Favourers of the Voyage for Guiana . 
 N things earnestly desired , though never so likely , we are still suspicious : thinking it more credit to our common wisdom , to discredit most noble and profitable endeavours with distrust , then touch to our valours and safeties , to lie wilfully idle . So that howsoever and 
 actium well and judicially attempted , be esteemed half performed ; yet is this my jealous conceit concerning Guiana , that nothing is begun , before all be ended . In this regard ( gentle Reader ) I have presumed to burden thine ears with the weak plea of a good 442 
 cause , and in stead of opening it thoroughly to thy prudent consideration , to note only mine own unsatisfied affection : hoping that because I do name Guiana unto thee , thou wilt vouchsafe hoc nomine , to veil and cover all other my defects in the desert of a good meaning . In publishing this Treatise , my labour principally tendeth to this end ; to remove all figleaves from our unbelief , that either it may have cause to shake off the colourable pretences of ignorance : or if we will not be persuaded ; that our self-will may rest inexcusable . They that shall apply , and construe this my doing , to serve the Spaniard his turn so well as our own ; in so much as it may seem to instruct , warn , and arm him : for their satisfaction herein , they must not be ignorant , that his eyes , in seeing our shipping there , do as effectually inform him , that many of our hearts are towards that place , as if it should be credibly advertised by some corrupt hireling , that we think , write , and discourse of nothing else . Neither can I imagine , that to conceal our knowledge herein ( which to conceal may perhaps prove , 8c be hereafter taken for worse then parricide ) would be of better purpose , then to hood wink our selves , as who would say , No man shall see us . Beside , if the actium were wholly to be effected at her Majesties charge ; then might it at her Highness pleasure be shadowed with some other drift , and never be discovered , until it were acted . But since it craves the approbation and purses of many Adventurers , who cannot be so prodigal both of their possessions and lives , as voluntarily to run themselves out of breath , in pursuing they know not what : great reason it is , that where assistance is to be asked , due causes be yielded to persuade 8c induce them unto it . The Spaniard is not so simple , unsettled , 8c uncertain in his determinations , as to built them on our breath , or to make our papers his Bulwarks ; nor so slow as to expect a precedent of our forwardness . His proceedings are suffi - 
 443 
 ciently strengthened with the travails , reports , & substantial proofs of his own men , that have above 60. years beaten round about this bush . And to say a truth , the expedition that he hath used in sending so many ships in February last to people this country , & disappoint us ; as it does consequently show , that he finds his chiefest force and sinews to consist in gold : so doth he thereby plainly to our faces exprobrate our remissness & long deliberations , that in 12. months space have done , or sought to do nothing worthy the ancient fame & reputation of our English In June 1^6 . nation , interested in so weighty business . * His late provision of a new supply of whole families to the number of 600. persons , bound for Guiana , but that it pleased God , that by means of that right honourable service most resolutely performed in the sea-fight , and sacking of Cadiz , the ships wherein they should have been conveyed , were converted into ashes : what might it signify ? Certes , as it does evidently prove , that El Dorado hath undoubted credit & account in their judgements : so pointeth it at us , while we only to entertain idle time , fit listening for Guiana news , & instantly forget it , as if it were nought else , but a pleasing dream of a golden fancy . If we with our selves shall expostulate , how this comes to pass , that the advantage wholly resting on our side , in respect that Berreo was this last year beaten out , the country thoroughly discovered , & the Inhabitants made desirous of her sacred Majesties happy government ; they notwithstanding by entering before us , have now got you start of us : what may we think ? Shall we judge that their native country is less deer , or more wearisome unto them , then ours is unto us ? Their Peruleri , who going bore & empty out of Spaine , do again within 3. or 4. years return from Peru , rich and in good estate , do apparently disprove all such conceits of them . Shall we say that they have more spare men to be employed in such actions ? It is no secret to 
 444 
 know the contrary . Are they subject to penury ? In all parts of Christendom , where money is not scant , all other things are plentiful . Or is their land not able to sustain their numbers of people ? They buy many slaves to follow their husbandry , & themselves disdaining base idleness & beggary , do all honour military profession , highly esteeming it in their mercenaries and strangers . Is it then want of ability , in those that are willing , lack of encouragement , or default of speedy order and direction for those that do voluntarily offer themselves , their substance , & best endeavour to further this cause ; that makes us to be thus coated of the Spaniard ? The first is no question . The later needs no answer . The profit then by their example to be gathered , is , not to lose opportunity by delay , or to seem fearful and dismayed , where there is no cause of doubt . For as yet their posthaste doth not way prejudice our advised leisure in setting forward , since their preparations of Negroes to work in the mines , their horses , cattle , and other necessaries may ( by the favour of God ) at our first coming , both store us with quantities of gold oar , and ease us of much trouble , pains , and travail . If we should suppose our selves now to live in the days of King Henry the seventh of famous memory , and the strange report of a West Indies , or new world abounding with great treasure should entice us to believe it : perhaps it might be imputed for some blame to the gravity of wise men , lightly to be carried with the persuasion and hope of a new found Utopia , by such a one as Columbus was , being and alien , and many ways subject to suspicion . But since the penance of that incredulity lies even now heavy on our shoulders ; the example forethreatning , I know not what repentance : and that we have the personal trial of so honourable and sufficient a Reporter , our own Countryman : let it be far from us to condemn our selves in that , which so worthily we reprove in our predecessors ; and to let our idle 
 445 
 knowledge content it self with naked contemplation , like a barren womb in a Monastery . We cannot deny that the chief commendation of virtue does consist in actium : we truly say , that Otium is animae vivae sepultura : we believe , that perfect wisdom in this mobility of all human affairs , refuseth not with any price to purchase safety : and we justly do acknowledge that the Castilians from bore legged mountainers have attained to their greatness by labour & industrie* To sleep then , because it costeth nothing ; to embrace the present time , because it flattereth us with deceitful contentment ; and to kiss security , saying , What evil happeneth unto us ? is the plain high way to a fearful downfall : from which the Lord in his mercy deliver us , and give us and understanding heart , in time to see , and to seek that , which belongeth unto our peace . 
 . 