The discovery of the large , rich , and beautiful Empire of Guiana , with a relation of the great and golden city of Manoa ( which the Spaniards call El Dorado ) and the provinces of Emeria , Aromaia , Amapaia , and other countries , with their rivers adjoining . Performed in the year 1595 by Sir Walter Ralegh Knight , Captain of Her Majesties Guard , Lord Warden of the Stanneries , and Her Highness Leiutenant general of the County of Cornwall . 
 To the right Honourable my singular good Lord and kinsman Charles Howard , Knight of the Garter , Baron and Counseller , and of the Admirals of England the most renowned : and to the right Honourable Sir Robert Cecyll knight , Counseller in her Highness Privy Counsels . 
 Or your Honours many Honourable and friendly parts , I have hitherto only returned promises , and now for answer of both your adventures , I have sent you a bundle of papers , which I have divided between your Lordship , and Sir Robert Cecyll in 
 these two respects chiefly : First for that it is reason , that wasteful factors , when they have consumed such stocks as they had in trust , do yield some colour for the same in their account ; secondly for that I am assured , that whatsoever shall be done , or written by me , shall need a double protection and defence . The trial that I had of both your loves , when I was left of all , but of malice and revenge , makes me still presume , that you will be pleased ( knowing what little power I had to perform ought , and the great advantage of forewarned enemies ) to answer that out of knowledge , which others shall but object out of 338 
 malice . In my more happy times as I did especially Hon. you both , so I found that your loves sought me out in the darkest shadow of adversity , and the same affection which accompanied my better fortune , sored not away from me in my many misery's : all which though I can not requite , yet I shall ever acknowledge : & the great debt which I have no power to pay , I can do no more for a time but confess to be due . It is true that as my errors were great , so they have yielded very grievous effects , & if ought might have be deserved in former times to have counterpoised any part of offences , the fruit thereof ( as it seems ) was long before fallen from the tree , & the dead stock only remained . I did therefore even in the winter of my life , undertake these travels , fitter for bodies less blasted with misfortunes , for men of greater ability , and for minds of better encouragement , that thereby , if it were possible , I might recover but the moderation of excess , & the least taste of the greatest plenty formerly possessed . If I had known other way to win , if I had imagined how greater adventures might have regained , if I could conceive what farther means I might yet use , but even to appease so powreful displeasure , I would not doubt but for one year more to hold fast my soul in my teeth , till it were performed . Of that title remain I had , I have wasted in effect all herein . I have undergone many constructions . I have be accompanied with many sorrows , with labour , hunger , heat , sickness , & peril : It appears notwithstanding that I made no other bravado of going to the sea , then was meant , and that I was never hidden in Cornewall , or else where , as was supposed . They have grossly belied me , that forejudged , that I would rather become a servant to the Spanish king , then return , and the rest were much mistaken , who would have persuaded , that I was too easeful and sensuali to undertake a journey of so great travel . But , if what I have done , receive the gracious construction of a 
 339 
 painful pilgrimage , and purchase the least remission , I shall think all too little , & that there were wanting to the rest many misery's . But if both the times past , the present , and what may be in the future , do all by one grain of gall continue in eternal distaste ; I do not then know whither I should bewail my self , either for my too much travel and expense , or condemn my self for doing less then that , which can deserve nothing . From my self I have deserved no thanks , for I am returned a beggar , and withered , but that I might have bettered my poor estate , it shall appear by the following discourse , if I had not only respected her Majesties future Honour , and riches . It became not the former fortune in which I once lived , to go journeys of picory , it had sorted ill with the offices of Honour , which by her Majesties grace I hold this day in England , to run from Cape to Cape , and from place to place , for the pillage of ordinaries prizes . Many years since , I had knowledge by relation , of that mighty , rich and beautiful Empire of Guiana , and of that great and golden City , which the Spaniards call El Dorado , and the naturals Manoa , which City was conquered , reedified , and enlarged by a younger son of Guainacapa Emperor of Peru , at such time as Francisco Pizarro and others conquered the said Empire , from his two elder brothers , Guascar , and Atabalipa , both then contending for the same , the one being favoured by the Orejones of Cuzco , the other by the people of Caxamalca . I sent my servant Jacob Whiddon the year before , to get knowledge of the passages , and I had some light from Captain Parker , sometime my servant , and now attending on your Lordship , that such a place there was to the Southward of the great Bay of Charuas , or Guanipa : but I found that it was 600 miles farther off then they supposed , and many other impediments to them unknown and unheard . After I had displanted DONE Antonio de Berreo , who was upon the same enterprise , leaving my 
 340 
 ships at Trinidad , at the Port called Curiapan , I wandered 400 miles into the said country by land and river : the particulars I will leave to the following discourse . The country hath more quantity of gold by manifold , then the best parts or the Indies , or Peru : All the most of the kings of the borders are already become her Majesties vassals : and seem to desire nothing more then her Majesties protection and the return of the English nation . It hath another ground and assurance of riches and glory , then the voyages of the West Indies , and easier way to invade the best parts thereof , then by the common course . The king of Spaine is not so impoverished , by taking three or foure Port towns in America , as we suppose , neither are the riches of Peru , or Nueva Espanna so left by the sea side , as it can be easily washed away with a great flood , or springtide , or left dry upon the sands on a low ebb . The Port towns are few and poor in respect of the rest within the land , and are of little defence , and are only rich , when the Fleets are to receive the treasure for Spaine : and we$might think the Spaniards very simple , having so many horses and slaves , if they could not upon two days warning carry all the gold they have into the land , and far enough from the reach of our footmen , especially the Indies being ( as they are for the most part ) so mountainous , so full of woods , rivers , and marishes . In the Port towns of the Province of Venezuela , as Cumana , Coro and S. Iago ( whereof Coro and S. Iago were taken by Captain Preston , and Cumana and S. Josepho by us ) we found not the valve of one riall of plate in either : but the Cities of Barquasimeta , Valencia , S. Sebastian , Cororo , S. Lucia , Laguna , Maracaiba , and Truxillo , are not so easily invaded : neither doth the burning of those on the coast impoverish the king of Spaine , any one ducat : and if we sack the river of Hacha , S. Marta , and Cartagena , which are the Ports of Nuevo reyno , and Popayan ; there are beside within the land , which are indeed rich and 
 341 
 populous , the towns and Cities of Merida , Lagrita , S. Christophoro , the great Cities of Pamplon S. Fe de Bogota , Tunxa and Mozo where the Esmeralds are found , the towns and Cities of Marequita , Velez , la Villam de Leva , Palma , Unda , Angustura , the great city of Timana , Tocaima , S. Aguila , Pasto , Juago , the great City of Popaian it self , Los Remedios , and the rest . If we take the Ports and villages within the Bay of Uraba , in the kingdom or rivers of Dariene , and Caribana , the Cities and towns of S. Juan de Roydas , of Cassaris , of Antiocha , Caramanta , Cali , and Anserma have gold enough to pay the kings part , and are not easily invaded by the way of the Ocean : or if Number de Dios and Panama be taken in the Province of Castilla del oro , and the villages upon the rivers of Cenu & Chagre ; Peru hath beside those & beside the magnificent cities of Quito & Lima so many islands , ports , cities , and mines , as if I should name them with the rest , it would seem incredible to the reader : of all which , because I have A treatise written a particular treatise of the West Indies , I will omit of the West repetitiOn at this time , seeing that in the said treatise I 
 ’ have anatomized the rest of the seatowns aswell of Nicaragua , lucatan , Nueva Espanna , & the islands , as those of the Inland , 8c by what means they may be best invaded , as far as any mean judgement can comprehend . But I hope it shall appear that there is a way found to answer every men longing , a better Indies for her Majesty then the King of Spaine hath any : which if it shall please her highness to undertake , I shall most willingly end the rest of my days in following the same : if it be left to the spoil & sackage of common persons , if the love 8c service of so many nations be despised , so great riches , 8c so mighty and empire refused , I hope her majesty will yet take my humble desire and my labour therein in gracious part , which , if it had not been in respect of her highness future honour 8c riches , could have laid hands on 8c ransomed many of the kings 8c Caciques of the country , 8c have had a reasonable proportion of gold for their 342 
 . 