A letter of Francis Suares to his brother Diego Snares dwelling in Lisbon , written from the river of Jenero in Brasill in June 1596. concerning the exceeding rich trade newly begun between that place and Peru , by the way of the river of Plate , with small barks of 30. and 40. tons . 
 Ir , we set sail from Lisbon the fourth of April 1596. and arrived here in this river of Jenero the twentie seventh of June next ensuing . And the same day the Visitadores did visit our ship with great joy , thinking that those commodities which we brought with us , 
 had be for the merchants of this country : but it proved to the contrary . 
 The pilot brought with him in the said ship two pipes of wine which were taken from him , and sold Wine sold at by the Justice for foure and twenty reals every gallon . and excessive But I sold mine for two and thirty and sixe and thirty iate ' 
 A rich trade from the river of Jenero by the river of Plate into Peru , iAc . 
 reals the gallon . If I had brought any great store of wine , I should have made a great gain of it : for I should have got eight reals for one . 
 The next day in the morning we went all on shore , and gave God thanks for our prosperous voyage , and good success which he had sent us . And because the governor of this country was gone from this Town to another house of his , three leagues up into the river beyond the place where we road at anchor , I desired the captain of our ship after dinner , that we might take the ship boat , and go to the place where the governor did lie . And so going up the river , we met with a canoa which was coming down the river , and going aboard our ship ; which canoa was laden with fresh victuals , and in the same was one Portugall , which met us , and told us that the governor of that captain ship had sent us a present , which we received very thankfully , and sent it aboard . And we went up the river , to the place where the governor did dwell ; and coming to the place where we landed , hard by the rivers side , the governor came thither and received us very courteously . So we remained at his house two days , talking of many matters of Portugall : then we departed from him , and came down the river . 
 Three days after , I hired a warehouse by my self , and landed my commodities . And now I am selling them as fast as I can ; and fell them very well , and to great profit : for I have sold all our hats . I would I had brought forty or fifty dozen , by reason of the great utterance of them up into Peru , and into the new kingdom of Granada , by the way of the river of Plate . For here is passage every three or foure months with barks of thirty and forty tons a piece , which are laden with sugars , rice , taffataes , hats , and other kinds of commodities of this country , which are carried up the said river of Plate in the said barks , and thence are conveyed up into Peru. And these barks are but tenne or twelve days going up the said river to Peru. And within foure and 40 
 five months after , the said barks come down this river again laden with reals of plate , and bring down from those places no other commodities but treasure . It is a wondered thing to behold the great gain and profit which is got in this river and in this country . I am ashamed to write it , fearing that I shall not be believed . For the employment of one hundred ducats in Spaine , being brought hither , will yield twelve hundred and fifteen hundred ducats profit . This trade hath been used but within this year . For we can go up to the mines of Potosi , which are the best and the richest mines in all Peru. If the merchant's of Spaine and Portugall did know this trade , they would not send nor venture so much merchandise to Cartagena as they do . For up this river is a great deal the nearer way , and the easier to go to Peru. For the Peruleros or merchant's of Peru , which dwell there , come down to this harbour and river of Jenero , and bring with them fifteene thousand and twentie thousand ducats in reals of plate and gold , and employ it here in this river in commodities : and when here are no commodities to be had for money in this place , then these merchant's of Peru are constrained to go to Baia and Fernambuc , and there to employ their money . I would I had brought good store of silks , and not these kind of commodities which I did bring . For here is more profit to be had a great deal then in the voyage of Angola . For here with five hundred ducats in five months space a man may get sixe thousand ducats . And this is no fable , but most true , and a great deal more then I can express . For a rapier which doth cost in Spaine foure and twenty and sixe and twenty reals , is sold here for forty and fifty ducats : a bridle for a horse is sold for fifteene ducats : a lock of a door and the key is sold for ten ducats : a pound of benjamin is sold for fifteene ducats : a yard of velvet is sold for twenty and five and twenty ducats : taffataes are sold for sixe and seven ducats the vare : and ounce of musk is sold for forty ducats : and all kind of commodities after this rate . So one 
 41 
 A.D. 1596. The shortness of the retume of the voyage to Peru. 
 This rich trade was begun in the year 1595. 
 The voyage of Angola in Africa . 
 Gain often thousand ducats for the laying out of one thousand . 
 A trade of buying Negroes in Angola . 
 Broad cloth excellently well sold . Vinegar . 
 Olives . 
 Taffataes . 
 Velvets . 
 thousand ducats of Spanish commodities will gain tenne thousand ducats . Thus I hope in God to make more profit and gain this voyage , then in two voyages to Angola : for I have sold most of my hats for two ducats and a half and for three ducats . The rest I will carry to Angola , to help to fell the rest of my commodities , which I cannot fell in this river . And I have sold and hundred cubits of broad cloth for five hundred and five hundred and fifty and sixe hundred reys the cubit . If I would have sold all my cloth for ready money told down for foure hundred and fifty and five hundred reyes , the merchant's would have bought it all of me : but I would fell no more , because I meant to exchange it in Angola for Negros . Howbeit with ready money in hand in Angola a man shall buy better Negroes , and better cheap . The captain of our ship sold all his cloth for ready money for foure hundred 8c fifty reys the cubit , and thought that he had made a good market : but he hath deceived himself . I sold six broad clothes for five hundred and fifty reys the cubit : and I was offered thirty thousand reys for a cloth . Vinegar is sold for two and thirty , and sixe and thirty , and forty reals a jar , by reason there is great store of limmons and oranges in the country : but in Angola it is more worth . Olives are sold for half a real a piece : wherefore I hope to fell the hogshead for twenty thousand reys . In taffataes and velvets there will be got two hundred and fifty and three hundred for one hundred . If I had brought great store , I could have sold it all at this rate . I have already got good store of reals of plate : for it is told me that money is a good commodity in Angola . But I must employ some in meal , which is in the grinding . All the rest of my money I will send you by bills of exchange , and some part I will employ in sugars : for I have sent order to Baia for that purpose . For from this place there is no shipping that does go that way . So these letters I do send by the way of Fernambuc , and have directed 
 them to my cousin : for I do determine to settle my self here in this country . There is come down from Peru , by this river of Plate , a merchant called Alonso Ramires , and he hath brought down with him ten or twelve thousand ducats in reals of plate , and is come down to this place to built him a ship to return into Spaine ; and there is come in his company a bishop . And thus Jesus Christ send you long health . 
 Your loving brother Francis Suares . 
 . 