The well governed and prosperous voyage of M. James Lancaster , begun with three ships and a galley-frigat from London in October 1594 , and intended for Fernambuck , the port-town of Olinda in Brasil . In which voyage ( beside the taking of nine and twenty ships and frigates ) he surprised the said port-town , being strongly fortified and manned ; and held possession thereof thirty days together ( notwithstanding many bold assaults of the enemy both by land and water ) and also providently defeated their dangerous and almost inevitable fireworks . Here he found the cargazon or freight of a rich East Indian carrack ; which together with great abundance of sugars , Brasil-wood , and cotton he brought from thence ; lading therewith fifteene sails of tall ships and barks . 
 N September 1594 the worshipful M. John Wats , aiderman , M. Paul Banning , aiderman , & others of worship in the city of London , victualed three 
 good ships ; to wit , The Consent , of the burden of 240 tons or thereabouts , The Salomon , of 170 tons , and The Virgin , of 60 tons : and appointed for commanders in this voyage , M. James Lancaster of London , 43 
 A ship with 80 tons of wine taken . 
 Another prize with 40 tons of wine taken . 
 gentleman , admiral of the fleet , M. Edmund Barker of London , viceadmiral , and M. John Audely of Poplar near London , rearadmiral , having in their said ships to the number of 275 men and boys .. 
 Being fully furnished with all needful provision , we departed from Blackwall in October following , keeping our own coast , until we came into the West country , where we met with such gusts and storms , that the Salomon spending her mast at the Range of Dartmouth , put into harbour ; but by the earnest care and industry of the generail and others having charge , she was shortly again provided . Which done , having a pleasant gale for our purpose , we put forth from Dartmouth the last of November following . But contrary to our expectation , not fifty leagues from our own coast , we lost the Salomon and the Virgin , by a storm of contrary wind that fell upon us : yet being alone , in hope to meet them about the Canaries or Cape Blank , we kept on our course to the Canaries , but could hear no tidings of our consorts ; which greatly grieved us . 
 Thence we went , bearing for the isle of Tenerif , where in the morning early we had sighed of a sail , which being becalmed under the shore , was towing with their boat a head , having one other at her stern . For this sail we manned our boat , appointing our men well for fight , if need should require . The Spaniards seeing our boat come , entered theirs , and leaving the ship , sought to save themselves by flight : but our men pursued them so fast , that they boarded them , and brought them with their ship to our general . This ship was laden with 80 tons of Canary-wine , which came not unto us before it was welcome . We kept and manned it , plying that day , and the next night thereabouts . The very next morning we had sighed of one other ; to whom in like manner we sent our boat : but their gunner made a shot at her , and struck off a proper young men arm ; yet we enforced her to yield , and found 40 tons of wine in her . The Spaniards having their free passage , and and 
 acquittance for the delivery of their wines , were all set on shore upon Tenerif , making a quick return of their long voyage intended into the West Indies . 
 Hence we departed towards Cape Blank ; and before we came thither , we met again with the Virgin our rear-admiral , whose men told us for very truth , that the Salomon was returned for England : enforced so to do , by spending her mast the second time . Which when our men understood , they were all in a maze , not knowing what to do , and saying among themselves that their force was but small when all our strength were together , and now we had lost the one half of our strength , we were not able to perform the voyage : and therefore some of them came to the captain , asking him what he would now do , seeing the Salomon was lost , the one half of our strength , giving him counsel ! to bear up for the West Indies , and prove there to make his voyage , because his first plate for want of strength was clean overthrown . The captain hearing this new novelty , as not unacquainted with the variable pretences of mariners , made them this answer : Sirs , I made known to you all at my coming out of England what I pretended , and that I meant to go for Fernambuck , and although at the present we want one of our ships , yet ( God willing ) I mean to go forward , not doubting but to meet her at the appointed places , which are either at Cape Blank or the islands of Cape Verde : for I am assured that M. Barker the captain is so resolute to perform this voyage , that his mast being repaired , he will not fail to meet us , & it were no wisdom for us to divert our course , till we have sought him at those places where our appointed meeting is : for the diverting of courses is the overthrow of most of our actions . And I hope you will be all contented herewith : for to go any other course then I have determined , ( by Gods help ) I will not be drawn unto . With these reasons and many others showed , they rested all satisfied : and at our coming to Cape Blank ( God be praised ) we 
 Foure y twenty sails of ships y of caravels taken by the Salomon . 
 Maio . 
 A gally-frigat carried out of England in pieces . 
 The gally-frigat set up . 
 met with the Salomon with no small joy to us all ; and there she had taken of Spaniards and Portugals 24 sail of ships and caravels , fishermen , and had taken out of them such necessaries as she had need of . Of these ships our captain took foure along with him , with another that he had taken himself , meaning to employ them as occasion should serve . At this place he understood of one of the pilots of those ships , that one of the carracks that came out of the East Indies , was cast away in the road of Fernambuc , and that all her goods were laid upon the Arrazife which is the lower town . Of these news we were all glad , and rejoiced much ; for our hope's were very good , seeing such a booty before us . 
 Of this good company and happy success we were all joyful , and had great hope of the blessing of God in performance of our intended voyage , and so after some parley & making frolic for joy of our meeting one with the other ( praising God for all ) we plied for Maio : where coming to anchor , our general 8c the rest of the captains went ashore to view the place where we might in best safety set our gally-frigat together ; which frame we brought from England of purpose to land men in the country of Brasil . Here we discharged our great prize of wine , and set her on fire : but before our coming thither , you shall understand we had sighed of foure sails , which was captain Venner in his ship the Peregrine , and a proper Biskaine which he took at Cape Blank , the Welcome of Plymmouth 8c her pinnace : all which stood with us . But they seeing our flags , not expecting such good fellows as we , did bear from us all they might ; which our people took very unkindly , that being all friends they would neither inquire , nor tell us any news of our friends , but without making any show of kindness would so depart . As before I have said , the choice being made for the place to built the gally-frigat , ashore it was brought , where the carpenters applied their work , still cheered 
 unto it by the generals good gifts bestowed among them , and kind usage of the rest of the commanders , not without great care of the captain for the safety of them all , by keeping good watch : yet one negligent fellow , ’which had no knowledge of the country , straying from his company , was by the Portugals taken , & very kindly used , and brought again unto us : for which good the general rewarded them well with gifts very acceptable , which they took as kindly . While we were thus busily employed about the foresaid galley , we descried at sea foure sails , which we had good hope would have proved Indies men , or some to have brought us what we looked for : but they proved captain Venner with his fleet , as aforesaid , who , seeing us at anchor , anchored also ; where spending some time , and being acquainted with our generals determination for landing , consorted with us , & their bills , according to the manner of the sea , were made and signed on either part , we to have three parts , & he the fourth , of all that should be taken , whereby our strength was increased , to all our comforts . Three weeks or thereabouts we stayed in this place before the gaily was finished ; which done , putting men into her , and fitting her with oars , having foureteene banks on a side , a mast and sail , the commandment of her was committed unto M. Wats , and honest skilful mariner . 
 From thence we put again to sea , and went for the isle Brava , where we watered : which done , we made no long stay after , but bent our course as directly as we could for the place , making our first fallen with the land to the Southward of Cape S. Augustine ; from whence Cape S. we plied still to our desired port of Fernambuck , and did so much , that about midnight we came before the 7^29 “ of harbour ; where some plied up and down , holding that March . the best policy , to forbear the entering till day might give them light , the harbour being hard , and therefore the more perilous . Our ships being in safety well arrived , God was praised : and the generail in his boat 
 went from ship to ship , willing them to make ready such men as they could spare , with muskets , pikes , bills , bows , arrows , and what weapons they had to follow him . Himself , with 80 men from his own ship , embarked himself in the gaily , which carried in her prow a good sacar , and two murdering pieces . 
 Our admiral spent all the night in giving directions to every ship to have their men ready shipped in their boats , for he intended to enter the harbour at the break of day , & to leave his ships without , till he had got the fort and the town : for he would not adventure the ships in , till the harbour was got . Also he provided five ships , which he brought from Cape Blank , and put men in them as many as could conveniently sail them , and no more , giving them charge to enter the harbour with his boats : for at the entrance of the harbour road three great Holland ships , which our admiral doubted would impeach his going in ; and therefore he gave order to the men of these five small ships , which were not above 60 tons a piece , if the Hollanders did offer any resistance , to run aboard of them , & to set their own ships on fire , and escape in their boats , which they had for the same purpose , that by this means they might not impeach our entrance . But when the morning was come , we were fallen above half a mile down to the Northward , below the harbour , which was a great inconvenience unto us : so that before we could get up again , the ebb was come upon us , and thereby we were forced to hover before the harbour till two of the clock in the afternoon , in the sighed of all the town . In this mean time , our ships road before the fort without the harbour , about a demy-colvering shot off : in the which time passed many shot between the fort and the ships , and especially between the admirals ship and them : but no great harm was done on either part . All this while our admiral kept the men ready hovering in the gaily & the boats . The Hollanders that road in the 
 mouth of the harbour , seeing our resolution , laid out haulsers , and wound themselves out of the way of us . Our admiral was very joyful , & gave great encouragement to all his men : for , to pass these three great Hollanders , he held it the greatest danger of all . About 12 of the clock the governor of the town sent a Portugall aboard the admirals ship , to know what he would have , and wherefore he came . He returned him this answer : That he wanted the carracks goods , and for them he came , and them he would have , and that he should shortly see . In this process of time , the townsmen and inhabitants which saw so much shipping , & perceived us to be enemies , gathered themselves together , three or foure ensigns of men , esteemed to the number of some sixe hundred at the least . These came to the fort or platform lying over against the entry of the harbour , and there attended our landing : but before our admiral set forward with his boats , he gave express order to all that had charge of governing the boats or galley , to run them with such violence against the shore , that they should be all cast away without recovery , and not one man to stay in them , whereby our men might have no manner of retreat to trust unto , but only to God and their weapons . 
 Now was the time come of the flood , being about two of the clock in the afternoon , when our admiral set forward , and entered the harbour with the small galley , and all the rest of the boats following him , the Hollanders that road in the mouth of the harbour , nothing impeached him : but now the fort began to play with their ordinance upon the galley and the boats ; and one of their shot took away a great piece of our ensign out of the galley . But our sail being set , it was no time for us to make any stay , but with all the force we could we ran the galley upon the shore right under the fort , within a coits cast of it , with such violence , that we brake her back ; and she sunk presently : for there where we landed , went a breach xi 49 worser 
 of the sea , which presently cast her away . The boats coming after did the like . At our arrival , those in the fort had laden all their ordinance , being seven pieces of brass , to discharge them upon us at our landing ; which indeed they did : for our admiral leaping into the water , all the rest following him , off came these pieces of ordinance : but almighty God be praised , they in the fort , with fear to see us land in their faces , had piked their ordinance so steep downwards with their mouths , that they shot all their shot in the sand , although , as I said before , it was not above a coits cast at the most between the place we landed and the face of the fort : so that they only shot off one of our men's arms , without doing any more hurt ; which was to us a great blessing of God : for if those ordinances had be well leveled , a great number of us had lost our lives at that instant . Our admiral seeing this , cried out , encouraging his men , Upon them , upon them ; all ( by Gods help ) is ours : and they therewith ran to the fort with all violence . Those foure ensigns of men that were set to defend our landing , seeing this resolution , began to go back , and retire into certain bushes that were by the same fort ; and being followed , fled thorough a certain oaze which was dry , being then but The fin of the beginning of the tide : and so abandoned the fort , 
 Fernambuck and left it with their ordinance to us . This day of 
 taken . our arr ; va ] ] was their Good-friday , when by custom 
 they usually whip themselves : but God sent us now 
 for a general scourge to them all , whereby that labour among them might be well spared . The fort being taken with all their ordinance , the admiral waved to the ships , willing them to weigh and come in ; which they did with all speed , himself taking order in leaving certain men in keeping the said fort , and placed the ordinance towards the high town , from whence he suspected the greatest danger ; and putting his men in order , marched towards the low town , which was about some foureteene score from the fort : in which town 
 lay all their merchandise and other goods . Approaching to the town , he entered the same , the people embarking themselves in caravels & boats , with all the expedition they could . The base town , of above and hundred houses , being thus taken , we found in it great store of merchandizes of all sorts : as Brasil-wood , sugars , Calico-cloth , pepper , cynamon , cloves , maze , nutmegs , with diverse other good things , to the great comfort of us all . The admiral went up and down the town , and placed at the South end of the same captain Venner and his company , himself and his company in the midst of the town , and captain Barker and captain Addy at the other end of the town , giving great charge , that no man upon pain of great punishment and loss of his shares , should break up or enter into any warehouse , without order and direction from the admiral . And this commandment was as well kept as ever any was kept , where so great spoil and booty was found : for it was not known in all the time of our being there , that any disorder was committed , or any lodge or warehouse broken open , or any spoil was made , or pillaging of any thing ; which is a note much to be observed in such and actium : for common mariners and soldiers are much given to pillaging and spoiling , making greater account of the same then of their shares . 
 Order being put in all things , we kept a very sure watch this first night , and the morning being come , our admiral and captain Venner , with the rest of the captains , went about the town , and gave order for the fortifying of it with all expedition : so that within two days it was surrounded with posts & planks , all that part of the town next the main land , at least nine foot high ; for ( God be thanked ) we found provision in the town , sufficient store for it . Now it is to be understood , that this town is environed on the one part by the sea , and on the backside by a river that runneth behind it ; so that to come to it by land , you must enter it by a small narrow passage not above 
 forty paces over at and high water . At this passage we built a fort , and planted in it five pieces of ordinance , which we took out of the first fort we won at our coming into the harbour . Now we having the town in possession , our admiral sent for the Hollanders by his chyrurgian , which had be brought up in that country , a man knowing their conditions , and sober and discreet of his own carriage . At his first coming aboard of them , they seemed to stand upon their own guard and defence , for they were three great and strong ships : but he used himself so , that they at the last willed him to come into the greatest of their ships , which was above 450 tons . Then he declared to them our intent of coming thither , and that they should be there as sure from any show of violence or injury offered them , as if they were in their own houses , and if they should think so good , his admiral would fraught them for England , if they would be content with fraught reasonable , and as they should agree , and it should be at their own choice whither to go or not , he would not force them , unless it were to their benefit and good liking . Although this people were somewhat stubborn at the first , as that nation is in these causes , yet being satisfied with good words and good dealing they came aland , & after conference had with the admiral , they were so satisfied , that they went thorough with a fraught : and then we joined with them , & they with us , and they served us as truly & as faithfully as our own people did , both at watch and ward , by sea and all other services . Within two days after our coming in , about midnight , a great number of Portugals and Indians with them , came down upon us with a very great cry and noise ; but God be thanked , we were ready for them : for our admiral supposing some such assault , had provided all our muskets with hailshot , which did so gaul both the Indians and the Portugals , that they made them presently retreat . And this is to be noted , that there 
 1595-was both the horse and his rider slain both with one of these shot . Our men followed them some five or sixe score , but no further . We lost in this conflict but only one man , but had diverse hurt . What was lost of their part , we could not tell , for they had before day , after our retreat , carried away all their dead . 
 Within three or foure days after our coming in appeared before the harbour 3 ships & 2 pinnaces , the pinnaces being somewhat never , descried our flags , and one of them came in , which was a French pinnace , declaring all the rest to be French bottoms ; which our admiral willed should come in : and so they did . These were Frenchmen of war , and came thither for purchase . The captains came aland , and were welcomed ; among whom was one captain John Noyer of Diepe , that the year before had taken in our admiral at the Hand of Mona in the West Indies , where his ship was cast away , coming out of the East Indies . To this man our admiral offered great kindness , and performed it , & was not ungrateful for his former benefit showed unto him . This captain desired of our admiral to bestow upon him his ships lading of Fernambuc-wood , which fie granted him , and also his pinnace , and more , gave him a caravel of about 50 tons , & bid him lade her with wood also ; which with other benefits he gratefully received . To the other two captains he granted their ladings of wood , the one captain being of Diepe , the other of Rochel . The captain of Diepe confessed that he met Abraham Cocke Abraham certain months before , & being distressed for want of Goeke g / nng water , gave him some , & went with him to a watering ojpiate , met place where he had water enough , and so departed from mthalL him , saying that his men were very weak . The coming in of these ships did much strengthen us ; 
 for our admiral appointed both these French and the Flemings to keep watch upon the river by night with their boats , every boat having in her 12 men at the least , and the boats well provided . This was for fear 
 of fired ships or barks to come down , which our admiral had great care unto , and caused our ships to ride by cables and haulsers , at all advantages to shun them , if by that means they should attempt to put us out of the harbour ; giving commandment to us that watched in the town , that what fires soever we should espy or see , not one man to start from his watch or quarter , unless we were by himself commanded to the contrary . Now this order put in all things , and having viewed all the goods in the town , and thinking our selves sufficiently fortified , we began to unladen our ships , which came as full laden in as they went forth , but not with so good merchandise . And this order was taken about the unlading of them , and also the lading of goods out of the town : our men were divided into halves , and the one half wrought one day , and the other half the other day ; always those that wrought not kept the watch with their furniture in their hands and about them , and none stepped far off or wandered from his colours , and those that wrought had all their weapons in good order set & placed by them , so that at and instant every one knew where to go to his furniture : and this was very carefully looked unto . 
 The third day after our coming in , came down from the higher town , which might be about foure miles off upon a hill , three or foure of the principali gentlemen of the country , and said that from the bishop , themselves , & the rest , they would have some conference with our admiral . This news being brought to the admiral , he hung down his head for a small season ; and when he had mused a while , he answered , I must go aboard of the Flemings upon business that imports me , and therefore let them stay if they will : and so he went & sat there with the Flemings from nine of the clock till two at the afternoon . In this space diverse messengers went to the admiral , to come away , for these gentlemen stayed . To whom he gave 54 
 this answer : Are they not gone yet ? And about two of the clock he came aland , and then they told him they were departed . Many of the better sort of our men marveled , and thought much , because he would not vouchsafe to come and have conference with such men of account as they seemed to be . But the admiral made them this answer , Sirs , I have be brought up among this people , I have lived among them as a gentleman , served with them as a soldier , and lived among them as a merchant , so that I should have some understanding of their demeanours and nature ; and I know when they cannot prevail with the sword by force , then they deal with their deceivable tongues ; for faith and truth they have none , neither will use any , unless it be to their own advantage . And this I give you warning , that if you give them parley , they will betray us ; and for my part , of all nations in the world , it would grieve me most to be overtaken by this nation & the Spaniards : and I am glad it was my fortune to pay them with one of their own fetches , for I warrant you they understand me better then you think they do . And with this I pray you be satisfied ; I hope it is for all our goods : for what shall we gain by parley , when ( by the help of God ) we have got already that we came for , should we venture that we have got with our swords , to see if they can take it from us by words and policy ? there were no wisdom in so doing . You know what it hath cost us , and how many men lie wounded that be not yet hold of this other nights hurts : and therefore from henceforth I give this commission , that if any be taken , he be sent away with this order , although he come as a friend , that if either he or any other approach us from henceforth , he shall hanged out of hand : and other course then this I will not take with them . Which course was followed , for within 3 or 4 days after it was performed by two taken in the night : and after that we were never troubled with 
 spies ; and although diverse slaves came running from their men to us , by which we understood much of their working & pretences , yet the admiral would entertain few of them . 
 In this mean time that we began to work , the Portugals with the country people were not idle , for seeing us so busy , about sixe nights after our coming in , they privily in the night cast up a trench in the 
 sands about a sacar shot from our ships , minding 
 there to plant ordinance , which would have offended our ships greatly ; & they would not have be able 
 to have road there to take in their lading , which now 
 began to go aboard of them . The admiral hear - ing this , about 3 of the clock in ; the after noon marshaled our men , and he and all the rest of the captains marched towards them . The Portugals & Indians perceiving our coming , began to withdraw themselves within the trench , meaning ( as it should appear ) to fight it out there : but we made no stand , neither did it behove us , but presently approached the trenches with our muskets & pikes , afore their trenches were thoroughly finished : so that by Gods help we entered them . And the Portugals & Indians left the place , & left unto us 4 good pieces of brass ordinance , with powder and shot & diverse other necessaries , and among the rest 5 small carts of that country , which to us were more worth then all the rest we took , for the lading of our goods from the town to the waters side : for without them we could not have told what to have done , much of our goods being so heavy , that without carts , we were not able to weyld them : all these things we brought away & destroyed all those platforms that they had made , and then we had rest with them for certain days , in which we went forward , dividing our merchandise with captain Venner according to our consort , and went daily lading them aboard , every ships company according as their turns fell out , but only the three Dutch ships : for the goods being put into their 
 boats their own companies jaded themselves . And this farther good chance or blessing of God we had to help us , that assoon as we had taken our carts , the next morning came in a ship with some 60 Negroes , io PortugaU women , and 40 Portugals : the women and the Negroes we turned out of the town , but the Portugals our Admiral kept to draw the carts when they were laden , which to us was a very great ease . For the country is very hight and ill for our nation to take any great travel in . 
 In this town there is no fresh water to be had , and therefore we were every 5 or 6 days compelled to pass over the river into the main land to get fresh water , which after the first or second time the Portugals kept and would have defended our watering , so that we were driven to water of force , and at several times some of our men were hurt , and only two or three slain , and with this danger we were forced to get our water . 
 And as they molested us in our watering , so they slept not in other devises , but put in practice to burn our ships or remove them out of the harbour . For within some 20 days after our coming in , they had prepared 5 Caravels and filled them with such things as would best take fire and burn : these they brought within a mile or little more of our ships , and there set them on fire , for nearer they could not well come because of our watch of boats , for as is above said , the Admiral had always 6 boats that kept watch above half a mile from the ships for fear of such exploits as these , which was the cause they could not fire them so near the ships as they would have done . But these fired Caravels had the tide with them , and also the little wind that blew was in their favour ; which caused them to come down the stream the faster : which our boats perceiving made to them with as much expedition as conveniently they could , but the tide and wind both serving them , they approached towards the ships with great expedition . Our men in the town began to be in some fear of them , yet no man moved or 
 57 
 AJX 
 1595 - 
 started from his quarter more then if there had be nothing to do . Also the master's and such as were aboard , were somewhat amazed to see 5 so great fires to be coming down among their ships , but they prepared for to clear them of it , as well as they could , being provided afore hand & judging that some such stratagems would be there used , the river being very fit therefore . But ( God be thanked ) who was always with us & our best defence in this voyage ; by whose assistance we performed this so great and attempt with so small forces . Our company in the boats so played the men when they saw the fires come near our ships , that casting grapnels with iron chains on them , as every boat had one for that purpose , some they towed aground , and some they brought to a bitter or anchor , where they road till all their force was burned out , & so we were delivered by Gods help from this fearful danger . Within some 6 nights after this , which might be about the 26 day after our coming in & abided there , about 11 of the clock at night , came driving down other 3 great rafts burning with the hugest fires that I have seen . These were exceeding dangerous , for when our men approached them thinking to clap their grapnels upon them , as they had done upon the Caravels the night before , they were prevented : for there stook out of the rafts many poles which kept them from the body of the rafts , that they could not come to throw their grapnels into them : & yet they had this inconvenience worse then all the rest which most troubled us . There stook out among the poles certain hollow trunks filled with such provision of fireworks that they ceased not still ( as the fire came down to those trunks to set them on fire ) to spout out such sparkles , that our boats having powder in them for our men's use , durst not for fear of tiring themselves with their own powder come near those sparkles of the rafts , but seeing them to drive nearer & nearer our ships , they wet certain clothes and laid upon their flasks and bandelers and so ventured upon them , & with 58 
 their grapnels took hold of them , and so towed them on ground , where they stook fast & were not burned out the next day in the morning . Diverse logs and timbers came driving along by our ships , and burning , but with our boats we easily defended them . And thus ( God be praised ) we escaped the second fires . A third firing was prepared , as a Negro gave us to understand , but this we prevented by our departure . For this third firing were very great preparations ; and we were credibly informed of certainty , that this firing should be such as we should never be able to prevent , and assuredly these fires be dangerous things and not to be prevented upon the sudden , unless it be afore prepared for and foreseen . For when it comes upon the sudden and unlooked for , and unprovided for , it brings men into a great amazement and at their wits end . And therefore let all men riding in rivers in their enemies country be sure to look to be provided before hand , for against fire there is no resistance without preparation . 
 Also it is a practice in these hight countries' , where there be such expert swimmers , to cut the cables of ships : and one night it was practised to cut the Admirals cable , and yet the boat road by the cable with two men in her to watch all the night , and the bwoy only was cut , but not the cable : but after that night , seeing then our good watch , they never after attempted it . 
 While all these things passed , our ships ( God be thanked ) thorough the industry of our governors , and diligent labour of our men , began to be wholly laden , and all the best merchandise conveyed aboard our ships , so that our Admiral meant to depart that night , which was the 31 day after our entrance , or else on the next day at the farthest , and so warning was given to all men to make themselves ready . Our Admiral being aboard his ship you same morning , espied in the sands right against the place where the ships road , that there was a small bank of sand newly cast up , under which he perceived now and then some people to be : presently he took his 
 59 
 A.D. 
 I595 « 
 boat and went to the town and called all the Captains together , declaring that the enemies were about some pretence right against the ships , consulting whither it were best to sally out & see what they were doing , or depart that evening according to the former determination . The Admiral was of opinion to depart that night , saying it was but folly to seek wars since we had no need to do it : other affirmed , it were good to see what they did , lest the wind might be contrary and the ships not get out , and so our enemies may built upon us to our great disadvantage . Well , said the Admiral , the matter is not great , for there can be no danger in this sally , for where they work it is within Falkonshot of the ships , and if any power should come against you , the ships may play upon them with 40 pieces of ordinance at the least , so that a bird cannot pass there but she must be slain . I am somewhat unwilling you should go , for I have not be well these two days , and I am not strong to march upon those heavy sands : they answered all at once , you shall not need to trouble your self for this service , for you see it is nothing and of no danger , being so near the ships , doubt you not we will accomplish this service well enough , and return again within this hour . The Admiral answered : the danger cannot be great , but yet you shall go out strong for fear of the worst . And so the Admiral marshaled them 275 men French and English , which were under the conduct of Edmund Barker , captain Barker of Plimmouth , Viceadmiral to captain Venner , captain Addy , and the three French captains all going out together , and they were to march upon a narrow piece of ground to the place whither they were sent unto : in the brodest part betwixt the sea and the water on the other side , it is not above a stones cast , for it is a bank of sand lying between the river & the sea , so they needed not to fear any coming on their backs or on their sides , and before them could not man come , but he must pass by all the ships which no company of men were able to do without present death . 
 The Admiral commanded them at their departure to go no further then the place he sent them to , and so he himself went aboard the ships and made ready all the ordinance for fear of the worst , not knowing what might ensue , although he saw no danger might follow . Thus we marched quietly till we came to the place we were sent unto , being right over against the ships : out of which place came some dozen shot , which seeing us come , discharged and ran their ways with such as were working within the said platform . So that we came into it and perceived they had begun to lay planks to plant ordinance upon . Our Admiral commanded , if there were any such thing , to burn the planks & return in again , which we might have done without hurting of any men finger : but our leaders were not content to have performed the service committed them in charge , but would needs expressly & against their order march on further to fight with certain Ensigns almost a mile off - , clean out of the reach of the ordinance of all our ships , & where lay the strength of the whole country . When our men began to draw near those Ensigns of men , the Ensigns seemed to retire with great speed , which our men followed with such great haste that some outrunning other some , our order was broken , and those ensigns retired themselves into the force of the whole country , so that our foremost men were in the midst of their enemies year they were aware , which were slain year the rest could come to succour them . The enemies encouraged by this , came also upon the rest , which presently began to retire , & the enemies followed them till they came within the reach of the ordinance of our ships , where they were beaten off and left their pursuit . In this conflict were slain captain Barker captain of the Salomon , captain Cotton the Admirals Lieutenant , captain John Noyer a French captain of Diepe , and another French captain of Rochel , with M. John Barker & other to the number 
 of 35 : for these were the foremost and hottest in the pursuit of the Ensigns aforesaid , and by their forwardness came all to perish . At our return into the town the Admiral came to us much bewailing the death of so many good men as were lost , wondering what we meant to pass the express order that was given us . With this loss our men were much daunted , but our Admiral began again to encourage them , declaring that the fortune of the wars was sometime to win and sometime to lose . And therewithal ! he wished every man to prepare & make himself ready : for that night ( God willing ) he would depart . For all our ships were ready and laden , and he would not stay any further fortune . The evening being come , the ships began to weigh & go forth of the harbour , and God be thanked of his goodness towards us who sent us a fair wind to go forth withal , so that by ii of the clock in the night we were all forth in safety . The enemies perceiving our departing , planted a piece or two of ordinance , and shot at us in the night , but did us no harm . We were at our coming forth 15 sails , that is , 3 sails of Hollanders , the one of 450 tons , the other of 350 tons , and the third of 300 tons , foure sails of french & one ship which the Admiral gave the french Captain , 3 sails of Captain Venners fleet of Plimmouth , and 4 sails of our Admirals fleet , all these were laden with marchan dizes , and that of good worth . We stayed in this harbour to pass all this business but only 31 days , and in this time we were occupied with skirmishes and attempts of the enemy 11. times ; in all which skirmishes we had the better , only this last excepted . To God be the honour and praise of all , etc. The whole fleet being out in safety , the next day in the morning the Admiral gave order to the whole Peranjeu 40. fleet to sail towards Peranjew a harbour lying some 40 leagues to the Northward of Fernambucke , and there Fernambuck . to take in fresh water and to refresh themselves : and 62 
 to make provision for refreshing , our Admiral had sent thither some 6 days before two French men in a small pinnace , which Frenchmen he had provided from Diepe before his coming out of England for that purpose . For both these two spoke the Indians language very perfectly : for at this port of Peranjew and and other called Potaju some 6 leagues to the Northward the Frenchmen have had trade for brasil-wood , and have laden from thence by the Indians means , who have fetched it for them some 20 leagues into the country upon their backs , 3 or 4 ships every year . Thus we all sailed towards Peranjew , at which place we arrived in the night , so that we were forced to lie off & on with a stiff gale of wind , in which we lost the most part of our fleet , & they not knowing this coast put off to the sea , and so went directly for England . Our Admiral and some 4 sail more with him put into the harbour of Peranjew , and there watered and refreshed himself very well , with hens , conies , hares and potatos , with other things , which the two Frenchmen had partly provided before his coming : this is a very good harbour where Peranjeu a ships may ride and refresh very well . But , as I am given to understand since our coming from thence , ’ the Portugals have attempted the place and do inhabit it , and have put the French from their accustomed trade . Here having watered and refreshed our selves , we put to the sea , plying after the rest of our fleet which were gone before , which we never herd of till our arrival in England at The downs in the month of July , where we understood the rest of our consorts to be passed up for London , Captain Venner & his fleet to be at Plimmouth , and the French ships to be safe arrived at Diepe , which to us was very great comfort . At our setting sail from The downs , according as the custom is , finding the Queens ships there , we saluted them with certain ordinance . The Gunner being careless , as they are many times of their powder , 
 in discharging certain pieces in you gunner room , set a barrel of powder on fire , which took fire in you gunner room , blew up the Admirals caben , slew the gunner with 2 others outright , & hurt 20 more , of which 4 or 5 died . This powder made such a smoke in the ship with the fire that burned in the gunner room among all the fire works , that no man at the first wist what to do : but recalling back their fear , they began to cast water into the gunner room in such abundance ( for the Queens ships now & also the other ships that were in our company came presently to our help ) that ( God be praised ) we put out the fire & saved all , & no great harm was done to the goods . By this may be seen that there is no sure safety of things in this world . For now we made account to be out of all danger , where behold a greater came upon us , then we suffered all the whole voyage . But the almighty be praised for ever , which delivered us out of this and many other in this voyage . Our fire being well put out , and we taking in fresh men ( God be praised ) we came to Black-wall in safety . 
 The king of Spaines resolution to proceed in the discovery y conquest of Rio Grande . 
 . 