A speciali letter written from Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho the Governor of Parajua in the most Northern part of Brasil , 1597 , to Philip the second king of Spaine , answering his desire touching the conquest of Rio Grande , with the relation of the besieging of the castle of Cabodelo by the Frenchmen , and of the discovery of a rich silver mine and diverse other important matters . 
 Received your Majesties letter bearing date the ninth of November 1596. whereby I understand that your Majesty does determine to proceed in 
 the discovery and conquest of Rio Grande , according to the relation which was sent your Majesty by DONE Francisco de Sousa , Governor general of this realm of Brasilia : 
 together with a copy of a letter , which your Majesty sent unto us , bearing date the two and twentieth of March 1596. Moreover I received another letter from your Majesty bearing date the 15 of March 1597. Both which letters were to one effect . It may please your Majesty to understand that there are diverse Gentlemen in these countries' of as good ability as my self , which seek to live at home only for their ease and pleasure , and are not wont to hazard nor venture their bodies , lives , and goods so often times in your Majesties service as I have done and commonly do ; and can keep their goods and riches , and not spend nor wast them as I have done , and daily do so wilfully : yet nevertheless being spent in your Majesties service , I am very glad thereof . For I and they are always ready at your Majesties commandment . 
 And as concerning your Majesties commandment in commanding me that I should put to my helping hand in the conquest of Rio Grande : although this Captainship of Parajua and country where I do TheCaptaine-governe does want ability for that purpose , yet never - °f thelesse your Majesty shall always find me ready to s^^h-tn do your Majesty the best service I can : for it is sixe degr . 45 very well known how forward I have be always min. of and am in this conquest , and still do put to my s°u&erly lati-helping hand , as pardy your Majesty does under - u e ' stand by a letter which I wrote to your Majesty by my son , bearing date the 19 of March 1596 wherein your Majesty may understand what good service I have already done therein , and always will be ready to my power to do the like in furthering of the said enterprise . 
 It may please your Majesty to understand that the third of July there was brought unto me a Frenchman a prisoner , who presented himself unto me . And I examining of him , he told me that he came running away from certain French ships men xi 65 E 
 of war , which came upon this coast : and he told me that he had served your Majesty in the wars of France . Likewise he told me that he left me seven great ships Frenchmen of war riding at and anchor in Rio Grande , and that there were 13 french ships of war more , which had given battery to the The castle of castle of Cabodelo , and landed 3 50 soldiers all in 'u^b the w^xte armour > and the battery continued from Friday French . until the Munday following both by sea and land , and great store of Frenchmen were slain , and two Captains of the French . On our side the Captain of the castle was slain , and other two Portugal » 
 hurt : other harm they had none . There were but twentie Portugals in the castle , and five pieces of 
 ordinance . They meant to have kept the castle , and to have traded with the Indian people . So seeing 
 they could not take the castle , they hoised sails , 
 and went from thence to Rio Grande : and being altogether they are in number 20 sail at and anchor in Rio Grande . And some of them determine after they be new trimmed and dressed , and have taken in fresh victuals , and stayed there until Easter , then to depart from thence to the Honduras , and so to burn and spoil some towns thereabouts . 
 I certified Manuel Mascarenhas of these informations , by my letters , requesting him to send me with all expedi-The garrison cion those soldiers which were in garrison in Fernambuck of Femam - to ayje me > and to defend this Captainship from the ’ enemy . But the Friars of The Covent would not consent thereunto , nor suffer them to be sent unto me . So I was forced to make shift with those soldiers only which I had in my government and took them with me , and marched to the place where the enemies were entrenched , and upon Whitsunday in the evening about The country three of the clock , having in my company a Negro of ofPetig^ar country of Petiguar , which was our guide , he against the brought us where the enemies camp was ; and presently Portugals . I did assault them , and slew great store of them , burning 66 
 T597-the villages and country of those rebels , which did join with the Frenchmen , and took many of them prisoners . 
 So they told me that there were ten great French ships of war which were at and anchor in Rio Grande . 
 Likewise I was informed , that there is a Frenchman called Daurmigas , which hath discovered and found great store of silver in a place called Copaoba . The A rich silver 
 silver hath be tried and melted , it is very good and f : and at fine silver , and there is great quantity . The man which told me of this hath been in the mine , and dayesjourney 
 hath seen it tried and melted . And 1 have be my ofParajua . 
 self once in the place : it is but 6 days journey t111-717-1 
 from this Captainship . 
 Furthermore this Frenchman told me that one Monsieur Mifa a french Captain , and a kinsman of the governor and Viceadmiral of Diepe in Normandie , had one of his arms strooken off at the siege of the castle of Cabodelo ; who is departed from Rio Grande , with determination to come back hither again the next year in the month of Januarie following , and to inhabit in this country of Paraiba , which is 20 leagues from Fernambuck , because of the great store of silver , which they have already found here . 
 Moreover I am informed that a noble man of France called The earl of Villa Dorca does intend to come upon this coast with a great fleet from Rochel . It were good that your Majesty would send into France to know the certainty thereof . 
 The Frenchman likewise told me that all the Canibals All the Cani-of Petiguar have joined themselves in company with bals rfPett-certaine Frenchmen , which were cast away in two with Jt^ ships upon this coast . The one of these ships which Frenchmen were cast away was one Rifoles , and the other ship against thee was this men . And those Frenchmen which came PortuSals - 
 upon this coast did join themselves with those Canibals which did rebel , and did divide themselves into two squadrons . So I sent presently to Manuel 
 French ships laden with great store oj silver oar . 
 Mascarenhas that he should send me aid and munition . But he sent me word again , that he had none to spare , and that he did purpose with all speed to go himself to Rio Grande ; and that he was not able to furnish himself so well as he could wish , nor to bring his soldiers into the field , for lack of shot , powder , and other munition , which he did want . 
 Hereupon once more the 29 of July I with my soldiers marched to the enemies camp , and there joining battle with the Indian rebels , which were joined with the Frenchmen that were their leaders , I did set upon them , and slew great store of them , and took foureteene of them prisoners . They do report the very same news , which the other Frenchmen did tell me as touching the ships which were in the harbour of Rio Grande ; and how their pretence was to have come and have taken us , and spoiled the country . 
 But now being put to flight and having received the overthrow , they can get no victuals to victuali their ships : which hath be the cause that they are mightily hindered in their intent , and dare not come any more to attempt us . And the Indians are so dismayed , that in haste they will have no more help nor aid of the Frenchmen . So by these means of necessity the Indians must submit themselves unto us , considering they are quite spoiled and overthrown for a long time . Likewise they have informed me touching the silver mines which are found , that it is most true . For those french ships which were in Rio Grande have laden great store of the oar . Wherefore I certified Manuel de Mascarenhas of the Frenchmens news , and how every thing did stand ; wishing him to make ready foure ships and three hundred soldiers , and so to take the harbour of Rio Grande , being now cleared and void of the enemy : and to search out the situation of the place , and where were best to fortify and to built some forts for the defence of 
 this river , where need shall require . Hereunto Mascarenhas sent me word , that when he went himself , and found it true which hath been reported touching the silver mines , that then he would send both men and ships . Therefore your Majesty must give order , that the rest of the Governors shall aid and assist me in these wars : otherwise of my self I am not able to do more then I have already done in defending of this country against our enemies which are many . 
 It may please your Majesty to be advertised , that from time to time I have written unto DONE Francisco de Sousa Governor general of this realm , who is in Baia , as concerning these Frenchmen of war : but he will not answer me to any purpose , because I do write unto him for such things as I do want , which are shot , powder , men , and munition requisite for your Majesties service & safeguard of this captainship . For here are neither shot , powder , nor any thing else to defend us from our enemies ; nor any that will put to their helping hands for the defence of this country , & the service of your Majesty . And therefore it were needful that your Majesty should commit the charge and government into the hands of Diego Sierva , with express charge that all the captains & commanders upon pain of death obey him and be ready at all times to aid and assist him in your service . Otherwise this country cannot be kept and maintained , having so great wars continually as we have , and are troubled withal . For this Diego Sierva is a very good soldier , and hath good experience ; and is fit to govern this ; country . Your Highness is also to send him Commission with express commandment to follow these wars ; otherwise this country cannot be kept , but daily they will rebel . For here are none that will serve your Majesty so justly as he will do : who will have a great care in any thing which shall concern your Majesties service touching the estate of this country . For the Governor Sousa does 
 Two Forts to be built at Cabodelo . 
 The country 
 spend your Majesties treasure in building his own Ingenios or sugar-mills . 
 And those Captains which your Majesty intends to send hither must bring with them shot , powder , and all kind of weapons , furniture , and munition for the defence and safeguard of this country , and for the conquest of Rio Grande . For there is no kind of munition in all this country to be had , if occasion should serve . It were also good that your Majesty should send order for the building of a couple of Forts or Castles at Cabodelo , for they be very needful for the defence of the enemy , which daily does war against this Captainship . For that man which shall govern this country , if he be no more fortunate than I have be hitherto , shall not miss one time or another , but he shall .. lose all the country . If DONE Francisco de Sousa had danger Jdayly sent me t^086 two hundred and fiftie soldiers which I to be lost . did send for , which were in garrison in the castle of 
 Arrecife , which do nothing but spend your Majesties victuals and treasure , and had not sent them to Baiha , The wars where there was no need , these wars of Petiguar had of etiguar . bene ended long ago , and had saved your Majesty a great deal of charges which you had spent in following of A new cap - this conquest of Rio Grande . I have chosen one Captain John de Matas Cardoso to be Governor of Cabodelo , who is a very sufficient man . 
 A great con - Furthermore , it may please your Majesty to under-^cUn6the stand > that the chiefest Friars of this Monastery of S. government of Antonie have complained on me to the lord Governor the Indian general , and have caused great strife and debate between towns . him anj me touching the government and rule of these Indian towns . For the Friars would command and govern both the Indians and their towns as well in Ecclesiastical as Temporali causes , as touching the punishment of the bodies of such as are offenders . But I have resisted them in your Majesties name , and have alleged , that none but your Majesty must rule and govern them and their country , and that the towns appertain 70 
 to your Majesty , and not unto the Friars . But the Governor hath written a letter unto me , signifying that he hath pronounced a sentence against me in the Friars behalf , which is this . The King our master hath sent a decree and certain statutes touching the good government and order to be executed and kept in those Indian towns : and that upon sighed hereof I shall presently banish all the Mamalukes and white men which dwell in any of those Indian towns with all speed , and that none of them from hence forward shall enter into the said villages , without commandment and consent of the said Friars . So this sentence was presented unto me by the Reverend father Custodio , Prior of Sant Anton of Brasil , with a further postscript of the governor importing these words ; I do likewise charge and command you the Governor of Parajua , that presently upon sighed hereof you shall restore those villages and houses which you have burned and destroyed in the last wars , and likewise the town of Thetowne of S. Augustine , and that you shall built them again at & Au&ustine-your own proper cost and charges : for the Friars allege that these towns were given them , by a decree sent them from Pope Pius Quintus , that the said Friars should govern and rule them . 
 On the other side I have pronounced another sentence against the said Friars , in your Majesties name , and for your Majesty , alleging that those towns , villages , and subject's appertain and belong unto your Majesty , and that in temporali causes I am to punish those offenders , which shall rebel against your Majesty : and as touching ecclesiastical causes that the Vicar of this Cathedral church shall rule , govern and instruct them in the Christian religion . So we both have appealed unto your Majesty herein , and your Majesty may peruse all our writings , and then determine that which shall be best and most profitable for your Majesties service and enlargement of your crown . For through these broils the inhabitants of this Parajua forsake their houses 
 & dwelling places , and so do some of the Friars , because they cannot be suffered to rule & govern . 
 Also the Indians have complained against me , because I have burned their villages in this last rebellion . Wherefore if your Majesty do not send some order for this country and see into these cases , it will breed great dissension and rebellion among us , and we shall be ready to cut one another's throat before it be long . 
 Thus I thought good , according to my humble bounden duty , and for the service of your Majesty and quietness of this realm , to certify your Majesty the truth of the whole matter ; hoping in short time that your Majesty will send some good order to qualify these broils : for there is great hatred and malice among us . Jesus Christ preserve and keep the royal person of your Majesty with long health , as it pleases him . From the Captainship of Parajua this present 20 of August . 1597. 
 Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho . 
 . 