Happily performed round about the world , by Sir Francis Drake , and M. Thomas Candish Esquire , together with the rest of our English voyages intended for the South Sea , the kingdoms of Chili , Peru , the back side of Nueva Espanna , the Malucos , the Philippinas , the mighty empire of China , though not so happily performed as the two former : whereunto are annexed certain rare observations touching the present state of 
 China , and the kingdom of Coray , lately invaded by Quabacondono the last monarch of the 66. princedoms of Japan . 
 The famous voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the South sea , and therehence about the whole Globe of the earth , begun in the year of our Lord , 1577. 
 15. day of November , in the year of our I 1577. M. Francis Drake , with a fleet of s^ips and barks , and to the number of 
 164. men , gentlemen and sailors , departed from Plymouth , giving out his pretended voyage for Alexandria : but the wind falling contrary , he was forced the 
 IOI 
 A.D. 
 ’577 - 
 The ci tie of Assumption , or Ascension 60. leagues from the mouth of Paraguai . 
 200. leagues from Assumption subject to the Spaniard , to the ci tie of Xaraes . 
 next morning to put into Falmouth haven in Cornwall , where such and so terrible a tempest took us , as few men have seen the like , and was in deed so vehement , that all our ships were like to have gone to wrack : but it pleased God to preserve us from that extremity , and to afflict us only for that present with these two particulars : The mast of our Admiral which was the Pelican , was cut over board for the safeguard of the ship , and the Marigold was driven ashore , and somewhat bruised : for the repairing of which damages we returned again to Plimmouth , and having recovered those harms , and brought the ships again to good state , we set forth the second time from Plimmouth , and set sail the 13. day of December following . 
 The 25. day of the same month we fell with the Cape Cantin , upon the coast of Barbarie , and coasting The Isle of along , the 27. day we found and Island called Mogador , Mogador on lying one mile distant from the main , between which arbarie^ Island and the main , we found a very good and safe harbour for our ships to ride in , as also very good entrance , and void of any danger . 
 On this Island our general erected a pinnace , whereof he brought out of England with him foure already framed . While these things were in doing , there came to the waters side some of the inhabitants of the country , showing forth their flags of truce , which being seen of our general , he sent his ships boat to the shore , to know what they would : they being willing to come aboard , our men left there one man of our company for a pledge , and brought two of theirs aboard our ship , which by signs showed our General , that the next day they would bring some provision , as sheep , capons and hens , and such like : whereupon our general bestowed among them some linen cloth and shoes , and a javelin , which they very joyfully received , and departed for that time . 
 The next morning they failed not to come again to the waters side , and our general again setting out 102 
 our boat , one of our men leaping over rashly ashore , and offering friendly to embrace them , they set violent hands on him , offering a dagger to his throat if he had made any resistance , and so laying him on a horse , carried him away : so that a man cannot be too circumspect and wary of himself among such miscreants . 
 Our pinnace being finished , we departed from this place the 30. and last day of December , and coasting along the shore , we did descry , not contrary to our expectation , certain Canters which were Spanish fishermen , to whom we gave chase and took three of them , and proceeding further we met with 3. Caravels and took them also . 
 The 17. day of January we arrived at Cape Blanco , Januarie . where we found a ship riding at anchor , within the Cape , and but two simple Mariners in her , which ship we took and carried her further into the harbour , where we remained 4. days , and in that space our General mustered , and trained his men on land in warlike manner , to make them fit for all occasions . 
 In this place we took of the Fishermen such necessaries as we wanted , and they could yield us , and leaving here one of our little barks called the Benedict , we took with us one of theirs which they called Canters , being of the burden of 40. tons or thereabouts . 
 All these things being finished , we departed this harbour the 22. of Januarie , carrying along with us one of the Portugall Caravels which was bound to the Islands of Cape Verde for salt , whereof good store is made in one of those Islands . 
 The master or Pilot of that Caravel did advertise our general that upon one of those Islands called Mayo , The Isle of there was great store of dried Cabritos , which a few MaJ°-inhabitants there dwelling did yearly make ready for such of the kings Ships as did there touch , being bound for his country of Brasile or elsewhere . we fell with this Island the 27. of January , but the Inhabitants would in no case traffic with us , being 
 103 
 thereof forbidden by the kings Edict : yet the next day our general sent to view the Island , and the likelihoods that might be there of provision of victuals , about threescore and two men under the conduct and government of Master Winter and Master Doughty , and marching towards the chief place of habitation in this Island ( as by the Portugall we were informed ) having travailed to the mountains the space of three miles , and arriving there somewhat before the day break , we arrested our selves to see day before us , which appearing , we found the inhabitants to be fled : but the place , by reason that it was manured , we found to be more fruitful then the other part , especially the valleys among the hills . 
 Rife grapes in Here we gave our selves a little refreshing , as by very Winter . ripe anj swee [ e grapes , which the fruitfulness of the earth at that season of the year yielded us : and that season being with us the depth of Winter , it may seem strange that those fruits were then there growing : but the reason thereof is this , because they being between the Tropike and the Equinoctial , the Sun passes twice in the year through their Zenith over their heads , by means whereof they have two Summer's , & being so near the heat of the line , they never loose the heat of the Sun so much , but the fruits have their increase and continuance in the midst of Winter . The Island is wonderfully stored with goats and wild hens , and it hath salt also without labour , save only that the people gather it into heaps , which continually in great quantity is increased upon the sands by the flowing of the sea , and the receiving heat of the Sun kerning the same , so that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic with their neighbours . 
 The descrip - among other things we found here a kind of fruit cion of the tree caHed Cocos , which because it is not commonly known kos^* us in England , I thought good to make some 
 description of it . 
 104 
 The tree bears no leaves nor branches , but at the very top the fruit grows in clusters , hard at the top of the stem of the tree , as big every several fruit as a men head : but having taken off the uttermost bark , which you shall find to be very full of strings or sinews , as I may term them , you shall come to a hard shell which may hold of quantity in liquour a pint commonly , or some a quart , and some less : within that shell of the thickness of half and inch 
 good , you shall have a kind of hard substance and very white , no less good and sweet then almonds : within that again a certain clear liquour , which being drunk , you shall not only find it very delicate and . sweet , but most comfortable and cordial . 
 After we had satisfied our selves with some of these 
 fruits , we marched further into the Island , and saw great store of * Cabritos alive , which were so chased by the inhabitants , that we could do no good towards our provision , but they had laid out as it were to stop our mouths withal , certain old dried Cabritos , which being but ill , and small and few , we made no account of . 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 * Or goats . 
 Being returned to our ships , our general departed hence the 31. of this month , and sailed by the Island The Isle of S. of S. Iago , but far enough from the danger of the inhabitants , who shot and discharged at us three pieces , but they all fell short of us , and did us not harm . The Island is fair and large , and as it seems , rich and fruitful , and inhabited by the Portugals , but the mountains and high places of the Island are said to be possessed by the Moors , who having been slaves to the Portugals , to ease themselves , made escape to the desert places of the Island , where they abide with great strength . 
 Being before this Island , we espied two ships under sail , to the one of which we gave chase , and in the end boarded her with a shipboat without resistance , which we found to be a good prize , and she yielded unto us 
 105 
 A prize , and good store of wine : which prize our General committed to the custody of Master Doughty , and retaining the % lfot taken . P^ot > sent the rest away with his Pinnace , giving them a Butt of wine and some victuals , and their wearing clothes , and so they departed . 
 The isle of The same night we came with the Island called by the Portugals , Ilha del fogo , that is , the burning Island : in the Northside whereof is a consuming fire , the matter is said to be of Sulphur , but notwithstanding it is like to be a commodious Island , because the Portugals have built , and do inhabit there . 
 Upon the South side thereof lies a most pleasant and sweet Island , the trees whereof are always green and fair to look upon , in respect whereof they call it Ilha Brava , that is , the brave Island . From the banks thereof into the sea do run in many places reasonable streams of fresh waters easy to be come by , but there was no convenient road for our ships : for such was the depth , that no ground could be had for anchoring , and it is reported , that ground was never found in that place , so that the tops of Fogo burr ne not so high in the air , but the roots of Brava are quenched as low in the sea . 
 Being departed from these Islands , we drew towards the line , where we were becalmed the space of 3. weeks , but yet subject to diverse great storms , terrible lightnings and much thunder : but with this misery we had the commodity of great store of fish , as Dolphins , Bonitos , and flying fish , whereof some fell into our ships , wherehence they could not rise again for want of moisture , for when their wings are dry , they cannot fly . 
 From the first day of our departure from the Islands of Cape Verde , we sailed 54. days without sighed of land , and the first land that we fell with was the coast Aprill . of Brasil , which we saw the fift of April in the height 33 - Agrees . o£ 33. degrees towards the pole Antarctike , and being discovered at sea by the inhabitants of the country , 106 
 1578. they made upon the coast great fires for a sacrifice ( as we learned ) to the devils , about which they use conjurations , making heaps of sand and other ceremonies , that when any ship shall go about to stay upon their coast , not only sands may be gathered together in shoalds in every place , but also that storms and tempests may arise , to the casting away of ships and men , whereof ( as it is reported ) there have be diverse experiments . 
 The seventh day in a mighty great storm both of lightning , rain and thunder , we lost the Canter which we called the Christopher : but the eleventh day after , by our Generals great care in dispersing his ships , we found her again , and the place where we met , our general called the Cape of Joy , where every ship took in some Cape of water . Here we found a good temperature and sweet air , a very fair and pleasant country with and exceeding fruitful soil , where were great store of large and mighty Dear , but we came not to the sighed of any people : but traveling further into the country , we perceived the footing of people in the clay-ground , showing that they were men of great stature . Being returned to our ships , we weighed anchor , and ran somewhat further , and harboured our selves between a rock and the main , where by means of the rock that brake the force of the sea , we rid very safe , and upon this rock we killed for our provision certain seawolves , commonly called with us Seals . 
 From hence we went our course to 36. degrees , and T^ir entrance entered the great river of Plate , and ran into 54. and 55. fathoms and a half of fresh water , where we filled our water by the ships side : but our general finding here no good harbour , as he thought he should , bore out again to sea the 27. of April , and in bearing out we lost sighed of our Flyboat wherein master Doughtie was , but we sailing along , found a fair and reasonable good Bay wherein were many , and the same profitable Abundance of Islands , one whereof had so many Seals , as would at the Seals . 
 107 
 The File-boat cast off and burned . 
 The people of the country . 
 least have laden all our Ships , and the rest of the Islands are as it were laden with fowls which is wonderful to see , and they of diverse sorts . It is a place very plentiful of victuals , and hath in it no want of fresh water . 
 Our general after certain days of his abided in this place , being on shore in and Island , the people of the country showed themselves unto him , leaping and dancing , and entered into traffic with him , but they would not receive any thing at any men hands , but the same must be cast upon the ground . They are of clean , comely , and strong bodies , swift on foot , and seem to be very active . 
 The eighteenth day of May our general thought it needful to have a care of such Ships as were absent , and therefore endeavouring to seek the Flyboat wherein master Doughtie was , we espied her again the next day : and whereas certain of our ships were sent to discover the coast and to search and harbour , the Marigold and the Canter being employed in that business , came unto us and gave us understanding of a safe harbour that they had found , wherewith all our ships bore , and entered it , where we watered and made new provision of victuals , as by Seals , whereof we slew to the number of 200. or 300. in the space of and hour . 
 Here our general in the Admiral rid close aboard the Flyboat , and took out of her all the provision of victuals and what else was in her , and hailing her to the Land , set fire to her , and so burned her to save the iron work : which being a doing , there came down of the country certain of the people naked , saving only about their waste the skin of some beast with the fur or hair on , and something also wreathed on their heads : their fences were painted with diverse colours , and some of them had on their heads the similitude of homes , every man his bow which was and ell in length , and a couple of arrows . They were very agill people and quick to deliver , and seemed not to be ignorant in the feats of 108 
 wars , as by their order or ranging a few men , might appear . These people would not of a long time receive any thing at our hands ; yet at length our general being ashore , and they dancing after their accustomed manner about him , and he once turning his back towards them , one leapt suddenly to him , and took his cap with his gold band off his head , and ran a little distance from him and shared it with his fellow , the cap to the one , and the band to the other . 
 Having dispatched all our business in this place , we departed and set sail , and immediately upon our setting forth we lost our Canter which was absent three or foure days : but when our General had her again , he took out the necessaries , and so gave her over near to the Cape of Good hope . The cape of 
 The next day after being the twentieth of June , we harboured our selves again in a very good harbour , u ‘ called by Magellan Port S. Julian , where we found a Ports . Julian . gibbet standing upon the main , which we supposed to be the place where Magellan did execution upon some of his disobedient and rebellious company . 
 The two and twentieth day our general went ashore to the main , and in his company , John Thomas , and Robert Winterhie , Oliver the Master gunner , John Brewer , Thomas Hood , and Thomas Drake , and entering on land , they presently met with two or three of the country people , and Robert Winterhie having in his hands a bow and arrows , went about to make a shoot of pleasure , and in his draught his bowstring brake , which the rude Savages taking as a token of war , began to bend the force of their bows against our company , and drove them to their shifts very narrowly . 
 In this Port our general began to inquire diligently of the actions of M. Thomas Doughtie , and found them not to be such as he looked for , but tending rather to contention or mutiny , or some other disorder , whereby ( without redress ) the success of the voyage might greatly have be hazarded : whereupon the company 
 109 
 was called together and made acquainted with the particulars of the cause , which were found partly by master Doughties own confession , and partly by the evidence of the fact , to be true : which when our general saw , although his private affection to M. Doughtie ( as he then in the presence of us all sacredly protested ) was great , yet the care he had of the state of the voyage , of the expectation of her Majesty , and of the honour of his country did more touch him , ( as indeed it ought ) then the private respect of one man : so that the cause being thoroughly herd , and all things done in good order as near as might be to the course of our laws in England , it was concluded that M. Dough tie should receive punishment according to the quality of the offence : and he seeing no remedy but patience for himself , desired before his death to receive the Communion , which he did at the hands of M. Fletcher our Minister , and our general himself accompanied him in that holy actium : which being done , and the place of execution made ready , he having embraced our general and taken his leave of all the company , with prayer for the Queens majesty M. Thomas and our realm , in quiet sort laid his head to the block , Doughty where he ended his life . This being done , our general ’ made diverse speeches to the whole company , persuading us to unity , obedience , love , and regard of our voyage ; and for the better confirmation thereof , willed every man the next Sunday following to prepare himself to receive the Communion , as Christian brothers and friends ought to do , which was done in very reverend sort , and so with good contentment every man went about his business . 
 August . The 17. day of August we departed the port of The straight S. Julian , & the 2o . day we fell with the straight or of Magellan . freat of Magellan going into the South sea , at the Cape or headland whereof we found the body of a dead man , whose flesh was clean consumed . 
 The 21. day we entered The straight , which we found to have many turnings , and as it were shuttings up , as if there were no passage at all , by means whereof we had 
 IIO 
 I that the wind often against us , so that some of the fleet recovering a Cape or point of land , others should be forced to turn back again , and to come to and anchor where they could . 
 In this straight there be many fair harbors , with store of fresh water , but yet they lack their best commodity : for the water is there of such depth , that no man shall find ground to anchor in , except it be in some narrow river or corner , or between some rocks , so that if any extreme blasts or contrary winds do come ( whereunto the place is much subject ) it carrieth with it no small danger . 
 The land on both sides is very huge & mountainous , the lower mountains whereof , although they be monstrous and wonderful to look upon for their height , yet there are others which in height exceed them in a strange manner , reaching themselves above their fellows so high , that between them did appear three regions of clouds . 
 These mountains are covered with snow : at both the Southerly and Easterly parts of the straight there are Islands , among which the sea hath his indraught into the straights , even as it hath in the main entrance of the freat . 
 This straight is extreme cold , with frost and snow continually ; the trees seem to stoop with the burden of the weather , and yet are green continually , and many good and sweet herbs do very plentifully grow and increase under them . 
 The breadth of the straight is in some place a league , The breadth of in some other places 2. leagues , and three leagues , and the itreights of in some other 4. leagues , but the narrowest place hath °se and a league over . 
 The 24. of August we arrived at and Island in the straights , where we found great store of foul which - Abundance of could not fly , of the bigness of geese , whereof we * e killed in less then one day 3000. and victualed our selves thoroughly therewith . 
 57. Degrees and a terce of Southerly latitude . 
 Botero witeth that another hath found this place all Islands . 
 M. Winter separated and returned . 
 The trending 
 The 6. day of September we entered the South sea at the Cape or head shore . 
 The seventh day we were driven by a great storm from the entering into the South sea two hundred leagues and odd in longitude , and one degree to the Southward of the Straight : in which height , and so many leagues to the Westward , the fifteenth day of September fell out the Eclipse of the Moon at the hour of sixe of the clock at night : but neither did the Elliptical conflict of the Moon impair our state , nor her clearing again amend us a whit , but the accustomed Eclipse of the Sea continued in his force , we being darkened more then the Moon seven fold . 
 From the Bay ( which we called The Bay of severing of friends ) we were driven back to the Southward of the straights in 57. degrees and a terce : in which height we came to and anchor among the Islands , having there fresh and very good water , with herbs of singular virtue . Not far from hence we entered another Bay , where we found people both men and women in their Canoas , naked , and ranging from one Island to another to seek their meat , who entered traffic with us for such things as they had . 
 We returning hence Northward again , found the 3. of October three Islands , in one of which was such plenty of birds as is scant credible to report . 
 The 8. day of October we lost sighed of one of our Consorts wherein M. Winter was , who as then we supposed was put by a storm into the straights again , which at our return home we found to be true , and he not perished , as some of our company feared . 
 Thus being come into the height of The straights again , we ran , supposing the coast of Chili to lie as the general Maps have described it , namely Northwest , which we found to lie and trend to the Northeast and 
 of the coast of Eastwards , whereby it appears that this part of Chili hath not be truly hitherto discovered , or at the least not truly reported for the space of 12. degrees at the 
 112 
 least , being set down either of purpose to deceive , or of ignorant conjecture . 
 We continuing our course , fell the 29. of November with and Island called la Mocha , where we cast anchor , 2% and our general hoisting out our boat , went with ten of Mocha in 38. our company to shore , where we found people , whom the cruel and extreme dealings of the Spaniards have forced for their own safety and liberty to flee from the main , and to fortify themselves in this Island . We being on land , the people came down to us to the water side with show of great courtesy , bringing to us potatoes , roots , and two very fat sheep , which our general received and gave them other things for them , and had promise to have water there : but the next day repairing again to the shore , and sending two men aland with barrels to fill water , the people taking them for Spaniards ( to whom they use to show no favour if they take them ) laid violent hands on them , and as we think , slew them . 
 Our general seeing this , stayed here no longer , but weighed anchor , and set sail towards the coast of Chili , and drawing towards it , we met near to the shore and Indian in a Canoa , who thinking us to have be Spaniards , came to us and told us , that at a place called S. Iago , there was a great Spanish ship laden from the kingdom e of Peru : for which good news our general gave him diverse trifles , whereof he was glad , and went along with us and brought us to the place , which is called the port The port of of Valparizo . 
 When we came thither , we found indeed the ship nutes . riding at anchor , having in her eight Spaniards and three Negroes , who thinking us to have be Spaniards and their friends , welcomed us with a drum , and made ready a Bottija of wine of Chili to drink to us : but as Wine ofChili . soon as we were entered , one of our company called Thomas Moon began to lay about him , and struck one of the Spanyards , and said unto him , Abaxo Perro , that is in English , Go down dog . One of these Spaniards 
 xi 113 H 
 seeing persons of that quality in those seas , all to crossed , and blessed himself : but to be short , we stowed them under hatches all save one Spaniard , who suddenly and desperately leapt over board into the sea , and swam ashore to the town of S. Iago , to give them warning of our arrival . 
 They of the town being not above 9. households , presently fled away and abandoned the town . Our general The town of manned his boat , and the Spanish ships boat , and went S. Iago taken . to t^e Town , and being come to it , we rifled it , and came to a small chapel which we entered , and found therein a silver chalice , two cruets , and one altar-cloth , the spoil whereof our general gave to M. Fletcher his minister . 
 We found also in this town a warehouse stored with WineofChiR . wine of Chili , and many boards of Cedarwood , all which wine we brought away with us , and certain of the boards to burn for firewood : and so being come aboard , we departed the Haven , having first set all the John Grieg > a Spaniards on land , saving one John Griego a Greek Pilot taken , born , whom our general carried with him for his Pilot to bring him into the haven of Lima. 
 When we were at sea , our general rifled the ship , and found in her good store of the wine of Chili , and 25000. Gold of Bal - pezoes of very pure and fine gold of Baldivia , amounting divia . in vaiue to 37000. ducats of Spanish money , and above . 
 So going on our course , we arrived next at a place called Coquimbo in Coquimbo , where our general sent 14. of his men on 29. degrees ianJ to fetch water : but they were espied by the Spaniards , 30. mtnu es . who came with 300. horsemen and 200 footmen , and slew one of our men with a piece , the rest came aboard in safety , and the Spaniards departed : we went on shore again , and buried our man , and the Spaniards came down again with a flag of truce , but we set sail and would not trust them . 
 Tarapaza . From hence we went to a certain port called Tarapaza , where being landed , we found by the Sea side a Spaniard lying asleep , who had lying by him 13. bars of silver , 114 
 which weighed 4000. ducats Spanish ; we took the silver , and left the man . 
 Not far from hence going on land for fresh water , we met with a Spaniard and and Indian boy driving 8. Llamas or sheep of Peru which are as big as asses ; every of which sheep had on his back 2. bags of leather , each bag containing 50. li . weight of fine silver : so that bringing both the sheep and their burden to the ships , we found in all the bags 800. weight of silver . 
 Here hence we sailed to a place called Arica , and - Arica in 18. being entered the port , we found there three small barks 3° > min-which we rifled , and found in one of them 57 wedges of silver , each of them weighing about 20 pound weight , and every of these wedges were of the fashion and bigness of a brickbat . In all these 3. barks we found not one person : for they mistrusting no strangers , were all gone aland to the Town , which consisteth of about twentie houses , which we would have ransacked if our company had be better and more in number . But our general contented with the spoil of the ships , left the Town and put ofF again to sea and set sail for Lima , and by the way met with a small bark , which he boarded , and found in her good store of linen cloth , whereof taking some quantity . he let her go . 
 To Lima we came the 13. day of February , and being Lima in 11. entered the haven , we found there about twelve sail of 5° - 
 ships lying fast moored at and anchor , having all their sails ‘ carried on shore ; for the master's and merchants were here most secure , having never be assaulted by enemies , and at this time feared the approach of none such as we were . Our general rifled these ships , and found in one of them a chest full of royals of plate , and good store of silks and linen cloth , and took the chest into his own ship , and good store of the silks and linen . In which ship he had news of another ship called the Cacafuego which was gone towards Paita , and that the same ship was laden with treasure : whereupon we stayed no longer here , but cutting all the cables of the ships in the 
 115 
 The rich ship called the Cacafuego taken . 
 Cape de San Francisco in I , degree to the North . 
 haven , we let them drive whither they would , either to sea or to the shore , and with all speed we followed the Cacafuego towards Paita , thinking there to have found her : but before we arrived there , she was gone from thence towards Panama , whom our general still pursued , and by the way met with a bark laden with ropes and tackle for ships , which he boarded and searched , and found in her 8o . li . weight of gold , and a crucifix of gold with goodly great Emeralds set in it which he took , and some of the cordage also for his own ship . 
 From hence we departed , still following the Cacafuego , and our general promised our company , that whosoever could first descry her , should have his chain of gold for his good news . It fortuned that John Drake going up into the top , descried her about three of the clock , and about sixe of the clock we came to her and boarded her , and shot at her three pieces of ordinance , and strake down her Misen , and being entered , we found in her great riches , as jewels and precious stones , thirteene chests full of royals of plate , foure score pound weight of gold , and sixe and twentie tun of silver . The place where we took this prize , was called Cape de San Francisco , about 150. leagues from Panama . 
 The Pilots name of this Ship was Francisco , and among other plate that our general found in this ship , he found two very fair guilt bowls of silver , which were the Pilots : to whom our general said : Senior Pilot , you have here two silver cups , but I must needs have one of them : which the Pilot because he could not otherwise choose , yielded unto , and gave the other to the steward of our Generals ships . 
 When this Pilot departed from us , his boy said thus unto our general : Captain , our ship shall be called no more the Cacafuego , but the Cacaplata , and your ship shall be called the Cacafuego : which pretty speech of the Pilots boy ministered matter of laughter to us , both then and long after . 
 116 
 When our general had done what he would with this Cacafuego , he cast her off , and we went on our course still towards the West , and not long after met with a ship laden with linen cloth and fine Chinadishes of white earth , and great store of China-silks , of China-silks , all which things we took as we listed . andPorceUan . 
 The owner himself of this ship was in her , who was a Spanish Gentleman , from whom our general took a Falcon of gold , with a great Emeraud in the breast thereof , and the Pilot of the ship he took also with him , and so cast the ship off . 
 This Pilot brought us to the haven of Guatulco , the Guatulco . town whereof , as he told us , had but 17. Spaniards in it . Assoon as we were entered this haven , we landed , and went presently to the town , and to the Town-house , where we found a Judge sitting in judgement , being associate with three other officers , upon three Negroes that had conspired the burning of the Town : both which Judges & prisoners we took , and brought them a shipboard , and caused the chief Judge to write his letter to the Town , to command all the Townsmen to avoid , that we might safely water there . Which being done , and they departed , we ransacked the Town , and in one house we found a pot of the quantity of a bushel , full of reals of plate , which we brought to our ship . 
 And here one Thomas Moone one of our company , took a Spanish Gentleman as he was flying out of the town , and searching him , he found a chain of gold about him , and other jewels , which he took , and so let him go . 
 At this place our General among other Spaniards , set The Portugal ashore his Portugall Pilot , which he took at the Pitot set on Islands of Cape Verde , out of a ship of S. Marry port lan ’ of Portugall : and having set them ashore , we departed hence , and sailed to the Island of Canno , where our The Island of general landed , and brought to shore his own ship , CamK-and discharged her , mended , and graved her , and furnished our ship with water and wood sufficiently . 
 117 
 A ship with a govemour fir the Islands of PhiRppinas . 
 June . 
 Sir Francis Drake sailed on the hackside of America to 43 - degrees of Northerly latitude . 
 And while we were here , we espied a ship , and set sail after her , and took her , and found in her two Pilots , and a Spanish Governor , going for the Islands of the Philippinas : we searched the ship , and took some of her merchandizes , and so let her go . Our general at this place and time , thinking himself both in respect of his private injuries received from the Spaniards , as also of their contempts and indignities offered to our country and Prince in generail , sufficiently satisfied , and revenged : and supposing that her Majesty at his return would rest contented with this service , purposed to continue no longer upon the Spanish coasts , but began to consider and to consult of the best way for his Country . 
 He thought it not good to return by the Straights , for two speciali causes : the one , lest the Spaniards should there wait , and attend for him in great number and strength , whose hands , he being left but one ship , could not possibly escape . The other cause was the dangerous situation of the mouth of the straights in the South sea , where continual storms reigning and blustering , as he found by experience , beside the shoalds and sands upon the coast , he thought it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolved therefore to avoid these hazards , to go forward to the Islands of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugals by the Cape of Buena Esperanza . 
 Upon this resolution , he began to think of his best way to the Malucos , and finding himself where he now was becalmed , he saw that of necessity he must be forced to take a Spanish course , namely to sail somewhat Northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sailed 600. leagues at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sailed from the x6 . of April , till the 3. of June . 
 The 5. day of June , being in 43. degrees towards the pole Arctike , we found the air so cold , that our men being grievously pinched with the same , complained 118 
 of the extremity thereof , and the further we went , the 
 I579* 
 more the cold increased upon us . Whereupon we thought it best for that time to seek the land , and did so , finding it not mountainous , but low plain land , till we came within 38. degrees towards the line . Degrees . In which height it pleased God to send us into a fair and good Bay , with a good wind to enter the same . 
 In this Bay we anchored , and the people of the description Country having their houses close by the waters side , of the people showed themselves unto us , and sent a present to our andPountrty general . 
 When they came unto us , they greatly wondered at the things that we brought , but our general ( according to his natural and accustomed humanity ) courteously entreated them , and liberally bestowed on them necessarythings to cover their nakedness , whereupon they supposed us to be gods , and would not be persuaded to the contrary : the presents which they sent to our general , were feathers , and calls of network . 
 Their houses are dug round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brims of the circle , cliffs of wood set upon them , joining close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness are very warm . 
 Their beds is the ground with rushes strowed on it , and lying about the house , have the fire in the midst . The men go naked , the women take bulrushes , and kemb them after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their lose garments , which being knit about their middles , hang down about their hips , having also about their shoulders a skin of Dear , with the hair upon it . These women are very obedient and serviceable to their husbands . 
 After they were departed from us , they came and visited us the second time , and brought with them feathers and bags of Tobacco for presents : And when they came to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we had pitched our tents ) they stayed them - 
 119 
 selves : where one appointed for speaker wearied himself with making a long oration , which done , they left their bows upon the hill , and came down with their presents . 
 In the mean time the women remaining on the hill , tormented themselves lamentably , tearing their flesh from their cheeks , whereby we perceived that they were about a sacrifice . In the mean time our general with his company went to prayer , and to reading of the Scriptures , at which exercise they were attentive , & seemed greatly to be affected with it : but when they were come unto us , they restored again unto us those things which before we bestowed upon them . 
 The news of our being there being spread through the Country , the people that inhabited round about came down , and among them the King himself , a man of a goodly stature , & comely personage , with many other tall and warlike men : before whose coming were sent two Ambassadors to our general , to signify that their King was coming , in doing of which message , their speech was continued about half and hour . This ended , they by signs requested our general to send some thing by their hand to their king , as a token that his coming might be in peace : wherein our general having satisfied them , they returned with glad tidings to their King , who marched to us with a princely majesty , the people crying continually after their manner , and as they drew near unto us , so did they strive to behave themselves in their actions with comeliness . 
 In the forefront was a man of a goodly personage , who bore the sceptre or mace before the King , whereupon hanged two crowns , a less and a bigger , with three chains of a marvellous length : the crowns were made of knit work wrought artificially with feathers of diverse colours : the chains were made of a bony substance , and few be the persons among them that are admitted to wear them : and of that number also the persons are 120 
 stinted , as some ten , some 12. etc. Next unto him which bore the sceptre , was the King himself , with his Guard about his person , clad with Conie skins , & other skins : after them followed the naked common sort of people , every one having his face painted , some with white , some with black , and other colours , & having in their hands one thing or another for a present , not so much as their children , but they also brought their presents . 
 In the mean time our general gathered his men together , and marched within his fenced place , making against their approaching a very warlike show . They being trooped together in their order , and a generail salutation being made , there was presently a general silence . Then he that bore the sceptre before the King , being informed by another , whom they assigned to that office , with a manly and lofty voice proclaimed that which the other spoke to him in secret , continuing half and hour : which ended , and a general Amen as it were given , the King with the whole number of men and women ( the children excepted ) came down without any weapon , who descending to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . 
 In coming towards our bulwarks and tents , the scepter-bearer began a song , observing his measures in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , whom the King with his Guard , and every degree of persons following , did in like manner sing and dance , saving only the women , which danced & kept silence . The General permitted them to enter within our bulwark , where they continued their song and dance a reasonable time . When they had satisfied themselves , they made signs to our General to fit down , to whom the King , and diverse others made several orations , or rather supplications , that he would take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their King , making signs that they would resign unto him their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject's . In which , to persuade us the better , the King and the rest , with one 
 121 
 The King consent , and with great reverence , joyfully singing a resides hu song , did set the crown upon his head , enriched his 
 kingdom* to neck with all their chains , and offered unto him many 
 Sir Francis other things , honouring him by the name of Hioh , Drake . adding thereunto as it seemed , a sign of triumph : which thing our general thought not meet to reject , because he knew not what honour and profit it might be to our Country . Wherefore in the name , and to the use of her Majesty he took the sceptre , crown , and dignity of the said Country into his hands , wishing that the riches & treasure thereof might so conveniently be transported to the enriching of her kingdom at home , as it aboundeth in you same . 
 The common sort of people leaving the King and his Guard with our general , scattered themselves together with their sacrifices among our people , taking a diligent view of every person : and - such as pleased their fancy , ( which were the youngest ) they enclosing them about offered their sacrifices unto them with lamentable weeping , scratching , and tearing the flesh from their faces with their nails , whereof issued abundance of blood . But we used signs to them of disliking this , and stayed their hands from force , and directed them upward to the living God , The like they whom only they ought to worship . They showed unto did in Hoche - us their wounds , and craved help of them at our hands , whereupon we gave them lotions , plasters , and ointments , agreeing to the state of their griefs , beseeching God to cure their diseases . Every third day they brought their sacrifices unto us , until they understood our meaning , that we had no pleasure in them : yet they could not be long absent from us , but daily frequented our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seemed so grievous unto them , that their joy was turned into sorrow . They entreated us , that being absent we would remember them , and by stealth provided a sacrifice , which we misliked . 
 Our necessary business being ended , our general with his company travailed up into the Country to their 
 122 
 villages , where we found herds of Dear by 1000. in Great herds a company , being most large , and fat of body . of Dear . 
 We found the whole Country to be a warren of a Abundance of strange kind of Connies , their bodies in bigness as be stran& counterfeit ™ 5-the Barbary Connies , their heads as the heads of ours , the feet of a Want , and the tail of a Rat being of great length : under her chin is on either side a bag , into the which she gathereth her meat , when she hath filled her belly abroad . The people eat their bodies , and make great account of their skins , for their Kings coat was made of them . 
 Our general called this Country Nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two causes : the one in respect of the white banks and cliffs , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it might have some affinity with our Country in name , which sometime was so called . 
 There is no part of earth here to be taken up , Gold and wherein there is not some probable show of gold or 
 r ° earth of Nova 
 S11V5 - , , „ Albion . 
 At our departure hence our general set up a monument of our being there , as also of her Majesties right and title to the same , namely a plate , nailed upon a fair great post , whereupon was engraven her Majesties name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free giving up of the province and people into her Majesties hands , together with her highness picture and arms , in a piece of sixe pence of current English money under the plate , whereunder was also written the name of our general . 
 It seems that the Spaniards hitherto had never be Their deparin this part of the Country , neither did ever discover ture-the land by many degrees , to the Southwards of this place .. October . 
 After we had set sail from hence , we continued Certain without sighed of land till the 13. day of October Islands in % , following , which day in the morning we fell with certain Islands 8. degrees to the Northward of the line , Qanoas > i^e from which Islands came a great number of Canoas , those of Java . 
 123 
 having in some of them 4. in some 6. and in some also 14. men , bringing with them cocos , and other fruits . 
 Their Canoas were hollow within , and cut with great art and cunning , being very smooth within and without , and bearing a glass as if it were a horn daintily burnished , having a prow , and a stern of one sort , yielding inward circlewise , being of a great height , and full of certain white shells for a bravery , and on each side of them lie out two pieces of timber about a yard and a half long , more or less , according to the smallness , or bigness of the boat . 
 This people have the neither part of their ears cut into a round circle , hanging down very low upon their cheeks , whereon they hang things of a reasonable weight . The nails of their hands are and ynche long , their teeth are as black as pitch , and they renew them often , by eating of and herb with a kind of powder , which they always carry about them in a cane for the same purpose . 
 Islands . Leaving this Island the night after we fell with it , the 18. of October , we lighted upon diverse others , some whereof made a great show of Inhabitants . 
 we continued our course by the Islands of Tagulada , Zelon , and Zewarra , being friends to the Portugals , the first whereof hath growing in it great store of Cinnamom . 
 November . The 14. of November we fell with the Islands of Maluco , which day at night ( having directed our course to run with Tydore ) in coasting along the Island of Mutyr , belonging to the King of Ternate , his Deputy or Vice-king seeing us at sea , came with his Canoa to us without all fear , and came aboard , and after some conference with our general , willed him in any wise to The Isle of run in with Ternate , and not with Tydore , assuring Ternate . hjm tjiat the King would be glad of his coming , and would be ready to do what he would require , for which purpose he himself would that night be with the King , and tell him the news , with whom if he once dealt , he 
 124 
 should find that as he was a King , so his word should stand : adding further , that if he went to Tydore before he came to Ternate , the King would have nothing to do with us , because he held the Portugall as his enemy : whereupon our General resolved to run with Ternate , where the next morning early we came to anchor , at which time our general sent a messenger to the king with a velvet cloak for a present , and token of his coming to be in peace , and that he required nothing but traffic and exchange of merchandise , whereof he had good store , in such things as he wanted . 
 In the mean time the Vice-king had be with the king according to his promise , signifying unto him what good things he might receive from us by traffic : whereby the King was moved with great liking towards us , and sent to our general with speciali message , that he should have what things he needed , and would require with peace and friendship , and moreover that he would yield himself , and the right of his Island to be at the pleasure and commandment of so famous a Prince as we served . In token whereof he sent to our general a signet , and within short time after came in his own person , with boats , and Canoas to our ship , to bring her into a better and safer road then she was in at present . 
 In the mean time , our Generals messenger being come to the Court , was met by certain noble personages with great solemnity , and brought to the King , at whose hands he was most friendly and graciously entertained . 
 The King purposing to come to our ship , sent before 4. great and large Canoas , in every one whereof were certain of his greatest states that were about him , attired in white lawn of cloth of Calicut , having over their heads from the one end of the Canoa to the other , a covering of thin perfumed mats , born up with a frame made of redes for the same use , under which every one did fit in his order according to his 125 
 A.D. 
 » 579 - 
 The king of Ternate offereth himself and his kingdom to the service of the Queen of England . 
 The great and strange Canoas of the King of Ternate . 
 The King of Ternate came to visit Sir Francis . Drake . 
 Saga a kind of meal . 
 dignity , to keep him from the heat of the Sun , diverse of whom being of good age and gravity , did make and ancient and fatherly show . There were also diverse young and comely men attired in white , as were the others : the rest were soldiers , which stood in comely order round about on both sides , without whom sat the rowers in certain galleries , which being three on a side all along the Canoas , did lie off from the side thereof three or foure yards , one being orderly built lower then another , in every of which galleries were the number of 4. score rowers . 
 These Canoas were furnished with warlike munition , every man for the most part having his sword and target , with his dagger , beside other weapons , as lances , calivers , darts , bows and arrows : also every Canoa had a small cast base mounted at the least one full yard upon a stock set upright . 
 Thus coming near our ship , in order they rowed about us , one after another , and passing by , did their homage with great solemnity , the great personages beginning with great gravity and fatherly countenances , signifying that the king had sent them to conduct our ship into a better road . 
 Soon after the King himself repaired , accompanied with 6. grave and ancient persons , who did their obeisance with marvellous humility . The king was a man of tall stature , and seemed to be much delighted with the found of our music , to whom as also to his nobility , our general gave presents , wherewith they were passing well contented . 
 At length the King craved leave of our general to depart , promising the next day to come aboard , and in the mean time to send us such victuals , as were necessary for our provision : so that the same night we received of them meal , which they call Sagu , made of the tops of certain trees , tasting in the mouth like sour curds , but melts like sugar , whereof they make certain cakes , which may be kept the space of ten 126 
 1579-yeeres , and yet then good to be eaten . We had of them store of rice , hens , unperfect and liquid sugar , sugar canes , and a fruit which they call Figo , with store of cloves . 
 The King having promised to come aboard , brake his promise , but sent his brother to make his excuse , and to entreat our general to come on shore , offering himself pawn aboard for his safe return . Whereunto our general consented not , upon mislike conceived of the breach of his promise , the whole company also utterly refusing it . But to satisfy him , our General sent certain of his Gentlemen to the Court , to accompany the King’s brother , reserving the Vice-king for their safe return . They were received of another brother of the kings , and other states , and were conducted with great honour to the Castle . The place A ** that they were brought unto , was a large and fair Ternatehouse , where were at the least 1000. persons assembled . 
 The King being yet absent , there sat in their places 60. grave personages , all which were said to be of the kings Counsel . There were beside 4. grave persons , appareled all in read , down to the ground , and attired on their heads like the Turkes , and these were said to be Romans , and Ligiers there to keep continual traf - Romana and fike with the people of Ternate . There were also 2. 
 Turks Ligiers in this place , and one Italian . The king majesty at last came in guarded with 12. lances covered over of the King . with a rich canopy , with embossed gold . Our men accompanied with one of their Captains called Moro , rising to meet him , he graciously did welcome , and entertain them . He was attired after the manner of the Country , but more sumptuously then the rest . 
 From his waste down to the ground , was all cloth of gold , and the same very rich : his legs were bore , but on his feet were a pair of shoes , made of Cordovan skin . In the attire of his head were finely wreathed hooped rings of gold , and about his neck he had a chai ne of perfect gold , the links whereof 
 127 
 were great , and one fold double . On his fingers he had sixe very fair jewels , and sitting in his chair of estate , at his right hand stood a page with a fan in his hand , breathing and gathering the air to the King . The fan was in length two foot , and in breadth one foot , set with 8. sapphires , richly embroidered , and knit to a staff 3. foot in length , by the which the Page did hold , and move it . Our Gentlemen having delivered their message , and received order accordingly , were licensed to depart , being safely conducted back again by one of the kings Counsel . 
 Temate the This Island is the chiefest of all the Islands of Maluco , and the King hereof is King of 70. Islands auco-ts s . bgsidgs The king with his people are Moors in religion , observing certain new Moons , with fastings : during which fasts , they neither eat nor drink in the day , but in the night . 
 After that our Gentlemen were returned , and that we had here by the favour of the king received all necessary things that the place could yield us : our General considering the great distance , and how far he was yet off from his Country , thought it not best here to linger the time any longer , but weighing his anchors , set A Utle Island out of the Island , and sailed to a certain little Island ard^f^ ' to Southwards of Celebes , where we graved our Celebes . ship , and continued there in that and other businesses 26. days . This Island is thoroughly grown with wood of a large and high growth , very straight and without boughs , save only in the head or top , whose leaves are not much differing from our broom in England . among these trees night by night , through the whole Tiery worms , land , did show themselves and infinite swarm of fiery worms flying in the air , whose bodies being no bigger then our common English flies , make such a show and light , as if every twig or tree had be a burning candle . In this place breeds also wonderful store of Bats . Bats , as big as large hens : of Crayfishes also here Cravlshes . wanted no plenty , and they of exceeding bigness , one 128 
 1580. whereof was sufficient for 4. hungry stomachs at a dinner , being also very good , and restoring meat , whereof we had experience : and they dig themselves holes in the earth like Conies . 
 When we had ended our business here , we weighed , and set sail to run for the Malucos : but having at that time a bad wind , and being among the Islands , with much difficulty we recovered to the Northward of the Island of Celebes , where by reason of contrary winds not able to continue our course to run Westwards , we were enforced to altar the same to the Southward again , finding that course also to be very hard and dangerous for us , by reason of infinite shoalds which lie off , and among the Islands : whereof we had too much trial to the hazard and danger of our ship and lives . For of all other days upon the 9. of Januarie , in the Januarie in year 1579. we ran suddenly upon a rock , where ’579-we stuck fast from 8. of the clock at night , till 4. ' 741 
 of the clock in the afternoon the next day , being indeed out of all hope to escape the danger : but our Their danger general as he had always hitherto showed himself 0 reck ’ courageous , and of a good confidence in the mercy and protection of God : so now he continued in the same , and lest he should seem to perish wilfully , both he , and we did our best endeavour to save our selves , which it pleased God so to bless , that in the end we cleared our selves most happily of the danger . 
 We lighted our ship upon the rocks of 3. tun of Cloves . cloves , 8. pieces of ordinance , and certain meal and beans : and then the wind ( as it were in a moment The klfe of11 by the speciali grace of God ) changing from the star - the 
 board to the larboard of the ship , we hoist our sails , " and the happy gale drove our ship off the rock into the sea again , to the no little comfort of all our hearts , for which we gave God such praise and thanks , as so great a benefit required . p , . 
 The 8. of Februarie following , we fell with the fruitful Island of Barateve , having in the mean time suffered island . 
 xi 129 1 
 Nutmegs and long Peper growing in Barateve . 
 Commendation of the Island of Barateve . 
 Java major . 
 many dangers by winds and shoalds . The people of this Island are comely in body and stature , and of a civil behaviour , just in dealing , and courteous to strangers , whereof we had the experience sundry ways , they being most glad of our presence , and very ready to relieve our wants in those things which their Country did yield . The men go naked , saving their heads and privities , every man having something or other hanging at their ears . Their women are covered from the middle down to the foot , wearing a great number of bracelets upon their arms , for some had 8. upon each arm , being made some of bone , some of horn , and some of brass , the lightest whereof by our estimation weighed two ounces apiece . 
 With this people linen-cloth is good merchandise , and of good request , whereof they make rolls for their heads , and girdles to wear about them . 
 Their Island is both rich and fruitful : rich in gold , silver , copper , and sulphur , wherein they seem skilful ! and expert , not only to try the same , but in working it also artificially into any form and fashion that pleases them . 
 Their fruits be diverse and plentiful , as nutmegs , ginger , long pepper , lemons , cucumbers , cocos , figu , sagum , with diverse other sorts : and among all the rest , we had one fruit , in bigness , form , and husk , like a Bay berry , hard of substance , and pleasant of taste , which being sodden , becomes soft , and is a most good and wholesome victuali , whereof we took reasonable store , as we did also of the other fruits and spices : so that to confess a truth , since the time that we first set out of our own Country of England , we happened upon no place ( Ternate only excepted ) wherein we found more comforts and better means of refreshing . 
 At our departure from Barateve , we set our course for Java major , where arriving , we found great coiirtesie , and honourable entertainment . This Island is governed by 5. Kings , whom they call Rajah : as Rajah Donaw , and 
 130 
 1580. Rajah Mang Bange , and Rajah Cabuccapollo , which live as having one spirit , and one mind . 
 Of these five we had foure a shipboard at once , and two or three often . They are wonderfully delighted in Read & green coloured clothes , as read and green : their upper parts cl°^1 of their bodies are naked , save their heads , where - eseeme • upon they wear a Turkish roll , as do the Maluccians : from the middle downward they wear a pintado of silk , trailing upon the ground , in colour as they best like . 
 The Maluccians hate that their women should be manners seen of strangers : but these offer them of high Peo^e courtesy , yea the kings themselves . 
 The people are of goodly stature , and warlike , well provided of swords and targets , with daggers , all being of their own work , and most artificially done , both in tempering their mettle , as also in the form , whereof we bought reasonable store . 
 They have and house in every village for their common assembly : every day they meet twice , men , women , and children , bringing with them such victuals as they think good , some fruits , some rice boiled , some hens roasted , some sagum , having a table made 3. foot from the ground , whereon they set their meat , that every person sitting at the table may eat , one rejoicing in the company of another . 
 They boil their rice in and earthen pot , made in form of a sugar loaf , being full of holes , as our pots which we water our gardens withal , and it is open at the great end , wherein they put their rice dry , without any moisture . In the mean time they have ready another great earthen pot , set fast in a furnace , boiling full of water , whereinto they put their pot with rice , by such measure , that they swelling become soft at the first , and by their swelling stopping the holes of the pot , admit no more water to enter , but the more they are boiled , the harder and more firm substance they become , so that in the end they are a firm & good bred , of the which with oil , butter , 
 131 
 A strange fashion of boy ling rice . 
 The Cape of Buena Esperanza not so dangerous as the Portugals have given out . 
 Sierra Leona . 
 Oyster-trees . 
 sugar , and other spices , they make diverse sorts of meats very pleasant of taste , and nourishing to nature . 
 The French pocks is here very common to all , and they help themselves , sitting naked from ten to two in the Sun , whereby the venomous humour is drawn out . Not long before our departure , they told us , that not far off there were such great Ships as ours , wishing us to beware : upon this our Captain would stay no longer . 
 From Java Major we sailed for the cape of Good Hope , which was the first land we fell withal : neither did we touch with it , or any other land , until we came to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea : notwithstanding we ran hard aboard the Cape , finding the report of the Portugals to be most false , who affirm , that it is the most dangerous Cape of the world , never without intolerable storms and present danger to travelers , which come near the same . 
 This Cape is a most stately thing , and the fairest Cape we saw in the whole circumference of the earth , and we passed by it the 18. of June . 
 From thence we continued our course to Sierra Leona , on the coast of Guinea , where we arrived the 22. of July , and found necessary provisions , great store of Elephants , Oysters upon trees of one kind , spawning and increasing infinitely , the Oyster suffering no bud to grow . We departed thence the 24. day . 
 We arrived in England the third of November 1580. being the third year of our departure . 
 . 