The voyage intended towards China , wherein M. Edward Fenton was appointed general : Written by M. Lycia Ward his Viceadmiral , and Captain of the Edward Bonaventure , begun Anno Dom. 1582. 
 He second of April I departed with the Edward Bonaventure from Blackwall , and the 19 of the same arrived in Nettle road at Hampton , where I found riding the Gallion Leicester : and so remaining there till the first of May , we set sail thence in the forenoon , being of us in 
 the whole fleet foure sail . 
 1 The Gallion Leicester of 400 tons Admiral , whereof was general Captain Edward Fenton , and William Hawkins the younger lieutenant general in her , and Christopher Hall , Master . 
 2 The Edward Bonaventure of 300 tons Viceadmiral , whereof was Captain Lycia Ward , and Thomas Perrie Master . 
 3 The Francis of fortie tons , whereof was Captain John Drake , and William Markam Master . 
 4 The Elizabeth of fiftie tons , whereof was Captain Thomas Skevington and Ralph Crane Master . 
 We spent by means partly of business , and partly of contrary winds , the month of May upon the coast , and then leaving the land we put ofF to sea , and proceeded on our voyage intended by the grace of God for China : until the month of August following , nothing fell out much worthy the knowledge of the world , which is not common to all navigants , but about the beginning of August aforesaid , being somewhat near the coast of Guinie , upon the shooting ofF a piece and the putting out of a flag in the Admiral , I went on board , and M. Walker , M. Shaw , M. GefFreis , our Master & Pilot 
 172 
 with me , where the general counsel was assembled to consider of two points , viz. 
 The first , whither it were necessary to water presently or not , which was thought very needful of all men , and so concluded . 
 The second , where the best and aptest place was to water in , which was thought of the greater number to be at Sierra leona on the coast of Guinie , which was also concluded , and by the Master and Pilots agreed to go hence Southeast , which determined , we returned aboard . 
 The 3 day we went Southeast and Eastsoutheast , till sixe a clock at night that we saw the land of Guinie , which bore Northeast of us about 12 leagues off , which seen , we sounded , and had no ground : then went I and our Master and Pilot aboard the Admiral , and after many debatements concluded to run in Northeast by East , and at eleven at night we came aboard again , and went all night Northeast by East . 
 The 4 at eight a clock in the forenoon we were within 2 leagues of the land , which bore off us Northeast , which rose like a hill full of woods , and on each side low land : we being persuaded by our pilots that it was the entrance into Sierra leona , went in Northeast until we were within and half league of the shore , and had brought the South point Southeast by east off us . At eleven a clock finding it a bay and not Sierra leona , we brought our tacks aboard , and stood along West by North and West larboard tacked . 
 In this time our Admirals pinnace rowed in , and went on land upon the South side of the bay , and the Elizabeths boat with her . They found houses of boughs , and in one of the houses the tongue of a beast , and a bullocks tongue fresh killed ; also a lake with plenty of fresh water , and fresh-water-fish in it had by the sea side : they found dry pomegranates , and peas like nuts , with other unknown fruits under the trees . The Elizabeth ran in , and brought the South point South by West of her , and anchored within Falcon shot of the shore in 173 
 A.D. 
 1582. 
 They arrive in the river oj Sierra leona . 
 Trees hung with oysters . 
 seven fathom oaze , where they took fish with hooks , while he stayed for the boats . 
 The 4 all the afternoon we ran along the coast ( which lies Northwest and by North , and Southeast by South ) West , and within a point one way or the other , seeing the land under our lee three or foure leagues off , and all night likewise . 
 The 9 at three a clock in the morning our Admiral shot off a piece , and at foure we weighed and went hence Northeast . At five in the morning we saw the land along , and the Island which we saw the night before , and diverse other Islands about it , & so ran in Northeast until we had brought our selves thwart of the river , and then ran in East about sixe at night , being a league within the river . Our Admiral shot off a piece , and there we anchored in eight fathom sand . Being at anchor , I manned our boat and would have gone aboard the Admiral , but could not , the flood was bent so strong , and she road half a mile beneath us in the tIED , but we had no tIED . 
 The 10 in the morning at five a clock I sent our skiff with our pilot in her to find a road , and a watering place : in the mean time at sixe a clock we set sail with our ship , and being calm we towed with our boat until ten , and then anchored a mile short of the watering place . After dinner I went on land with my skiff to find timber to fish our mast , and searching along the shore we found a good watering place : and further seeking in the wood , which all the country is full of , and of diverse sorts , we found Limmon trees full of fruits : also trees growing by the water side with the stalks hung full of oysters and great periwinkles , and crabs among them : we found dry pomegranates with many other fruits unknown to us . In the mean time our Admiral and the Edward with the barks , having a gale at West , set sail , and ran up and anchored in the road before the accustomed watering place . 
 The 22 day certain Portugals which had be with 174 
 us before , came down and brought some other Portugals and Negroes with them in a ship-boat , wherein they brought us 80 mews of rice , 500 and odd weight of Elephants teeth , and a Negro boy , which boy they gave the general , and the rice and teeth for the Elizabeth , Their traffic which we sold them , with all her tackle and sails , the having need of the rice , because our meal which we wu&a ■ brought out of England was decayed and nought , whereof we had into the Edward 30 bushels , which is a mewe and a half : the Francis had 5 bushels , and the Gallion had the rest . And we had 200 weight of Elephants teeth , and the Gallion 300 and a half , and sixe pound . 
 During this time we sent our skiff with the Admirals pinnace up the river to meet with a Gundall , which the Portugals had sent for fresh victuals for us : who not finding her , returned at night : All this day I with M. Walker remained aboard with the Admiral , and after their dinner and supper we ended our business , and returned aboard , having had many good speeches with the Portugals . 
 The 26 day being Sunday , Captain Hawkins , M. Maddox , M. Hall , M. Bannister , Captain Drake , M. Evans , M. Hoode , and others came aboard and herd the Sermon , and dined with me : after dinner we went on shore to the lower point where we followed the footing of and Elephant , but saw him not , and so spent the time to and from till supper time , and then came aboard , and supped together , which done , each man departed to his abided . 
 This night I was very sick , ( and so were all they Sickness by that were on shore with me , ) with eating of a fruit eating seem in the country , which we found on trees , like nuts : whereof some did eat foure , some five , some sixe , and ’ more , but we vomited and scoured upon it without reason . 
 The 27 day in the afternoon the old Greek Francisco came aboard to me , with request that he might have the Francis boat to go up for his own 175 
 boat which was not come down , with whom I talked of this Country and Countrypeople , until five of the clock at night that the flood was come , and then I went aboard to the Admiral , and god his consent , and sent themselves in her : viz. Ferdinando the Portugal ! Master , and his Negro : In the mean time I sent foure of my men to watch in the Elizabeth all night . 
 The 28 day in the morning at foure a clock I sent my skiff with the Admirals pinnace down to the west point to fish , who came aboard again at one in the afternoon , and brought as much fish as all our companies could eat . 
 During the time that our boats were a fishing , came down the river a canoa and the Portugals former boat , 7^ Portugal with hens , oranges , plantans , which they presented the presents . general and me with : and also the rest of the rice due to us for the payment of the Elizabeth . For the parti - tions whereof I went aboard the Admiral , where I dined . M. Evans After dinner M. Evans began to barter away certain of 
 one of our the ships commodities with the Negroes , without acquaint - 
 merchants . jng the Generaq or any other until he had done , whereof grew more words then profit , as by the books of merchandise appears . Which done I came aboard , and had two of the Portugals to supper with me . About two of the clock in the morning we had a Ternado , and much rain . 
 They search The 29 about 4 a clock in the morning , I in my the country . skiff , and Captain Parker in his pinnace , went down to the West point , and there we landed with 11 men in all well furnished , and searched the woods , plains and plashes , after and Elephant , finding the haunt , footing , and soil of many newly done , yet we saw none of them . we saw hogs , goats or fawns , and diverse sorts of fowls very wild : and having travailed about 2 leagues , about noon we returned to the point , where we landed , and met our boats which had been at sea , and taken plenty of good fish : there we refreshed our selves with such victuals as we had , and came 176 
 1582. aboard our several ships , where I found the Portugals and Negroes , who had dined , and after supped aboard with me . 
 The 2 of September we set sail at sixe of the clock in the morning , & went out West between 7 and 10 fathom , with a pretty gale at East till 8 , then it waxed calm , we being shot out of the harbour a league and a half . It continued calm this day till one in the afternoon , and then it blew up at Westsouthwest a good gale , so we stood off Northnorthwest , and Northwest till 5 in the afternoon , then we anchored in 12 fathom , being 6 leagues off the point West by North . 
 The 3 day about eight a clock in the forenoon , the They return general came aboard to me , complaining that his main t0 ^rra ^ona cross-trees were broken , and therefore determined to a^aine-goe into Sierra leona again when the wind blew : at 12 at noon we set sail , and went in Eastsoutheast , and Southeast , and Southsoutheast , being carried to the Northward with the flood . And at 7 at night we anchored in eight fathom three leagues off the entrance , Westnorthwest . 
 The 12 day came down the river a boat with three Traffic with other Portugals , with whom the General bargained , to let 3 °j her . Porlu them have 3 barrels of salt for 5 barrels of rice , and after s£ewis that rate to exchange for 40 barrels , which he acquainted Henriques a me with : afterwards I dined among the Portugals with dweller here him : after dinner I went on shore to the oven , and above 20 to the carpenters . After I had be on shore and seen the work there , I returned aboard , & there supped with Fernandos me the general , M. Maddox , Captain Hawkins , and Captain . 
 Portugals : after supper each man returned to his ^T'dro Vaz place . ™ ’ 
 The 13 in the afternoon , the Portugals came again aboard me , and brake their fast with me : after I sent by them up the river in my skiff 12 barrels of salt , and gave them a bottle of wine for one of the savage Queens . 
 XI 177 M 
 They enter up The 15 after dinner , the Master , M. Walker , and I , to search the accompanied with 12 other traveled over a great deal country . ground to find some cattle , but found none : and coming home thorough the Oyster bay , I found of my company and of the Admirals together roasting of oysters : and going from them , Thomas Russell one of my com-pan ie saw a strange fish nam Utelif , which had fought with a crocodile , and being hurt came near the shore , where he waded in , and by the tail drew him a land , A swordfish and there slew him , and sent the general the hinder hilled . half of him : the head part I kept , in whose nose is a bone of two foot long like a sword with three and twentie pricks of a side , sharp and strange : The body we did eat , and it was like a Shark . 
 The 30 and last day of September the Francis cook came aboard about seven a clock in the forenoon from fishing with my net , and brought among other A strange fish fish , a Sea-calf ( as we called it ) with hair and lympits , taken ' and barnacles upon him , being seven foot long , foure foot nine inches about : which to see I sent for the general , and such as pleased to come see it out of the Admiral , who came and brought with him M. Maddox , Captain Hawkins , Captain Parker , and most part of his company , who having viewed the beast , which was ugly being alive , it being flayed , opened , and dressed , proved and excellent , fair , and good meat , broiled , roasted , sod and baked , and sufficed all our companies for that day . 
 The first day of October in the morning , we took in to make up our full compliment of rice twentie barrels for the twelve barrels of salt , delivered the Portugall Lewis Henriques before . 
 The 2 day about sixe a clock in the morning , we set sail having little wind : the Captain with the Master , and other of their company of the Portugals came aboard me , complaining that the carsey by them received for the foure Negroes of the general , was not sufficient for their payment , whereupon I gave them 178 
 1582. scarlet caps , and other things to their content , who finding themselves well pleased , departed away in the Gundall , and we having little wind , god down thwart of the fishing bay , and there came to anchor about nine a clock the same forenoon . 
 The third day about two a clock in the morning we set sail , and went hence Southwest by West till two in the afternoon then being little wind : at five we anchored sixe leagues Eastsoutheast of the Southermost part of the land in fifteene fathom , and there we road till eight a clock at night , and set sail with a stiff gale at Northeast , which sometime blew , and sometime was little wind , and so continued all night . 
 The first day of November in the forenoon , we took in our main sail to mend it : in the mean time , the Admiral came up by us , and desiring me with my Master , and M. Blackcoller to come aboard to him about certain conference , he sent his boat for us , where by him was propounded , whither it were best for us to stand on with the coast of Brasil as we did , or else to stand about starboard tacked to the Eastwards : whereupon diverse of their charts and reckonings were showed : by some it appeared , we were a hundred and fifteene leagues , by some a hundred and fiftie leagues , by some a hundred and fortie leagues , and some a great deal further short of Brasil , next hand Northeast of us : but all agreed to be within twentie minutes of the line , some to the North , some to the South of the line . 
 After many debatements , it was agreed by most consent to stand on for the coast of Brasil , except the wind changed , and there to do , as weather should compel us . In this consultation , we had speeches of courses , and places of meeting , if by misfortune we should be separated , wherein was no full order concluded , but that we should speak every night with the Admiral , if we conveniently might , and so to appoint our course from time to time , if we lost company , to stay fifteene days 179 
 in the river of Plate , and from thence to go for the straights , and there to ride , and water , and trim our ships . 
 The 12 in the afternoon M. Maddox , M. Hall , M. Bannister , and others came aboard to visit M. Walker . After a time of abided with him , they returned to the gallion all again , except M. Maddox who remained with M. Walker here aboard . 
 This night M. Maddox and I , beheld many constellations in the firmament , and set down certain new stars raised to the Southwards . All day and night we went South , and South by East among . 
 The seventeenth day in the afternoon we shot off three pieces of ordinance in honour of our Queens Majesty . This day after dinner came master Maddox , and Captain Drake with others to take their leave of Master Walker , as I with , all my company had done before , supposing him passed hope of recovery . At 19 degrees of foure of the clock , finding our selves in nineteene Southerly degrees to the Southwards of the line , and clear of 
 aiu e ' the shoalds called by us Powles , we went hence South - 
 southwest all night following . 
 The 18 day being Sunday , after dinner the general , M. Maddox , Captain Parker , and many other came aboard , and visited M. Walker : which done , they drank , and departed aboard again . All this day and night , we went our course Southwest by South , with a frank gale . 
 The 19 day about noon , the Sun was in our Zenith , being declined to the Southwards 21 degrees , and 33 minutes , where we found the air fresh and temperate , as in England in June , when a fresh gale of wind Cold evenings , doth blow in the heat of the day , but the evening , the night , and the morning are more fresh and colder here , then it is in England either in June or Julie . 
 The first of December , about sixe of the clock in the morning , we saw land on the coast of Brasil , in the height of 28 degrees or there about , which bore 180 
 Northwest , and was eight leagues from us very high land . we stood in with it , being much wind , and coming near , found diverse Islands : and seeing the Diverse Hands . Francis would not come room nor run ahead us , we stood in with the shore , and sounded in 30 fathom oaze three leagues off the land , bearing from the Westnorthwest to the Northnorthwest of us , and so stood still till it shoalded orderly into seven fathom , within a mile of a headland : then perceiving a breach over our bow , and no hope of a good harbour , in that place , we bore up room , and our Admiral after us , whom we haled : then he told us he would seek harbour to leewards , requiring me to go ahead . Then seeing the bark was astern I hoist out my skiff , and set her mast and sail , taking her ging , and Tobias one of my Master's mates with me , and ran before the ship , sounding in 15 fathom fair sand , leaving a ledge of rocks aseaboord of us : so the ships and the bark looffed up under a headland , and anchored in eight fathom , half a mile off the land , having brought the headland which lies in 27 degrees 50 minutes The latitude Southsoutheast off them , and the North land Northeast deZrees Off them . 50 minutes . 
 I stood on with the skiff , hoping to find a better harbour to leeward three leagues , but it proved not so : wherefore I returned , and in my way aboard I met with a rock in the sea , where we landed , and killed good store of fowl , and after I went aboard the Admiral , where I presented him with fowl , and returned aboard to supper . 
 In this time our boats had been aland , and found water , ballast , and two decayed houses , as they told me , and our men aboard hooked freshfish . This night we road quietly . 
 The second , being Sunday , our master's moared our ships further into the bay . We brought the South point Southeast off us , and the North land Northeast : and so rid . 
 181 
 jin exceeding great draught offish . 
 The woods set on fire by our men . 
 A sail seen and taken . 
 After dinner captain Parker , with my boat , and company , went a land , and there placed pipes , and made three wells . In the mean time , I accompanied with M. Hawkins , M. Maddox , M. Cotton , and diverse of mine own people , landed farther within the bay , and found two rivers of fresh water , and a good fishing place . Presently I sent aboard for my net , with which at one draught we drew 600 great mullets , and 5 great bases ; the like draught was never seen with so small a net : with which we went aboard , giving to the admiral 240 , to the Francis 80 , and the rest our company spent , and gave almighty God thanks for his great goodness . 
 All this while was captain Parker and others gone into the land , and fired the woods ; which burned extremely . 
 The third day in the morning our carpenter calked without board , and the master and others took up all the merchandise in the stern sheets to the keel , and there put down a boats loading of stone : and seeing the merchandise well conditioned , stowed the same again . In the mean time , my self , and others in our boats , scraped off the worms , and washed the rudder , and part of one side of our ship . 
 After dinner , the master , pilot , and I , went ashore , and observed the Sun at noon , which being passed , with our net we drew plenty of diverse sorts of fish , and went from that bay to the watering place : from thence , aboard the generail , which had taken physic , and gave them and the Francis fish for their companies , and so went aboard , where our company had rummaged aforemast : so that this afternoon we took in two boats more lading of stones afore mast . 
 The sixt day in the morning , before sixe of the clock , we saw a sail which went towards the Southwards , the admiral not having knowledge thereof . I went aboard , and certified him ; who appointed me to go and bring her in , and to take captain Parker 182 
 and some of the galleons men into the Francis , and the admirals skiff with us : so we gave her chase , and took her sixe leagues to the leewards of the place we road in . Then not being able to fetch the road again , we anchored in the sea . I intending to come away in the pinnace , and leave the Francis , and the prize together , being ready to depart , the wind blew at South a stout gale , and rain ; so that about sixe of the clock , we anchored in the road , where our ships rid . 
 After we had taken them , and that captain Parker and I were aboard , we had much talk with them before they came to the ships ; and being anchored there , the chief men were carried aboard the general , which was a gentleman , nam DONE Francisco de Torre Vedra , nephew to the governor of the river of Plate , nam DONE John de Torre Vedra . 
 We found and Englishman , nam Richard Carter Richard born in Limehouse , who had be out of England foure and twenty years , and hath be never twelve ta^en - tn years dwelling in the river of Plate , at a town nam prize . Ascension , three hundred leagues up in the river , whither they were now determined to go & inhabit , having two women , and two young children , seven friars , the rest boys , and sailors , to the number of one and twenty persons . The number 
 The old friar was had in great reverence among the 1 in the rest : insomuch that they called him the Holy father . r ’ He was abiding in no place ; but as visitor he went visiting from monastery to monastery . 
 The substance of all the speeches was , that the Spanish fleet was before the straights of Magellan , as they thought ; for they were departed sixe weeks passed from the river of Jenero , where they had been seven months to refresh and Winter , and that these were not of that company , but came out of Spaine the 26 of May 1582 in a bark of fourescore tun , and fourescore persons , of purpose for the river of Plate . 
 183 
 The friars being eighteene in number , could not agree , and their bark was a ground at Spirito santo , like to be lost : therefore the old friar bought this small bark of 46 tun , at a port nam Spirito santo , in Brasill ; and so divided themselves : and coming from thence , lost company at sea : but they thought they were before at the river of Plate . After his speeches , I went and appointed ( by the generals order ) men to remain aboard the prize with captain Parker , and brought one of the Portugals sails away with me , and came aboard , where I found that our men had filled water all day . 
 The 7 day in the morning the general sent for me ; where he showed me and M. Maddox certain articles which the friars and mariners Spaniards were examined of ; which tended altogether to the knowledge of the Spanish fleets intent , and of the means whereby we might be discovered by the way of the river of Plate by land to Peru. In this time came the rest : after whose coming it was debated , whither it were best to take the boat & people with us or not . Which was not determined ; but referred till further examination . 
 Then was it determined to pass by the straights , notwithstanding the Spaniards were there , but not to set up forge , nor to built pinnace , but water , and so thorough . 
 The eight day afore noon M. Walker and I went aboard the admiral to dinner , where was determined to discharge the Spanish bark , nam Our lady of pity , and all the men , except Richard Carter the English man , and John Pinto a Portugall , which dwelled at the river of Plate . After dinner , the generail appointed me and captain Hawkins to see them all set aboard their ship , and to receive from them certain necessaries , which willingly they imparted with us , and to leave them satisfied . Which done , I returned aboard . 
 The 9. day , being Sunday , in the morning , I sent M. Shaw and M. Geffries aboard the admiral , to peruse the Spaniards letters : wherein they found the estate of the 184 
 1582. fleet which was in the straights of Magellan , as by the note thereof appears . 
 About ten of the clock the generail , M. Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain Parker , came aboard of me . The general began to reprove my quarter master for grudging of victuali for the Francis . Which was answered : and he well satisfied . Then sent I for the old friar and DONE Francisco ; who all dined with me : and after dinner , the Spaniards having received the canoa , which was sunk , aland , and stones to ballast them , which my boat carried them , and all other things to their liking and content , they departed from me . The general also departed , and his company , who being gone , I divided the sugar and ginger among my people , which Spanish the Spaniards gave us : and after spent the day in presents . ordinary business . 
 The 10 day in the morning , our skiff went a fishing , whereof we eat as much to supper as served the company : the rest we salted for store , and to prove if they would take salt or not . 
 The 11 day , betimes in the morning , our skiff went again to fish , and took great plenty . About seven of the clock I went aland , taking with me the master , and others of our best men , to the number of 22 persons , & traveled to the place where our people before had Things found found many great jars of earth , and decayed habitations in the uland of the Indians , and trees , being dead and withered , of sweet wood . From that place we saw over the tops of a narrow wood , a fair plain , which at the request of the master and the rest , I went with them to see . We passed thorough a thick and perilous wood , before we came to the supposed plain : and when we came to it , we found the lowest part thereof higher then any of our heads , and so mossy under foot , that we slipped to the knees many steps , which so wearied us , that for my part , I was very sick , and so hasted aboard , leaving the master with 15 men , which cut a tree of sweet wood , and brought many pieces thereof aboard . 
 185 
 They leave the harbour in 27 degrees and 50. min. 
 About 3 afternoon , M. Walker and many of our men being ashore , the wind came fair , and we laid out a warp to the Northeast , and began to wind ahead . After we laid out another warp with a bend , and wound to the plate , and so rid by it with one anchor all night . 
 The 12 day about five a clock in the morning , we set sail , and as we ran out betwixt the ledge of rocks and the main , in eight fathom water , as we were catting our anchor , the catt-rope , stopper , and all brake ; so that we were glad to let slip all the cable , and cast off our boat and skiflfe to weigh the same . After we had stood out a good way , the admiral was under sail : then cast we about and went room with the admiral which weaved us , who sent in his pinnace and the Francis to help out our boats ; so by the help of the admirals pinnace , with her sail , we had our boat the sooner , and about 12 a clock at noon had taken in the anchor , cable , our long boat , skiflFe , & all , and put out all our sails bearing after the admiral , which went hence South by east . About sixe a clock at night , being thick weather , we lost sighed of the land , being foure leagues off or thereabouts . All night it was but little wind : yet went we our course South by west . 
 The 13 day about seven afore noon , the wind blew at Southsoutheast , & was very foggy ; with which gale we stood in larboard tacked West , till ten a clock the same forenoon . Then had we sighed of the land ahead , all along ( for it waxed clear weather ) it shows a far off like white cliffs , but is all sandy hills , and bays along the sea side . At one a clock after noon we were in j 6 fathom water , and within half a league of the shore , where we saw several fires made by the Indians to give warning to the other people within the land , as we supposed . Then we cast about , and stood ofF Southeast by east till midnight , that the wind came large : then went we our course South by west till next morning . 
 The 14 day we went our course South by west , having sighed of the land at sixe a clock in the morning 186 
 1582. about seven leagues off : and so went till sixe at night , that we saw land again seven leagues ofF West , and the wind shifted to the South . Then we cast about , and stood off Eastsoutheast at seven at night for a while : then came up the wind at Northwest , and blew agood . 
 The 15 day in the morning , the admiral was ahead , as far as we could almost see her , by whose default I know not ; and being little wind we could not get to her till foure of the clock after noon : then we hailed her , and stood in between the Southsouthwest and the Southwest till sixe at night , that the wind was variable , and foul weather . Then we cast about , and sounded in 23 fathom soft oaze , and stood off a while Northeast ; and presently cast about again , and went South by East larboard tacked , and Southsoutheast , among all night : finding at foure in the morning 15 fathom sand . 
 The 20 day , about ten a clock afore noon , we went aboard the admiral ; viz. M. Walker , the master , the pilot , the two merchant's , and my self , being directed so to do by the general . Upon our coming the general was going to dinner , where we also dined with him . Having dined , the general called us his assistants into his cabin , and there delivered to us in writing two demands , to be by us considered upon , and he to have our opinions therein . 
 The effects of the demands were these . 
 1 Whither it was best for us to adventure our selves to pass the straights of Magellan or not ; considering the force of the enemy , which we knew to be there before us : and also that our determination was there to set up our pinnace , make iron hoops , carene our ships , and do all our necessary businesses for the full accomplishment of our voyage . 
 2 If that course were not thought best , which way were meetest for us to take . 
 To the first we were of opinion , that it were good to hear the opinions of captain Hawkins , captain Drake , 187 
 Richard Carter the English man taken in the prize , carried along with them . 
 They retume in the latitude 
 of 33 - 
 and the two pilots , which had passed the straights and knew the harbours , and likest places to be fortified , and inhabited or not , who were called , & the three master's with them . Their opinions were as diverse as their names ; & as much difiered , as before this time they were wont usually to do : only they all agreed in this one point , that it was impossible for us to pass the straights without seeing , and encountering with the ships , although the fortification of the land did not annoy us : which being long and thoroughly debated , and their opinions with the three master's demanded , which accorded not scant any one with other , they were dismissed . 
 Then the general received the opinions of us his assistants , beginning with the youngest in authority first : which when he had herd them all over , and being set down in writing under our hands , he took deliberation till after supper to give his determination . 
 When we had all supped , then he sent for us down into his cabin , and delivered in writing his determination , ( which was ) to victuali , and furnish our selves on this coast , before he proceeded any further ; and nam two places , The river of Plate , or S. Vincent , to be chosen . 
 For the better deciphering of the river of Plate , & the commodities thereof , was called before us , Richard Carter , which does dwell there ; who could not assure us of any wine , except we could stay foure months for it : but other victuals plenty . The river is shoal and dangerous , the road seven leagues from any town , or place of commodity : which considered with the treachery that might from thence be used , into the straights by sea , and into Peru by land , we all concluded to go to S. Vincent , which place is inhabited by Portugals , and where in honest sort we might conveniently have all our business done . 
 With this resolution we took our leaves about eight a clock at night , & being come aboard , presently bore up , and went room , having all the day before beatrice up the 188 
 1583. wind larboard-tacked Eastsoutheast till at night : after it was a little wind all night we went North next hand . 
 The 21 day , after service , I declared unto my company the intent of our return to the port of S. Vincent , wherewith they were well satisfied , being before doubtful that we should not proceed , but return without performance of our voyage . It continued calm all day till six at night , then we went Northwest by west till eight at night , and then we cast about , and stood off Eastsoutheast , and East by south all night with a good gale . 
 The 22 day in the morning we missed the Francis , John Drake in which by all presumption went room in the beginning of Francts .. A r r ° ° went to the 
 .. river of Plate , 
 The 2 5 day , being Chnstmasse day , it was little wind wherein his in the forenoon till ten a clock ; then it blew a fresh ship was cast gale , with which we went our course Northnortheast , bull thee In the afternoon it was less wind : yet went we our ' ' landmdlived course North by east , and Northnortheast , and North , and months North by west , till midnight . Then being in shoaled among the water , we cast about , and lay Southsoutheast , and South - Savages . east by south , and hour ; and seeing our admiral came not after us , we cast about back again , and presently met him : so we went both together next hand Southsoutheast all the rest of the night . This afternoon we saw the Infinite numskim of fish so thick in the sea , that it seemed a water ber °ffish . troubled with trampling of horses ; which was thick , and slimy : for we had taken up some of it . 
 The 17 day of January , about seven a clock , the master , M. Blaccoller , and I went in our skiff , and rowed , and sounded round about and isle , and found 16 fathoms within a stones cast hard aboard the shore , and fair ground : after we landed , and found nothing but woods and bushes , and strange worms : we saw a falcon , and one other small bird , and therefore nam it Falcon isle : Asmalllsland it is a mile about , with a rock on the East side , which which our men lies close to it , and it is in sighed without danger . After aucon we came aboard , and dined ; at two a clock we set sail , with wind Southeast , and ran in Northeast a while , till the 
 189 
 wind scanted : then we went in Northnortheast , till we were in seven fathom and a half of water , within a league of shore : then we cast about , and stood off Southsoutheast all night , till sixe a clock the next morning . 
 The 18 day about three a clock , afore day , we saw our admiral again , and kept her company till day . 
 Citron isle . The 19 day , being within a league of the Citron isle , about eight a clock afore noon , we went aboard the general , viz. M. Walker , the master , the pilot , and my self , rejoicing of our good meeting , who told me of their evil road , where they lost and anchor , a cable , and a haulser , and how the day before , their pinnace was ashore on the same Hand , and found fowl , and water there , whither now they had sent their boat and pinnace for more water , where I know they had small store . 
 I also taking captain Parker , the master , and M. Wilks with me , went ashore , and traveled to the top of the isle , which is wooded , and high grass , but evil water , and little on it , but young fowl plenty , and dangerous coming to them . By this time ( I having set the isles , and headlands about in sighed with a compass ) came a small gale at Southsoutheast ; then our admiral shot off a piece for the boats , and hence I went , and dined aboard with him , and came after aboard , and went in Northnortheast and Northeast till morning : at which time we were within a league of the isle , entering before Their arrwall s . Vincent , but knew not how much water was upon at S. Vtncent . bar to gO out < 
 The 20 day in the morning , being calm , the generals pinnace came in to the shore , with intent to found Three canoas the entrance , but seeing three canoas , with each at the least ° { / 7ndians men > whereof the greater part were naked Indians , 
 ' which rowed , the rest Portugals , they returned aboard again . The canoas came with a flag of truce within , calling of our ship , and we showed them the like , asking what we were , and of what nation : at length one Portugall went aboard the admiral , by whom the general sent a letter to the governor , craving a pilot to bring in 190 
 our ship of courtesy , and to have traffic . About noon , having the wind at South , we bore in Northwest , and so to the Northeast , as the channel trended : but coming into seven fathom water , we anchored , until our boats had sounded the bar . During which time , I went aboard the admiral , to confer with him about our proceedings . 
 After I had stayed a while aboard the admiral , the generail came aboard with me , where we published unto all my company very good rules for their behaviour and profit , to their great satisfaction : after he went down into my cabin , where with all his assistants he conferred of diverse particulars of our voyage : by which time the boat being returned from sounding , we departed , and set sail , following our skiffs and with our ships god within the bar into seven fathom : then being becalmed , we anchored again before a sandy bay , wherein stands a castle A castle . and houses : we rid within musket shot of it : and anchored about foure a clock afternoon . 
 Then went I forward with my skiff unto a further point , sounding along . Before my return , the generail had sent for me to supper ; and thither I went : but being ready to fit down , there came out to us a canoa , wherein can°a with were ten Indians and two Christians ; the one and ancient Genouois , the other a Portugall : who came aboard , and “ christians there received a small banquet , declaring their coming whereof one was to understand our intents , and what we sought : who was and old being satisfied , departed with a farewell of three great pieces from each ship . 
 The 2i day about three a clock afternoon , came a canoa , with the old Genouois nam Joseph Dory , a John Whithall Fleming nam Paul Badeves , and Steven Repose a Portugall , and brought a letter from the governor , and welleth at withal , answer of fear and doubts of us , etc. After Santos , hath many speeches and requests , a banquet was made them , and married this the generail in his pinnace with his music , & trumpets ; Dories and I in my skiff with trumpets , drum and fife , and tabor and pipe , accompanied them a mile up the river : at going 
 191 
 off , we saluted them with a volley of three great pieces out of each ship : and after us came captain Parker with the admirals long boat , and certain shot in the same , to attend on the generail . 
 The 22 day betimes in the morning , I went aboard the admiral to confer about the sending of some token and present to the governor , which was by all the assistants determined to send him three yards of fine scarlet , & three yards of fine murry-cloth ; and to Joseph Dory the old Genouois , Steven Repose the Portugall , and to Paul Badeves the Fleming , each of them three yards of fine Santos . black cloth , which our merchant's went up to Santos withal in the admirals skiff , about nine a clock aforenoon . 
 Also this forenoon , we being minded to go up higher with our ships into harbour , I advised them to go view the place , and found the road before we went up ; which we did : where were found the place both unconvenient , and the road worse : and so we returned , and left the first determination . This day we took down our maintops , and topmast , and all the shrowds . 
 About two a clock after noon our merchant's returned with their presents , not having been at the town , because Steven Repose by the way met them on the river , and advised them to stay until there had been word sent to the governor , who was unwilling to speak with them yet , but shortly would send their answer . 
 The rest of this forenoon we spent in communication about the appointing of a purser for the Edward . Also we signed and assent for coming to this place : about which thing grew foul speeches between the general and his lieutenant , after the old custom . 
 The Indians Then went we to supper : and being at supper , certain presents . Indians came aboard , and brought the generail a strange crow , and potatos , and sugar canes , to whom he gave Inn tin oh - glasses , great pins , and biscuit : and so we being late . Also this afternoon I ran over S. Vincent , and sounded the bay a league over , 192 
 The channel of , . , 
 S. Vincent departed , 
 sounded . towards 
 island found the channel and flats , and returned aboard again within two hours , having a good gale of wind . 
 The 23 day our skiff went ashore to fish , and took pretty store : we sent our maintop ashore to be mended , and many of our men to wash their clothes ; also I went my self with them aland , to take order that no man should any ways offend the Indians . In the mean time the general with all the rest of the chiefest gentlemen , came ashore , and viewed the place , and appointed out the fittest room to set up our smith's forge , and ovens Portable wens to bake our biscuit , and place for our coopers to trim t0 tn-our water cask . 
 The 24 day at foure of the clock , before day , we herd one call for a boat on the North shore , to whom I sent my skifle , who brought aboard one nam John John Whithall , and English man , which is married here in this Whtthali-place , and with him two of his Indians ; whom I entertained until I sent word to the general to prepare himself to receive him : in which time he and I talked of many several particulars . 
 About sixe a clock I conveyed him aboard the GoodcounseU admiral : there he discovered unto us what had be done at the town , as fortification , and sending their t0 our wives away , etc. advising us to receive no more delays , men . but to come up presently before the town with our ships . 
 About ten a clock came a canoa , and brought down Joseph Dory and Steven Repose , who told us that on Saturday the governor would meet our generail , and talk with him , praying us in the mean time to use our ordinary business of cooperage , carpenters work , filling water , fishing , and washing , etc. but not to set up forge , nor oven , until speech had with the governor . After this answer , we dined together aboard the gallion : after dinner we left the messengers sitting in the cabin , and went upon the poop ; where the generail demanded the advice of his assistants , whither it were not best to stay these men while we had them or not , or whither it were best to go up with our ships to the town or no . 
 xi 193 N 
 Whereunto each man paused to make answer : wherefore I delivered my opinion ; which was , that we were forbidden to use violence to any nation for trade . 
 The Minion of Secondly , I considered that diverse of our nation , wor-^m^inBrasill merchant's , and now adventurers in this voyage , 
 for traffic . had set out the Minion hither , and begun a trade , which with our forcible dealing might be spoiled , and our nation brought in hatred . 
 Lastly , that with force we were not like to attain so much commodity , as we were in possibility to have with courtesy . 
 Hereupon all was concluded , and they suffered to pass away : to whom the generail gave the three cloak-clothes , to Joseph Dory , to Paul Baudevese , and to Steven Repose , to each of them one , which were before cut out for them : and so friendly we and they departed about two a clock after noon . 
 Three Spanish About foure of the clock this afternoon we saw ships dis - three sail of ships come bearing in about the point , 
 ' which assoon as they saw us , anchored upon the bar , 
 and put themselves in readiness , sending from one ship to another with their boats , and blowing off their ordinance , meaning to take us : and we before night , getting our men and other necessaries from the shore , which were busy on land , armed our ships to defend our selves . Then went I aboard the admiral to know what he meant to do : who determined to set his watch in warlike sort ; and so he did : for after the trumpets and drum had sounded , he shot off a great piece , as they before had done ; and presently the viceadmiral shot at me , whom I answered with another , and so ceased . We then set up our maintop , and topmast , rigged before eleven of the clock the same night . In the mean while they let slip their anchors and cables , and came driving and towing with their boats in upon us , meaning to have boarded us : and being near our admiral , he hailed them ; who refused to tell of whence they were , thinking by spending of time to get 
 194 
 aboard of him : to whom I called still to beware , and to shoot at them in time . At length he let fly at them , yet was glad to let and anchor and cable slip to avoid them : then came they all driving down thwart my halse , so that I was feign to let slip and anchor and cable to shun the gallion . All this while the ordinance and small shot plied of all parts , and I was feign to send the gallion my skiff with a haulser to ride by , for she was lose , and with the flood drave up within me . Then was the viceadmiral on my broad side , who was well paid before , yet I left not galling of him , till I thought our powder spent in vain to shoot at him , he was so torn , and broken down by us . About foure of the clock it reigned so fast , that we could scant discern one the other , the Moon being gone down , yet rid the admiral , and the rearadmiral , but a little ahead of us : during which time , we paused , and made ready all our munition . 
 The 25 day , by daylight , we saw the viceadmiral sunk hard by us , so that his yards which were hoist across , and his tops , and that over head , was above water : most of their men were got away in their boats , saving about fourtie persons which hung in the shrowds , and tops , whom I advised our general to send for away , and had made ready , and well manned our pinnaces ; but being upon the way going , the generail called them back , and would not suffer them to go . There were three of their boats also going for them from their ships ; at whom I shot , and made them to retire , and leave them upon the shrowds . At length our generail sent for two of the men away : which his pinnace brought to him ; the one was heaved over board , because he was soar hurt , not like to live ; and he was a Marsillian ; the other was a Greek , born in Zante , boatswain of the viceadmiral : the rest of the men , some swam away upon rafts , some were drowned , and some remained still hanging on her . By this time it was fair daylight , and I called to our generail to r95 
 A.D. 
 I583 - 
 The fight betwixt the English y Spanish ships at S. Vincent . 
 The Spanish viceadmiral sunhe by the English . 
 This Greek told the general that there were 600 and odd in the 3 Spanish ships . 
 weigh , and drive down to them , who required me to go first and anchor on their quarter , and he would follow , and anchor on their bows . I weighed , and went down , and anchored by them ; yet not so never as I meant , for the ebb put me off to the Northwards . There rid I alone , spending shot at them , and they both at me , foure hours , before our admirals anchor would come up ; during which time I had some spoil done ; but when our admiral came , she had her part , and eased me very well . 
 At length our admiral began to warp away , and being come without me , set sail , and began to stand out into the sea : I went aboard of him to know his pleasure . Who determined to get out of shot ; but could not , because the wind scanted on them . The Edward before she could get up her anchors , endured many more shot , after the gallion was further off a good way then she , and sometime the gallion had two or three . Thus we ended about two of the clock after noon : the rest of this day and part of the night , we spent in mending , fitting , and putting our ordinance and furniture in order for the next morning , thinking they would have be with us . 
 The 26 day in the morning we could not see them , because they were gone up the river : we manned our boats and pinnaces , and weighed two anchors and one cable , that they let slip the night before : as our men were weighin the third anchor , the bwoy-rope brake , and so we lost that anchor . Our admiral had and anchor of twelve hundred , and a good cable of eleven inches , and we had and anchor about sixe hundred , with a piece of a base cable , and bwoy-rope nothing worth . 
 After dinner I went aboard the admiral , to confer with him , who determined to go off to sea , and thither I carried Senor Pinto to interpret the Indian language , with and Indian nam Peter , which fled from the bay where we rid in a canoa , and brought with him a Spaniards caliver , flask , and touch box , to go with 196 
 us , whom our admirals boat met , and brought him aboard to the admiral . He told us that the Spaniards had brought many dead men on land , and buried them , and also landed many hurt men in their bay , and that there were certain Spaniards gone over thorough the woods to look after us . Then the general , captain Hawkins , and master Maddox came aboard of me to view my hurt men , and harms of my ship , both men , ship , and tackle ; and I also went aboard him to peruse his hurts , who had but one man , a sailer , slain . 
 The 28 day in the morning died Lancelot Ashe , of a hurt ; who departed very godly . This day we stood to the Northwards : and in getting in our anchors and skifie , we were put 3 leagues to leeward of Fiddle isle , but the gallion rid still . 
 The 29 day in the morning , seeing my self put to Where the sea from the admiral , I assembled master Walker , master Shawe , master Jeflries , the master , the master's mate , and venture werg the pilot , to whom I showed that I was desirous to severed , and go back to seek our admiral , whereunto the master , never met pilot , and master's mate answered directly , that we could afterwards . not fetch the isle where we left them , and to meet them in going back it was very unlikely and to us dangerous many ways , aswell for falling into the laps of the Spaniards , as to be put on a lee shore : whereupon all the rest advised me to stand off into the sea , whereunto I assented , remembering withal , that time spent consumed victuali , and how long we had beaten up and down in the same bay before , to get in with calms and contrary winds . 
 Thus we concluded that M. Walker should set down each men opinion , and we set to our hands , and from henceforth he to keep a Register of all our proceeding , as M. Maddox did aboard the Admiral . 
 The first day of February , we went East by south , and East southeast with a stout gale : and went the same course the 3. 4. and 5. days following . 
 197 
 The 5. day about 10. a clock in the forenoon M. Walker died , who had be weak and sick of the bloody flix 6. days , we took a view of his things , and prised them , and heaved him over board , and shot a piece for his knell . 
 The 14. day I called into my cabin the two merchants , the Master and the Pilot , showing them our wants of victuals and other necessaries : whereupon they and I concluded , that it was best for us to return to our country , with as little loss of time and expense of victuals as might be , being without hope of relief upon this coast , and yet to keep the coast of Brasil to friend for fear of extremity . 
 The 17. day in the morning having much rain , we saved above two tun of water , of which we were very glad . 
 The 18. day I observed the variation of the compass , which varied one point , and a half to the Southwards , by our ordinary compass of London . 
 The second day of March the Master , Pilot , & I agreed to fetch the isle of Fernando Loronha . 
 From the 3. day to the 10. day we went West , and by South , and ran in for the shore . 
 The 10. day we saw the land , which was sandy hills with woods on it . 
 The 11. day seeking to go a shore , we saw foure men , which weaved to us with a white shirt , and we weaved to them with a flag of truce : At length one of them swam to our boats side , and there lay in the Sea talking with us , almost and hour : in the end , being partly persuaded by Pinto , who talked with them in the Indian-tongue , and partly enticed with such trifles as I showed him , be came into our Skiff , and called to his companions on shore , who came aboard swimming : we delivered them certain barricos to fetch us them full of fresh water : after , there came down 40. Indians , boys , women , and men , and with them a French boy , but the former Indians deceived us of our barricos . Whereupon 
 198 
 Pinto and Russell swam a shore to seek water , but found none . 
 The same day we sailed to a place where boats might land , & I went a land in my Skiff , and found the Indians , and Frenchman which were with me the day before , and they brought our three barricos full of fresh water : for which I rewarded them with some trifles . In the mean time our boat went ashore , and our men with some of the Indians brought us twentie barricos more of fresh water , and I my self went to shore and brought 23. hens of India . 
 The 12. day betimes in the morning , we manned our boat and Skiff , and took some trifling things to shore , and barricos : at our first arrival the rude Indians flocked together , wading to the Skiff wherein I was , begging and wondering about us : First I caused them to fetch 27. barricos of water , whom I rewarded with small bells' , etc. In the mean time they brought hens to me , wading to the Skiff , for I kept my self always afloat , and for their hens I gave them a knife , and a small looking glass . All this while M. Blackcoller our Pilot , Thomas Russel , Mark Thawghts were still on shore , and would not tarry aboard : In the end , fearing some treachery , because all the Indians were slipped on shore from me , I called our men away , and suddenly they laid hands on our men ashore , and with their bows shot thick at us in the boats , and waded into the water to us , laying hands on our Skiff , yet God of his mercy delivered us from their hands , with the loss of five men slain , and others hurt . 
 Thus we god aboard with 40. hens , ducks , turkeys , and parrats , and three hogsheads of water : and I carried a Frenchman aboard with me , nam Jaques Humfrey , who was by chance in the boat with me when this fray began . 
 The 17. day we took three sharks in the morning . 
 From that day to the first of April , we went our course , sometime with rain , and sometime with variable 199 
 A.D. 
 I583 - 
 Treason of the Indians . 
 Jaques Humfrey a Frenchman saved . 
 1583. winds , & so till the 4. of April : which day we saw 4. birds with long tails , which hovered about the ship , and in the afternoon we saw and took up many weeds which drave thick in the sea , which we judged to be driven with the East winds from the isles of Cape verde . 
 From this day till the 11. day we went our course sometime Northeast , sometime Northwest according to the winds : upon this 11. day George Coxe one of our Carpenters , having the night before broken up the hold , and stolen wine , and drunken himself drunk , being 
 A desperate act . taken in the room , leapt overbord out of the beak head and so drowned himself . The 12. day we spied our foremast to be perished in the hownes , and durst not bear our foretop sail upon it , but went hence with our sails , next hand , North all day and night . From hence to the 20. day we went Northeast and 
 Variation of the Compass . by North . This day I observed the variation of the compass : and I noted that the South point of the compass carried more then half a point to the Westwards . The 25. day of May we went between the East northeast , and the Northeast with a small gale till five a clock in the afternoon : then had we sighed of land , which rose ragged to the Northwards like broken land , we being about five leagues off : that isle bore Northeast by North of us , and the Northermost part bore North by East of us , with a rock a sea board : we then sounded and had fiftie and five fathom gray sand , and maze great store in it : so we stood in Northeast till eight a clock , and then beheld it again being within foure leagues of it , bearing as before , but we could not make it , for some thought it to be the foreland of Fontenay , some judged it the isle of Ussant : then we sounded again in 55. fathom brown sand , and little maze in it : at eight a clock at night we went about , and stood ofF South southwest one watch , then the wind shrinked to the Southwest , that we could 200 
 lie but South southwest sixe glasses , so that at three a clock we cast about , and lay Northwest sixe glasses , and North northwest a watch being then eight a clock the next day . 
 The 26. day we lay as nigh as we could between the North and the North northeast , and saw the same land again , and made it to be the foreland of Fontenay , and the rags to be the Seams , which bore now East Northeast of us : and we stood on till tenne a clock , then being within two leagues of the rocks and less , we cast about and stood ofF Southwest , because we could not double the uttermost rocks : when we were about we drave to the Southwards very fast , for the ebb set us West southwest , and being spring tides , it horsed us a pace to leewards , for the space of one hour : then with the flood which was come , we drave again to windwards : at twelve at noon it was calm till 6. afternoon , then we stood about larboard tacked , South southwest one watch , then at midnight we cast about and stood over North till foure aforenoon . 
 The 27. day having brought the land East southeast of us , we made it to be Sylly being before deceived , and went hence East by North to double Grimsbie , leaving The bishop and his clerks to the Southwestwards , which we before took to be The Seams . 
 At 7. a clock in the afternoon we saw the lands end of England , which bore East by North ofF us , and is 7. leagues ofF from Sylly . 
 The 29. day at sixe a clock , beforenoone we had brought the Ramhead North of us , and were within a league of it , and went in Northeast next hand , being thick and foggy , and little wind : so that at eleven a clock we god in within the island , and there by mistaking of a sounding , our ship came aground between the isle and the main , and there sat till 4. a clock in the afternoon that it was half flood . 
 The 30. day about 9. a clock , with much ado I furnished away P. Jeffries , M. Symberbe , and William 
 201 
 A.D. 
 1583. 
 The isle of Sylly . 
 We came to PUmmouth . 
 Towreson with letters , after dined at M. Blaccollers , and made many salutations with diverse gentlemen . 
 1583. The 31. I wrought aboard all day , and put our ship , and things in order : Afternoon I having pity of some poor men of Milbrooke , which were robbed the night before by a pirate nam Purser , which rid in Cawson bay , I consented to go out with the Edward in company of a small ship which they had furnished to be their Master , so about five of the clock in the afternoon , came a hundreth men of theirs aboard of me : About twelve a clock we set sail , and by three afore day we were got to the windwards of him , then he set sail , and went hence to the Eastwards , and outsailed us , because our consort would not come near him : after a small chase which we gave him to no effect , we returned into our old road , and there moared the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and hence went all the Milbrooke men again ashore from me . And thus I ended a troublesome voyage . 
 . 