The last voyage of the worshipful M. Thomas Candish esquire , intended for the South sea , the Philippinas , and the coast of China , with 3. tall ships , and two barks : Written by M. John Jane , a man of good observation , employed in the same , and many other voyages . 
 He 26. of August 1591 , we departed from Plimmouth with 3. tall ships , and two barks , The Galeon wherein M. Candish went himself being Admiral , The Roebuck vice admiral whereof M. Cocke was Captain , The Desire Rear-admiral whereof was Captain M. John 
 Davis ( with whom and for whose sake I went this voyage ) The Black pinnace , and a bark of M. Adrian Gilbert , whereof M. Randolfe Cotton * was Captain . 
 The 29. of November we fell with the bay of Salvador upon the coast of Brasil 12. leagues on this side Cabo Frio , where we were becalmed until the second of 
 December : at which time we took a small bark bound 
 for the River of Plate with sugar , haberdash wares , and Negroes . The Master of this bark brought us unto and isle called Placencia thirtie leagues West from Cabo Frio , where we arrived the fift of December , and rifled sixe or 3^9 
 A.D. 
 1591. 
 The Spaniard taken in at Port Famine . 
 Baya de Salvador . 
 Abarketaken . 
 Cabo Frio . 
 Isla de Placencia . 
 seven houses inhabited by Portugales . The 11. we departed from this place , and the fourteenth we arrived Isla de S. Se - at the isle of S. Sebastian : from whence M. Cock and bastian . Captain Davis presently departed with The Desire and the black pinnace , for the taking of the town of Santos . The 15. at evening we anckered at the bar of Santos , from whence we departed with our boats to the town ; and the next morning about nine of the clock we came to Santos , where being discovered , we were enforced to land with 24. gentlemen , our long boat being far a stern , by which expedition we took all the people or the town at Mass both men and women , whom we kept all that day in the Church as prisoners . The cause why master Candish desired to take this town was to The town of supply his great wants : For being in Santos , and having Santos taken . jn qUje^ possession , we stood in assurance to supply all our needs in great abundance . But such was the negligence of our governor master Cock , that the Indians were suffered to carry out of the town whatsoever they would in open view , and no man did control them : and the next day after we had won the town , our prisoners were all set at liberty , only foure poor old men were kept as pawns to supply our wants . Thus in three days the town that was able to furnish such another Fleet with all kind of necessaries , was left unto us nakedly bore , without people and provision . 
 Eight or tenne days after master Candish himself came thither , where he remained until the 22. of January , seeking by intreaty to have that , whereof we were once possessed . But in conclusion we departed out of the town through extreme want of victuali , not being able any longer to live there , and were glad to receive a few canisters or baskets of Cassavi meal ; so that in every condition we went worse furnished from the town , then when we came unto it . The 22. of The town of January we departed from Santos , and burned Sant Vincent to the ground - The 24. we set sail , shaping our course ' for the Straights of Magellan . 
 390 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 1592. 
 The seventh of February we had a very great storm , and the eighth our Fleet was separated by the fury of the tempest . Then our Captain called unto him the Master of our ship , whom he found to be a very honest and sufficient man , and conferring with him he concluded to go for Port Desire , which is in the Southerly latitude of 48. degrees ; hoping that the general would come thither , because that in his first voyage he had found great relief there . For our Captain could never get any direction what course to take in any such extremities , though many times he had entreated for it , as often I have herd him with grief report . In sailing to this port by good chance we met with The Roebuck , wherein master Cocke had endured great extremities , and had lost his boat , and therefore desired our Captain to keep him company , for he was in very desperate case . Our Captain hoist out his boat , and went aboard him to know his estate , and returning told us the hardness thereof , and desired the Master and all the company to be careful in all their watches not to lose The Roebuck , and so we both arrived at Port Desire the sixth They arrive at of March . Port Desire . 
 The 16. of March The Black pinnace came unto us , but master Gilberts bark came not , but returned home Adrian to England , having their Captain aboard the Roebuck Gilberts bark without any provision more then the apparel that he England wore , who came from thence aboard our ship to remain with our Captain , by reason of the great friendship between them . The 18. the Galeon came into the road , and master Candish came into the harbour in a boat which he had made at sea ; for his long boat and lighthorseman were lost at sea , as also a pinnace which he had A pinnace built at Santos : and being aboard The Desire he told our built at Santos . Captain of all his extremities , and spoke most hardly of his company , and of diverse gentlemen that were with him , purposing no more to go aboard his own ship , but to stay in The Desire . We all sorrowed to hear such hard speeches of our good friends ; but having spoken with the 
 391 
 gentlemen of the Galeon we found them faithful , honest , and resolute in proceeding , although it pleased our general otherwise to conceive of them .. 
 The 20. of March we departed from Port Desire , master Candish being in The Desire with us . The eighth They fallen with of April 1592 , we fell with the Straights of Magellan , enduring many furious storms between Port Desire and an . the Straight . The 14. we passed through the first Straight . The 16. we passed the second Straight being ten leagues distant from the first . The 18. we doubled Cape Froward , which Cape lies in 53. degrees and J. The 21. we were enforced by the fury of the weather to put into a small coove with our ships , 4. leagues from the said Cape , upon the South shore , where we remained until the 15. of May . In the which time we endured extreme storms , with perpetual snow , where many of our men died with cursed famine , and miserable cold , not having wherewith to cover their bodies , nor to fill their bellies , but living by muscles , water , and weeds of the sea , with a small relief of the ships store in meal sometime . And all the sick men in the Galeon were most uncharitably put a shore into the woods in the snow , rain , and cold , when men of good health could scarcely endure it , where they ended their lives in the highest degree of misery , master Candish all this while being aboard the Desire . In these great extremities of snow and cold , doubting what the end would be , he asked our Captains opinion , because he was a man that had good experience of thee Northwest parts , in his 3. several discoveries that way , employed by the merchants of London . Our Captain told him , that this snow was a matter of no long continuance , and gave him sufficient reason for it , and that thereby he could not much be prejudiced or hindered in his proceeding . Notwithstanding he called together all the company , and told them , that he purposed not to stay in the Straights , but to depart upon some other voyage , or else to return again for Brasil . But his resolution was to go for the Cape of 
 392 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 .. W - 
 Buena Esperanza . The company answered , that if it pleased him , they did desire to stay Gods favour for a wind , and to endure all hardness whatsoever , rather then to give over the voyage , considering they had be here but a small time , and because they were within fourtie leagues of the South sea , it grieved them now to return ; notwithstanding what he purposed that they would perform . So he concluded to go for the Cape of Buena Esperanza , and to give over this voyage . Then our Captain , after master Candish was come aboard The Desire from talking with the company , told him , that if it pleased him to consider the great extremity of his estate , the slenderness of his provisions , with the weakness of his men , it was no course for him to proceed in that new enterprise : for if the rest of your ships ( said he ) be furnished answerable to this , it is impossible to perform your determination : for we have no more sails then masts , no victuals , no ground-tackling , no cordage more then is over head , and among seventie and five persons , there is but the Master alone that can order the ship , and but foureteene sailors . The rest are gentlemen , servingmen , and artificers . Therefore it will be a desperate case to take so hard and enterprise in hand . These persuasions did our Captain not only use to master Candish , but also to master Cock . In fine upon a petition delivered in writing by the chief of the whole company , the general determined to depart out of The Straights of Magellan , and to return again for Santos in Brasil . 
 So the 15. of May we set sail , the general then 234^ return being in the Galeon . The eighteenth we were free of . the btreights , but at Cape broward it was our hard hap Magellan . to have our boat sunk at our stern in the night , and to be split and soar spoiled , and to lose all our oars . 
 The twentieth of May being thwart of Port Desire , in The occasion of the night the general altered his course , as we suppose , by which occasion we lost him : for in the evening he ' stood close by a wind to seaward , having the wind at 
 393 
 Northnortheast , and we standing the same way , the wind not altering , could not the next day see him : so that we then persuaded our selves , that he was gone for Port Desire to relieve himself , or that he had sustained some mischance at Sea , and was gone thither to remedy it . Whereupon our Captain called the Generals men unto him , with the rest , and asked their opinion what was to be done . Every one said , that they thought that the general was gone for Port Desire . Then the Master being the Generals man , and careful of his master's service , as also of good judgement in Sea-matters , told the company how dangerous it was to go for Port Desire , if we should there miss the general : for ( said he ) we have no boat to land our selves , nor any cables nor anchors that I dare trust in so quick streams as are there : yet in all likelihood concluding that the general was gone thither , we stayed our course for Port Desire , and by chance met with the Black pinnace , which had likewise lost the Fleet , being in very miserable case : so we both concluded to seek the general at Port Desire . 
 They come The sixe and twentieth day of May we came to Port again to Port Desire , where not finding our general , as we hoped , ? fMathe2 ( > being most slenderly victualed , without sails , boat , V ay ' oars , nails , cordage , and all other necessaries for our relief , we were strooken into a deadly sorrow . But referring all to the providence and fatherly protection of the Almighty , we entered the harbour , and by Gods quiet road , favour found a place of quiet road , which before we knew not . Having mored our ship with the pinnaces boat , we landed upon the South shore , where we found A pool of a standing pool of fresh water , which by estimation might 
 fresh water on ho [ de some tenne tons , whereby we were greatly portde^ire comforted . From this pool we fetched more then fortie tons of water , and yet we left the pool as full as we found it . And because at our first being in this harbour we were at this place and found no water , we persuaded our selves that God had sent it for our relief . Also 
 394 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 J592-there were such extraordinary low ebbs as we had never scene , whereby we god muscles in great plenty . Likewise God sent about our ships great abundance of Abundance of smelts , so that with hooks made of pins every man ms^^s ani caught as many as he could eat : by which means we ' preserved our ships victuals , and spent not any during the time of our abided here . 
 Our Captain and Master falling into the consideration of our estate and dispatch to go to the general , found our wants so great , as that in a month we could not fit our ship to set sail . For we must needs set up a Smiths forge , to make bolts , spikes , and nails , beside the repairing of our other wants . Whereupon they concluded it to be their best course to take the pinnace , and to furnish her with the best of the company , and to go to the general with all expedition , leaving the ship and the rest of the company until the Generals return ; for he had vowed to our Captain , that he would return again for the Straights , as he had told us . The Captain and Master of the pinnace being the Generals men were well contented with the motion . 
 But the general having in our ship two most dangerous pestilent fellows , when they herd of this determination mutm3-they utterly misliked it , and in secret dealt with the company of both ships , vehemently persuading them , that our Captain and Master would leave them in the country to be devoured of the Canibals , and that they were merciless and without charity : whereupon the whole company joined in secret with them in a night to murder our Captain and Master , with my self , and all those which they thought were their friends . There were marks taken in his caben how to kill him with muskets through the ships side , and bullets made of silver for the execution , if their other purposes should fail . All agreed hereunto , except it were the boatswain of our ship , who when he knew the matter , and the slender ground thereof , revealed it unto our Master , and so to the Captain . Then the matter being 
 39S 
 called in question , those two most murderous fellows were found out , whose names were Charles Parker and Edward Smith .. 
 The Captain being thus hardly beset in peril of famine , and in danger of murdering , was constrained to use lenity , and by courteous means to pacific this fury : showing , that to do the general service , unto whom he had vowed faith in this actium , was the cause why he purposed to go unto him in the pinnace , considering , that the pinnace was so necessary a thing for him , as that he could not be without her , because he was fearful of the shore in so great ships . Whereupon all cried out with cursing and swearing , that the pinnace should not go unless the ship went . Then the Captain desired them to show themselves Christians , and not so blasphemously to behave themselves , without regard or thanksgiving to God for their great deliverance , and present sustenance bestowed upon them , alleging many examples of Gods sharp punishment for such ingratitude ; and withal promised to do any thing that might stand with their good liking . By which gentle speeches the matter was pacified , and the Captain and Master at the request of the company were content to forgive this great treachery of Parker and Smith , who after many admonitions concluded in these words : The Lord judge be - tween you and me : which after came to a most sharp revenge even by the punishment of the Almighty . Thus by a generail consent it was concluded not to depart , but there to stay for the Generals return . Then our Captain and Master , seeing that they could not do the general that service which they desired , made a motion to the company , that they would lay down under their hands the losing of the general , with the extremities wherein we then stood : whereunto they consented , and wrote under their hands as follows . 
 . 