Advertisements touching the ships that go from Sivil to the Indies of Spaine ; together with some notes of the Contractation house in Sivil . 
 The Pilot. 
 Our Pilot must be examined in the Contractation house , and allowed by such as be appointed for the examination of Pilots , that he be a sufficient man to take the charge in hand , and that which belongeth thereunto , and to govern and led the same ship directly by his only command - 
 meant to such ports as are convenient for the voyage that he takes in hand . 
 You must have a Master , that must give in sureties to the valve of 6000 ducats : and such as be his sureties must be landed men , and their lands worth to the valve of that sum aforesaid , if the said ship be between three or foure hundred tons . And if she be more or less of burden , then he must give sureties of a greater sum or less , according to the proportion of her burden . 
 He shall in all his voyage give a just and true account of all such goods , and merchandizes , as shall in all that 442 
 voyage come into the ship : as also of such plate and money , as shall registered in the Kings Register , aPPERTAINING to the King , or any other particular merchant : and if any default be , he or his sureties are to pay all such losses as thereof shall grow : as also to see the mariners paid well and truly , the third part of all such freights , as the said ship shall get going and coming . 
 The ship being freighted by her merchant's , the Master shall take order that there be sufficient mariners aboard her to take in such lading from time to time , as the merchant shall send to her : And also the Purser must be The Purser . a man sufficient of ability to take , & to give account of all such goods , merchandise , silver and gold , as shall come in and out of the said ship that present voyage , as also give sureties of 1500 ducats at the least to come back from the Indies in the said ship , and not to tarry there , if he live . 
 The Master must provide a perfect mariner called a Romager , to range , and bestow all merchandise in such A Romager . place as is convenient : and that it be not put in place , where it may perish for lack that it be not fast , sure , and dry , according to the quality and form of the said merchandise . 
 When it is all bestowed , and the ship able to bear no more , than a mariner called the Countermaster , or Master's mate , hath charge to lock fast the hatches , that The Master's none of the merchants wines , or oils , or any other kind mate-of merchandise be robbed or spoiled by the mariners . 
 And if it fortune that any be so spoiled , then the mariners are to pay for it out of the third part of all the whole fraught of the ship that does appertain to the said merchants . 
 The ship being laden , goes to the port wherehence she saileth to go towards the Indies called S. Lucar , and there one of the chief Judges of the Contractation house The chief comes down to dispatch the ships that go together J " d£es in that fleet . And that Judge goes aboard every ship , and with him he does carry and expert mariner or two ' 
 443 
 Visitors being called Visitors of the ships , to know whither the said ‘ nen^man ' s^’PPe or ships he well tackled : whither they have men Thenamesand sufficient : and in every ship every men name is taken , marks of men and if he have any mark in the face , or hand or arm , it taken , is written by a Notary ( as well as his name ) appertaining to the Contractation house , appointed for these causes . Also the Master is bound to bring back every mariner again , and to leave none behind him there , upon great pains , unless he be a passenger appointed by the King at the court , and brings his licence from thence for the 
 same purpose . 
 The Pragma - The ship must be well appointed with ordinance of tics or order brassCj anc [ iron , according to The order of their house , tractatio^ there must want nothing , and every ship is 
 house . appointed according to her burden in all kind of artillery , as pieces of brass and iron , handguns , crossbowes , pikes , swords , daggers , targets , and for all ordinance double shot , with powder , with new cables and anchors sufficient for the voyage . And moreover it is ordained , that the ships have double sails , that is , that they be thoroughly sailed , and moreover all new sails of before - sail , and maine-sail , of coarse , and bonnet new made , and kept in some driefat or chest in the same ship ; that if the weather take the one from them , the other may be in readiness . 
 Provision of Every ship must have their master sworn before the victuals upon sayj Judge of the Contratacion , that all this is in other ' a readiness in the ship , as also so many new pipes 
 of fresh water , so many buttes of good racked wine , so many kintals of bred , so many jars of oil , so many jars or Botijas of vinegar , so much flesh , so much fish , and such quantity of every kind of victuali , as the burden of the ship requires , wherein every ship according to her greatness is appointed by The ordinances of the house : Also so many gunners , so many mariners , so many gromettes , so many pages , and so many soldiers . Then all these aforesaid matters being under Register by the notary and all things prepared for the voyage , the 444 
 Judge doth command the master's to hoist up the yards across unto the hounds of the masts ; and many times , if they perceive the ship to be walty and overladen , as many covetous master's do , then he hangs the boats in the before and main tackle , to see whither the said ship will make any held downward , in laying down her side : if she do held , he commands barks aboard , to discharge her of such lading , as is thought to be too much in her : and there can no ship depart before they carry the Register of the said Judges , how that she goes Register by their order : and every ship carrieth her own Register , and in the Register the quantity of all the goods that are laden in her , and if there be any more goods , they be forfeited in the Indies , both ship and goods . 
 The master's are bound to keep the course that the Tie two Admiral doth lead , and every ship to follow her , and she must go always in the Sea before all the rest of the Qf fleet , and by night carry light , that all may know where peace . she goes . The viceadmiral must come behind all , and so every ship in the fleet before her : if any be ill of sail , all are bound to fit their sails in such order , that they go no faster then she doth . 
 The Admiral and the viceadmiral go never but half laden , but very well armed of men , and artillery , three times double and more then any of the other have : because they may help to defend all the rest , if need do require : and the dead freight of these two ships is always born upon the whole goods that are laden in the fleet , as also at the least there be two hundred soldiers in every of these two ships beside the mariners , great gunners , gromettes , and other officers . 
 The voyages be so appointed , that always they go Note . and come in the best of Summer , and be there all the winter in the ports to discharge their lading and recharge back again . 
 The ships that are Admiral and viceadmiral be neither the greatest nor the smallest ships , but of 3 hundreth or 4 hundreth tons at the most : but they be very good 
 445 
 sailors , and strong chosen for the purpose , to sail well and to bear good store of ordinance . In these two ships are always going and coming , two good knights men of war , and Captains and soldiers expert in the wars . 
 A Captainein And in every other ship is a Captain , which ruleth in every ship . causes of controversy , or fights in the seas ; the Pilot directeth only in government and leading the ship to her port . 
 All the Captains , Master's , Pilots , Mariners , and passengers , and all others be obedient to the two ships , so appointed to pass : they do , as in all other commandments what is by them appointed , having power to hang , or do any justice upon any man , as to them seems good at sea , and this is the last commandment upon pain of death , if the General please . 
 Concerning the Contractation house , there are therein Sixe Judges , sixe Judges of the highest sort . 
 Foure visi - There are visitors of ships , as it is said before , to see whither the ships go in order well , and sufficient in the art of things : and what manner of men the Master's of the Navigation , ships and Pilots are , whither they be able to answer to all such articles , as the reader is able to object unto them , in matters of Navigation : if they be not found sufficient , they are not admitted to take charge . 
 The master must know whither the ship be sufficiently calked , tackled , and furnished in all things accordingly , as with masts , sails , cables , anchors , and all other necessary furniture : that at such time as any of the high judges with their ordinary visitors appointed for such causes do come , there be nothing found out of order or lacking , rders^alud accorchng to The book of order , which every ship °in Spanish proportionable to her burden ought to have , which is not Pragmatics , unknown to any of the master's , being in writing common common in among them : and all the charge given to the Master and writing among pnot serves only to conduct the ship from port to port . 
 The counter Master , or master's mate is obedient in all things whereunto he shall be commanded by the master 446 
 and Pilot , and at his commandment are all the mariners of the ship . 
 The ships commonly go deeper laden from Spaine , then our ships do in any voyage . 
 . 