t h e s five r five e y oh f c o r n wonderful a l L. a n d a epistle concern the excellency of the english tongue . -------------------------------------- by Richard Carew , of Antony , Esq ; -------------------------------------- with the life of the author , by H**** C***** Esq. -------------------------------------- a new edition . = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = ' London , print for E. law , in ave-mary-lane ; and i . Hewett , at Penzance . mdcclxix . list of the SUBSCRIBERS , A. Copies . sir . John saint Aubyn , of clowance , baronet 20 rev. mr. jervey Allen , of Helston Thomas Saunders Allen of saint just , attorney at law Alexander Allen , purser of the wolf Sloop of war John Antony , of saint Ives John Antony , junior , of saint Ives B. Joseph beard , of Penzance John Batten , jun . of ditto , merchant Joseph Batten , of ditto John Blewett , Esq. of Marazion 4 George Borlase , attorney at law , of Penzance William bastard , of Exon Joseph Batten John beard , jun . of Penzance , merchant Capt. Barkley , of the wolf Sloop of war rev. mr. William Borlase , of Zennor William Borlase , Ll. d . of Ludgvan , F.R.S. James Bennett Capt. Thomas Braithwaite , of Falmouth James Bonithon , of Penzance rev. mr. Jacob Bullock , of Wendron Francis Benallock James bower , of Lostwithiel James baron , of ditto Thomas Bennet Nicholas bishop , of Bristol Jofeph Bunney , Esq. Leicester John Bawden , Exon C. Nicholas cloak , of Penzance Daniel Carthew , of ditto Robert Coleman , of Bristol George Cooney , of Penzance mr. Carlyl , of Marazion Humphrey coal , attorney at law , of ditto David cloak , surgeon , of Penzance William cornish , of Marazion Capt. Thomas Cassett , of Plymouth Richard Carne , of Falmouth , merchant Coleman , Harris , and Co. Merchants at Bristol 2 Henry Coleman , Esq. of market harbour , Leicestershire Henry Coleman , Esq. Leicester D. David Dennis , attorney at law , of Penzance John Dennis , of ditto James Donithorne , of Marazion Thomas Daniel , of Truro , Esq. John Dyer , of Penryn William Dawkin , Esq. of Kilvough , near Swanzey , in Wales Robert Dunkin , of Penzance E. William Ellis , Esq. of Penzance 5 Charles Streater Ellis , of ditto James Edward , of ditto , merchant Hugh Edward , attorney at law , saint Ives Thomas Ennys , of Redruth F. miss C. Foley rev. mr. fisher , of Marazion Edward freeman , of Lostwithiel G. Thomas Glynn , jun . of Helston , Esq. Charles Gwavas , of Penzance , merchant 2 Pascoe Grenfell , of Marazion , merchant John Grenfell , of Penzance , merchant Richard jervey Gryles , attorney at law , of Helston , Andrew Gaylard , of Bristol miss Jane Gilbert , of saint Ives Thomas Glanvile , of Lostwithiel rev. mr. Edward giddy , of saint earth Thomas giddy , of Truro , surgeon William giddy , of ditto H. Richard Hichens , of Penzance , attorney at law 2 Capt. John Halse , of Redruth rev. mr. Edward Hobbs , of sancrete John Hawkins , Esq. of Helston rev. mr. John Hosken , of Menaccan Thomas Hacker , of Penzance Isaac head , Esq. collector of his majesty custom in the island of Scilly William Holbeck , gentleman Com. of Trinity Col. Oxford , Esq. captain Peter hill , of Falmouth John hall John Hewett , of plymouth-dock John Hurd , of Birmingham Christopher Harris , Esq. Keneggy 6 Nathanial Hicks , of saint Ives rev. mr. Haydon , Liskeard Samuel Hick , of Lostwithiel Edward Harford , of Bristol John Hosking , of Madron John Howell , of Penzance John hall , of Stofford , Devonshire i William John , of Penzance , merchant John James , of Newlyn , ditto Capt. John James , of Marazion William James , of Redruth Thomas John , of Penzance , merchant John James , of saint Agnes king John Knill , Esq. collector of his majesty custom at saint Ives John Keir , surgeon , of Marazion 2 J. Kimber , attorney at law , of Fowey L. Thomas love , of Newlyn Stephen luke , of Penzance maddren Legoe , of saint just John Ley , of saint Ives , merchant rev. mr. lane , of saint Ives John Luxmore , Esq. of Oakhampton , Devon . Samuel Luly , of Penzance rev. mr. Philip Lyne , vicar of Leskard Tobias Lanyon , Esq. Penzance m. Joseph Michael , of Penzance Henry Michael , of ditto James Michael , of Marazion John Michael , of Chyandower James Moore , of Penzance Thomas Mathews , of saint Ives Herbert Mackworth , Esq. Exon Henry Mudge , of Truro Robert Michael , of ditto Mathias Michael , of Penzance N. rev. mr. Newton , of Sithney William Nicholls , Esq. of Trereife John nancarrow , jun . of Marazion Charles Newman , of Falmouth rev. mr. Newton , of Bristol Thomas Nicholls , of Penzance B. nankivell , of saint Agnes P. John price , Esq. 6 John Pender , of Penzance , merchant Benjamin Pidwell , of Penzance rev. mr. James Parkin , lecturer of ditto Thomas Pidwell , jun . of ditto John Pearse , surgeon , of ditto William Penrose , ------ of ditto Thomas Pascoe , ------ , of ditto Josias Perry , surgeon , of Langdon , Devon James Pascoe , attorney at law , of Penzance rev. H. Parker , D.D. fellow of Trinity college , Oxford William price , surgeon , at Redruth Daniel Pryor , of Penzance Henry Philips , of saint Ives , merchant rev. mr. Richard Pearce , of saint Buryan Thomas Penrose , attorney at law , of Penzance R. Thomas Robyns , Esq. at Penzance Thomas Rodda , of Marazion George Rippar , of ditto David Richard , of ditto Charles Rashleigh , of saint austle , attorney at law Thomas read , of Penzance Charles Rawlinson , of Marazion Stephen Robinson , jun . of Bridport Samuel Rodda , of Marazion S. Walter stone , of Penzance John stone , of ditto George Scobell , Esq. Collector of his majesty custom at Penzance John Stackhouse , Esq. of Pendarves William Stackhouse , Efq. of Trehane William Sincock , of Marazion Edward Stevens , of saint Ives William Stevens , of ditto Thomas Slade , of ditto miss Sarah Stephens , of ditto William skue , of Helston John Stott , of Ludgvan , Esq William Stevens , of Bristol Francis Spernon , surgeon , in Lostwithiel rev. mr. smith , of saint just John smith , Truro T. Thomas trenwith , Esq. of saint Ives John Trengrouse , surgeon , of ditto Richard Treeve , of Penzance Uriah Tonkin , Esq. of ditto William Tregurtha , of ditto John Tonkin , surgeon , of ditto Joseph Tovey , of ditto rev. mr. James Tonkin , of ditto John Treluddra , of Marazion rev. mr. Trevennen , of Cambron George treweeke , surgeon , of Penzance Joseph Taylor , of Bristol J. Trevethan , attorney at law , of Redruth U. George Veale , attorney at law , of Penzance William usticke , Esq. of Nansalverne W. rev. mr. Williams , of Crowan Dionysius Williams , of Penzance , F.R.S. Samuel Woodis , of ditto John Williams , officer of excise Matthew will , surgeon , of Helston Richard Williams , Marazion rev. mr. Anthony Williams , of saint keverne Philip Webber , attorney at law , Falmouth George Woodis , of Penzance John Weston , Esq. of Illuggan rev. Thomas Wharton , A. m. fellow of Trinity college , Oxford . the life of r i c h a r d c a r e wonderful of Antony Esq ; by Hugh C******* Esq ; Richard Carew , the celebrate author of the survey of Cornwall , be bear of a ancient family at East-Antonie ( he ) , the seat of his ancestor , in the year 1555 , if we may credit mr. wood ( b ) . he be the son of Thomas Carew by Elizabeth Edgecumb , daughter to sir Richard Edgecumb , a gentleman say our author ( c ) , in who mildness and stoutness , diffidence and wisdom , deliberateness of undertake , and sufficiency of effect , make a more commendable , than blaze mixture of virtue . he add , that sir Richard , at his fine house , call to this day mountedgecumb , " during queen Mary reign , entertain at one time for some good space , the admiral of the english , spanish , and Netherlands fleet , with many nobleman beside . but " , pursue he , " not too much of this , lest a partial affection steal , as unaware , into my commendation , as one , by my mother , descend from his loin , and by my birth a member of the house ( d ) . " but mr. Carew have give we a account of his ancestor , which i shall set down here , that the reader may see they be no less distinguish by the great estate in their possession , than by the noble family they be ally to . speak of the lyner , which , with the tame , discharge itself into the sea above Plymouth ; " a little within this mouth of Lyner " , say he ( e ) , " stand East-Antonie , the poor home of my ancestor , with which in this manner they be invest : sir John lerchedekne ------- of Ashton in Devon . touch our stock in general " , pursue our author ( f ) , " and my family in particular ------------- our queen . " the pregnancy of his part be much above his age , he be send to Oxford in the year 1566 , be then but eleven year old , and " ( g ) become a gentleman commoner of Christ church ....... but have his chamber in broadgate hall : " and three year after he be call to dispute with the incomparable sir Philip Sidney , who be a year old than he ( he ) . dr. Fuller and mr. will have take notice of this memorable dispute , without mention from whence they have that particular , which , as we have see already , be relate by mr. Carew himself . " he be breed " , say dr. Fuller ( i ) , " a gentleman - commoner in Oxford ; where , be but fourteen year old , and yet three year stand , he be call out to dispute ex tempore , before the earl of Leicester and Warwick , with the matchless sir Philip Sidney . si quaeriti huius fortunam pugnae , non est superatus ab illo . ask you the end of this contest ? they neither have the better , both the best . " mr. wood express it thus : " at fourteen year of age " , say he ( k ) , " he dispute ex tempore with the matchless fillip Sidney , ( while he be a young ( l ) man , i suppose ) in the presence of the earl of Leicester , Warwick , and other nobility , at what time they be lodge in christ-church , to receive entertainment from the Muse . " mr. wood say afterward , that " after mr. Carew have spend three year in Oxon , he retire to the middle temple , where he spend 3 year more " ( m ) ; which may be true , though he bring in no authority for it . but what he add , that " then he be send with his uncle ( sir George Carew as it seem ) in his embassage unto the king of Poland ; who when he come to Dantzick , he find that he have be new go from thence into Sweden , whither also he go after he : " and that " after his return , and a short stay make in England , he be send by his father into France with sir hen . Nevil , who be then ambassador leaguer unto king hen . 4. that he may learn the french tongue , which by read and talk , he overcome in three quarter of a year : " all this , i say , can hold , if it be true that , though he understand italian , french , high-dutch , and spanish , he have never be out of England ; as his countryman Charles Fitzgeffry seem to assert in the follow compliment to he : quis deus tibi tam bene invocatus ( n ) , disertissime millium trecentum idemq ; optime omnium caraee , ( seu quis multiplicem eruditionem , seu quis , quo magis emicas elenchum morum ponderet elegantiorum , virtutumq ; tot auream coronam ) quis ( inquam ) deus ( o deus profecto ! ) Tantis te spoliis , tot and trophaeis terrarum locupletat exterarum , domi perpetuo interim morantem et libris patriaeque servientem ? quo graij tibi , quo tibi Latini auri pondera tanta ? quove Hetrusci , Galli , Teutones , invidiq ; Iberi Tam assatim te opibus suis bearunt ? o si tot deus ora , totq ; linguas mihi idulserit , ut tuas referrem laudes , quot dedit ora quotq ; linguas tibi uno deus ore , lingua in una ? i may add , that mr. Carew , in his survey of Cornwall , give a account of the eminent man bear in that duchy , reckon among the civilian doctor Carew ( oh ) : " in the civil law " , say he ( p ) , " there live of late doctor kennal , and now ( quoth ) do doctor Carew , one of the ancient master of the chancery ; in which call , after his young year spend abroad to his benefit , he have repose himself . " he mention he again among the person employ in state affair , and therethrough step to preferment ( r ) . " master George Carew " , say he , " in his young year gather such fruit as the university , the inn of court , and foreign travel can yield he . upon his return , he be first call to the bar , then supply the place of secretary to the lord chancellor Hatton ; and after his decease , perform the like office to his two successor , by special recommendation from her majesty , who also give he the prothonotaryship of the chancery ; and in anno 1598 send he ambassador to the king of Poland , and other northern potentate , where through unexpected accident , he undergo extraordinary peril ; but God free he from they , and he perform his duty in acceptable manner : and at this present the commonwealth use his service , as a master of the chancery . " have our author attend this worthy person in his embassy , it be hardly possible he shall not have take some notice of it here ; be elsewhere so ready to honour himself with the friendship or acquaintance of the great man of his time . as to what mr. wood add , viz. that mr. Carew be send by his father into France with sir Henry Nevil .... that he may learn the french tongue , etc i be afraid he have mistake our author for his son , who , in effect , go into France with a Nevil , in order to learn the french tongue ; as it appear by the follow verse of the aforesaid Fitzgeffry , upon his return . ad ( s ) richardum CARAEUM , Ri. Filium , e gallijs reducem . melligo juvenum caraee , quotquot Damnoni occiduis alunt in oris : ecquid fama sinistimae ( t ) auricellae veris se insinuate meae susurris , te longae peregrinitate omnes exanclasse ( five ) molestias , marisq ; emensum omnia taedia , ad parent Patremq ; unanimum , piamq ; matrem , Membrorum incolumi statu redisse , onustum omnigenae eruditionis Gazis and spoliis , quot aut Camoenae dant vaenum emporio Lutetiano aut culto aureliae urbis in Lycaeo . qua tibi aonii latus NEVILLI Phoeboeumq ; TRELAVNIVM sequuto aulam invisere curiamq ; magni regis contigit , aemulam tonantis . at o Liligeri potentis Aula aetatem bene sit tibi , quod almum careum modo patriae patriq ; post desiderium utriusq ; longum , salvumq ; incolumenq ; reddidisti . at tu non modo stemmatum opumq ; verum and laudis and eruditionis patritae genuinus artis haeres cresce in spem patriae , hostium timore , patris delicias , Elisae amore , donec concilijs senex , at ore et membris juvenis sit intigellus ( ten ) totum Nestora vixeris , tuisq ; album feceris Albiona factis : melligo juvenum caraee quotquot Damnoni occiduis alunt in oris . learning be not only useful , but necessary in all condition and state of life ; but i will presume to say , that it be more particular so to all gentleman , who be allot to live in the country . and if they can pass their leisure hour in read , or cultivate art and science , they will spend that time in such thing as must be detrimental to their family , and , at the end , fatal to their own person . our author can never fall into those inconvenience : he love letter , and not only make they subservient to his own entertainment , but sometime useful to the public . as he be a great master of language , he deliver his opinion upon the true and ready way to learn the latin tongue , in answer to a quaere , whether the ordinary way by teach latin by the rule of grammar , be the best way for youth to learn it ( viceroy ) ? he write likewise a dissertation , show the excellency of the english tongue ( z ) : and publish a translation of the examan de ingenios para las Sciencias , write by Juan huerte , that ingenious and learned spanish physician . it be print at London in 1594 , with this title : the examination of man wit . in which , by discover the variety of nature , be show for what profession each one be apt , and how far he shall profit therein ( he ) . his proficiency in natural philosophy , enable he to improve Agriculture and husbandry to such a degree , that he be account among his neighbour the great husband , and most excellent manager of bee in Cornwall ( b ) . the inquiry he have make into the history and antiquity of nation , and chief of great Britain , engage he to attempt a description of Cornwall ; as it be natural to every man to have a particular fondness for his native country : nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit and immemore none finit esse svi . this he only undertake for his private satisfaction and entertainment ; but be afterward prevail upon by his friend to publish it , as we shall see anon . mr. Camden , who have see it , and be a excellent judge in those matter , think himself oblige to do justice both to the author and his performance , in the first edition of his Britannia , print in the year 1586 : " but these matter " ( say he , at the end of his account of Cornwall ) " will be lay open more distinct and full , by Richard Carew of Antony , a person no less eminent for his honourable ancestor , than his own virtue and learning , who be write a description of this country , not in little , but at large . " say haec planius and plenius docebit richardus Carew de Antony , non minus generis splendore , quam virtute and doctrina nobilis ; qui huius regionis descriptionem latiore specie , and non ad tenue elimat ( d ) . our author knowledge in the law , his love for justice and equity , and his affection to the government , raise he to all the post of honour , that be consistent with a country life . mr. wood assure we ( e ) , that he be make justice of the peace in 1581 , high-sheriff of Cornwall in 1586 , and about that time be the queen deputy for the militia . and indeed we find in his survey of Cornwall , that he be justice of the peace , and one of the quorum ( f ) : and that in the year 1599 , ( sir Walter Raleigh be then lieutenant general of Cornwall ) mr. Carew be one of the deputy lieutenant , treasurer of the lieutenancy , and colonel of a regiment , consist of five company , or 500 man , arm with 170 pike , 300 musket , and 30 caliver , appoint for Causam bay ( g ) . there be at that time a society of several gentleman , eminent for their learning and merit , such as sir Robert Cotton , mr. Dodderidge , ( afterward sir John Dodderidge , who die one of the judge of the king's-bench ) mr. Camden , mr. Stow , etc who have regular meeting , or conference , for the improvement and illustration of the history and antiquity of England . that society have a particular claim to our author ; and in 1589 he be elect a member of the college of the antiquary ( h ) . the oration he make at his introduction , contain , ( as i be inform by a gentleman who see it ) " a elegant display of the devastation time so swift make upon all thing ; thence it subside to the advantage and commendation of that kind of study , they have choose to be the subject of their conference : and conclude with a pathetical exhortation to his auditory , that they will persevere in establish what they have so noble begin , and continue to employ their labour upon those thing , which be worthy of they ; that so they may not be draw into oblivion themselves , by that which they will rescue from it , and that time may not rob they of aught more considerable than that which they shall restore . " thus flourish that illustrious college of antiquary , who meeting be chief hold at sir Robert cotton house ( i ) . for they have no public place for it . and therefore these gentleman consider that they be but a private society , which several accident may either interrupt , or even dissolve , and do beside want some accommodation , in order to fix and perpetuate a institution so beneficial to the public , they resolve to apply to the queen for a royal charter , and for some public building , where they will perform their exercise ; and intend to erect a library suitable to it . and they have the more reason to believe they can obtain such a grant , that the queen , not content with a superficial smattering of learning , back with conceit and talkativeness , ( which be the high pitch person of the first rank do common arrive to ) be true and solid learn , and a real encourager of letter : wherein she have the ready concurrence of her minister , who be no less conspicuous for their learning , than for their integrity and consummate wisdom . but as fair as the hope of this famous college appear in its bloom , they be soon blight by the death of that ever-memorable princess , like those fruit , which for want of the sun genial ray , can arrive at due maturity . for all the application they make for the same purpose to her successor , prove vain and unsuccessful . but what else can be expect from a man who never have a relish for polite literature , or any kind of useful learning , and only delight in pedantic scholastical divinity ; and fancy himself the wise and most glorious prince in the world , ( a second Solomon forsooth ) if he can but scribble a pamphlet against witch , or against tobacco : a man , in short , who genius and taste be as low and mean , as his soul and inclination ! as for our learned antiquary , they be oblige to dissolve themselves , and break their society , lest ( such be the wisdom of those time ) they shall be prosecute as a cabal against the government : ne quicquam mali contra rempublicam illos moliri rex , conciliariive suspicarentur ( king ) . mr. Carew publish his survey of Cornwall , in the year 1602 ( l ) and do dedicate it to his friend sir Walter Raleigh , lord warden of the stannaries , lieutenant-general of Cornwall , etc " this my ill-husbanded survey " , say he to that great man , " long since begin , a great while discontinue , late review , and now hasty finish , appeal to your lordship direction , whether it shall pass ; to your correction if it do pass ; and to your protection when it be pass . neither undu : for the same intreat of the province and person , over who body and estate , you carry a large , both martial and civil command , by your authority ; but in who heart and love you possess a far great interest , by your kindness . your ear and mouth have ever be open to hear and deliver our grievance , and your foot and hand ready to go , and work their redress ; and that , not only always as a magistrate of yourself , but also very often , as a suitor and solicitor to other , of the high place . wherefore , i , as one of the common behold , present this token of my private gratitude . it be duty and not presumption , that have draw i to the offer ; and it must be favour , and not desert , that shall move your lordship to the acceptance . and so i take humble leave , rest no less willing to serve you , than under you . " the reader will , i hope , excuse my transcribe here the whole epistle . Theise address be a true test of a author wit and genius . and who can be displease with so just a character of one of the great man of our nation ? mr. Carew subscribe himself , his lordship poor kinsman , Richard Carew of Antony ; but how he be relate to he , i can not yet find . sir Walter Raleigh have a son , who christen-name be Carew ; and probable our author be his godfather . in his preface , mr. Carew observe , that when he first compose this treatise , not mind that it shall be publish in print , he cause only certain write copy to be give to some of his friend ...... but since that time , master camden often mention this work , and his friend persuasion , have cause his determination to alter , and to embrace a please hope , that charity and good construction will rest now general in all reader . " beside " , say he , " the state of our country have undergo so many alteration , since i first begin these scribble , that , in the review , i be drive either likewise to vary my report , or else to speak against my knowledge .... reckon therefore ( i pray you ) that this treatise plot down Cornwall , as it now stand , for the particular , and will continue , for the general . " mr. carew survey of Cornwall be receive , when it come out , ( as it have be ever since ) with a general applause ; as it appear by the encomium pass upon it , which it will be too long to enumerate . mr. Camden , in the six edition of his Britannia , print in 1607 , acknowledge , at the end of his account of Cornwall , that our author have be his chief guide through it ( m ) . but as it|be usual to author of a inferior rank to be the best please with their work , so the best author be the least satisfy with their performance , and the most severe censor to themselves . the approbation of the public only excite they to mend their write , and give they all the perfection they be capable . mr. Carew be uneasy at the error of the printer , and some oversight of he , that have creep into his book ; and desire to improve it by the observation of other , who have write on the same subject . be tell in the year 1606 , that mr. Dodderidge , who be then sollicitor-general , have publish some account of the duchy of Cornwall , ( which be not true , for that tract do not come out till 1630 ) he desire mr. Camden to send he a copy of it . " i make bold " , say he ( n ) , " to use my thank for your kind remember i by sir Anthony rouse , as a shoe - horn to draw on a request ; and this it be : i learn that master Sollicitor have compile a treatise of our cornish duchy , and dedicate it to the prince : this i much long to see , and hearty pray by your mean to obtain a copy thereof . the first publish of my survey be voluntary ; the second , which i now purpose , be of necessity , not so much for the enlarge it , as the correct mine and the printer oversight : and among these , the arm not the least , touch which my order , suitable to your direction , be not observe , and so myself make a instrument , but not the author of wrong and error . i imagine that i may cull out of master sollicitor garden many flower to adorn this other edition ; and if i wit where to find mr. Norden , i will also fain have his map of our shire ; for perfect of which , he take a journey into these part . " mr. Carew never publish a second edition of his book , though he live fourteen year after the write of that letter . and whether he leave behind he a copy of it revise and correct for a new impression , do not appear . it have indeed be report , that there be a copy extant with large addition ( oh ) ; but they do tell we who addition they be . they can hardly be the author own addition , since they be say to be large one ; and we have see that mr. carew design in the intend second edition of his survey , be not so much for the enlarge it , as the correct his and the printer oversight . however it be , we may reasonable wonder that a work so valuable , and the only complete one we have on that subject , shall not have be reprint since the year 1602 ; whereby it be become so scarce , and bear such a excessive price . perhaps this be owe to the false rumour which have be spread from time to time , that it be go to be reprint with large addition . for these idle common report have often prevent new edition of useful and necessary book . but it be to be hope , that some public-spirited person will reprint it , as it be first publish . if any body have any addition or supplement to it , they may print they separate . mr. Carew ( p ) " be intimate with the most note scholar of his time , particular with sir Henry Spelman , who in a epistle ( * ) to he concern tithe , do not a little extol he for his ingenuity , virtue , and learning . it Palmam igitur cedo ' ( say he ) ' and quoth Graeci olim in Caria fua gente , admirati sunt , nos in Caria nostra gente agnoscimus , ingenium splendidum , bellarumque intentionum saecundissimum , and c . ' " and a famous scotch poet ( + ) " still he another Livy , another Maro , another Papinian , and high extol he for his great skill in history , and knowledge in the law ( Q ) . " mr. Carew " die on the six day of November , in fifteen hundred and twenty , and be bury in the church of East-Antonie among his ancestor . Shortly after , he have a splendid monument set over his grave , with a inscription thereon , write in the latin tongue ( r ) " as i have not see that inscription , i can tell whether it be the same with the follow epitaph , write by mr. Camden ( s ) , probable at the request of mr. carew family . M.S. Richardo Carew de Antony armigero , filio Thomae Carew ex Anna Edgcombia , nepoti wimundi Carew Militis ex Martha Dennia , Pronepoti Joannis Carew ex Thomasina Hollandia : viro moribus modestis , mente generosa , erudition varia , animo erga deum devato ; qui inter medias de caelesti vita meditationes Placide in Chrifto obdormivit , anno aetatis lxiij . E. Arundelia uxor marito charissimo , conjugalis fidei ergo , et .... filius patri optimo , officiosi obsequii ergo , posuerunt . obiit ............. ( a ) in the eastern part of Cornwall , within some mile of Plymouth . ( b ) Anth. wood Athen. Oxon. vol. 1. c . 452. 2d edit . ( c ) the survey of Cornwall , folio 100 ( d ) the survey of Cornwall , folio 100 ( e ) Ibid. folio 102. ( f ) Ibid. folio 103 , 104. ( g ) wood , ubi supra . ( h ) sir Philip Sidney be bear in 1554. wood ibid . c . 226. ( i ) the history of the worthy of England , p. 205. ( k ) ubi supr . ( l ) what mr. wood mean by this parenthesis , i leave to the reader to determine . ( m ) Ibid. ( n ) Caroli Fitzgeofridi Assaniae : sive epigrammatum Libri tres etc Oxon. 1601 , in 8vo . Lib. 3. Ep. 33. ( o ) afterwards sir George Carew . ( p ) survey , folio 59 ver . ( quoth ) the survey of Cornwall be publish in the year 1602. ( r ) Ibid. folio 61. ( s ) ubi supr . Epi. 40. ( t ) lege , sinitimae ( five ) leg exantlasse . ( ten ) leg integellus . ( y ) it be print in 1654. see wood , ubi supr . c . 453. ( A ) wood , ibid . ( b ) Ibid. ( d ) Britannia , etc Londini 1586 , in 8vo . ( e ) ubi supr . c . 452. ( f ) survey , etc folio 88 ( g ) Ibid. folio 83. ( h ) wood , ubi supr . ( i ) see dr. smith life of sir Robert Cotton . ( king ) dr. smith , ubi supr . ( l ) in 4to . ( m ) quemque mihi preluxiss non possum non agnoscere . ( n ) Gul. Camdeni Epistolae , etc Epist. lviii . page . 72. that letter be date 13th of May 1606. ( oh ) W. Nicolson , the english historical library , chapter ii p 11 , 12 of the 2d edition . ( p ) wood , ubi supr . c . 453. ( * ) in his Apol. of the treatise de non temerandis ecclesiis , etc Lond. 1646 , 4to . ( + ) Joh. Dunbar megalo-britannus in Epigrammat . n'est , cent . 6. numb . 53. ( Q ) wood , ibid . ( r ) wood , ibid . ( saint ) Camdeni Epistolae , etc page . 106. the saint five r five e y of c o r n wonderful a l l write by Richard Carew , of Antony , esquire . [ Abstract graphic ] to the honourable , sir Walter ra - leigh knight , lord warden of the stannaries , lieutenant general of Cornwall , etc This my ill-husbanded survey , long since begin , a great while discontinue , late review , and now hasty finish , appeal to your lord direction , whether it shall pass ; to your correction , if it do pass ; and to your protection , when it be pass . neither undue : for the same intreat of the province , and person , over who body , and estate , you carry a large , both marshal , and ciuiil command , by your authority , but in who heart , and love , you possess a far great interest , by your kindness . your ear , and mouth , have ever be open , to hear , and deliver our grievance , and your foot and hand , ready to go , and work their redress , and that , not only , always , as a magistrate , of your self , but also very often , as a suitor , and solliciter to other , of the high place . wherefore , i , as one of the common behold , present this token of my private gratitude . it be duty , and not pre - sumption , that have draw i to the offering ; and it must be favour , and not desert , that shall move your lordship to the acceptance : and so i take humble leave , rest - ing no less willing to serve you , then under you . your lordship poor kinsman , Richard Carew of Antony . to the reader . when i first compose this treatise , not mind that it shall be publish in print , i cause only certain write copy to be give to some of my friend , and put Prosopopeia into the book mouth . but since that time , master camden often-mencioning this work , and my friend persuasion , have cause my determination to alter , and to embrace a please hope , that charity , and good construction rest now general in all reader . albeit , i well know , how Opere in vario , no less than in longo , fas est obrepere somnum . and i acknowledge , this play work to come so far short , of satisfy , even myself ( though suus cuiq ; placet partus ) as i have little reason , to expect the applause of any other . beside the state of our country have undergo so many alteration , since i first begin these scribble , that , in the review , i be drive , either likewise to vary my report , or else to speak against my knowledge . and no marvel , for each succeed time , add , or rave , good , and evil , accord to the occasion , which it self produce : rather a wonder it be , that in the ceaseless revolution of the universe , any parcel shall retain a steadfast constitution . reckon therefore ( i pray you ) that this treatise plot down Cornwall , as it now stand , for the particular , and will continue , for the general . my eulogy proceed no less , from the sincerity of a witness , than the affection of a friend : and therefore i hope , that where my tongue have be good , no man eye will be evil : and that each well-minded reader will wish a merry passage , to this my rather fancie-sporting , then gaine-fseeking voyage . farewell . [ 1 ] the Prosopopeia to the book . i crave not courteous aid of friend , to blaze my praise in verse , nor , proud of vaunt , my author name , in catalogue rehearse : i of no willing wrong complain , which force or stealth have wrought , no fruit i promise from the tree , which forth this blooth have bring . i curry not with smooth term , ne yet rude threat i blast : i seek no patron for my fault , i plead no needless haste . but as a child of feeble force , i keep my father home , and , bashful at each stranger sight , dare not abroad to roam , save to his kin of near blood , or friend of dear price , who , for his sake , not my desert , with welcome i entice . t h e s five r five e y oh f Cornwall . the first book . Cornwall , the far shire of England westwards , have her name by diverse author diverse derive . some ( as our own chronicler ) draw it from Corineus , cousin to Brutus , the first conqueror of this island : who wrestle at Plymmouth ( as they say ) with a mighty giant , call Gogmagog , throw he over cliff , break his neck , and receive the gift of that country , in reward for his prowess : some , as Cerealis , ( no less mistake perhaps in that , then in his measure ) from cornu galliae , a home or corner of France , whereagainst nature have place it : and some , from cornu walliae , which ( in my conjecture ) carry great likelihood of truth . for what time the saxon , after many bloody invasion [ anno Dom. 586. ] as pirate , begin at last to plant their dwelling [ 2a ] and take root in this island , as conqueror , the Briton , by they supplant , be drive to seek their safeguard in the waste Moores , craggy mountain , and wild forest of wale and Cornwall , where the country barrenness bar their pursuer from victual , and the dangerousness of the passage lay they open to privy invasion . such as have in this sort withdraw themselves , the saxon term Welshmen , by interpretation stranger , for so they be to they , as they to the country : and their place of abode they call Welshland , sithence turn to wale , even as by the same reason , they give still the same name to Italy . now , Cornwall be cast out into the sea , with the shape of a horn , borrow the one part of her name from her fashion , as Matthew of Westminster testify , and the other from her inhabitant ; both which conjoin , make Cornwalliae , and contrive , Cornwall : in which sense , the cornish people call it Kernow , derive likewise from Kerne a home . neither need this composition to be account any way uncouth , see the same be make familiar unto we by the like in other country , as of Herbipolis in Germany , Lombardie in Italy , Paleocastrum in Crete , and Neoportus in Carniola : all which , with many other , be likewise compact of double language . this ill-halfening horny name , have ( as corneto in Italy ) open a gap to the scoff of many , who not know their own present condition , or at least their future destiny , can be content to draw a odious mirth from a public infamy . but see the wise enditer , have direct the pen of his holy writer to use this term , not only in a good meaning , but also in a significant sense , and to sanctify the thing itself in sundry part of his service : such jester dishonest indiscretion be rather charitable to be pity , than their exception either angry to be grieve at , or serious to be confute . i be not ignorant , how sore the whole story of Brutus , be shake by some of our late writer , and how stiff support by other some : as also that this wrestle pull between Corineus and Gogmagog , be report to have befall at Dover . for my own part , though i reverence antiquity , and reckon it a kind of wrong , to exact a overstrict reason for all that which upon credit she deliver ; yet i rather incline to their side , who will warrant her authority by apparent verity . notwithstanding , in this question , i will not take on i the person of either judge , or stickler : and therefore if there be any so plunge in the common flood , as they will still gripe fast , what they have once catch hold on , let they sport themselves with these conjecture , upon which my averment in behalf of Plymmouth be ground . the place where Brutus be say to have first land , be Totnes in Cornwall , and therefore this wrestle likely to have chance there , soon than elsewhere . the province bestow on Corineus for this exploit , be Cornwall . it may then be presume , that he receive in reward the place where he make proof of his worth , and who prince ( for so with other i take Gogmagog to have be ) he have conquer , even as Cyrus recompense Zopirus with the city Babylon [ Herodotus ] , which his policy have recover . again , the activity of Devon and Cornishmen , in this faculty of wrestle , beyond those of other shire , do seem to derive they a special pedigree , from that grand wrestler [ 3 ] Corineus . moreover , upon the hawe at Plymmouth , there be cut out in the ground , the pourtrayture of two man , the one big , the other lesser , with club in their hand , ( who they term Gog-Magog ) and ( as i have learn ) it be renew by order of the townsman , when cause require , which shall infer the same to be a monument of some moment . and last the place , have a steep cliff adjoin , afford a opportunity to the fact . but of this too much . Cornwall be seat ( as most man account ) in the latitude of fifty degree , and thirty minute ; and in the longitude of six . the shire extend in length to about seventy mile : the breadth , as almost no where equal , so in the large place , it pass not thirty , in the middle twenty , and in the narrow of the west part , three . the whole compass may hereby be conjecture . it border on the east with Devon , divide therefrom , in most place , by the river tame , which spring near the north sea , at Hartland in Devon , run through Plymmouth haven , into the south . for the rest , the main ocean sunder the same , on the north from Ireland , on the west from the land of Scilley , and on the south from little Britain . Theise border now thus straighten , do once extend so wide , as that they enable their enclose territory , with the title of a kingdom . Polidore Virgil allot it the four part of the whole island , and the ancient chronicle report , that Brutus land at Totnes in Cornwall , a town now seat in the midst of Devon . Moreover , until Athelstanes time , the cornish-man bear equal sway in Excester with the english : for he it be who hem they within their present limit . last , the encroach sea have ravine from it , the whole country of lioness , together with diverse other parcel of no little circuit : and that such a lioness there be , these proof be yet remain . the space between the land end , and the isle of Scilley , be about thirty mile , to this day retain that name , in cornish lethowsow , and carry continual a equal depth of forty or sixty fathom ( a thing not usual in the sea proper dominion ) save that about the midway , there lie a rock , which at low water discover his head . they term it the gulf , suit thereby the other name of Scylla . fisherman also cast their hook thereabouts , have draw up piece of door and window . moreover , the ancient name of saint Michael mount , be caraclowse in cowse , in english , the hoar rock in the wood : which now be at every flood encompass by the sea , and yet at some low ebb , root of mighty tree be descry in the sand about it . the like over - flow have happen in Plymmouth haven , and diverse other place . in this situation , though nature have shoulder out Cornwall into the far part of the realm , and so besiege it with the ocean , that , as a demie island in a island , the inhabitant find but one way of issue by land : yet have she in some good measure , countervail such disadvantage , through place it , both near unto , and in the trade way between wale , Ireland , Spain , France , and Netherlands . the nearness help they , with a short cut , less peril , and mean charge , to vent forth and make return of those commodity , which their [ 4 ] own , or either of those country do afford : the lie in the way , bring foreign ship to claim succour at their harbour , when , either outward , or homeward bind , they be check by a east , south , or southeast wind : and where the horse wallow , some hair will still remain . neither be it to be pass over without regard , that these remote quarter , lie not so open to the invasion of foreign enemy , or spoil of civil tumult , as other more inward part of the realm , which be seat near than heart , be soon seek , and early ransack in such troublesome time : or if the country long naked side , offer occasion of land to any adverse ship , her forementioned inward natural strength , increase by so many lane and enclosure , straighten the same to a prey only upon the outward skirt by some petty fleet : for the danger of far pierce , will require the protection of a great force for execution , then can there be countervail with the benefit of any booty , or conquest , be they sure to prevail . and if to be free from a damage , may pass for a commodity , i can add , that the far distance of this county from the court , have heretofore afford it a supersedeas from taker and purveyor : for if they shall fetch any provision from thence , well it may be mark with the wizard of her highness prerogative , but the same will very slender turn to the benefit of her majesty house keep : for the foulness and uneasiness of the way , the little mould of cornish cattle , and the great expense of drive they , will defaulke as much from the iuft price to the queen , at the deliver , as it do from the owner at the take . beside that , her highness ship shall heerethrough be defraud of often supply , which these part afford unto they . upon which reason , some of the purveyor attempt , heretofore through the suit of the country , the solicitation of sir Richard Gremuile , the credit of the lord warden , and the graciousness of our Soueraigae , be revoke and suppress , and the same under her highness privy seal confirm . notwithstanding , when her majesty make her pleasure afterward know , that she will have a general contribution from every shire , for redeem this exemption , Cornwall oppose duty against reason , or rather account duty a reason sufficient , yield to undergo a proportionable rate of the burden . so they compound to furnish ten ox after Michaelmas for thirty pound price ; to which , by another agreement with the officer , they shall add forty mark of their own . upon half a year warn either party may repent the bargain . This hold for a while ; but within a short space , either the carelessness of the justice in impose this rate , or the negligence of the constable in collect it , or the backwardness of the inhabitant in pay the same , or all these together overslip the time , and withhold the satisfaction . hereon down come a messenger with sharp letter from the officer of the green cloth . the conclusion ensue , that his charge must be bear , and a high price disburse for the supply . thus it fare too and fro , and the Cornishmen seem to hold a wolf by the ear : for to make payment the people be unwilling , as in a charge heretofore usual , to undergo the [ 5 ] manage hereof , the justice strain courtesy , as in a matter nothing plausible , and appertain to overmany partner , for the well effect , and yet to break they be both afraid , suspect that a heavy load will follow , if this composition be once set at large . Theise commodity go not unaccompanied with their inconvenience : for to Cornwall also have Pandora box be open . one be , that the far distance from the high seat of justice , rip a wide gap to intrude injury , and increase the charge and time of procure their redress . which due occasion of discouragement , the worst condition , and least client petiuoguer , do yet ( under the sweet bait of revenge ) convert to a more plentiful prosecution of action . the ordinary trade of these man be , where they perceive a spark of displeasure kindle , to increase the flame with their bellows of persuasion . have such a one abuse you , say he ? anger he a little , that break out into some outrageous word , you may take advantage thereof ; and you shall see how we will hamper he : warrant you he shall fetch a errand to London , and bear part of your charge too . after the game have be bring in by this winlesse , the poor foul be bind not to release his adversary , without his attorney consent , who pli the matter with so good a stomach , as he eat the kernel , while they fight about the shell . at last , when the fountain of his client purse be draw dry , by his extravagant fee of pro consilio , pro expedition , pro amicitia vicecomitis , etc beside the pack between the undersheriff and he , of dockete out writ never sue forth , the mediation of friend must shut up the matter in a compromise . another discommodity grow , that whereas London furnish all provision ( even tin , and such other arise in the same country ) of best stuff , fashion , store , and cheapness : the hard procure , and far carriage , add a extraordinary increase of price to the cornish buyer : and for matter of benefit , or preferment , by suit at court , either the opportunity be past , before notice can arrive so far : or the follow there , and loss the while at home , will require a great and assure gain in the principal , to warrant the hope of a save bargain in the appurtenance . touch the temperature of Cornwall , the air thereof be cleanse , as with bellows , by the billow , and flow and ebb of the sea , and therethrough become pure , and subtle , and , by consequence , healthful . so as the inhabitant do seldom take a ruthful and reave experience of those harm , which infectious disease use to carry with they . but yet i have note , that this so pierce a air , be apt to preserve than recover health , especial in any languish sickness which have possess stranger : neither know i , whether i may impute to this goodness of the air , that upon the return of our fleet from the Portugal action , 1589. the disease which the soldier bring home with they , do grow more grievous , as they carry the same far into the land , than it fall out at Plymmouth , where they land : for there the same be , though infectious , yet not so contagious , and though pestilential , yet not the very pestilence , as afterward it prove in other place . the spring visit not these quarter so timely , as the eastern part . summer impart a very [ 6 ] temperate heat , recompense his slow-fostering of the fruit , with their kindly ripen . autumn bring a somewhat late harvest , special to the middle of the shire , where they seldom inn their corn before Michaelmas . winter , by reason of the south near neighbour , and sea warm breath , favour it with a mild cold then elsewhere , so as , upon both coast , the frost and snow come very seldom , and make a speedy departure . this notwithstanding , the country be much subject to storm , which fetch a large course , in the open sea , do from thence violent assault the dweller at land , and leave they uncover house , pare hedge , and dwarfe-growne tree , as witness of their force and fury : yea , even the hard stone , and iron bar of the window , do fret to be so continual grate . one kind of these storm , they call a flaw , or flaugh , which be a mighty gale of wind , pass sudden to the shore , and work strong effect , upon whatsoever it encounter in his way . the cornish soil , for the most part , be lift up into many hill , some great , some little of quantity , some steep , some easy for ascent , and part in sunder by short and narrow valley . a shallow earth do cover their outside , the substance of the rest consist ordinary in rock and shelse , which make they hard for manurance , and subject to a dry summer parch . the middle part of the shire ( save the enclosure about some few town and village ) lie waste and open , show a blackish colour , bear heath and spiry grass , and serve in a manner , only to summer cattle . that which border upon either side of the sea , through the inhabitant good husbandry , of enclose , sand , and other dress , carry a better hue , and more profitable quality . Meadow ground it afford little , pasture for cattle and sheep , store enough , corn ground plenty . Hils of great name and height be , hinxten , rowtor , Brownwelly , saint Agnes , Haynborough , the four borough , Roche , Carnbray , and the two Castellan Danis . in the rest of this earthy description , i will begin with such mineral as her bowel yield forth , and then pass on to those thing , of grow , and feel life , which upon her face do relieve themselves . Theise mineral be not so deep bury by nature in the entrails of the earth , nor so close couch among the rock , but that desire of gain with the instrument of art can dig they up : they may be divide into stone and metal . quarry stone be of sundry sort , and serve to diverse purpose . for wall , there be rough , and Slate : the rough make speedy building , the slate sure . for window , dorne , and chimney , moor stone carry chief reckon . that name be bestow on it , by the moor or waste ground , where the same be find in great quantity , either lie upon the ground , or very little under . this stone answer the charge of fetch , with the fairness of his whitish colour , contain certain glimmer sparkle , and countervail his great hardness in work , with the profit of long endurance , nature have ordain the same , as of purpose , to withstand the fret weather . there be also three other sort of stone , serve to the same use , and hew with less , though differ labour : Pentuan dig out of the sea cliff , and in colour [ 7 ] somewhat resemble grey marble , caraclouse black , not unlike the jeat ; the three take out of inland quarry , and not much differ from the eastern free stone . the sea strand also in many place , afford peeble-stone , which wash out of the earth , or fall from the rock , and there lie loose , be , by often roll of the wave , wrought to a kind of roundness , and serve very handsome for pave of street and court . for cover of house there be three sort of Slate , which from that use take the name of healing-stone . the first and best blow : the second , sage-leaf colour , the three and mean grey . the blue , and so the rest , be common find under the wall slate , when the depth have bring the workmenn to the water . This Slate be in substance thin , in colour fair , in weight light , in last strong , and general carry so good regard , as ( beside the supply for home provision ) great store be yearly convey by ship both to other part of the realm , and also beyond the sea , into Britain and Netherlands . they make lime , moreover , of another kind of marle-stone , either by burn a great quantity thereof together , with a servant fire of furze , or by maintain a continual , though lesser heat , with stone coal in small kill : this be account the better cheap , but that yield the white lime . touch metal : copper be find in sundry place , but with what gain to the searcher , i have not be curious to inquire , nor they hasty to reveal . for at one mine ( of which i take view ) the Owre be ship to be refine in wale , either to save cost in the fuel or to conceal the profit . neither have nature deny silver to Cornwall , though Cicero exclude the same out of all Britain : and if we may believe our chronicler report , who ground themselves upon authentical record , king Edward the first , and king Edward the three , reap some good benefit thereof . but for our present experience , what she proffer with the one hand , she seem to pull back with the other , whereof some gentleman not long sithence , make trial to their loss : howbeit , neither be they discourage by this success , nor other from the like attempt . tynners do also find little hop of gold among their Owre , which they keep in quill , and sell to the goldsmith oftentimes with little better gain , than Glaucus exchange . yea it be not altogether barren of precious stone , and pearl : for diamond be in many place find cleave to those rock , out of which the tin be dig : they be polish , square , and point by nature : their quantity from a pease , to a walnut : in blackness and hardness they come behind the right one , and yet i have know some of they set on so good a foil , as at first sight , they may appose a not unskilful lapidary . the pearl ( though here not apt range ) breed in big oyster , and muscle , great in quantity , then acceptable for goodness , as neither round nor orient . perhaps Caesar spoil the best bed , when he make that gay coat of they , to present his grandame Venus . Cornwall be also not altogether destitute of agate [ 8 ] and white coral , as by credible relation i have learn . but why seek we in corner for petty commodity , when as the only mynerall of cornish tin , open so large a field to the country benefit ? this be in work so pliant , for sight so fair , and in use so necessary , as thereby the inhabitant gain wealth , the merchant traffic , and the whole realm a reputation : and with such plenty thereof have God stuff the bowel of this little angle , that ( as astiage dream of his daughter ) it overflow England , water Christendom , and be derive to a great part of the world beside . in travail abroad , in tarry at home , in eat and drink , in do aught of pleasure or necessity , tin , either in his own shape , or transform into other fashion , be always requisite , always ready for our service : but i shall rather disgrace , then endear it by my overweak commendation , and soon tire myself , then draw the fountain of his praise dry . let this therefore suffice , that it can be of mean price , which have find , with it , diamond , among it gold , and in it silver . the cornish tynner hold a strong imagination , that in the withdraw of Noah flood to the sea , the same take his course from east to west , violent break up , and forcible carry with it , the earth , tree , and rock , which lie any thing loose , near the upper face of the ground . to confirm the likelihood of which suppose truth , they do many time dig up whole and huge timber tree , which they conceive at that deluge to have be overturn and whelm : but whether then , or sithence , probable it be , that some such cause produce this effect . hence it come , that albeit the tin lie couch at first in certain strike among the rock , like a tree , or the vein in a man body , from the depth whereof the main load spread out his branch , until they approach the open air : yet they have now two kind of tin work , stream , and load : for ( say they ) the foremention flood , carry together with the move rock and earth , so much of the load as be enclose therein , and at the assuage , leave the same scatter here and there in the valley and river , where it pass ; which be seek and dig , be call streamworke : under this title , they comprise also the moor work , grow from the like occasion . they maintain these work , to have be very ancient , and first wrought by the Jew with pickax of Holme , box , and heart horn : they prove this by the name of those place yet endure , to wit , attall Saracen , in english , the Jew offcast , and by those tool daily find among the rubble of such work . and it may well be , that as acorn make good bread , before Ceres teach the use of corn ; and sharp stone serve the indian for knife , until the Spaniard bring they iron : so in the infancy of knowledge , these poor instrument for want of better do supply a turn . there be also take up in such work , certain little tool head of brass , which some term thunder-ax , but they make small show of any profitable use . neither be the roman ignorant of this trade , as may appear by a brass coin of Domitian , find in one of these work , and fall into my hand : and perhaps under one of those flavians , the jewish workman make here their first arrival . [ 9 ] they discover these work , by certain tynne-stone , lie on the face of the ground , which they term shoad , as shed from the main load , and make somewhat smooth and round , by the water wash and wear . where the find of these afford a tempt likelihood , the tynner go to work , cast up trench before they , in depth 5 , or 6. foot more or less , as the loose ground go , and three or four in breadth , gather up such shoad , as this turn of the earth do offer to their sight . if any river thwart they , and that they resolve to search his bed , he be train by a new channel from his former course . This yield a speedy and gaineful recompense to the adventurer of the search , but i hold it little beneficial to the owner of the soil . for those low ground , beforetime fruitful , have herethrough their wrong side turn outward , accuse the tynners injury by their succeed barrenness . to find the loadworke , their first labour be also employ in seek this shoad , which either lie open on the grass , or but shallow cover . have find any such , they conjecture by the sight of the ground , which way the flood come that bring it thither , and so give a guess at the place whence it be break off . there they sink a shaft , or pit of five or six foot in length , two or three foot in breadth , and seven or eight foot in depth , to prove whether they may so meet with the load . by this shaft , they also discern which be the quick ground ( as they call it ) that move with the flood , and which the firm , wherein not such shoad do lie . if they miss the load in one place , they sink a like shaft in another beyond that , common far up towards the hill , and so a three and four , until they light at last upon it . but you may not conceive , that every likelihood do ever prove a certainty : for diverse have be hinder , through bestow charge in seek , and not find , and many undo in find and not speed , while a fair show , tempt they to much cost , have , in the end , fail in substance , and make the adventurer bankrupt of their hope and purse . some have find tynneworke of great value , through mean no less strange , then extraordinary , to wit , by dream . as in Edward the sixt time , a gentlewoman , heir to one tresculierd , and wife to Lanine , dream , that a man of seemly personage tell she , how in such a tenement of her land , she shall find so great store of tin , as will serve to enrich both her self and her posterity . this she reveal to her husband : and he , put the same in trial , find a work , which in four year , be worth he wellnear so many thousand pound . moreover , one Taprel late live , and dwell in the parish of the hundred of west , call S. Niot , by a like dream of his daughter ( see the luck of woman ) make the like assay , meet with the effect , farm the work of the unwit lord of the soil , and grow thereby to good state of wealth . the same report pass as currant , touch sundry other ; but i will not bind any man credit , though , that of the author have herein sway i : and yet he that will afford his ear to astrologer and natural philosopher , shall have it fill with many discourse , of the constellation of the heaven , and the constitution of man body , fit to this purpose . [ 10 ] there be , that leave these trade of new search , do take in hand such old stream and loadwork , as by the former adventurer have be give over , and oftentimes they find good store of tin , both in the rubble cast up before , as also in vein which the first workman follow not . from hence there grow a diversity in opinion , among such gentleman , as by , judgement and experience , can look into these matter ; some of they suppose that the tin grow ; and other , that it only separate from the consume offal . but whosoever read that which Francis Leandro have write touch the iron mineral , in the I|will of Elba , will cleave perhaps to a three conceit : for he avouch , that the trench , out of which the Owre there be dig , within twenty or thirty year , become alike full again of the same mettle , as at first , and he confirm it by suitable example , borrow from Clearchus , of marble , in Paros island , and of salt , in India , deduce thence this reason , that the air and water replenishi the void room , through the power of the universal agent , and some peculiar celestial influence , be turn into the self substance ; and so by consequence , neither the Owre grow , nor the earth consume away : and this opinion , Munster in his cosmography , do seem to underprop , affirm , that near the city of Apolonia in Dalmatia , the vein whence brass be dig , be fill in like manner . So do he report , that near Ptolomais , there lie a round valley , out of which glassy sand be take , the wind fill the pit again , from the upper part of the adjoin mountain ; which matter be convert into the former substance and that even metal throw into this place , do undergo the like metamorphosis . the colour both of the shoad and load , resemble his bed , as the sea sand do the cliff , and be so diversify to reddish , blackish , dusky , and such other earthy colour . if the load wherein the tin lie , carry a foot and half in breadth , and be not ouerbarren , it be account a very rich work : but common the same exceed not a foot , unless many load run together . when the new find work intise with probability of profit , the discoverer do common associate himself with some more partner , because the charge amount mostly very high for any one man purse , except line beyond ordinary , to reach unto : and if the work do fail , many shoulder will more easy support the burden . Theise partner consist either of such tinner as work to their own behoof , or of such adventurer as put in hire labourer . the hireling stand at a certain wage , either by the day , which may be about eight penny , or for the year , be between four and six pound , as their deserve can drive the bargain : at both which rate they must find themselves . if the work carry some importance , and require the travail of many hand , that have his name , and they their overseer , who they term their captain : such be the Pel , whilancleuth , in english , the work of the ditch : Pulstean , that be , the miry head : crueg braaz , the great borough : saint Marget , and many surname ball , which betoken the vale where the work be set on foot . [ 11 ] the captain office bind he to sort each workman his task , to see they apply their labour , to make timely provision , for bind the work with frame of timber , if need exact it , to place pump for draw of water , and to give such other direction . in most place , their toil be so extreme , as they can endure it above four hour in a day , but be succeed by spell : the residue of the time , they wear out at coite , kayle , or like idle exercise . their calendar also allow they more holiday , then be warrant by the church , our law , or their own profit . their ordinary tool , be a pickax of iron , about sixteen inch long , sharpen at the one end to peck , and flat-headed at the other , to drive certain little iron wedge , wherewith they cleave the rock . they have also a broad shovel , the utter part of iron , the middle of timber , into which the staff be slopewise fasten . their manner of work in the loadmine , be to follow the load as it lie , either sidelong , or downright : both way the deep they sink , the great they find the load . when they light upon a small vein , or chance to lief the load which they wrought , by mean of certain firing that may hap to cross it , they begin at another place near-hand , and so draw by guess to the main load again . if the load lie right down , they follow it sometime to the depth of forty or fifty fathom . Theise loadworke , Diod. Sic. l.5.cap.8 . seem to point at , where he say , that the inhabitant of Veleriumm promontory , dig up tin out of rocky ground . from some of their bottom you shall at noon day descry the star : the workman be let down and take up in a stirrup , by two man who wind the rope . if the load lie slopewise , the tynner dig a convenient depth , and then pass forward under ground , so far as the air will yield they breathe , which , as it begin to fail , they sink a shaft down thither from the top , to admit a renew vent , which notwithstanding , their work be most by candlelight . in these passage , they meet sometime with very loose earth , sometime with exceed hard rock , and sometime with great stream of water . the loose earth be prop by frame of timberwork , as they go , and yet now and then fall down , either press the poor workman to death , or stop they from return . to part the rock , they have the foremention axe , and wedge , with which , mostly , they make speedy way , and yet ( not seldom ) be so tie by the tooth , as a good workman shall hardly be able to hew three foot , in the space of so many week . while they thus play the moldwarp , unsavoury damp do hear and there distemper their head , though not with so much danger in the consequence , as annoyance for the present . for convey away the water , they pray in aid of sundry device , as addit , pump and . wheel , drive by a stream , and interchangeable fill , and empty two bucket , with many such like : all which notwithstanding , the spring so incroche upon these invention , as in sundry place they be drive to keep man , and somewhere horse also at work both day and night , without cease , and in some all this will not serve the turn . for supply such hard service , they have always fresh man at hand . [ 12 ] they call it the bring of a addit , or audit , when they begin to trench without , and carry the same through the ground to the Tynworke , somewhat deep than the water do lie , thereby to give it passage away . this addit , they either fetch athwart the whole load , or right from the branch where they work , as the next valley minister fit opportunity , for soon cut into the hill : and therefore a gentleman of good knowledge , deduce this name of addit , ab aditu ad aquas . Surely the practice be cunning in device , costly in charge , and long in effect : and yet , when all be do , many time the load fall away , and they may sing with Augustus bird , opera and impensa periit . if you do see how apt they cast the ground , for convey the water , by compassing and turn , to shun such hill and valley as let they , by their two much height or lowness , you will wonder how so great skill can couch in so base a cabin , as their ( otherwise ) thick cloud brain . as much almost do it exceed credit , that the tin , for and in so small quantity , dig up with so great toil , and pass afterward through the manage of so many hand , ere it come to sale , shall be any way able to acquit the cost : for be once bring above ground in the stone , it be first break in piece with hammer ; and then carry , either in wain , or on horse back , to a stamp mill , where three , and in some place six great log of timber , bind at the end with iron , and lift up and down by a wheel , drive with the water , do break it small . if the stone be overmoist , they be dry by the fire in a iron cradle or grate . from the stamp mill , it pass to the craze will , which between two grind stone , turn also with a water-wheel , bruise the same to a fine sand : howbeit , of late time they mostly use wet stamper , and so have no need of the craze mill , for their best stuff , but only for the crust of their tail . the stream , after it have forsake the mill , be make to fall by certain degree one somewhat distant from another ; upon each of which , at every descent lie a green turf , three or four foot square , and one foot thick . on this the Tinner lay a certain portion of the sandy tin , and with his shovel soft toss the same to and fro , that through this stir , the water which run over it , may wash away the light earth from the tin , which of a heavy substance lie fast on the turf . have so cleanse one portion , he set the same aside , and begin with another , until his labour take end with his task . the best of those turf ( for all sort serve not ) be fetch about two mile to the eastwards of saint Michael mount , where at a low water they cast aside the sand , and dig they up : they be full of root of tree , and on some of they nut have be find , which confirm my former assertion of the sea intrusion . after it be thus wash , they put the remnant into a wooden dish , broad , flat , and round , be about two foot over , and have two handle fasten at the side , by which they soft shog the same to and fro in the water between their leg , as they sit over it , until whatsoever of the earthy substance that be yet leave , be flit away . some of late time , with a slight invention , and light labour , do cause certain boy to stir it up and down with their [ 13 ] foot , which work the same effect : the residue after this often cleanse , they call black tin , which be proportionable divide to every of the adventurer , when the lord part have be first deduct upon the whole . then do each man carry his portion to the blow house , where the same be melt with charcoal fire , blow by a great pair of bellows , move with a water-wheel , and so cast into piece of a long and thick squareness , from three hundred to four hundred pound weight , at which time the owner mark be set thereupon . the last remove , be to the place of coinage , which i shall touch hereafter . i have already tell you , how great charge the tynner vndergo , before he can bring his Owre to this last mill : whereto if you add his care and cost , in buy the wood for this service , in fell , frame , and pile it to be burn , in fetch the same , when it be coal through such far , foul , and cumbersome way , to the blow house , together with the blower two or three month extreme and increase labour , swelter heat , danger of scald their body , burn the house , cast away the work , and last their ugly countenance , tan with smoke and besmear with sweat : all these thing ( i say ) be due consider , i know not whether you will more marvel , either whence a sufficient gain shall arise to countervail so manifold expense , or that any gain can train man to undertake such pain and peril . but there let we leave they , since their own will do bring they thither . during the Tinnes thus melt in the blow house , diverse light sparkle thereof be by the forcible wind , which the bellows send forth , drive up to the thatch roof . for which cause the owner do once in seven or eight year , burn those house , and find so much of this light tin in the ash , as pay for the new building , with a gainful overplus . a strange practice ( certes ) for thrift sake , to set our house on fire . other do frame the tunnel of the chimney very large and slope , therein to harbour these sparkle , and so save the burn . this casualty may be worth the owner some ten pound by the year , or better , if his Mil have store of suitor . but sithence i gather stick to the build of this poor nest , sir Francis Godolphin , ( who kind help have much advance this my play labour ) entertain a dutch mynerall man , and take light from his experience , but build thereon far more profitable conclusion of his own invention , have practise a more save way in these matter , and beside , make tin with good profit , of that refuse which the tynner reject as nothing worth . we will now proceed , to take a view of the order and custom most general use among the tynner . their work , both stream and load , lie either in several , or in wastrell , that be , in enclose ground , or in commons . in several , no man can search for tin , without leave first obtain from the lord of the soil ; who , when any my be find , may work it whole himself , or associate partner , or set it out at a farm certain , or leave it unto wrought at his pleasure . in wastrell , it be lawful for any man to make trial of his fortune that way , provide , that he acknowledge the lord right , by share out unto he a certain part , which they call toll : a custom favour more of [ 14 ] indifferency , than the tynners constitution in Devon , which inable they to dig for tin in any man ground , enclose , or close , without licence , tribute or satisfaction . wherethrough it appear , that the lawmaker rather respect their own benefit , than equity , the true touch of all law . the wastrel work be reckon among chattel , and may pass by word or will . when a i be find in any such place , the first discoverer aim how far it be likely to extend , and then , at the four corner of his limit proportion , dig up three turf , and the like ( if he listen ) on the side , which they term bound , and within that compass , every other man be restrain from search . Theise bound he be bind to renew once every year , as also in most place to bestow some time in work the i , otherwise he lose this privilege . the work thus find and bound , look how many man do labour therein , so many doale or share they make thereof , and proportionable divide the gain and charge . the lord of the soil be most-where allow liberty to place one workman in every fifteen for himself , at like hand with the adventurer , if he be so dispose . they measure their black tin , by the Gill , the toplisse , the dish and the foot , which contain a pint , a pottel , a gallon , and towards two gallon . Townes special privilege for the coynage , be Helston , Truro , Lostwithiel , and liskerd . the time of coinage come twice in the year , viz about midsummer and Michaelmas : but because it fall out very often that the tin which be wrought , can be blow and bring thither , against the limit day , there be , in favour of the tynner , certain late time assign , which they term post-coynages . the officer depute , to manage this coinage , be , porter , to bear the tin , peizer to weigh it , a steward , Comptroller , and receiver to keep the account , every of which have entertainment from her majesty , and receive a fee out of the coin tin . for the manner of coinage : the block or piece of tin , be bring into a great room ordain for that purpose , and there first peize , then taste , that be , prove whether they be soft tin or hard , and after , mark with their majesty stamp . to the hard ( less worth by fifty shilling in the thousand then the soft ) the letter H. be add , ever it come from the blowing-house . each thousand must answer forty shilling to the queen , which with the other incident fee be satisfy , then , and not before , it be lawful for the owner to alienate and distract the same . but about the price there grow much ado , between the merchant and the owner , before they can jump to a agreement . the merchant unfold his pack of strange news , which either he bring with he from London ( where most of they dwell ) or forge by the way , tell what great likelihood there be of war , what danger of pirate at sea , how much of the fore-bought tin lie on their hand , etc the owner , on , the other side , stop his ear against these charm , answer his news with the Spaniard , credo en dios , encounter his reason , with the present scarcity and charge of get and work tin , and so keep up the price , Iniquum petit , ut aequum ferat . in the end , after much bid , and love , vary , and [ 15 ] delay , common that merchant who have most money to bestow , and that owner who have most tin to sell , do make the price , at which rate the merchant be bind to yield present payment for so much tin as shall be bring he , and , of necessity , must bargain for ten thousand at the least . other notwithstanding be not bind to buy or sell at this price , but every man leave at liberty , to make his best market . the tin so sell , have usual amount heretofore to the worth of thirty or forty thousand pound in money , and carry price between twenty and thirty pound the thousand , sometime high , and sometime low , accord to the quick vent and abundance , or the dead sale and scarcity ; wherein yet some have observe , that this so profitable , and vendible a merchandise , rise not to a proportionable enhancement , with other less beneficial , and affect commodity , and they impute it partly to the eastern buyer pack , partly to the owner not vent , and venture the same . here i must either crave or take leave of the Londoner , to lay open the hard deal of their tin merchant in this trade . when any western gentleman , or person of account , want money to defray his expense at London , he resort to one of the tin merchant of his acquaintance , to borrow some : but they shall as soon wrest the club out of Hercules fist , as one penny out of their finger , unless they give bond for every twenty pound so take in loan , to deliver a thousand pound weight of Tyn at the next coinage , which shall be within two or three month , or at far within half a year after . at which time the price of every thousand , will not fail to be at least twenty three , perhaps twenty five pound : yea , and after promise make , the party must be drive ( with some indignity ) to make three or four errand to his house , ere he shall get the money deliver . in this sort , some one merchant will have 5. hundred pound out beforehand , reap thereby a double commodity , both of excessive gain for his loan , and of assurance to be serve with Tyn for his money . this they say be no usury , forsooth , because the price of tin be not certain know beforehand : ( for once only within these twelve year , of set purpose to escape the penalty of the law , they bring it a little under twenty pound the thousand : ) but if to take above fifty in the hundred be extremity , whatsoever name you listen to give it , this in truth can be none other , than cutthroat and abominable deal . i will not condemn all such as use this trade , neither yet acquit those who make great pretence of zeal in religion : and it may be , that some upon by-respect , find somewhat friendly usage in usance , at some of their hand : but the common voice say , that for the most part , they be nought all . and yet how bad soever this fashion may just be account , certain of the same countryman do pass far beyond it , as thus : the merchant , that he may stand assure to have tin for his money , at the time of coinage or deliverance , beside his trade of loan abovemention , lay out diverse sum beforehand , unto certain Cornishmen , owner of tynworke , or otherwise of know sufficiency , who be bind to deliver for the same , so many thousand of tin , as [ 16 ] the money shall amount unto , after the price agree upon at the coinage . to these hungry fly , the poor labour tynner resort , desire some money before the time of his pay at the deliverance : the other put he off at first , answer he have none to spare : in the end , when the poor man be drive through necessity to renew his suit , he fall to question , what he will do with the money . say the tynner , i will buy bread and meat for my self and my household , and shoe , hose , petticoat , and such like stuff for my wife and child . sudden herein , this owner become a petty chapman : i will serve thou , say he : he deliver he so much wear as shall amount to forty shilling , in which he cut he half in half for the price , and four noble in money , for which the poor wretch be bind in Darby bond , to deliver he two hundred weight of tin at the next coinage , which may then be worth five pound or four at the very lest . and as mischief still creep onward , this extreme deal of the London merchant and country chapman , in white tin be imitate ( or rather exceed ) by the wealthy sort of tynner themselves in the black , by lay out their money after thus much the mark : which trade , though subtle and dark , i will open as plain as i can . a foot of black tin ( as be before say ) contain in measure two gallon ; the weight uncertain follow the goodness . a foot of good moore-tyn , ( which be count the best sort ) will way about fourscore pound . of the my tin ( which be mean ) fifty two pound : of the worst fifty pound . two pound of good black tin , be melt , will yield one of white : twentle eight or thirty foot of the best , forty : of the middle , 52. of the mean , a thousand . now the wealthy sort of tynner , lay out part of their money beforehand , buy this black tin of the poor labourer , after so much the mark : that be , look how many mark there be in the price , make at the coinage for the thousand , so many two penny halfpenny , three penny , or four penny , partly after the goodness , and partly accord to the hard conscience of the one , and necessity of the other , shall he have for the foot : as if the price be twenty six pound , thirteen shilling and four penny the thousand , therein be forty mark : then shall the poor tynner receive of he who deal most friendly , for every foot of his best black tin ( of which as be say , about thirty will make a thousand ) forty time four penny : viz. thirteen shilling and four penny , which amount to twenty pound the thousand : whereas that foot at the price , be worth above five penny the mark . likewise will he pay for the mean black tin ( of which about forty foot will make a thousand ) three penny the mark , which be ten shilling the foot , and so shall he have also after twenty pound for the thousand : for the worse they give less , rateable . by which proportion , how uncertain so ever the goodness of the tin , or the greatness of the price do fall , their gain of a four part at least rise always certain . whereto add , that they lie out beforehand but a portion of the money due , and that only for some small time , you shall find it grow to the high degree of extremity . but whether it proceed from this hard deal , or for that the tynners whole family give themselves [ 17 ] to a lazy kind of life , and depend only upon his labour and gain ; which often ill succeed adventurer , and such over-dear buy tin daily impair , or from both these together ; once it have be due observe , that the parish where tin be wrought , rest in a mean plight of wealth , than those which want this damageable commodity : and that as by abandon this trade , they amend , so by revive the same , they decay again ; whereas husbandry yield that certain gain in a mediocrity , which tynneworke rather promise , then perform in a large measure . let we now examine what course of justice be hold for decide such controversy as befall in tin cause , and with what privilege they be endow and encourage . after such time as the Jew by their extreme deal have wear themselves , first out of the love of the english inhabitant , and afterward out of the land it self , and so leave the mine unwrought , it happen , that certain gentleman , be lord of seven tithing in blackmoore , who ground be best store with this mineral , grow desirous to renew this benefit : and so upon suit make to Edmond , earl of Cornwall , son to Richard , king of the roman , they obtain from he a charter , with sundry privilege : among which , it be grant they to keep a court , and hold plea of all action , life , limb , and land except : in consideration whereof , the say lord accord to pay the earl a halfpenny for every pound of tin which shall be wrought ; and that for better answer this tax , the say tin shall be bring to certain place purposely appoint , and there peize , coin , and keep , until the earl due be satisfy . again , the lord of these tithing , be , for their part , authorise to manage all stannery cause , and , for that intent , to hold parliament at their discretion , and in regard of their labour , there be allot unto they the toll-tynne within those tithing , which their successor do yet enjoy . this charter be to be keep in one of the church steeple , within those tithing , and , the seal have a pickax and shovel in saulty grave therein . this i receive by report of the late master William carnsew , a gentleman of good quality , discretion , and learning , and well experience in these mynerall cause , who avouch himself a eyewitness of that charter , though now it be not extant . howbeit , i have learn , that in former time , the tynner obtain a charter from king John , and afterward another from king Edward the first , which be again expound , confirm and enlarge by parliament , in the fifty year of Edward the three , and last strengthen by Henry the seven . king Edward the first charter , grant they liberty of sell their tin , to their best behoof . nisi ( say he ) nos ipsi emere voluerimus . upon which ground certain person in the reign of king Edward 6. and queen marry , seek to make use of this preemption , ( as i have be inform ) but either cross in the prosecution , or defeat in their expectation , give it over again ; which vain success can not yet discourage some other of late time from the like attempt , allege many reason how it may prove beneficial both to her highness and the country , and prejudicial to none save only the merchant , who practise a far [ 18 ] worse kind of preemption , as have be before express . This for a while be hot onset and a reasonable price offer , but ( upon what ground i know not ) soon cool again . yet afterward it receive a second life , and at Michaelmas term 1599 the Cornishmen , then in London , be call before some of the principal lord of her majesty council , and the matter there debate , by the lord warden , in behalf of the country , and certain other depute for the merchant , who have set this suit on foot . in the end it grow to a conclusion , and article be draw and sign , but they also prove of void effect . last of all , the say lord warden , in the begin of November 1600 call a assembly of tynner at Lostwithiel , the place accustom , impanele a jury of twenty four tynner , signify her majesty pleasure both for a new imposition of six pound on every thousand , that shall be transport ( over and above the former forty shilling , and sixteen shilling already payable ) as also that her highness will disburse four thousand pound in loan to the tynner , for a year space , and be repay in tin at a certain rate . by the foreremembered ancient charter , there be assign a warden of the stannery , who suppli the place , both of a judge for law , and of a chancellor for conscience , and so take hear of cause , either in forma iuris , or de jure and aequo . he substitute some gentleman in the shire of good call and discretion , to be his vice-warden , from who either party , complainant or defendant , may appeal to he , as from he ( a case of rare experience ) to the lord of the council , and from their honour to her majesty person : other appeal or remove to the common law they gainsay . the jail for Stannery cause be keep at Lostwithiel , and that office be annex to the comptrolership . the tynner of the whole shire be divide into four quarter , two call moor , of the place where the tin be wrought , viz. foy moor , and black moor : the other , tiwarnaill and penwith . to each of these be assign by the lord warden , a steward , who keep his court once in every three week . they be term Stannery court of the latin word Stannum , in english tin , and hold plea of whatsoever action of debt or trespass , whereto any one deal with black or white tin , either as plaintiff or defendant , be a party . their manner of trial consist in the verdict give by a jury of six tynner , accord to which the steward pronounce judgement . he that will spare credit to the common report , shall conceive a ill opinion touch the slipping of both witness and juror sometime in these court : for it be say , that the witness have not stick now and then to fatten their evidence , rather for serve a turn , then for manifest a truth , and that the juror verdict have favour more of affection then of reason , especial , in controversy grow between stranger and some of the same part . and such fault-finders vouch diverse cause of this partiality : one , that when they be swear , they use to add this word , my conscience , as the roman do their ex animi mei sententia , which be suspect to imply a conceit enlargement of their oath : another , that the variety of custom , which in every place ( wellnear ) differ one from another , yield they in a manner a unlimited [ 19 ] scope , to aver what they listen , and so to close the best lawyer mouth with this one speech , our custom be contrary . and last , that they presume upon a kind of impunity , because these six man jury fall not within compass of the star-chamber censure , and yet the lord warden have now and then make the pillory punishment of some , a spectacle , example , and warn to the residue . for my own part , i can in these tin case , plead but a hearsay experience , and therefore will only infer , that as there be no smoke without a fire , so common the smoke be far great than the fire . strange it be , and not to be expect , that all poor tin juror and witnesy , shall in such a remote corner always conform themselves to the precise rule of uprightness , when we see in the open light of our public assize , so many more judicious and substantial person now and then to swerve from the same . in matter of important consequence , appertain to the whole Stannery , the lord warden , or his vnderwarden , use to empanel a jury of four and twenty principal tynner , which consist of six out of every quarter , returnable by the major of the four Stannery town , and who act do bind the residue . next to the liveless thing , follow those which partake a grow life , and then a feel . the woman and child in the west part of Cornwall , do use to make mat of a small and fine kind of bent there grow , which for their warm and well wear , be carry by sea to London and other part of the realm , and serve to cover floor and wall . Theise bent grow in sandy field , and be knit from over the head in narrow breadth after a strange fashion , of herb and root for the pot and medicine , Cornishmen enjoy a like portion in proportion with other shire , which somewhere also receive a increase by the sow and plant of such as be bring thither from beyond the sea . the like may be say of root , and salad for the table , save that ( i suppose ) Cornwall natural bring forth great store of Seaholm and sampire , then be find in any other county of this realm . the Seaholme root preserve either in syrup , or by canding , be accept for a great restorative . some of the gaul ground do also yield plenty of rosa solis . moreover nature liberal hand deck many of the sea cliff with wild Hissop , sage , pelamountayne , Maiorum , rosemary , and such like well-fauouring herb . in time past , the cornish people give themselves principal , ( and in a manner whole ) to the seek of tin , and neglect husbandry : so as the neighbour of Devon and Somerset shire , hire their pasture at a rent , and store they with their own cattle . as for tillage , it come far short of feed the inhabitant mouth , who be likewise supply weekly at their market from those place , with many hundred quarter of corn and horseloade of bread . but when the tynneworke begin to fail , and the people to increase , this double necessity drive they to play the good husband , and to provide corn of their own . labour bring plenty , plenty cheapness , and cheapness seek a vent beyond the sea , some by procure licence , and more by stealth ( if at least the common brute do not wrong they with a slander ) [ 20 ] so as , have not the imbargo with Spain ( whither most be transport ) foreclose this trade , Cornwall be likely in few year , to reap no little wealth by the same . and yet , whosoever look into the endeavour which the cornish husbandman be drive to use about his tillage , shall find the travel painful , the time tedious , and the expense very chargeable . for first , about may , they cut up all the grass of that ground , which must new be break , into turf , which they call beat . Theise turf they raise up somewhat in the midst , that the wind and sun may the soon dry they . the inside turn outward dry more speedy , but the outside can better brook the change of weather . after they have be thorough dry , the husbandman pile they in little heap , and so burn they to ash . then do they bring in sea sand , of great or lesser quantity , partly after their nearness to the place , from which it be fetch , and partly by the good husbandry , and ability of the tiller . a ordinary horse will carry two sack of sand , and of such the borderer on the sea , do bestow , 60. at least , in every acre , but most husband double that number . the inland soil require not so large a proportion , and in some place , they sow it almost as thin as their corn : for if they shall strew the same very thick , the ground will become ouer-rancke , and choke the corn with weed . a little before plow time , they scatter abroad those beat-borough , and small sand heap upon the ground , which afterward , by the plough turn down , give heat to the root of the corn . the tillable field be in some place so hilly , that the ox can hardly take sure foot ; in some so tough , that the plough will scarce cut they , and in some so shelfy , that the corn have much ado to fatten his root . the charge of this beat , burn , seed and sand , ordinary amount to no less than twenty shilling for every acre : which do , the tiller can common take but two crop of wheat , and two of oat , and then be drive to give it at least seven or eight year leyre , and to make his breach elsewhere . of wheat there be two sort , french , which be beard , and require the best soil , recompense the same with a profitable plenty : and notwheate , so term , because it be unbearded , content with a mean earth , and content with a suitable gain . Rye be employ only on those worst ground , which will bear no wheat . Barley be grow into great use of late year , so as now they till a large quantity in one hundred , then be in the whole shire before : and of this , in the dear season pass , the poor find happy benefit , for they be principal relieve , and the labourer also feed , by the bread make thereof ; whereas otherwise , the scarcity of wheat fall out so great , that these must have make many hungry meal , and those outright have starve . in the westerne-most part of Cornwall , they carry their barley to the mill , within eight or nine week from the time that they sow it ; such a hasty ripen do the border sea afford . this increase of barley tillage , have also amend the cornish drink , by convert that grain into malt , which ( to the ill relish of stranger ) in former time they make only of oat . i have be always prone to maintain a paradox , [ 21 ] that dearth of corn in Cornwall ( for with other shire i will not undertake to meddle ) so it go not accompany with a scarcity , be no way prejudicial to the good of the country ; and i be induce thus to think , for the reason ensue : there be not two trade , which set so many hand on work , at all time of the year , as that one of tillage . the husbandman find profit herein , be encourage to bestow pain and charge , for enclose and dress of waste ground , which therethrough afterwards become also good for pasture . with the ready money , get by his weekly sell of corn , he set the artificer on work , who be better to buy dear bread , be but a part of his meat , and which he countervail again , by raise the price of his ware , then to sit idle , knock his heal against the wall . their objection , who fear lest the transport of much away , will leave too little at home , i answer with this observation : when the price of corn fall , man general give over surplus tillage , and break no more ground , then will seem to supply their own turn : the rest , they employ in graze , wherethrough it fall out , that a ill kern or save harvest , soon empti their old store , and leave they in necessity , to seek new relief from other place . whereas on the other side , if through hope of vent , they hold on their large tillage , this retain one year provision underhand , to fetch in another , which upon such occasion , may easy be leave at home : and of this , what Cornishman be there , that have not see the experience ? for fruit , both wild , as whurt , strawberry , and Raspies , and long to the orchard , as pear , plum , peareplumme , cherry , mulberry , chestnut , and walnut , though the mean sort come short , the gentleman step not far behind those of other part ; many of they conceive like delight to grass and plant , and the soil yield it self as ready to receive and foster . yet one special privilege , which the nearness to the south , the fitness of some ground stand upon lime stone , the well grow of vine , and the pleasant taste of their grape , do seem to grant , i have not hitherto know by any to be put in practice , and that be , the make of wine : the trial will require little cost , and ( perhaps ) requite it with great advantage . for fuel , there grow general in all part great store of furze , of which the shrubby sort be call tame , the better grow french , and in some , good quantity of broom . the east quarter of the shire be not destitute of Copswoods , nor they of ( almost ) a intolerable price : but in most of the west , either nature have deny that commodity , or want of good husbandry lose it . their few parcel yet preserve , be principal employ to coal , for blow of tin . this lack they supply , either by stone coal , fetch out of wale , or by dry turf , some of which be also convert into coal , to serve the tynners turn . timber have in Cornwall , as in other place , take a universal downfall , which the inhabitant begin now , and shall hereafter rue more at leisure : ship , howse , and vessel , have breed this consumption : neither do any man ( welnere ) seek to repair so apparent and important a decay . as for the statute standle , common call hawketree , the breach of the sea , and force of the weather do so pare and gall they , that they can [ 22 ] pass under no better title than scarecrow . among creature of a breathe life , i will only note such as minister some particular cause of remembrance . touch venomous worm , Cornwall can plead no such charter of nature exemption , as Ireland . the country people retain a conceit , that the snake , by their breathe about a hazel wand , do make a stone ring of blue colour , in which there appear the yellow figure of a snake , and that beast which be sting , be give to drink of the water wherein this stone have be sock , will therethrough recover . there be such a one bestow on i , and the giver avow to have see a part of the stick stick in it : but penes authorem sit side . this mention of snake , call to my remembrance , how not long since , a merry cornish gentleman try that old fable to be no fable , which show the dangerous entertain of such a guest . for he have get one of that kind , and break out his tooth ( wherein consist his venom ) use to carry he about in his bosom , to set he to his mouth , to make he lick his spittle , and when he come among gentlewoman , will cast he out sudden , to put they in fear : but in the end , their vain dread prove safe than his foolhardiness : for as he once walk alone , and be kiss this gentle playfellow , the snake in good earnest , with a stump , either new grow up , or not full pull out , bite he fast by the tongue , which therewith begin so to rankle and swell , that by the time he have knock this foul player on the head , and be come to his place of abode , his mouth be scarce able to contain it . Fayne be he therefore to show his mishap , and by gesture to crave aid in earnest of the gentlewoman , who he have aforetime often scare in sport . of all manner vermin , cornish house be most pester with rat , a brood very hurtful for devour of meat , clothes , and write by day ; and alike cumbersome through their cry and rattle , while they dance their gallop gallyard in the roof at night . stranger , at their first come into the west part , do complain that they be visit with the slow sixe-legged walker , and yet the cleanly homeborn find no such annoyance . it may proceed from some lurk natural effect of the climate ; as we read , that the traveller who pass the equinoctial , doe there lose this manlike hunt vermin , and upon their return recover they again . the other beast which Cornwall breed , serve either for venery , or meat , or necessary use . beast of venery persecute for their case , or damage feasance , be martern , squirrel , fox , badger , and otter . profitable for skin and flesh , hare , cony and deer . the fox plant his dwell in the steep cliff by the sea side ; where he possess hold , so many in number , so dangerous for access , and so full of wind , as in a manner it fall out a matter impossible to disseyze he of this his ancient inheritance . true it be , that sometime when he march abroad on forray , to reuittaile his male pardus , the captain hunter , discover his sally by their espial , do lay their soldierlike hound , his bear enemy , in ambush between he and home , and so with Har and Tue pursue he to the death . then master Reignard ransack every corner of his wily [ 23 ] sconce , and bestur the utmost of his nimble stump to quite his coat from their jaw . he cross brook , to make they lose the scent , he slip into covert , to steal out of sight , he cast and coast the country , to get the start of the way ; and if he be so meet , as he find himself overmatch , he abide , and bid they battle , first send the mire of his tail against their eye , in lieu of shot , and then manful close at hand-blow , with the sword of his tooth , not forget yet , the while , to make a honourable retraict , with his face still turn towards the enemy : by which mean , have once recover his fortress , he then give the fico , to all that his adversary can by siege , force , my , sword , assault , or famine , attempt against he . the otter , though one in kind , have yet two several place of haunt : some keep the cliff , and there breed , and feed on sea-fish , other live in the fresh river , and trade not so far down , who be less store with provision , make bold now and then to visit the land , and to break their fast upon the goodman lamb , or the goodwive pultrie . of cony , there be here and there some few little Warren , scant worth the remember . Cornwall be store not long since with many park of fallow deer . but king Henry the eight be persuade ( as it be say ) by sir Richard Pollard , that those belong to the duke , can steed he with little pleasure in so remote a part , and will yield he good profit , if they be lease out at a improve rent , do condescend to their dispark . so four of they take a fall together , to wit , carry bullock , liskerd , Restormel and Lanteglos . howbeit , this good husbandry come short of the devisor promise , and the king expectation : wherethrough the one be shend for the attempt , and the other discontent with the effect . notwithstanding , as prince example be ever take for warrantable precedent to the subject : so most of the cornish gentleman prefer gain to delight , or make gain their delight , short after follow the like practice , and make their deer leap over the pale to give the bullock place . Parkes yet remain , be in east hundred , pool , sir Jonathan trelawney : new revive , Halton , m. rouse , late impale : and Newton , m. Coringtons , almost decay . in west hundred , Boconnock , sir Reginald mohun . in powder hundred , Caryhayes , m . treuamons . in Stratton launcel , m. chamond . in Kerier hundred , Trela warren , m. Viruans : and Merther , m. Reskymers . Red deer , this shire breed none , but only receive such , as in the summer season range thither out of Devon : to who the gentleman border on their haunt , afford so course entertainment , that without better plead their heal , they be fain to deliver up their carcase for a pledge , to answer their trespass . beast serve for meat only , or pig , goat , sheep , and Rother cattle . for meat , draught , and plow , ox : for carriage , and ride , horse : for guard , attendance , and pleasure , dog of sundry sort . what time the shire , through want of good manurance , lay waste and open , the sheep have general [ 24 ] little body , and course fleece , so as their wool bear no better name , then of cornish hair , and for such have ( from all ancienty ) be transport , without pay custom . but since the ground begin to receive enclosure and dress for tillage , the nature of the soil have alter to a better grain , and yield nourishment in great abundance , and goodness , to the beast that pasture thereupon : so as , by this mean ( and let not the owner commendable industry , turn to their surcharge prejudice , lest too soon they grow weary of well-doing ) Cornish sheep come but little behind the eastern flock , for bigness of mould , fineness of wool often breed , speedy fat , and price of sale , and in my conceit equal , if not exceed they in sweetness of taste , and freedom from rottenness and such other contagion . as for their number , while every dweller have some , though none keep many , it may sum the total to a jolly rate . most of the cornish sheep have no horn , who wool be fine in quality , as that of the horn moor in quantity : yet , in some place of the county there be that carry four horn . the Devon and Somersetshire grazier , feed yearly great drove of cattle in the north quarter of Cornwall , and utter they at home , which notwithstanding , beef , whitfull , leather or tallow , bear not any extraordinary price in this county , beyond the rate of other place : and yet , the opportunity of so many haven|be , tempt the merchant ( i doubt i , beyond their power of resistance ) now and then to steal a transportation , and beside , utter no small quantity for the reuitail of weather-driven ship . some gentleman suffer their beast to run wild , in their wood and waste ground , where they be hunt and kill with crossbow , and piece , in the manner of deer , and by their fierceness , and wariness , seem to have put on a part of the other nature . each ox have his several name , upon which the driver call aloud , both to direct and give they courage as they be at work . the cornish horse , common be hardly breed , coarse feed , low of stature , quick in travel , and ( after their growth and strength ) able enough for continuance : which sort prove most serviceable for a rough and hilly country . but very few of they ( through the owner , fault ) retain long this their natural goodness . for after two year age , they use they to carry sack of sand , which bow down , and weaken their back , and the next summer they be employ in harrow , which mar their pace . two mean that so quail also their stomach , and abate their strength , as the first rider find they ouer-broken to his hand . howbeit now , from nought , they be almost come to nought : for since the statute 12. of Henry the eight , which enable every man to seize upon horse that pasture in commons , if they be under a certain size , the sheriff officer , reckon themselves special privilege to poll in their master year , haven of late time , whether by his commandment , or sufferance , accustom to drive those waste ground , and to seize on those not voluntary statute-breaking tits , so as nature deny a great harace , and these carry away the little , it rest , that hereafter , not the damme foal , but the dame trotter , be trust unto , this consideration [ 25 ] have make i entertain a conceit , that ordinary husbandman shall do well to quit breed of horse , and betake themselves to moil : for that be a beast , which will fare hardly , live very long , draw indifferent well , and carry great burden , and have also a pace swift , and easy enough , for their mill and market service . by which mean , look what be abate from the usual number of hackney , shall ( with a gainful recompense ) be add to their goodness : and hereof this quarter have already take some experiment . for , not long sithence , it happen that one bring over a he ass , from France , because of the strangeness of the beast ( as every thing where it come first , serve for a wonder ) who follow his kind , beget many monster , viz. moil , and for monster indeed , the country people admire they , yea , some be so wise , as to knock on the head , or give away this issue of his race , as uncouth mongrel . among live thing on the land , after beast , follow bird , who seek harbour on the earth at night , though the air be the great place of their haunt by day . of tame bird , Cornwall have dove , goose , duck , peacock , Ginney duck , China goose , Barbary hen , and such like . of wild , quail , rail , partridge , pheasant , plover , snyte , wood-dove , Heathcocke , about , etc but , among all the rest , the inhabitant be most behold to the woodcock , who ( when the season of the year afford ) flock to they in great abundance . they arrive first on the north-coast , where almost every hedge serve for a road , and every plashoote for Springles to take they . from whence , as the moist place which supply they food , begin to freeze up , they draw towards those in the south coast , which be keep more open by the summer near neighbourhood : and when the summer heat ( with the same effect from a contrary cause ) dry up those plash , nature and necessity guide their return to the northern wet soil again . of hawk , there be marlion , sparhawk , hobby , and somewhere Lannards . as for the Sparhawk , though she serve to fly little above six week in the year , and that only at the partridge , where the falconer and Spanels must also now and then spare her extraordinary assistance ; yet both cornish and Devonshire man employ so much travail in seek , watch , take , man , nusling , diet , cure , bathe , carry , and mew they , as it must needs proceed from a great folly , that they can discern their folly herein . to which you may add , their busy , dangerous , discourteous , yea , and sometime despiteful steal one from another of the egg and young one , who , if they be allow to air natural , and quiet , there will be store sufficient , to kill not only the partridge , but even all the good-huswive chicken in a country . of sing bird , they have lynnet , goldfinch , ruddock , canary bird , blackbird , thrush , and diverse other ; but of nightingale , few , or none at all , whether through some natural antipathy , between they and the soil ( as Pliny write , that Crete foster not any owl , nor Rhodes Eagles , nor Larius lacus in Italy stork ) or rather for that the country be general [ 26 ] bear of covert and wood , which they affect , i leave to be discuss by other . not long sithence , there come a flock of bird into Cornwall , about harvest season , in bigness not much exceed a sparrow , which make a foul spoil of the apple . their bill be thwart crosswise at the end , and with these they will cut a apple in two , at one snap , eat only the kernel . it be take at first , for a forboden token , and much admire , but , soon after , notice grow , that Gloucester shire , and other apple country , have they a over-familiar harm . in the west part of Cornwall , during the winter season , swallow be find sit in old deep tynneworke , and hole of the sea cliff : but touch their lurk place , Olaus Magnus make a far strange report . for he say , that in the north part of the world , as summer wear out , they clap mouth to mouth , wing to wing , and leg in leg , and so after a sweet sing , fall down into certain great lake or pool among the cane , from whence at the next spring , they receive a new resurrection ; and he add for proof hereof , that the fisherman , who make hole in the ice , to dip up such fish with their net , as resort thither for breathe , do sometime light on these swallow , congeal in clod , of a slimy substance , and that carry they home to their stove , the warmth restore they to life and flight : this i have see confirm also , by the relation of a venetian ambassador , employ in Poland , and hear avow by traveller in those part : wherethrough i be induce to give it a place of probability in my mind , and of report in this treatise . after have thus lay open every particular of the land , natural order lead my next labour , to be employ about the water , and the thing incident thereunto : the water i sever into fresh and salt . touch fresh water , every hill well-near send forth plentiful , fresh , clear and pleasant spring , profitable for moisten the ground , and wholesome for man use , and diverse by run through vein of metal , suppose also medicinable for sundry disease ; of which moor in their particular place . Theise spring , ( as several person assemble , make a multitude ) take advantage of the fall ground , to unite in a great strength , and beget river , which yet be more in number , and swift in course , then deep in bottom , or extend in largeness . for they work out their bed through a earth , full of rock and stone , suit therethrough , the nature only of some special fish , of which kind be , minowe , Shoats , Eeles , and lampreys . the rest be common to other shire , but the shoot in a manner peculiar to Devon and Cornwall : in shape and colour he resemble the trout : howbeit in bigness and goodness , come far behind he . his bait be fly and tag-worme , which the cornish english term angle-touches . of the river and haven|be which they make , occasion will be minister we to speak particular in the next book ; and therefore it shall suffice to name the chief here in general , which be on the south coast : tame , Tavy , Liner , Seaton , loo , foy , fala , Lo. on the north , camel , Halae . of fresh water pond , either cast out by nature , or wrought out by art , Cornwall be store with very few , though the site of so many narrow valley offer [ 27 ] many , with the only charge of raise a head . but the ocean plentiful beam darken the affect of this petty starlight : touch who nature and property , for his saltness in taste , strength in bear , course in ebb and flow , the effect be so well know to the vulgar , as they need not any particular relation ; and the cause so controverse among the learned , as it pass my ability to moderate the question : only this i will note , that somewhat before a tempest , if the sea-water be slash with a stick or oar , the same cast a bright shine colour , and the drop thereof resemble sparkle of fire , as if the wave be turn into flame , which the sailor term briny . among other commodity afford by the sea , the inhabitant make use of diverse his creek , for griste-mille , by thwart a bank from side to side , in which a floodgate be place with two leaf : these the flow tide open , and after full sea , the weight of the ebb close fast , which no other force can do : and so the imprison water pay the ransom of drive a under-shoote wheel for his enlargement . land , saint Nicholas in the mouth of Plymmouth , saint George before loo , saint Michael mount , and the ily of Scilley . haven|be on the south coast there be , Plymmouth , loo , foy , Falmouth , Helford , and the road of mount bay . on the north , S. ie , and padstowe , of which moor hereafter . diverse of these be daily much endamage by the earth which the tynner cast up in their work , and the rain flood wash down into the river , from whence it be discharge in the haven , and shoulder the sea out of his ancient possession , or at least , encroach upon his depth . to remedy this , a act of parliament be make 23. H. 8. that none shall labour in tynnework , near the Devon and Cornish haven : but whether it aim not at the right cause , or have not take his due execution , little amendment appear thereby for the present , and less hope may be conceive for the future . yet this earth be through such mean convert into sand , enrich the husbandman equal with that of Pactolus : for after the sea have season it with his salt and fructify moisture , his wave work up to the shore a great part thereof ( together with more of his own store , grate from the cliff ) and the tiller , some by barge and boat , other by horse and wain , do fetch it , and therewith dress their ground . this sand be of diverse kind , colour , and goodness : the kind , some big , some lesser ; some hard , some easy . the colour be answerable to the next cliff . the goodness increase as it be take far out of the sea some have also use to carry up into their ground the Hosea or salt water mud , and find good profit thereby , though not equall the sand . to this purpose also serve Orewood , which be a weed either grow upon the rock under high water mark , or break from the bottom of the sea by rough weather , and cast upon the next shore by the wind and flood . the first sort be reap yearly , and thereby better in quantity and quality : the other must be take when the first tide bring it , or else the next [ 28 ] change of wind will carry it away . his use serve for barley land . some accustom to burn it on heap in pit at the cliff side , and so convert the same to a kind of wood , but the noisome savour have curse it out of the country . This Floteore be now and then find natural form like ruf , comb , and such like : as if the sea will equal we in apparel , as it resemble the land for all sort of live creature . the sea strand be also strew with sundry fashion and colour shell , of so diversify and pretty workmanship , as if nature be for her pastime dispose to show her skill in trifle . with these be find , moreover , certain nut , somewhat resemble a sheep kidney , save that they be flatter : the outside consist of a hard dark colour rind : the inner part , of a kernel void of any taste , but not so of virtue , especial for woman travail in childbirth , if at least , old wife tale may deserve any credit . if i become blameworthy in speak of such toy , Scipio and Lelius shall serve for my patron , who hold it no shame to spend time in their gather . but to carry you from these trifle , you shall understand , that Cornwall be store with many sort of ship , ( for that term be the genus to they all ) namely , they have cock-boat for passenger , sayn-boat for take of Pilcherd , fisherboat for the coast , barge for sand , lighter for burden , and bark and ship for traffic : of all which several to particularize , be consectari minutias , and therefore i will omit to discourse of they , or of the wrack proceed from they , to their great damage , and the finder petty benefit , to who , he that enjoy the admiral right , by the common custom allow a moiety for his labour . but though i shun tediousness herein , i fear lest i shall breed you nauseam , while i play the fishmonger : and yet , so large a commodity may not pass away in silence . i will therefore , with what briefness i can , show you , what they be , when they come , where they haunt , with what bait they may be train , with what engine take , and with what dress save . herein we will first begin with the peall , trout , and Sammon , because they partake of both salt and fresh water , breed in the one , and live in the other . the trout and peall come from the sea , between march and midsummer , and pass up into the fresh river , to shed their spawn . they be mostly take with a hooke-net , make like the eastern weelye , which be place in the stickell part of the stream ( for there the fish chief seek passage ) and keep abroad with certain hoop , have his small end fasten against the course of the water , and his mouth open to receive the fish , while he fare up by night . the Sammons principal access , be between Michaelmas and Christmas : for then , and not before , the river can afford they competent depth . a time forbid to take they in , by the statute thirteen of Richard the second : but if they shall be allow this privilege in Cornwall , the inhabitant may utter quit all hope of good by they , for the rest of the year . they be refet ( that be fat ) at their first come from the sea , and pass up as high as any water can carry they , to spawn the more safe , and , to that end , take advantage of the great rainy flood . after Christmas , [ 29 ] they return to the sea , altogether spend and out of season , who , as the spring time come on , their fry do follow : and it have be observe , that they ( as also the trout and peall ) haunt the same river where they first be breed . upon the north coast , and to the westwards of Foy , few or none be take , either through those river shallowness , or their secret dislike . to catch they , sundry device be put in practice : one be , with the hook and line , where they use fly for their bait : another , with the Sammons spear , a weapon like Neptune mace , beard at the point . with this , one stand watch in the dark night , by the deep pool , where the Sammons work their bed for spawn , while another make light with a waze of reed . the salmon natural resort to the flame , play in and out , and therethrough be discern , strike and draw on land by a cord fasten to the spear . the three and more profitable mean of their take , be by hutches . a head of faggot , or stone , be make across the river , and his great part let out , through a square room therein , who upper side give passage to the water by a grate , but deny it to the fish , and the low admit his entry , through certain thick lath , couch slopewise one against another , but so narrow , as he can find no way of return , while the stream toss he hither and thither , and the lath end gall he , if he stumble on the place . they use also to take Sammons and trout , by grope , tickle they under the belly , in the pool where they hover , until they lie hold on they with their hand , and so throw they on land . touch these , one scribble of the river Lyner , rhyme as ensue : the store-house of sun chevisance , the clock who measure time do dance , the moon vassal , the lord of chance , Oceanus ere year compass his circle end , from huge bosom , where they wend , his scaly brood to greet do send , his wife tellus . some hail but with the coast shore , some multiply the harbour store , some far into the river bear , among the rest . a threefold rout , of Argus hue , kind to increase , foe to eschew , with lyner supple mantle blow , themselves revest . what time , enrich by Phoebus ray , the alder his new wealth display ( * ) of bud groat , and welcome pay unto the spring . the trout , of middle growth begin , and eygall peizd , betwixt either fin , at wont host dan lyners inn , take their lodging . next , as the day up early rise , in come the peall , who small size , in his more store , and oft supply , a praise do find . laftly , the salmon , king of fish , fill with good cheer the Christmas dish , teach that season must relish each in his kind . ( * ) it be say that the fish come , when the alder leaf be grow to the breadth of a groat . [ 30 ] and of the salmon in particular . now to the salmon , king of fish , a trice , against who slate , both skill and will conspire , pain bring the fuel , and gain blow the fire , that hand may execute the head device . some build his house , but his thence issue bar , some make his meashie bed , but reave his rest : some give he meat , but leave it not digest , some tickle he , but be from please far . another troop come in with fire and sword , yet cowardly , close counterwaite his way , and where he do in stream , mistrustless play , veil with night robe , they stalk the shore aboard . one offer he the daylight in a waze , as if darkness alone contrive wile : but new Neptune , his mate , at land , the while , with fork mace , deer school his foolish gaze . poor fish , not pray , that be make a prey , and at thy native home find great harm , though dread warn , swiftness guide , and strength thou arm , thy nearness , greatness , goodness , thou betray . in the haven|be , great store , and diverse sort of fish , some at one time of the year , and some at another , do haunt the depth and shallows , while the lesser fly the great , and they also be pursue by a big , each prey one upon another , and all of they accustome , once in the year , to take their kind of the fresh water . they may be divide into three kind , shell , flat , and round fish . of shell fish , there be wrinkle , limpet , cockle , muscle , shrimp , crab , lobster , and oyster . of flat fish , ray , thorn-back , sole , Flowkes , dab , playce . of round fish , Brit , Sprat , bairn , smelt , white , Scad , Chad , shark , cudle , eel , Conger , base , Millet , Whirlepole , and porpose . the general way of kill these ( that be the Fishermans bloody term , for this cold-blouded creature ) be by wear , haking , sayne , tuck , and trammel . the wear be a frith , reach slopewise through the Hosea , from the land to low water mark , and have in it , a bunt or cod with a eye-hooke , where the fish enter , upon their come back with the ebb , be stop from issue out again , forsake by the water , and leave dry on the Ose. for the hake , certain stake be pitch in the Hosea at low water , athwart from creek , from shore to shore , to who foot they fasten a net , and at ful-sea draw the upper part thereof to their stop , that the fish may not retire with the ebb , but be take , as in the wear . the say be a net , of about forty fathom in length , with which they encompass a part of the sea , and draw the same on land by two rope , fasten at his end , together with such fish , as light within his precinct . the tuck carry a like fashion , save that it be narrow meash , and ( therefore scarce lawful ) with a long bunt in the midst : the trammel differ not much from the shape of this bunt , and serve to such use as the wear and hake . [ 31 ] the particular take of sundry kind of fish , be almost as diverse as themselves . wrinkle , limpet , cockle , and muscle , be gather by hand , upon the rock and sand . many of the crab breed in the shell of cockle , and of the lobster in those of wrinkle , as my self have see : be grow , they come forth , and live in hole of rock , from whence , at low water , they be drag out , by a long crook of iron . the shrimp be dip up in shallow water by the shore side , with little round net , fasten to a staff , not much unlike that which be use for dare of lark . the ostyer ( beside gather by hand , at a great ebb ) have a peculiar dredge , which be a thick strong net , fasten to three spill of iron , and draw at the boat stern , gather whatsoever it meet , lie in the bottom of the water , out of which , when it be take up , they cull the oyster , and cast away the residue , which they term guard , and serve as a bed for the oyster to breed in . it be hold , that there be of they male , and female . the female , about may , and June , have in they a certain kind of milk , which they then shed , and whereof the oyster be engender . the little one , at first , cleave in great number , to their mother shell , from whence , wax big , they wean themselves , and towards Michaelmas , fall away . the country people long retain a conceit , that in summer time they wear out of kind ( as indeed the milky be ) but some gentleman make experiment of the contrary , begin to eat they at all season , wherethrough , by spend they often and in great quantity , by spoil the little one , and by cast away the unseasonable , there ensue a scarcity , which scarcity bring a dearth , the dearth breed a spare , and the spare restore a plenty again . they have a property , though take out of the water , to open against the flood time , and to close upon the ebb , or before , if they be touch , the which , not long sithence occasion a ridiculous chance , while one of they through his sudden shut , catch in his own defence , three young mouse by the head , that of malice prepense , have conspire to devour he , and so treble the valour of the cleave block , which grip Milo by the hand . nature have strew the shore with such plenty of these shel-fish , as thereby she warrant the poor from dread of starve : for every day they may gather sufficient to preserve their life , though not to please their appetite , which , ordinary with we , be miraculous to the rocheller in their siege 1572. after shellfish succeed the free-fish , so term , because he want this shelly bulwark . among these , the flowk , sole and plaice follow the tide up into the fresh river , where , at low water , the countri people find they by tread , as they wade to seek they , and so take they up with their hand . they use also to poche they with a instrument somewhat like the sammon-speare . of eel there be two sort : the one Valsen , of best taste , come from the fresh river , when the great rain flood after September do break their bed , and carry they into the sea : the other , breed in the salt water , and call a conger eel , which afterward , as his bigness increase , venter out into the main ocean , and be enfranchise a burgess of that vast common wealth : but in harbour they be take mostly by Spillers make of a cord , [ 32 ] many fathom in length , to which diverse lesser and short be tie at a little distance , and to each of these a hook be fasten with bait : this Spiller they sink in the sea where those fish have their accustom haunt , and the next morning take it up again with the beguile fish . for catch of Whiting and base , they use a thread , so name , because it consist of a long small line with a hook at the end , which the fisherman let slip out of his hand by the boat side to the bottom of the water , and feel the fish catch by the stir of the line , draw it up again with his purchase . the porpoise be shape very big and black . Theise chase the small schoel of fish from the main sea into the haven , leap up and down in the water , tail after top , and one after another , puff like a fat lubber out of breath , and follow the fish with the flood , so long as any depth will serve to bear they ; by which mean they be sometime intercept : for the borderer watch until they be pass far up into some narrow creek , get below they with their boat , and cast a strong cord net athwart the stream , with which , and their loud and continual shout and noise make , they fray and stop they from retire , until the ebb have abandon they to the hunter mercy , who make short work with they , and ( by a old custom ) share they among all the assistant with such indifferency , as if a woman with child be present , the babe in her womb be gratify with a portion : a point also observe by the speare-hunter in take of Sammons . now from within harbour , we will launch out into the deep , and see what luck of fish God there shall send we , which ( so you talk not of hare or such uncouth thing , for that prove as ominous to the fisherman , as the beginning a voyage on the day when Childermas day fall , do to the mariner ) may succeed very profitable : for the coast be plentiful store , both with those foreremember , enlarge to a big size , and diverse other , as namely of shellfish , sea-hedge-hog , scallop and sheath-fish . of fat , bret , turbet , dory , Holybut . round , Pilcherd , herring , Pollock , mackerel , Gurnard , Illeck , tub , Breame , oldwife , Hake , dogfish , lounp , cunner , rockle , cod , wroth , Becket , Haddock , Guilt-head , rough-hound , squary Scad , seal , Tunny , and many other , quos nunc , etc the sheath , or rasor-fish , resemble in length and bigness a man finger , and in taste , the lobster , but repute of great restorative . the sea-hedge-hogge , of like or more goodness , be enclose in a round shell , fashion as a loaf of bread , handsome wrought and pink , and guard by a utter skin full of prickle , as the land urchin . but the least fish in bigness , great for gain , and most in number , be the Pilcherd : they come to take their kind of the fresh ( as the rest ) between harvest and alhallon-tyde , and be wont to pursue the Brit , upon which they feed , into the haven , but be now forestall on the coast by the drover and sayner . the drover hang certain square net athwart the tide , through which the schoell of pilchard pass , leave many behind entangle in the meash . when the net be so fill , the drover take they up , cleanse they , and let they fall again . the sayner complain with open mouth , that [ 33 ] these drover work much prejudice to the commonwealth of fisherman , and reap thereby small gain to themselves ; for ( say they ) the take of some few , break and scatter the whole schoel , and fray they from approach the shore : neither be those thus take , marchantable , by reason of their bruise in the meash . let the crafts-master decide the controversy . the say , be in fashion , like that within harbour , but of a far large proportion . to each of these , there common belong three or four boat , carry about six man apiece : with which , when the season of the year and weather serve , they lie hover upon the coast , and be direct in their work , by a Balker , or Huer , who stand on the cliff side , and from thence , best discern the quantity and course of the Pilcherd : accord whereunto , he cund ( as they call it ) the master of each boat ( who have his eye still fix upon he ) by cry with a loud voice , whistle through his finger , and wheaze cert diversify and significant sign , with a bush , which he hold in his hand . at his appointment they cast out their net , draw it to either hand , as the schoell lie , or fare , beat with their oar to keep in the fish , and at last , either close and tuck it up in the sea , or draw the same on land , with more certain profit , if the ground be not rough of rock . after one company have thus shoot their net , another begin behind they , and so a three , as opportunity serve . be so take , some , the country people , who attend with their horse and panier at the cliff side , in great number , do buy and carry home , the large remainder , be by the merchant , greedy and speedy seize upon . they be save three manner of way : by fume , press , or pickel . for every of which , they be first salt and pile up row by row in square heap on the ground in some cellar , which they term , Bulking , where they so remain for foam ten day , until the superfluous moisture of the blood and salt be soak from they : which accomplish , they rip the bulk , and save the residue of the salt for another like service . than those which be to be venture for France , they pack in staunch hogshead , so to keep they in their pickle . those that serve for the hot country of Spain and Italy , they use at first to fume , by hang they up on long stick one by one , in a house build for the nonce , and there dry they with the smoke of a soft and continual fire , from whence they purchase the name of fumado : but now , though the term still remain , that trade be give over : and after they have be rip out of the bulk , reff upon stick , and wash , they pack they orderly in hogshead make purposely leak , which afterward they press with great weight , to the end the train may soak from they into a vessel place in the ground to receive it . in pack , they keep a just tale of the number that every hogshead contain , which otherwise may turn to the merchant prejudice : for i have hear , that when they be bring to the place of sale , the buyer open one hogshead at adventure ; and if he find the same not to answer the number figure on the outside , he abate a like proportion in every other , as there want in that . the train be well sell , as employ to diverse use , and wellnear acquit the cost in save , and the save set almost a infinite [ 34 ] number of woman and child on work , to their great advantage : for they be allow a penny for every last carriage ( a last be ten thousand ) and as much for bulk , wash , and pack they , whereby a lusty huswife may earn three shilling in a night ; for towards the evening they be mostly kill . this commodity at first carry a very low price , and serve for the inhabitant cheap provision : but of late time , the dear sale beyond the sea have so increase the number of taker , and the taker jar and brawl one with another , and foreclose the fish take their kind within harbour , so decrease the number of the take , as the price daily extend to a high rate , equall the proportion of other fish : a matter which yet i reckon not prejudicial to the commonwealth , see there be store sufficient of other victual , and that of these a twenty part will serve the country need , and the other nineteen pass into foreign realm with a gainful utterance . the sayner profit in this trade be uncertain , as depend upon the sea fortune , which he long attend , and often with a bootless travail : but the pilcherd merchant may reap a speedy , large , and assure benefit , by dispatch the buy , save and sell to the transporter , within little more than three month space . howbeit , diverse of they , snatch at wealth overhastily , take money beforehand , and bind themselves for the same , to deliver Pilcherd ready save to the transporter , at a underrate , and so cut their finger . This vent of Pilcherd enhance great the price of cask , whereon all other sort of wood be convert to that use : and yet this scant supply a remedy , there be a statute make 35. Eliz. that from the last of June 1594. no strange shall transport beyond the sea any pilcherd or other fish in cask , unless he do bring into the realm , for every six ton , two hundred of clapboord fit to make cask , and so rateable , upon pain of forfeit the say Pilcherd or fish . this act to continue before the next parliament , which have revive the same , until his ( yet not know ) succeeder . the Pilcherd be pursue and devour by a big kind of fish , call a Plusher , be somewhat like the dogfish , who leap now and then above water , and therethrough bewray they to the Balker : so be they likewise persecute by the tonny , and he ( though not very often ) take with they damage faisant . and that they may no less in fortune , then in fashion , resemble the fly fish , certain bird call gannet , soar over , and stoop to prey upon they . last , they be persecute by the Hakes , who ( not long sithence ) haunt the coast in great abundance ; but now be deprive of their wont bait , be much diminish , verify the proverb , what we lose in Hake , we shall have in herring . Theise Hakes and diverse of the other fore-recited , be take with thread , and some of they with the bolter , which be a Spiller of a big size . upon the north coast , where want of good harbour deny safe road to the fisherboat , they have a device of two stick fill with cork , and cross flat-long , out of who midst there rise a thread , and at the same hang a sail ; to this engine , term a lestercock , they tie one end of their Boulter , so as the wind come from the shore , fill the sail , and the sail carry out the Boulter into the sea , which after the respite of some hour , be draw in again [ 35 ] by a cord fasten at the near end . they lie also certain weelye in the sea , for take of cunner , which therethrough be term cunner-pot . another net they have long and narrow meash , thwart with little cord of wide distance , in which the fish intangle it self , and be so draw up . for bait they use bairn , Pilcherd , and lugge . the lug be a worm resemble the tagworme or angle-touch , and lie in the Hosea somewhat deep , from whence the woman dig they up , and sell they to the fisherman : they be descry by their work over head , as the tagworme . And , for lack of other provision , the fisherman sometime cut out a piece of the new take Hake , near his tail , and therewith bait their hook , to surprise more of his canniballian fellow . the seal , or soil , be in make and growth , not unlike a pig , ugly face , and foot like a moldwarp ; he delight in music , or any loud noise , and thereby be train to approach near the shore , and to show himself almost whole above water . they also come on land , and lie sleep in hole of the cliff , but be now and then wake with the deadly greeting of a bullet in their side . the fishermen hook do not always return they good prize : for often there cleave to the bait , a certain fish like a star , so far from good meat , as it be hold contagious . there swim also in the sea , a round slimy substance , call a blobber , repute noisome to the fish . but you be tire , the day be spend , and it be high time that i draw to harbour : which good counsel i will follow , when i have only tell you , in what manner the fisherman save the most part of their fish . some be poll ( that be , behead ) gutted , split , powder and dry in the sun , as the lesser sort of Hakes . some head , gutted , jagged , and dry , as ray , and thornbacke . some gutted , split , powder , and dry , as buckhorn make of whiting , ( in the east part name scalpion ) and the small sort of conger , and Hake . some gutted , split , and keep in pickle , as Whiting , mackerel , Millet , base , peall , trout , Sammon , and conger . some , gutted , and keep in pickle , as the lesser whiting , pollock , eel , and squarie scad . some cut in piece , and powder , as seal and porpose . and last , some boil , and preserve fresh in vinegar , as tonny and turbet . beside these float burgess of the ocean , there be also certain fly citizen of the air , which prescribe for a corrodie therein ; of who some serve for food to we , and some but to feed themselves . among the first sort , we reckon the dip-chicke , ( so name of his diuiug , and littleness ) Coots , sanderling , sea-larke , ox and cow , seapy , puffin , pewet , mew , murre , creyser , curlewe , tale , wigeon , burranet , shag , duck and mallard , gull , wild-goose , heron , crane , and Barnacle . Theise content not the stomach , all with a like sauorinesse , but some carry a rank taste , and require a former mortification : and some be good to be eat while they be young , but nothing toothsome , as they grow old . the gull , pewet , and most of the residue , breed in little desert land , border on both coast , lay their egg on the grass , without make any [ 36 ] nest , from whence the owner of the land cause the young one to be fetch about Whitsuntide , for the first brood , and some week after for the second . some one , but not every such rock , may yield yearly towards thirty dozen of gull . they be keep tame , and feed fat , but none of the sea kind will breed out of their natural place : yet at Caryhayes , master treuanion house , which border on the cliff , a old gull do ( with a extraordinary charity ) accustom , for diverse year together , to come and feed the young one ( though perhaps none of his alliance ) in the court where they be keep . it be hold , that the barnacle breed under water on such ship side , as have be very long at sea , hang there by the bill , until his full growth dismiss he to be a perfect foul : and for proof hereof , many little thing like bird , be ordinary find in such place , but i can hear any man speak of have see they ripe . the puffyn hatch in hole of the cliff , who young one be thence ferrete out , be exceed fat , keep salt , and repute for fish , as come near thereto in their taste . the burranet have like breed , and , after her young one be hatch , she lead they sometime overland , the space of a mile or better , into the haven , where such as have leisure to take their pastime , chase they one by one with a boat , and stone , to often dive , until , through weariness , they be take up at the boat side by hand , carry home , and keep tame with the duck : the egg of diverse of these fowl be good to be eat . sea-foul not eatable , be ganet , ospray ( plynyes Haliaeetos . ) among which , iacke-daw ( the second slander of our country ) shall pass for company , as frequent their haunt , though not their diet : i mean not the common daw , but one peculiar to Cornwall , and therethrough term a cornish chough : his bill be sharp , long , and red , his leg of the same colour , his feather black , his condition , when he be keep tame , ungracious , in filch , and hide of money , and such short end , and somewhat dangerous in carry stick of fire . after have march over the land , and wade through the sea , to discover all the creature therein insensible , and sensible , the course of method summoneth i to discourse of the reasonable , to wit , the inhabitant , and to plot down whatsoever , noteworthy , belong to their estate , real , and personal , and to their government , spiritual , and temporal . under their real state , i comprise all that their industry have procure , either for private use , or intercourse , and traffic . in private life , there come into consideration , their tenement , which yield they sustenance , and their house , which afford they a place of abode . every tenement be parcel of the demain , or service of some manner . common thirty acre make a farthing land , nine farthing a cornish acre , and four cornish acre , a knight fee . but this rule be overrule to a great or lesser quantity , accord to the fruitfulness , or barrenness of the soil . that part of the demaine , which appertain to the lord dwell house , they call his Barten , or Berton . the tenant to the rest hold the same either by sufferance , Will , or custom , or by convention . the customary tenant hold at Will , either for year , [ 37 ] or for life , or to they and their heir , in diverse manner accord to the custom of the manor . customary tenant for life , take for one , two , three , or more life , in possession , or reversion , as their custom will bear . somewhere the wife hold by widow estate , and in many place , when the estate be determine by the tenant death , and either to descend to the next in reversion , or to return to the lord , yet will his executor , or administrator detain the land , by the custom , until the next Michaelmas after , which be not altogether destitute of a reasonable pretence . among other of this customary land , there be seventeen manor , appertain to the duchy of Cornwall , who do every seven year , take their hold ( so they term they ) of certain commissioner send for the purpose , and have continue this use , for the best part of three hundred year , through which , they reckon , a kind of inheritable estate accrue unto they . but , this long prescription notwithstanding , a more busy than well occupy person , not long sithence , by get a chequer lease of one or two such tenement , call the whole right in question : and albeit God deny his bad mind any good success , yet another take up this break title , to salve himself of a desperate debt , prosecute the same so far forth , as he bring it to the jutty of a nisi prius . hereon certain gentleman be choose and request by the tenant , to become suitor for stop this gap , before it have make a irremediable breach . they repair to London accord , and prefer a petition to the then lord treasurer Burleigh . his lord call unto he the chancellor , and Coise baron of the exchequer , and take a private hear of the cause . it be there manifest prove before they , that beside this long continuance , and the importance , ( as that which touch the undo of more than a thousand person ) her highness possess no other land , that yield she so large a benefit in rent , fine , heriot , and other perquisites . Theise reason find favourable allowance , but can obtain no thorough discharge , until the gentleman become suppliant to her majesty own person , who , with her native and supernatural bounty , vouchsafe we gracious audience , testify her great dislike of the attempter , and give express order for stay of the attempt : since which time , this bark dog have be muffle . may it please God to award he a utter choke , that he never have power to bite again . herein we be behold to sir Walter ralegh earnest write , ( who be then in the country ) to sir Henry Killigrews sound advice , and to master William Killigrews painful solicit ( be the most kind patron of all his country and countreymens affair at court . ) in time past , and that not long ago , hold be so plentiful , and holder so scarce , as well be the landlord who can get one to be his tenant , and they use to take assurance for the rent by 2. pledge of the same manor . but now the case be alter : for a farm , or ( as we call it ) a bargain can no soon fall in hand , than the survey court shall be wait on with many officer , vie and reuy each on other ; nay they be take mostly at a ground-hop , before they fall , for fear of come too late . and over and above the old yearly rend , they will give a hundred or two hundred [ 38 ] year purchase and upward at that rate , for a fine , to have a estate of three life : which sum common amount to ten , or twelve year just value of the land . as for the old rent , it carry at the most , the proportion but of a ten part , to that whereat the tenement may be present improve , and somewhere much less : so as the parson of the parish can in most place , dispend as much by his tithe , as the lord of the manor by his rent . yet be not this dear let every where alike : for the western half of Cornwall , come far short of the eastern , and the land about town , exceed that lie far in the country . the reason of this enhance price , may prove ( as i guess ) partly , for that the late great trade into both the Indies , have replenish these part of the world with a large store of the coyne-currant metal , than our ancestor enjoy : partly , because the banishment of single-liuing votary , young marriage then of old , and our long freedom from any sore waste war , or plague , have make our country very populous : and partly , in that this populousness have enforce a industry in they , and our bless quietness give scope , and mean to this industry . but howsoever i aim right or wide at this , once certain it be , that for these husbandry matter , the cornish inhabitant be in sundry point sway by a diverse opinion , from those of some other shire . one , that they will rather take bargain , at these excessive fine , than a tolerable improve rent , be in no sort will to over a penny : for they reckon that , but once smart , and this , a continual ache . beside , though the price seem very high , yet mostly , four year tillage , with the husbandman pain and charge , go near to defray it . another , that they fall every where from commons to enclosure , and partake not of some eastern tenant envious disposition , who will soon prejudice their own present thrift , by continue this mingle-mangle , then advance the lord expectant benefit , after their term expire . the three , that they always prefer life before year , as both presume upon the country healthfulness , and also account their family best provide for , when the husband , wife , and child , be sure of a live . neither may i ( without wrong ) conceyle the just commendation of most such wife , in this behalf : namely , when a bargain be so take to these three , it often fall out , that afterward the son marry , and deliver his yeruing-goods ( as they term it ) to his father , who in lieu thereof , by his wife assent ( which in many ancient deed be formal ) depart to he and his daughter in law , with the one half of his hold in hand . now , though after the father decease , the mother may , during her life , turn they both out of door , as not bind by her own word , and much less by her husband : yet i have seldom or never know the same put in practice , but true and just meaning have ever take place . yet another unconscionable quirk some haven of late time pry into , viz. in a ioynt-lease to three intend by the taker and payer , to descend successive and entire , one of they pass over his interest to a stranger , who by rigour of law shall hold it during the life of the other twain . [ 39 ] the ordinary covenant of most conuentionary tenant be , to pay due capon , do harvest journey , grind at the mill , sue to the court , discharge the office of Reeue and tithingman , dwell upon the tenement , and to set out no part thereof to tillage , without the lord licence first obtain . which condition be yet enlarge or restrain , accord to the demisor humour . usual it be for all sort of tenant , upon death , at least , if not surrender , or forfeiture , to pay their best beast for a Heriot : yea , if a stranger , pass through the country , chance to leave his carcase behind he , he also must redeem his burial , by render his best beast , which he have with he , to the lord of the soil : or if he have none , his best jewel ; or rather than fail , his best garment then about he , in lieu thereof . but this custom have be somewhat shake , in come to trial , and labour of a dangerous fever , though the cornish gentleman use all possible remedy of almost fas et nefas , by plead the 11. point of the law , to keep it on live . the free tenant service , be ordinary with those of other place , save that they pay in most place only fee-Morton releese , which be after five mark the whole knight fee , ( so call of John earl first of Morton , then of Cornwall , and last king of this land ) whereas that of fee-Gloucester be five pound . and to accomplish this part , i have here insert a note of the cornish knight fee and acre , which i receive from my learned and religious kinsman master Robert Moyle . record . feod . Milit. in Cornub. fact . anno 3. H. 4. ut sequitur . henricus dei gratia , rex Anglia and francia , and dominus hiberniae , dilectis nobis vicecom . and Escaetori nostris in Com. Cornub. ac Iohanni colshil , and Iohanni tremayn seniori collectoribus auxilij 20. solidorum , de quolibet feod . Milit. tento de nob . fine medio in Com. praedicto ad Blanchiam primogenitam filiam nostram maritand . iuxta formam statuti , anno regni domini edwardi nuper regis angliae , aui nostri 25. edict . assignat salutem . Quasdam euidentias , quas de libris , rotulis and memorand . scaccarii nostri exhiberi fecimus pro information vestra , super caption inquisitionum diuersorum feodorum in Com. praedicto , viz. de rubro libra unam scedulam , and duos rotulos de euidentiis nuper collectoribus auxilii praedicti , auo nostro ad filium suum primogenitum milit . faciend , anno Regni svi 20. concessi vobis mittimus , sub pede sigilli nostri , mandante , ut inspect . evidence . prae . ulterius inde tam per easdem evident . quam per Inquisitiones super praemiss . per vos capiend . pro commodo nostro faciatis , quod de jure per vos videatur faciend : ita quod evidence . prae , una cum toto fac . vestro in premiss . and hoc breve ad Scaccarium nostrum super complot . vestrum proxim . de eodem auxilio redend . baronibus de dictio scaccario nostro ibidem liberandum habeati . testae Iohanne cokayn apud westmonast . 30. die Ianua . anno Regni nostri 3. Rotl . memorum de anno 3. hillar . record . [ 40 ] hundred de Penwith . will , de Campo Arnulphi ten . 7 feod . and di . in Luduon trewedryn , maien and Kelle - meek . will . Basset ten . 1. feod in tihidi and Trenalga . Mich. de Bray ten . 2. part unius feod . in Bray Alanas Bloighon ten 2. feod . in Tremall . haeres Marci de Walestbren ten . 2. part feod . in Veno . Episcop . Exon. ten dimid . feod . in Lauestli . haeres Iocei Dynnan ten . 1. feod . in Gorten . Comes Gloc. ten . 4. part . unius feod . in Drayn - neck . idem . Comes ten . 1. feod . in Couerton . idem . Comes ten . 1. feod . in Binnerton . idem . Comes ten . 5. part . 1. feod . in Loigans . haeres tie ten . dimid . feod . in Alwerton . Marchio Dorset . ten . 4. feod . in Trenwel . hundred de lysnewith . will , de botriaux tenet in isto hundred in Wale breux . 1. feod . idem will . ten . in Polruman di . feod . idem will . ten . in Wolueston 1. feod . idem will . ten . in Tresciward 1. feod . idem will . ten . in Worthauale 1. feod . Reginald de Ferrar in ead . Hund. 7. feod . will , de Witha and Iohan. de Crammon tenent in Trewint and in westdisart 1. feod . idem will . de Campo Arnulphi ten . 1 feod . in heliset . idem will . ten . in Oterham 1. feod . idem will , in Donneghny Crugplegh di . feod . Simon Giffard ten . 1. feo . in Donneghny de la Bruer . Henric. de la pomerey ten . in lesnewith and Treuyghan di . feod . Rogerus de Crammon ten . in Moteland 1. feod . omnia praedicta feod . sunt feod . Mortanne . haeres Iocei Dinan ten . in over rescradeck . and neither rescradeck di . feod . hundred de Stratton . HErbertus de pin ten . in Middeland 3. feod . idem ten . in bear 1. feod . in Devon . idem ten . in Alwington in Devon 2. feod . idem ten . Marwonchurch 1. feod . idem ten . in Pensenteinon , trethewy and westory 2. feod . Comes Gloc. ten . 2. magna feod . in Kilkham land . [ 41 ] Ranulphus de Albo Monasterio tenet in Stratton 1. feod . Thomas de Wamford ten . in Efford 1. feod . Henric. de Killigreu ten . 1. feo . in orchard mar - rise . Johannes de Cobbeham in lancel 1. feod . quod Abbas and conuentus de Hartland tenent in pur . and perpet . elem . idem ten . in Wiston and Serpeknol 1. feod . idem ten . in burgo paruo Ponte knol . and Sunondsham 1. feod . quod Abbas and conu . prae . clam , tenere in pura and perpet . elem . idem ten . 3. part . 1. feod . in Turlebere . idem ten . 1. feod . and 6. part . 1. feod . in Hilton simul cum Ferewil in Devon . Rogerus de Carmmon ten . 1. feod . in Hormecot and Rescher . Rex ten . 1. feod . in bostinne . idem ten . Lamaylwen 1. feod . quod Oliuerus de Cram - mon ten . idem ten . in nantoige 1. feod . di . feod . Iohanna Lengleis ten . i . feod . in wadfaste . Guilielmus de Campo Arnulphi ten . 1. feod . m Pen - nalim . idem ten . 1. feod . and 2. part 1. feod . in Wike . Prior de Lanceston ten . 1 / 4 1. feod . in Borton . Haluethus maliuery ten , di . feo . milit . in Tamerton . omnia praedicta feod . sunt parua feod . prater . 2. feod . in Kilkam land . hundred the east . IOhanna de Rame ten . 1. fe . magnum de Seniock . Nicholaus danne ten . 1. partem feod . dict . feod . de Mortimer in Tregantle de Modeton . idem Nich. ten . 1. magnum feod . de Abbate de ta - uistauk . idem Nich. ten . 1. mag . feod . in Trecan and Trecurnel and Churleton de predict . Abbate . idem Wil. de Bodbrand ten . 2. parua feod . de mor - teynne in penhangle de Trematon . idem will . ten . 1. parum . feod . dict . feod . de Morteynn in Karkeil de Trematon . Rogerus de Tredenick ten . in Tredenick 5. part . 1. parui feod . prout ibid . Rogerus de Ferrar ten . 2. parua feod . dict . feod . de Mortyn in Penpol de Tremerton . idem ten . 1. parum . feod . in Haston de Tremerton . idem ten . 1. parum . feod . in westuenton de tre - merton . idem ten . di . paru . feod . dict . feod . de Mortyn in the - lebridge in la road . idem ten . 3. part , unius paru . feod . in Croketon de Tremerton . [ 42 ] idem Calistock 1. parum . feod . and est in manu regis . idem aqua de Tamar di . feod . in manu reg . de honore de tremeton . idem Rogerus de Inkepenne ten . 2. parum . feo . Mortynn in Halton . Galfrid . de Erth. ten . di . paru . feod . ibid . idem Galfrid . de grove ten . 3. part , unius di . feod . paru . de Mortyn ibid . idem Nic. de Merton ten . 1. parum . feod . Mortyn in treualuare and in trekinward . will . de Botriaux ten . di . paru . feod . de Mortyn in penhele de rege . Thomas lercedekne ten . 4. part . 1. feod . paru . in Treu - ris de rege . Baro de Stafford ten . di . feod . paru . dict . feod . de Mortyn de rege in kallilond . Episcop . Exon. ten . 1. mag . feod . Gloce. de rege . Ric. de Trenaga tenet ibid . paru . feod . de Willi . Botriaux . Regin . de Beuil ten . ibid . paru . feod . in Tredawil de Wil. de botriaux . idem prio de minstre ten . 1. parum . feod . mort in polisant . idem Nic. Danne ten . 3. part . 1. feod . paru . dict . feod . de Mor. in Legh . hundred the west . CArdynan Penlyn ten . pro dvobus feod . paru . dict . feod . de Morteyn in custodia regis . Ric. de Serifeaux ten . 3. parum . feod . de mort in Laurethon , kilgather and Lansalwys . will . de Bodrigan ten . parum . feod . in Trethim bes - sant . Manerium de liskerd est di . paru . feod . mort and est in manu reg . Tho. de Cruptus ten . 2. parum . feod . in cruph and caruaton . Matheus de Trethake ten . 2. par . feod . Mo. in tree - thake , lamlewarn , trelewarn and denant . Mathilda de Hewisch ten . di . part . feo . in meue . Ioh. de Wellington and Reg. querquius ten . 5. part . 1. feod . in Fawyton . hundred de Trigger . rob . Thomy ten . di . feod . in Bliston dict . feod . Mortyn . idem Nico. de Bindon ten . in Penrosburdon di . feod . mort Rob. de Cheyndut ten . in Bodannan 4. part . 1. feo . mort Ioh. filius Wil. te . in kinnarght 4. par . 1. feo . Mor. [ 43 ] idem ten . in Tregradeck , 4. part . 1. feod . Mor. henricus camel ten . in Belionnus , 1. feod . Mor. Polroda . Robert . de Brunn ten . in Delisonbol 1. feod . mort Matheus and Agnes de Trehauk ten . in trehome di . feod . mort Robertus Giffard te . in Lannomunnus di . fe . Mor. Robertus de Helligan ten . ibi . 2. feo . dict . fe . mort Johannes de Tinten ten . in tynten and in Trewinneck 1. feod . mort Ioh. de seneschal te . in Helland , 4. part . 1. fe . mort haeres de Walesbren ten . in Lamailwen 4. part . 1. feod . mort Ric. de rescarreck ten . in Rescarretunus 4. part . fe . mort Dom. de Lancarsse ten . ib . 5. part . 1. feo . di . fe . mort Dom. de Portguin ten . ib . di . feod . mort Silvester de Tregamuran ten . in Tregonen 1. feod . magnum . Johannes Darundle ten . in Treawset , and in Trenbeith 1. feod . mort Episcop . Exon. ten . in eglosel 1. feod . mag . Ioh. Tracy and Hugo Peuerel tenent in tremscord and hamatethy , 2. feod . mort Ricard . de Serifeaux ten . in kilkoid 2. feod , and di . mort Johannes de Guillez ten . in Trenderet . 1. feo . Mor. Barth , de Cant. ten . ibid . di . feod . mort Ioh. fill . will . ten . in haumal di . feod . Alanus Blughon ten . in Polrodon Donnat 2. feo . mort hundred the pider . IOhannes de Vinfrauil ten . ratione Aliciae uxoris fuae , 1. mag . feod . in Laherne . Ric. de Hiuoisch ten . ibid . mag . feod . in saint Idy . Rosamunda de la forest ten . ibid . mag . feod . in tree - ueald . Bartholomeus de bercle tenet dimid . mag . feod . in tree - woleck . Johannes de tregage tenet dimid . mag . feod . in tree - nurdre . Episcop . Exon. te . 5. part . mag . feod . in Dinbegh . Rad. de Berthei ten . ibid . 1. parum . feod . Henric. tie te . 4. part . mag . feod . in trewarnayl . item rex ten . 4. part . 1. mag . feod . in trewarnayl . Ela the sanct . Colano ten . ibid . di . paru . feo . mort Ric. the sanct . Colano ten . ratione Isoldae vxo . eius ibid . di . paru . feod . mort Rob. Thomy ten . in Caruaton 4. part . 1. parum . feod . Barth . de Berckle te . in Tremor , di . paru . feo . Ioh. Darundle ten . di . paru , feod . in Treloy . Johannes Hamelyn te . di . paru . feod . in Trekinnen , Rad. Darundle te . di . paru . feo . in Trekinnen . [ 44 ] regin . de Botriaux ten . 5. part . paru . feod . in cut - fordferle . hundred the powder . will . de Campo Arnulphi ten . in Tiwardraith 1. feo . unde prio ten . 3. acr . and di . ibi . idem will . ten . in Bodrigan Penarth and Cargois 3. feod . idem will . ten . in gouely 1. feod . idem will . ten . in prideas 1. feod . idem will . ten . in lishiestick 1. feod . idem will . ten . in Treuerlynwater di . feod . idem will . ten . in Bodenda 4. part . 1. feod . idem will . ten , in Treuerbindren 5. par . i . feod . idem will . ten . in Tronneck 5. part . 1. feod . idem will . ten . in tronalgerthan 4. part . 1. feod . Episcop . Exon. ten . in Caniwerez 1. feod . idem Episcop . ten . in Trenel 1. feod . idem Episcop . ten . in Taluren 1. feod . idem ten . in Fentengullyn di . feod . idem ten . in Tremnel di . feod . idem ten . in Trelonck . di . feod . Henr. de la pomeray ten . 3. part . 1. feo . in Hellarna . Ioh. de Riparys ten . in mauntayn di . feod . idem ten . in Trethak 1. feod . Steph. de Belloprato ten . in treuewith and Trewithy di . feod . paru . Serlo de lauladro ten . ibid . and in saint Goriann and in paru . Luntyan 1. feod . and di . paru . Rad. de Killigreu ten . ibid . 1. feod . paru . will , de Bodrigan ten . in tremodret and in la roche 3. feod . paru . Serlo de lauladro ten . in Alet 3. part . 1. feod . will . Stanley and come the river ten . 1. feod . mili . Mo. in Elerky . haeres Iocei Dynnan ten . in eglosroset in trelewith 1. feod . will . Baillisbury vaca . vxo . fuae ten . in blanchelond 1. feod . Henr. fill . Maugi de Killigreu ten . in Trewyn 3. part . 1. feod . Ric. de Hiwisch ten . in trenasanstel di . feod . idem ten . in gloure 1. feod . haeres Iocei Dynnan ten . in argallez 1. feod . paru . idem ten . in Fountomon 3. part . 1. feod . paru . haeres Thomas de prideas ten . in boswyghergy 2. part . 1 . feod . paru . Mat de Trethake ten . in Tragameddon 2. feo . par . Rex . ten . aquam de far pro 2. feod . and 3. part , 1 . feo . Henricus de la pomerey ten . 12. feod . in Tregony . hundred the kery . WAlter . Wailisbury and Isolda vxor eius te . 3. feod . in rescronge dicta feod . Mortan . [ 45 ] Iohannis de Riparys te . in rosewike 1. feo . mort Episcop . Exon. ten di . mag . feod . in minstre . Rogerus de Carminon ten . 20. part . 1. feo . mort extra 10. part . illius 20 , in Wynnenton , Marthyn and ta - merton . Thomas Durant ten . in Penzenguans , 1. fe . mort Johannes fill . will . ten . di . feod . in arworthel per car - tam edwardi quondam Com. Cornub. dict . feod . Mor. euidentiae extractae de rubro libra de scaccario , 143. Cornub. RObertus de Cardinan 71. feod . milit . Reginaldus de Valle torta 59 de honore de tre - meton . Thomas de Middleton 10. de honore de Midd. will . de botterill 12. milit . Robertus fill . Walteri 11. milit . de feod . Ric. de Lusti auunculi svi . Robertus de Peuerel 9 milit . de feod . eiusdem . Ric. fill . Ric. 1. feod . and 3. part , cum heir de Rupe . Rad. Bloyon 7. arehennaund . Flandrensis 7. milit . Robertus de Tintagle 5. milit . Henricus fill . will . 4. milit . Wil. de Albemarle 5. milit . cum relict , Robert . de Bikehat . Radulphus de Treat . 1. milit . Ric. Wallensis 2. milit . Wil. de Bosfco Roardi 2. milit . Johannes de monte acuto . Henricus de pomeray . Henricus de Herys 1. Pharanus Warebras 1. milit . Barth . fill . 1. milit . Gilbertus Anglicus 1. milit . Simon Pincerna 1. Ric. filius iuonis 1. Ric. Buzon . 1. Henricus fill . Com. 1. Huardus de bekelege 1. walterius de Dunstan vil . 1. milit . Hastul de Sullinge 4. part . Robertus de Mandeuil 1. milit . Alicia de valletorta 1. milit . seriante . PEtrus fill . Ogeri 40. Cabulion per unam Capam de gresenge in aduentum dict . Regis in cornu - biam . Rogerus cithare 5. pro portanda illa capa dum rex fuerit in cornubia . [ 46 ] Iohan. de pencoit unam acram in Lametyn prec . de 5 . s . fac . ibid , custodiam per 40. die . Rog. de Bodmel 1. acram pro sequela in Com. Rob. Espiakelin duas acras and furuum in Lanceneton , ut eat in exercitum cum rege stipendiis ipsius regis . extenta acrarum Cornub. facta coram Salome . de Ross. and Sociis n'est justice . itinerant , apud Laun - ceston a die Paschae in 3 . septimanas anno Reg. Edw. 12. hundred de penwith . decunar . de tihidi . 70. lanistly 28. Acr. redwory 14. acras . Alwarton . 64. Couerton . 45. Trefruss . 3. treruffe . 1. Marchel . 23. Dreyneck . 5. Trefundryn . 20. Bennerton . 45. Maen . 15. Gurlyn . 15. Bree . 8. Loygans . 9 Kelyneck . 24. Tenent de Tregony . 9 Warewil . 25. Penuerthy . 8. Tredyne . 1. Vthno . 8. Trewannard . Prior Mich. 8. kelision . 6. Treynwal . 20. Tredeny . 3. luddeuan . 55. Sum. 532. Acr. hundred the kery Talgollon . 6. carmynow . 18. Pensignans . 6. Wymanton . 12. Kenel 1. di . Trebrabo . 24. Arwothel . 9 S. Mawgan . 9 restrongas . 21. Helston . 30. Penryn . 21. Methele . 15. Treros . 6. Trenhale . 6. Minster . 12. Godolghan 13. also . Epo . 9 trewotheck . 6. pengirsick , 6. trenaw . 9 Rogearon . 9 Trelan . 9 Wenna . 9 rosewike . 30. Trelew . 9 also . 1. Ac. Exo. lysard . 12. Presprinick . 6. Tredaneck . 6. Trelybey . 9 tucay . 6. Luceas 31. also . 31. Ac. Ex. Clehar . 6. Sum. 397. Acr. and dimid . hundred the pider . Deci . de naushike pro . 6. Trewenneck . 3. Kalestek . 4. Trewoleck . 9 elineas . 24. Bodwenek . 9 dygimbris . 39 Rialton parua . 57 Treloy . 9 Trenowith . 3. [ 47 ] s. ify . 14. treworder Bilcon . 12. Lanheyl Tinten . 18. Meddeschole . 9 Methean . 2. S. Peran . 3. trewarnayl . 51. Eliquyn . 6. Carantock . 18. cargoule . 39 Ryalton . 18. porthe . 9 Lanhernow . 18. Carnaton . 14. Pawton . 120. Tregennow . 9 Aldennow . 21. tremblithe . 4. Lantallen . 4. gluuian . 3. Tremore . 6. Withiel . 15. Banhedrek . 9 Ryalton magna . 57 Retergh . 9 Cotford fall . 15. Trewynnian . 3. Berthey . 24. meyndy . 6. Cragantallen . 3. Sum. 700. Acr. hundred the powder . Decuna de tregaire . 93. Treworeck and true . 24. Ind alloc . 20. Ac. pro . do . Tremodreth . 18. Devon . treueruen and Poldu . 15. Blanchelond . 11. Eglosros . 3. Argallas . 6. crogith and Caryheges . 9 Trenoweth . 9 trevanion . 6. Kestel and Coran . 6. Lanhaddron . 4. trelueck . 1. Boderdel . 20. trelewith . 6. Brithion . 8. Tewynton . 33. Lanestek . 6. Tregony Pomeray . 32. Elerky . 42. tredaek . 20. Werneckbosueleck . 4. gouily . 9 Cargoul . 8. Pennarth . 9 Tretherf . 3. Trenyeck and golour . 7. di . Pentewyn . 3. trethewy . 6. S. goron . 6. Boswiththe . 20. Beranel . 36. Trenance priour . 12. Trenananstle . 8. Killiuregh . 2. tregarreck . 14. landegy . 9 Maresk 36. pro reg . all - Tregamedon . 6. loc . 2. Alet . 12. Bodrugan . 9 Berthey Brune . 3. Treualgarthyn . 3. growth and trewithgy . 30. Lauada . 1. Treworeck . 9 Pridiaux . 12. Tybest and Penkeuel . 42. Tywascreth . 36. Treueruyn . 3. Pensentimow . 6. Nantyan . 36. Kenewyn . 1. Sum. 573. Acr. and dimid . hundred de Trigg . egloshayl . 7. di . Lannousun . 18. penpout . 21. bendeuy . 36. [ 48 ] Namail . 3. roscarreck Bighan . 3. Hundr . de Trig. 9 Tregradeck . 16. Trelindret . 1. di . Lancarff . 6. Tinten . 12. Pentir . 1. di . Trenesquit . 18. Trewornar . 18. Peterow . 6. Penrosburdon . 12. Boddannan . 27. killigint . 18. Deliodbol . 6. Tridiseck . 18. Bliston . 33. Heligan . 9 Canta . 1. di . Reskarrekam . 9 Broneyr . 2. Linnoban . 66. Rugog . 9 Bodymel . 12. delioner . 9 Trehaneck . 6. Polroda . 15. hellaund . 6. Killigen . 9 Tamitethy . 12. Portligwyn . 1. di . lanowseynt . i8 . Sum. 473. and dimid . hundred de lesnewith . Hellesland . 57 cydmonth . 7. Treualga . 18. Powndstock . 9 Treuilla . 3. Donneny . 18. Cracampton . 12. treseward . 7. di . dysard . 6. Bochym . 21. Wolueston . 9 Boleny . 8. Treglasta . 35. Ebsett . 21. Mokelound . 8. S. Genys . 10. treueru . 9 Whalsborow . 8. Wortheual . 29. Otterham . 12. lesnewith . 24. tremayl . 6. Sum. 337. and dimid . hundred de Stratton . Decena de Middeland . marwyn-church and extra . 2 . 68 di . launceles . 20. Loghe . 2. Thurlebere . 12. Corg . 1. weke . 15. Fanceston . 8. wadfast . 17. Pennalym . 17. Wyldsworthy . 4. Efford . 21. Tamerton . 8. bear . 3. Harnacot . 9 di . Hilton . 20. Morton . 2. Forkeston and Brendon . 4. Kilkampton and Allerton . Witston and S. Petnel . 2. 68 Boyton and Bradbridge . 9 Stratton . 21. dimid . Bryard . 5. Sum. 341. Acr. and dimid . [ 49 ] hundred de east . penheal . 36. landreyn . 3. item ibid . 1. Clemyslond . 50. Tredawel . 13. Halton . 18. Trelosk . 14. Newton . 16. Tauestok . 27. Trematon . 80. Modeton . 9 Lanrake . 100 Cauilond . 44. Sheuiek . 100 Launcelond . 50. Tregilla . 12. polisaund 6. Penquite . 11. Trefrys . 18. Carnedon . 8. Lawytton . 80. Rame . 20. Haston . 7. bennalua . 20. Landilp and leghe . 14. Penhasgar . 26. Killaton . 20. Thorleton . 5. Treuaga . 13. Cranydon . 24. Trenymel . 12. Buysworek . 10. Penpol . 24. S. Germyn . 37. Treuartha . 3. Hamet . 7. Sum. 927. hundred the west . Cardinan . 24. Treuellawan . 15. Breuigon . 6. Lanrethow . 12. Estdraynez . 6. S. wynow . 4. dimid . Tremethert . 24. Bocunek . 12. Recradock . 9 Treuilias . 3. Lutcot . 24. Trethu . 6. Pendryn . 6. S. wot . 3. killigath . 9 Perpol . 24. plenynt . 9 losnewith . 6. Manely . 12. trethewy . 3. Polscoth . 1. dimid . Penquite . 9 Botylet . 9 Boccalawar . 6. Killigoreck . 9 Tallan . 6. Baurylen and hamit . 3. Trethek . 6. dimid . Fowyton . 30. Langonet . 6. Treueruyn . 6. Rathwil . 1. dimid , west Draynez . 6. Brothok . 3. laskerd . 18. Penfran . 9 crutour . 9 Colmettyn . 6. Trelowya . 6. Kelly and Mighstow . 3. trenant . 6. sum 353. Sum. tot . 5555. dimid . Acr. [ 50 ] nomina baron . and militum ex rotulis de feodis militum , vel de scutagio solutis regi Richardo primo : in libro rubeo scaccarii . Cornubia . WAlterus hay 20. m. per Agn. vxorem svam . Nicholaus filius galfridi 10. m. Willi . boterell . 12. m. Alanus Blundus 7. m. Geruasius filius Willi . 5. m. Willi . frater comitis 4. m. Willi . filius Ric. 5. m. Rad. de Rupe 3. m. Willi . Oliver . 1. m. henricus de Tredeleberg . 1. m. richardus filius iuo . dim . m. Johannes de Soleigny . Stephanus Flandrensis . 7. m. Alanus de Dunstauill . 1. m. Rogerus Anglicus . 1. m. Regium de valletorta 51. m. secundum quod Lucas filius Bernardi Senescallus euis mandauit per littera baron . de Scaccar . in anno sexto regis richardi . Robertus de Cardin . 71. m. secundum quod Senescallus eiusdem mandauit baron . eodem anno 6. R. 1. Galfridus de Lacell . qui habet m . feod . q . fuerunt Richard , de Lucy in hoc Com. 9 m. sicut Ric. filius Willi . Senescallus eius mandauit per breve , anno regni regis richardi octavo . Cornubia anno 40. Henr. tertii . lllustri viro , domino Henrico , dei gratia , regi angliae , domino hiberniae , dust Nor. Aquitan . and Com. Andeg . vicecome cornubiae , salutem , cum omni reve - rentia and obsequio . ad mandatum vestrum , nomina illorum qui ten . quindecem libratas terrae vel plus , and tenent per seruitium militare , and milite non sunt , excellentiae vestrae praesentibus transmitto , vide - licet . THomas de Tracy , cvius terrae in cornubia valent 40. libra and plus . Rogerus de Mesy . 16. livre . Stephanus de Bellocampo . 15. livre . Henr. filius Henr. de la pombre . 30. livre . Robertus de Carmeneu . 16. livre . Willi . filius Roberti . 15. livre . Marc le flamanc . 16. livre . [ 51 ] Willi . wise . 16. livre . Iordanus de Hacumb . 14. livre . Robertas de Draenas . I5 . li . Philippus de valletorta . 40. livre . Richard . de Grenuile . 50. livre . Henricus de Dones . 15. livre . nomina militum , and aliorum hominum ad arma , anno Regni regis Edw. filii regis Edw 17. IOhannes de Treiagu vicecome . nomina militum de Com. cornubiae , tam infra libertates quam extra . WIlli . de botriaux . Reginaldus de botriaux . Rad. de Albo Monasterio , Richard . de Campo Arnulphi . Henricus de Campo Arnulphi . le Petit. THomas lercedekne est in Vascoma in sericium regis . Johannes de Alneto . Johannes de Tynten . Willi . de Ferrer . Robertus Bendyn . Reginaldus de Mohun . Robertus filius Willi . impotens mile coronator domini regis . Johannes de Carmenou . Otto de Bodrugan peregrinatus est ad San. iacobum li - centia domini regis . nomina hominum ad arma in Com. cornubiae . IOhannes de Dynham . Rad. de bloyen . Willi . Basset . Oliuerus the carminou . Henricus de Peng . Rogerus de Reskymmer . Johannes de Lambron . Johannes le scor . de Taluran . [ 52 ] richardus de Cerefeaux junior . Johannes de Pyn. Rogerus Pridyas . Rad. de bello Prato , peregrinatus est cum Ottone de Bodrugan , cum licentia regis pro se and dvobus va - lectis . Isti praenominati habent 40. libr . terrae and redditus per annum . alii multi Armigeri desunt , nomina eorum dilace - rata , non possunt legi in originali . EDwardus dei gratia , rex angliae , dominus hiberniae , and Dux aquit . vicecomiti Cornub. salutem . cum nuper tibi praeceperimus , quod omnes and singulos de balliua tua in - from libertate and extra , tam illos qui viginti libratas terrae and redditus per annum habent , quam illos similiter qui plus habent , de quocunq ; teneant sine delatione rogare , and speci - aliter requirere ex parte nostra , fermiterq , iniungentes eis - dem , quoth essent add nos Londini die dominica prox . post octa - vas Sci. Iohannis Bapt. proximo futuras , cum equis and be - mis , videlicet , quilibet eorum prout decuerit statum suum , parati transfretare cum corpore nostro , part transmarina , ad dei nostri and ipsorum honorem , ut speramus , and pro sal - uatione and communi utilitate regni nostri , tibi praecipimus , firmiter iniungentes , quod mandato nostro praedicto diligenter and celeriter executo , nos de nominibus omnium illorum de balliua tua quos sit rogaueris ad dictam diem dominie . this - tincte and aperte , sub sigillo tuo certiores reddere non omitta : remittens nobis tunc hoc breve . testae meipso apud Portes - mouth , 24. die Maii , anno regni nostri vicesimo quinto . nomina eorum qui habent viginti libratas terrae , seu redditus vel amplius , in Com. cornubiae . dominus Oliuerus de Denham . dominus Willi . de Boteraus senior . dominus Willi . de Boteraus maior . dominus Willi . de Campo Arnulphi . dominus Thomas de can . dominus Stepha . de bello Prato . dominus Rogerus the carminou . dominus Thomas de Pridias . dominus Hugo peuerell . dominus Johannes de Lambron . dominus Rad. Bloyhon . dominus Johannes filius Willi . dominus Osbertus le Sor. dominus Robertus Gifford . dominus richardus de huwyse . dominus Reg. de Beuill . dominus richardus de Reskymer , dominus henricus de la pomerey . dominus Petrus de Fysac . dominus Roulandus de Quoykyn . dominus richardus de greneuyle . dominus Walterus de cornubia . [ 53 ] dominus Reginaldus de Botreaus . Thomas le Erchideakene . Serlo de Lansladeron . Walterus de Trem. Steph. de Trewythen . Odo de la Roche . Willi . deal estre . Rad. filius Oliueri de Arundel . Willi . de Bret. Mich. le Petit. Johannes de Kellerion . Henricus de Kymyell . Johannes de Arundel . Rogerus le Fleming . richardus le Ceariseus . Johannes de Tynton . Rad. de Cheyndut . Robertus le Brun. Stephanus de Trewynt . Robertus filius Willi . Thomas de Waunford . Rogerus Cola. Rogerus de Meules . Johannes de kylgat . richardus de trenaga . Philip . de San. Wynnoko , Johannes de thurlebere . now to weave on our former web . the ancient manner of cornish building , be to plant their house low , to lay the stone with mortar of lime and sand , to make the wall thick , their window arch and little , and their light inward to the court , to set hearth in the midst of the room , for chimney , which vent the smoke at a lover in the top , to cover their planching with earth , to frame the room not to exceed two story , and the roof to rise in length above proportion , and to be pack thick with timber , seek therethrough only strength and warmness ; whereas nowadays , they seat their dwelling high , build their wall thin , lay they with earthen mortar , raise they to three or four stoary , mould their light large , and outward , and their roof square and slight , covet chief prospect and pleasure . as for glass and plaster for private man house , they be of late year introduction . the poor cottager content himself with Cob for his wall , and thatch for his cover : as for brick and lath wall , they can hardly brook the cornish weather : and the use thereof be put in trial by some , be find so profitable , as it be not continue by any . it rest , that after the cornish inhabitant real private estate , i speak of their intercourse and traffic , and so step forth to their personal . this intercourse be obtain by high way and bridge : for highway , the roman do not extend they so far : but those lay out of late time , be in the eastern part of Cornwall , uneasy , by reason either of their mire or stone , beside many vp-hil and downe-hil . [ 54 ] the western be better trauaileable , as less subject to these discommodity : general , the statute 18. Eliz. for their amendment , be reasonable well execute . Bridges , the river tame have Polston , Gresham , horse , and new bridge . Lyner , that at noddetor , Seton , and loo , two bridge of the same name . Foy river , Reprin , Lostwithiel , saint Nighton , or Niot . Fala river , grampord , Tregny . loo river , Helston . on the north coast , upon camel , wade , Dilland and Helland . upon Devon , trywartheuy , etc for they be worth not curious enquiry . for maintenance of traffic by buy and sell , there be weekly market keep : in the hundred of east , at Saltash , Launceston , and Milbrook . in west H. at loo , and liskerd . in Stratton H. at the town of the same name . in lesnewith H. at Bottreaux castle , and Camelford . in powder H. at Foy , Lostwithiel , grampord , Tregny , and Truro . in trig H. at Bodmin . in Kerier Hun . at Helston , and Perin . and in penwith hundred , at pensant , and at saint Ies. of these , Bodmyn and Launceston be the great : this as place in the broad , that in the middle part of the county . fair there be many , some of which here ensue . march 13. at Bodmyn , Helston , saint Michael mount . April 24. at loo . 25. at saint columb , saint Probus . May 1. at Launceston , Perin . June 11. at minhinet , 24. at Launceston , pelint , Probus , Colombs July , on saint Marget day , at saint Stephens . S. Thomas transl , at Camelford . on saint Iames day , at Golsinni , Saltash . August 1. at saint german . on saint Laurence day , at saint Laurence . on the assumption of our lady , at lalant , September , on saint Mathews day , at liskerd , on saint bartholmew , at Lostwithiel , on the nativity of our lady , at Kellington , S. marie week , and Marcasiow . October , on saint dionise day , at Treuenna in Tintagel , November , on saint katherins day , at saint Thomas . on saint Leonards day , at Launceston and Tregny . December , on saint Nicholas day , at Bodmyn . and because traffic can be exercise without weight and measure , a word or two of they . touch weight , the statute 12. H. 7. which make a general ordinance therein , do special exempt those appertain to the cunnage , in Devon and Cornwall , viz. that they shall be privilege to continue their former usage . in measure the shire vari , not only from other , but also in it self : for they have a land-measure , and a water-measure : the water-measure , of thing sell at the ship side ( as salt and peason ) by the inhabitant , be sixteen gallon the bushel ; by stranger , between 18. and 24. the land-measure differ in diverse place , from 18. to 24. gallon the bushel , be least in the east part , and increase to the westwards , where they measure oat by the hogshead . the justice of peace have oftentimes endeavour to reduce this variance to a certainty of double Winchester : but though they raise the low , they can abate the high to this proportion : and yet from the want of this reformation , there ensue many inconvenience ; for the farmer that have the great bushel at the market , make a price for the lesser to follow with little , ( or at least ) no rateable deduction . beside , they sell at home to their neighbour , the [ 55 ] rest of the week , by the small meafure , as be pay in the market for the big . there be also some ingrosser , who buy wheat of the husbandman , after 18. gallon the bushel , and deliver it to the transport merchant , for the same sum , at 16. So do their perch exceed that of other country , which amount unto 18. foot . and it be likewise observe by stranger , that the cornish mile be much long than those about London , if at least the weariness of their body ( after so painful a journey ) blemish not the conjecture of their mind . i can impute this general enlargement of saleable thing , to no cause soon , than the cornish man want of vent and money , who therethrough , to equal other in quality of price , be drive to exceed they in quantity of measure . touch the personal estate of the cornish inhabitant , to begin with their name in general , i learn by master Camden ( who , as the arch-antiquarie Iustus Lipsius testify of he , britanniae nebulas claro ingenij sole illustrauit ) that Ptolomey call they damnonii , Strabo Ostidamnii , and Aretemidorus , Cossini . touch their particular denomination ; where the saxon have not intrude their new usance , they partake in some sort with their kinsman the welsh : for as the Welshman catalogize ap rice , ap Griffin , ap Owen , ap Tuder , ap Lewellin , etc until they end in the high of the stock , who their memory can reach unto : so the western cornish , by alike , but more compendious manner , entitle one another with his own and his father christen name , and conclude with the place of his dwell ; as John , the son of Thomas , dwell at Pendaruis , be call John Thomas Pendaruis . Richard his young brother be name , Richard Thomas Pendaruis , etc through which mean , diverse gentleman and other have change their name , by remove their dwelling , as trengoue to Nance , Bonithon , to Carclew , two brethren of the thomass , the one to carnsew , the other to rescrowe , and many other . most of they begin with three , pol , or pen , which signify a town , a top , and a head : whence grow the common byeword . by three , pol , and pen , you shall know the Cornishmen . neither do they want some signification , as Godolfin , alias Godolghan , a white eagle : Chiwarton , the green castle on the hill : which gentleman give such arm ; Reskimer , the great dog race , who bear a wolf passant . carnsew , alias , carndew , a black rock : he house Bokelly , which sound the lose goat : and a goat he bear for his coat : Carminow , a little city : Cosowarth , the high grove , etc and as the cornish name hold a affinity with the welsh , so be their language deduce from the same source , and differ only in the dialect . but the cornish be more easy to be pronounce , and not so unpleasing in sound , with throat letter , as the welsh . a friend of i , one master Thomas Williams , discourse once with i , that the cornish tongue be derive from , or at least have some acquaintance with the greek : and beside diverse reason which he produce to prove the same , he vouch many word of one sense in both ; as for example : [ 56 ] greek cornish English Teino Tedna draw Mamma Mamm mother Episcopos escoppe bishop Klyo Klowo here didaskein dathisky to teach Kyon kye dog Kentron Kentron spur Methyo Methow drink Scaphe scapth boat Ronchos Ronche snort , etc this language be store with sufficient plenty to express the conceit of a good wit , both in prose and rhyme : yet they can no more give a cornish word for tie , than the greek for Ineptus , the french for stand , the english for Emulus , or the irish for knave . other they have not pass two or three natural , but be fain to borrow of the english : mary , this want be releeuve with a flood of most bitter curse , and spiteful nickname . they place the adjective after the substantive , like the grecian and Latines , as father we , march guiddn , horse white , etc 1 2 3 4 in number they say , wonnen , dew , three , Pidder , 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 pimp , whey , zith , eath , naw , Deag , Ednack , Dowthack , 13 14 15 16 17 18 Tarnack , Puzwarthack , Punthack , Wheytack , Zitack , Itack , 19 20 40 100 1000 10000 Naunzack , Eygganz , dew Egganz , cans , mille , Molla . Durdatha why , be good morrow to you . Trenestatha , good night . Fatlugan a why : how do you ? dam durdalathawhy : well i thank you . Betha why Iawanneck : be you merry . Benetugana : farewell . a sister , they call whore : a whore , whorra : a priest , coggaz : a partridge , grigear : a mare , cazock . Relauta : by my troth . Warrasay : by my faith . Molla tuenda laaz , ten thousand mischief in thy gut . Mille vengeance warna thy , a thousand vengeance take thou . Pedn joll , devil head : Pedn brauze , great head : pedn mowzack , stink head : and so in infinitum . which term , notwithstanding though they witness their spite on the one side , yet retain they as great a proof of their devotion on the other : for the lord prayer , the apostle creed , and the ten commandment , have be use in Cornish beyond all remembrance . but the principal love and knowledge of this language , live in doctor Kennall the civilian , and with he lie bury : for the english speech do still encroach upon it , and have drive the same into the uttermost skirt of the shire . most of the inhabitant can no word of Cornish ; but very few be ignorant of the english : and yet some so affect their own , as to a stranger they will not speak it : for if meeting they by chance , you inquire the way or any such matter , your answer shall be , meea nauidua cowzasawzneck , i can speak no saxonage . the english which they speak , be good and pure , as receive it from the best hand of their own gentry , and the eastern merchant : but they disgrace it , in part , with a broad and rude accent , and eclipse ( somewhat like the Somersetshire man ) special in pronounce the name : as Thomas they call , Tummas and Tubby : Matthew , Mathaw : Nicholas , Nichlaaz : Reginald , Reinol : David , daaui : mary , Maari : Francis , [ 57 ] Frowncis : Iames , Iammez : Walter , Watty : Robert , dobby : Ralph , raw : Clemence , Clemmcowe , etc hold herein a contrary course of extension to the italian abridgement , who term Francis , Cecco : Dominick , beco : Laurence , Renzo : as also to the turk , who name Constantinople , Stampoli : Adrianople , Adrina : a Olifant , fill : and the sicilian , who curtail Nicholas , to Cola. beside these , they have take up certain peculiar phrase , which require a special dictionary for their interpretation : of which kind be , it|be not ' bezibd it ( fortune ) to i : thou have not ' road ' ( aim ) , he will never ' scrip ' ( escape ) it , he be nothing ' pridy ' ( handsome ) , ' boobish ' ( lubberly ) , ' dule ' ( comfort ) , ' lidden it ( byeword ) , ' shun ' ( strange ) , ' thew ' ( threaten ) , ' skew ' ( shun ) , ' hose ' ( forbear ) . to reprove one of laziness , they will say , do thou make idle a coat ? that be , a coat for idleness ? in conjecture what number may effect a thing , they add , or same : as two , or some : ten , or some : twenty , or some : id est , thereabouts . the other rude term , wherewith Devon and Cornish man be often twyte , may plead in their defence , not only the prescription of antiquity , but also the title of propriety , and the benefit of significancy : for most of they take their source from the saxon , our natural language , and continue in use among the dutch : as Nimme come of nimpt : vang , of fieng : the one import a take by one self : the other by delivery : both which we now confound . Ich to ick , cund to Cundigen , lade , to Geladen : erue good , to erbnuss . So thwyte , be proper the cut of little chip from a stick . Pilme , the dust which rise : brusse , that which lie : which term , as they express our meaning more direct , so they want but another Spencer , to make they passable . the number of cornish inhabitant , though it can direct be sum , may yet proportionable be guess at by the muster take of the able man ( hereafter set down ) which we will value at a three part of the whole , in ensue Bodins rate . but another question fall sometime into scan , namely , whether Cornwall have heretofore be better store with people , than it be now . some hold the affirmative , and vouch to prove it , the general decay of inland town , where whole street , beside particular house , pay tribute to comdowne castle , as also the ruin yet rest in the wild moor , which testify a former inhabitant . other incline again to the negative , allege the reason heretofore touch , in the dear price of farm or bargain , by which my assent be rather sway : for i suppose that those waste ground be inhabit , and manure , when the saxon and Dane continual invasion drive they to abandon the sea coast , save in such town , as be able to muster , upon any sudden occasion , a sufficient number for their own defence . the residue retire into the heart of the land , where , upon a long warning , they may soon assemble from all side , to make head , and the enemy in so far a march and retreat , shall adventure a great hazard to be distress by the way . which policy the french be drive unto , in Edward the three time , upon the Englishman [ 58 ] often road , and the Spaniard make use of at this day , in their Indies . touch the decay inland town , they be countervail with a surplusage of increase of those on the coast , and the desolate walk in the mores , have beget a sevenfold race of cottage near the sea side . and thus much of Cornwall compare with it self : now , if you match it with other champion shire , methinks , i may gather the same to be better inhabit , within a like circuit of mile , because the plenty of hill and valley , afford a large quantity of ground thereunto . he that can conceive this , may read Polibius in his 9 book , where it be write , that for this reason , Lacedaemon , be but forty eight furlong in compass , contain more dwelling than Megalopolis , which extend unto fifty . my last proof be ground on this , that where the most part of the shire be sever into enclosure , you can easy make choice to stand in any one of they , above a quarter of a mile distance from some dwell house . after the name , language , and number thus peruse , the cornish people disposition and quality of mind and body , as well ancient as present , and then their degree and recreation , succeed to be survey . the first inhabitant , or Aborigenes , as the Paynims hold , resemble those who our story affirm Brutus to have find here at his land , huge of body , rough of live , and savage of condition , who a old poet decipher in certain verse , which i receive of my particular kind friend , and general well-deserving countryman m. Camden , now clarentieulx , which he since have publish . -- titanibus ilia , say paucis famulosa domus , quibus vda ferarum terga dabant vestes , cruor haustus , pocula trunci : Antra lares , dumeta thoros , caenacula rupe , Praeda cibos , raptus venerem , spectacula caedes , Imperium vires , animos furor , impetus arma , mortem pugna , sepulchra rubus , monstrisque gemebat monticolis tellus , sed eorum plurima tractus , pars erat Occidui , terror maiorque premebat , te furor extremum zephiri cornubia limen . which sound thus in English . this be the Titan haunt , but with no plenty do abound , who beast raw hide for clothing serve ; for drink , the bleed wound ; cup , hollow tree ; their lodging , dennr ; their bed , brake ; parlour , rock ; prey , for their food ; ravine , for lust ; their game , life-reauing knock . their empire , force ; their courage , rage ; a headlong brunt , their arm ; combat , their death ; bramble , their grave . the earth groan at the harm of these mount-harboured monster : but the coast extend west , chief foison have , and dire dismay , and forest fury press thou , Cornwall , that with utmost bound of Zephyr be possess . but afterward , the Cornishmen , through the conversation of foreign merchant trade into their country for Tyn , by the testimony of Diodorus Siculus ; grow to a large measure of civility , than other their fellow , but more remote islander . from which civility , in the fruitful age of canonization , they step a degree far to holiness , and help to stuff the church calendar with diverse saint , either make or bear Cornish . such be Keby son to Solomon prince of Cor. such Peran , who if my author [ 59a ] the legend lie not ) after that ( like another Johannes de temporibus ) he have live two hundred year with perfect health , take his last rest in a cornish parish , which therethrough he endow with his name . and such be Dubslane , Machecu , and Manslunum , who ( i speak upon Math. of Westm. credit ) forsake Ireland , thrust themselves to sea , in a boat make of three ox skin and a half , with seven day victual , and miraculous arrive in Cornwall . of Cornishmen , who industry in learned knowledge have recommend their fame to their posterity , these few as yet be only come to my notice : [ 1170 ] John of Cornwall , a student at room , and other place in Italy , write of the incarnation of Christ , against Peter Lombard , and dedicate the same to pope Alexander the three , by who he be high favour . [ 1201 ] Simon Thurnay , after he have outgo all the Oxford scholar in profane learning ( say the commendable painful antiquary , and my kind friend , master Hooker ) pass from thence to Paris , and there so profit in the study of divinity , that he attain the chief place among the profound Sorbonists . but it be a windy knowledge that thus fill his sail of glory , which grow at last so to tempest his wit , as he hold Aristotle superior to Moses and Christ , and yet but equal to himself . but this extreme surquedry , forfeit his wit , so as at last they can not serve he to know any letter in the book , or to remember aught that he have do . in king Henry the three time , live Michael of Cornwall , admirable ( as those day give ) for his variety of latin rhyme , who maintain the reputation of his country , against Henry de abrincis , the king arch-poet , but somewhat angry , as it seem by these verse against the say de abrincis : est tibi gamba capri , crus Passeris , and latus Apri , os leporis , catuli nasus , den and gena muli , frons vetulae , tauri caput , and colour vndique maurus he argumentis , quibus est argutia mentis , quod non a monstro differ , satis hic tibi monstro . [ 1292 ] Walter of Exon , a franciscane friar of Carocus in Cornwall , at the request of Baldwin of Exon ( the - ) form the history of Guy of Warwick . Godfrey , surname of Cornwall , be about that time a cunning schoolman , and divinity reader in Paris . [ 1342 ] William de grenefild , from the deanery of Chichester , step to the chancellorship of England , and archbishopric of York , under king E. the first . in ed , the second day , one Geffrey of Cornwall , be remember for a writer . John Treuisa , a Cornishman , live in R. the 2. reign , and translate diverse book into English . king Henry the five not unmindful of the civill art among his martial exploit , found a university at Caen in Normandy , and appoint Michael tregury of Cornwall , for his rare gift in learning , to be governor thereof . in Henry the sixt time , John skewish compile certain abbridgement of chronicle , and the war of Troy . king Henry the 7. promote John Arundel for his learning , to the sea of Excester . neither be Thomas trivet to be forget , as a writer , [ 60 ] though he have grave his memory in a fair letter , by build the costly bridge at bridgewater , of which sometime he be lord . within our remembrance Cornwall have breed or harbour divine , grace with the degree doctorship , Moreman tremayn , Nichols and roll . bachelor , Medhope , Stowel , Moore , Denis . of preacher , the shire hold a number , plentiful in regard of other shire , though not competant to the full necessity of their own , all commendable labour in their vocation , though not endow with a equal ability to discharge the same . in the civil law there live of late doctor kennal , and now do doctor Carew , one of the ancient master of the chancery ; in which call , after his young year spend abroad to his benefit , he have repose himself . bachelor there be carnsew , kete , and Denis . barristers at the common law , Chiuerton , Tremayne , skaw , Michael , Moyle , Courtnay , tub , Treffry , sayer . Theise testify the honesty of their carriage by the mediocrity of their estate : and ( if they will give i leave to report a jest ) do verify a old gentleman prophesy , who say that there stand a man at Polton bridge ( the first entrance into Cornwall , as you pass towards Launceston , where the assize be hold ) with a black bill in his hand , ready to knock down all the great lawyer , that shall offer to plant themselves in that county . in earnest , whether it be occasion through the country poverty , or by reason of the far distance thereof from the supreme court , or for that the multiplicity of petty one near at hand , appertain to the duchy , stannary , and franchise , do enable the attourneye and such like of small read , to serve the people turn , and so curtail the better study counselor profit ; once certain it be , that few man of law , have either in our time , or in that of our forefather , grow here to any supereminent height of learning , livelihood or authority . of like fortune , but less number be the physician ; by how much the few , by so much the great witness of the soil healthfulness . the most professor of that science in this country , save only one Io. Williams , can better vouch practice for their warrant , then warrant for their practice . among these , i reckon raw clye a black smith by his occupation , and furnish with no more learning , then be suitable to such a calling , who yet have minister physic for many year , with so often success and general applause , that not only the homebred multitude believe mighty in he , but even person of the better calling , resort to he from remote part of the realm , to make trial of his cunning , by the hazard of their life ; and sundry , either upon just cause , or to cloak their folly , report that they have reap their errand end at his hand . but far more commendable be m. Atwel , sometime parson of Caluerly in Devon , and now of saint Tue in Cornwall . for beside other part of learning , with which he have be season , he be not unseen in the theoric of physic , and can out of they ready and probable discourse , touch the nature and accident of all disease . beside , his judgement in urine come little behind the skilful in that profession . Mary his practice be somewhat strange and vary from all other : for though now and then he use blood-letting , and do ordinary minister manus christi , and such like cordial , [ 61 ] of his own compound ( a point fit well with my humour , as enable nature , who best know how to work ) yet mostly for all disease he prescribe milk , and very often milk and apple , a course deep subject to the exception of the best esteem practitioner ; and such notwithstanding , as whereby either the virtue of the medicine , or the fortune of the physician , or the credulity of the patient , have recover sundry out of desperate and forlese extremity . this his reputation be of many year stand , and maintain it self unimpaired . but the same soar to a high pitch , by the help of another wing , and that be , his liberality . on the poor he bestow his pain and charge gratis : of the rich he take moderate , but leave the one half behind , in gift among the household , if he be call abroad to visit any : the rest together with the profit of his benefice ( rather charitable accept then strict exact from his parishioner ) he pour out with both hand in pios usus , and will hardly suffer a penny to sleep , but never to dwell with he . Few town there be in Cornwall , or any other shire between that and London , which have not in some large measure taste of his bounty . none come in kindness to see he , but depart gratify with somewhat , if his modesty will accept it . brief , his sound affection in religion , be so wait on by honesty of life , and pleasantness of conversation , that in Fabritius his voluntary poverty , he be a equal partner of his honour , and possess a large interest in the love of his neighbour . my love to virtue , and not any particular behold , have express this my testimony . for person employ in state affair , and therethrough step to preferment , that i may not outstride late remembrance , sir Richard Edgecumb the elder , be comptroller of the household , and privy counseller to king Henry the seven , be send by he also in diverse ambassade , in one of which to the duke of Britain he decease . king Henry the eight make like use in this last kind , of John Tregonwel , who graduate a doctor , and dub a knight , do his prince good service , and leave fair revenue to his posterity . sir Thomas Arundel , a young brother of Lanhearn house , marry the sister to queen Katherine Howard , and in Edward the 6. time be make a privy counseller : but cleave to the duke of Somerset , he lose his head with he . sir Henry Killigrew , after ambassade and message , and many other employment of peace and war , in his prince service , to the good of his country , have make choice of a retire estate , and reverent regard by all sort , place his principal contentment in himself , which , to a life so well act , can no way be want . master George Carew , in his young year gather such fruit , as the university , the inn of court , and foreign travel can yield he : upon his return , he be first call to the bar ; then supply the place of secretary to the lord chancellor Hatton ; and after his decease , perform the like office to his two successor , by special recommendation from her majesty , who also give he the prothonotaryship of the chancery , and in anno , 1598. send he ambassador [ 62 ] to the king of Poland , and other northern potentate ' where , through unexpected accident , he undergo extraordinary peril , but God free he from they , and he perform his duty in acceptable manner , and at this present the common wealth use his service , as a master of the chancery . Cornwall , no doubt , have afford a far large proportion of well deserve and employ member , to the good of their prince and country , albeit they fall not within the compass of my knowledge , and . it be likely that the succeed age will much increase the number , by mean of her highness bounty , who to that end have establish seed-plot of free school , with competent pension out of her own coffer , for the teacher at Saltash , Launceston , and Perin , three market town of the county . in descend to martial man , Arthur claim the first mention , a Cornishman by birth , a king of Britain by succession , and the second of the three christian worthy by desert : who ( if you so please ) that captain of arm and venery , sir Tristan , shall accompany . from they , i must make a great leap ( which convince i a unworthy associate of the antiquary college ) to sir John naphant who ( if i mistake not ) be by country a cornish man , though by inhabitant a calisian , where H. 7. use his service in great trust ; and cardinal Wolsey own he for his first master . More assure i be , that sir John Arundel of Trerne , upon a long fight at sea , take prisoner one Duncane camel , a hardy scottish pirate , and present he to king H. the 8 : for our chronicle report it . towards the end of that king rain , sir Wil. Godolphin also demean himself very valiant in a charge which he bear beyond the sea , as appear by the scar he bring home , no less to the beautify of his fame , than the disfigure of his face : who nephew , of the same name and dignity , have so enrich himself with sufficiency for matter of policy , by his long travel , and for martial affair , by his present valiant carriage in Ireland , that it be better know , how far he outgo most other in both , then easy to be discern for which he deserve principal commendation himself . so do sir Richard Greinuile the elder interlace his home magistracy , with martial employment abroad : whereof the king testify his good like by his liberality . which domestical example , encourage his son Roger the more hardy to hazard , and the more willing to resign his life in the unfortunate mary rose . a disposition and success equal fatal to that house : for his son again , the second sir Ric. after his travel and follow the war under the emperor Maximilian , against the great Turk , for which his name be record by sundry foreign writer and his undertake to people Virginia and Ireland , make so glorious a conclusion in her majesty ship the revenge ( of which he have charge , as captain , and of the whole fleet as viceadmiral ) that it seem thereby , when he find none other to compare withal in his life , he strive through a virtuous envy to exceed it in his death . a victorious loss for the realm ; and of which the Spaniard may say with Pyrrhus , that many such conquest will beget his utter overthrow . last , his son John take hold of every martial occasion that be minister he , until , in service against her highness enemy , under the command of sir Walter Ralegh , the ocean become his bed of honour . neither may i without wrong pass over captain George Wray in silence , who ( by a rare temperature of virtue ) breathe courage into his soldier , purchase love among his acquaintance , and breed dismay in his enemy . or captain Hender , the absolute man of war for precise observe martial rule which his day afford , beside his commendable sufficiency of head and hand for invention and execution . i will end with master William lower , late captain of sir Francis Vere company in Netherlands , who have open the war school unto a great many cornish young gentleman , that under his conduct seek to conform themselves to his pattern , every way accomplish , with all the due part of honour . for mechanical science the old veil of Bodmyn may just expostulate with my silence , if i shall not spare he a room in his survey , while he so well deserve it . this man have be so behold to mercuryes predominant strength in his nativity , that without a teacher he be become very skilful in wellnear all manner of handicraft : a carpenter , a joiner , a Milwright , a free-mason , a clockmaker , a carver , mettle founder , architect , and quid non ? yea a surgeon , physician , alchumist , etc so as that which Gorgias of Leontium vaunt of the liberal science , he may profess of the mechanical , viz. to be ignorant in none . the cornish mind thus qualify , be the better enable to express the same by the strong , active , etc healthful constitution of their body ; touch each whereof a little in particular , though we shall have a fit general occasion to discourse thereof , where we handle their passetime . for strength , one John Bray ( well know to i as my tenant ) carry upon his back , at one time , by the space wellnear of a butt length , six bushel of wheaten meal , reckon fifteen gallon to the bushel , and the miller a lubber of four and twenty year age , upon the whole . John roman , a short clownish grub , will bear the whole carcase of a ox , and yet never tug with he , like that so famous Milo , when he be a calf . for activity , one Kiltor , commit to Launceston gayle for the last cornish commotion , lay there in the castle-green upon his back , throw a stone of some pound weight , over that tower top , which lead into the park . for health , 80. and 90. year age , be ordinary in every place , and in most person , accompany with a able use of the body and his sense . one polzew , late live , reach unto 130 , a kinsman of he , to 112. one Beauchamp to 106. yea brawn the beggar , a Cornishman by wander ( for i can say , by inhabitant ) though Irish by birth , out-scoreth a hundred winter , by i wot not how many revolution . and in the parish where God have seat my poor dwelling , i remember the decease of four , within 14. week space , who year add together , make up the sum of 340. now to the degree of their several calling , wherein as i will post over the duke to another place , so for nobleman , i may deliver in a word , that Cornwall at this present enjoy the residence of none at all the occasion whereof grow , partly , because their issue female have carry away the inhabitant , together with the inheritance , to gentleman of the eastern part : and partly , for that their issue male , little affect [ 64 ] so remote a corner , like better to transplant their possession near to the heart of the realm . Elder time be not so barren : for beside the lord tregoye in Wil. conqueror day , Bottraux castle vaunt his baron of that title ; both now descend to the earl of Huntingdon : the last decease of which , retain the honour , depart with the land to my kind friend master John Hender , a gentleman for his good part , employ by her majesty among other , in the peace government of the shire . the lord Bonuile his house be at trelawne , alias , Trelawney , late purchase of her highness , by sir Jonathan Trelawny , a knight well speak , stay in his carriage , and of thrifty providence . the lord Bray dwell at [ blank ] : the lord brook , at Kellington , where one of they have his tomb : the lord Marney at colquite : and the lord Denham at Cardenham . Boconnock also appertain to the earl of Devon , and be by Francis earl of Bedford , sell to sir William Mohun , who derive his pedigree from the ancient baron of that name , and be also issue from one of those earl of devons sister and heir . This together with other fair possession , now rest in sir Reignald Mohun his son , one that by his courteous , just , and liberal course of life , maintain the reputation , and increase the love always bear his ancestor . the most cornish gentleman can better vaunt of their pedigree , than their livelihood : for that , they derive from great antiquity , ( and i make question , whether any shire in England , of but equal quantity , can muster a like number of fair coate-armour ) whereas this decline to the mean . one cause there be of both proceed from the want of those supply , which service , law and merchandise , afford the more inward inhabitant of the realm , as i have elsewhere touch : yet this rule be not so general , but that it admit his exception : for there be diverse , who patrimony extend to a large proportion ; and for the residue , the cheapness of their provision , and their casualty of Tyn , and fine ( which 2. late ordinary treble the certain revenue of their rent ) enable they with their few score , to equal the expense of those eastern dweller , who reckon by the hundred : beside , they find mean by a survey , to defray any extraordinary charge of building , marriage , law , or such like . yet i can deny , but that some , in gape for dead man shoe , find their improvident covetous humour punish with go barefoot . this angle which so shut they in , have wrought many interchangeable match with each other stock , and give beginning to the proverb , that all cornish gentleman be cousin ; which end in a injurious consequence , that the king have there no cousin . they keep liberal , but not costly build or furnish house , give kind entertainment to stranger , make even at the year end with the profit of their live , be reverence and belove of their neighbour , live void of faction among themselves ( at leastwise such as break out into any dangerous excess ) and delight not in bravery of apparel : yet the woman will be very loath to come behind the fashion , in [ 65 ] newfangledness of the manner , if not in costlynes of the matter , which may perhaps ouer-empty their husband purse . they converse familiar together , and often visit one another . a gentleman and his wife will ride to make merry with his next neighbour ; and after a day or twain , those two couple go to a three : in which progress they increase like snowball , till through their burdensome weight they break again . and here i think requisite , to lay down the name of such cornish gentleman , as i find record to have come in with the conqueror . Gentlemen descend from those , who come in with the conqueror , and now resi - ding in Cornwall . Arundel . Greinuile . Basset . Karrow , alias , Carew . bluat , alias , bluet . Beauchamp . mow , alias , Mohun . Bray . Malet . Bellet . miner . Beuill . Barret . Pomeray . Courtenay . Rouse . Chaumont , alias , chamond . Samtalbin , alias , Semtabyn . Denis . Saulay , alias , Saul . if the variety of arm disclaim from any of these name , i will not stand upon a stiff justification : and yet it be to be note , that diverse cornish gentleman , born young brother , and advance by match , have leave their own coat , and honour those of their wife with the first quarter of their shield . which error their posterity likewise ensue , as also , that before these late petty difference grow in vogue , the arm of one stock be great diversify in the young branch . i have also make a more painful , then perfect collection of most of the cornish gentleman name and arm : but because the publish thereof may perhaps go accompany with diverse wrong , to my much reverence friend the herald , by thrust my sickle into their harvest ; to a great many my countryman , who my want of information shall be force to pass over unmentioned ; and to the truth it self , where my report ( rely upon other man credit ) may through their error entitle i the publisher ( though not the author ) of falsehood : i rather think fit altogether to omit it , and to note only , that of diverse gentleman there have be in Cornwall , either their name be wear out , or their live transfer by the female , into other family : as likewise , sundry of those there now inhabit , be late denize Cornish , be general draw thither ( beside other more private respect ) through either the desire of change , which the disease of discontent affect , or the love of quiet in so remote a corner , or the supposal of commodity there arise , and accrue , or the warrantise from overlook and bear , where little difference in quality tend to a [ 66 ] equality in estate . from gentility , we will descend to civility , which be or shall be in the townsman . those in Cornwall do no more by nature , than other elsewhere by choice , conceive themselves a estrange society from the upland dweller , and carry , i will not say a malice , but a emulation against they , as if one member in a body can continue his well-being without a behold to the rest . their chief trade consist in utter their petty merchandise , and artificer labour at the weekly market . very few among they make use of that opportunity , which the scite upon the sea proffer unto many , for build of ship , and traffic in gross : yet some of the eastern town piddle that way , and some other give themselves to fish voyage , both which ( when need require ) furnish her majesty navy with good store of very serviceable mariner . there be ( if they be not slander ) that hunt after a more easy than commendable profit , with little hazard , and ( i will i can not say ) with less conscience . anno 32. H. 8. a act of parliament be make for repair , among other , the borough town of Launceston , liskerd , Lostwithiel , Bodmyn , Truro , and Helston in Cornwall , but with what fruit to their good , i can relate . within late year memory , the sea-coast town begin to proclaim their better in wealth , by costly increase of building ; but those of the inland , for the most part , vouch their ruin house , and abandon street , as too true a evidence , that they be admit no partner in this amendment . if i mistake not the cause , i may with charity enough wish they still the same fortune : for as be elsewhere touch , i conceive their former large people , to have be a effect of the country impoverish , while the invasion of foreign enemy drive the sea-coast inhabitant to seek a more safe , then commodious abode in those inland part . stranger occasion to travail through the shire , be wont , no less sharp then true , to inveigh against the bad drink , course lodging , and slack attendance which they find in thosehouse that go for Innes : neither do their horse better entertainment , prove they any welcomer guest then their master : but in stead of remedy , they receive in answer , that neither such a outcorner be frequent with many wayfarer , nor by hang out sign , or forestal at the town end , like the italian , do they invite any ; and to make great provision upon small hope of utterance , be to incur a skorne-worthy loss , see aspettare , and non venire ( say the same italian ) be one of the tre cose da morire . touch the yeomanarie of Cornwall , i can say little , worth the observe , for any difference from that of other shire , and therefore i will step down the next stair to husbandman . Theise in time not past the remembrance of some yet live , rub forth their estate in the poor plight , their ground lie all in common , or only divide by stitch-meale : little breadcorn : their drink , water , or at best , but whey : for the rich farmour in a parish brew not above twice a year , and then , God wot what liquor : their meat , whitsull , as they call it , namely , milk , sour milk , cheese , curd , [ 67 ] butter , and such like as come from the cow and ewe , who be tie by the one leg at pasture : their apparel , course in matter , ill shape in manner : their leg and foot naked and bare , to which sundry old folk have so accustom their youth , that they can hardly abide to wear any shoe ; complain how it keep they over hot . their horse shod only before , and for all furniture a pad and halter , on which the mean country wench of the western part do yet ride astride , as all other english folk use before R. the 2. wife bring in the side saddle fashion of straw . suitable hereunto be their dwell , and to that their implement of household : wall of earth , low thatch roof , few partition , no planching or glass window , and scarce any chimney , other than a hole in the wall to let out the smoke : their bed , straw and a blanket : as for sheet , so much linen cloth have not yet step over the narrow channel , between they and Britain . to conclude , a mazer and a pan or two , comprise all their substance : but now most of these fashion be universal banish , and the cornish husbandman conform himself with a better supply civility to the eastern pattern , which have direct he a more thrive form of husbandry ; and our halcion day of peace enable he to apply the lesson : so as , his fine once overcome , he can maintain himself and his family in a competent decency to their call , and find money to bestow weekly at the market , for his provision of necessity and pleasure : for his quarterly rent serve rather as a token of subjection to his landlord , than any grievous exaction on his tenement . one point of their former roughness , some of the western people do yet still retain , and therethrough in some measure , verify that testimony which Matthew Westm. give of they , together with the welsh , their ancient countryman : namely , how foster a fresh memory of their expulsion long ago by the english , they second the same with a bitter repine at their fellowship : and this the worst sort express , in combine against , and work they all the shrewd turn which with hope of impunity they can devise : howbeit , it shoot not to a like extremity in all place and person , but rather by little and little , wear out unto a more mild and conversable fashion . among themselves they agree well , and company love together : to their gentleman they carry a very dutiful regard , as enure in their obeisance from their ancestor , and hold they as roytelet , because they know no great . only it may be wish , that diverse among they have less spleen to attempt lawsuit , for petty suppose wrong , or not so much subtlety and stiffness to prosecute they : so shall their purse be heavy , and their conscience light : a reporter must aver no falsehood , nor conceal any truth . we must also spare a room in this survey , to the poor , of who few shire can show more , or own few than Cornwall . Ireland prescribe to be the nursery , which send over yearly , yea and daily whole shipload of these crooked slip , and the dishabit town afford they root : so upon the matter , the whole county make a contribution , to pay those lord their rent . many good statute have be enact for redress of these abuse , and upon the first publish , heedful and diligent put in practice : but [ 68 ] after the nine day wonder expire , the law be forget , the care abandon , and those vermin swarm again in every corner : yet those peevish charitable can be ignorant , that herethrough , to the high offence of God and good order , they maintain idleness , drunkenness , theft , lechery , blasphemy , atheism , and in a word , all impiety : for a worse kind of people then these vagabond , the realm be not pester withal : what they consume in a day , will suffice to relieve a honest poor parishioner for a week , of who work you may also make some use : their starve be not to be fear , for they may be provide for at home , if they listen : no alm therefore shall be cast away upon they , to the robbery of the needy impotent ; but money least of all : for in give he silver , you do he wrong , by change his vocation , while you metamorphize he from a beggar to a buyer . lack he meat , drink , or apparel ? ( and nothing else he ought to be owner of ) he must procure they of the worst by free gift , and not make choice , for a just price , of the best . well , though the rogue laugh you to scorn at night , the alewife have reason the next day to pray for you . Surely we find by experience , that this so heinous a enormity may be both easy and quick reform : for let the constable execute upon the rogue that last most beneficial act of parliament , with due severity for one week , and the terror thereof will free the parish for a month : use it a month , and you be acquit for the whole year . if the constable persift in their remissness , let the justice lay the penalty upon they , and they will no long hoodwink themselves at their neighbour fault . let the neighbour be so pinch by the purse , but once or twice , and he will become a great deal the more sensible to season his charity with discretion for a long time after . upon the first statute , there be a house of correction erect at Bodmin , to the great charge , but little benefit of the country . which experience lesson they to illude this late , by appoint certain cottager house in every parish to serve , nomine tenus , for that purpose . lazer-house , the devotion of certain cornish gentleman ancestor erect at minhinet , by liskerd , saint Thomas by Launceston , and saint Laurence by Bodmyn : of which , this last be well endow and govern . concern the other , i have little to say , unless i shall echo some of their complaint , that they be defraud of their right . the much eat of fish , especial new take , and therein principal of the liver , be reckon a great breeder of those contagious humour , which turn into leprosy : but whence soever the cause proceed , daily event minister often pitiful spectacle to the cornishmen eye , of people visit with this affliction ; some be author of their own calamity by the forementioned diet , and some other succeed therein to a haereditarius morbus of their ancestor : who we will leave to the poor comfort in misery , a helpless pity . but let i lead you from these unplease matter , to refresh yourselves with take view of the cornishmen recreation , which consist principal in feast and pastime . their feast be common harvest dinner , church-ale , and the solemnize of their parish church dedication , which they term their saint feast . [ 69 ] the harvest dinner be hold by every wealthy man , or as we term it , every good liver , between Michaelmas and Candlemas , whereto he invit his next neighbour and kindred , and though it bear only the name of a dinner , yet the guest take their supper also with they , and consume a great part of the night after in Christmas rule : neither do the good cheer whole expire ( though it somewhat decrease ) but with the end of the week . for the church-ale , two young man of the parish be yearly choose by their last foregoer , to be warden , who divide the task , make collection among the parishioner , of whatsoever provision it please they voluntary to bestow . this they employ in brew , bake , and other acate , against Whitsuntide ; upon which holiday , the neighbour meet at the church-house , and there merry feed on their own victual , contribute some petty portion to the stock , which by many small|be , grow to a meet greatness : for there be entertain a kind of emulation between these warden , who by his graciousness in gather , and good husbandry in expend , can best advance the church profit . beside , the neighbour parish , at those time love visit one another , and this way frank spend their money together . the afternoon be consume in such exercise , as old and young folk ( have leisure ) do accustomable wear out the time withal . when the feast be end , the warden yield in their account to the parishioner , and such money as exceed the disbursement , be lay up in store , to defray any extraordinary charge arise in the parish , or impose on they for the good of the country , or the prince service . neither of which common gripe so much , but that somewhat still remain to cover the purse bottom . the saint feast be keep upon the dedication day , by every householder of the parish , within his own door , each entertain such foreign acquaintance , as will not fail when their like turn come about , to requite he with the like kindness . of late time , many minister have by their earnest invective , both condemn these saint feast as superstitious , and suppress the church-ale , as licentious : concern which , let it breed none offence , for i to report a conference that i have not long since , with a near friend , who ( as i conceive ) look hereinto with a indifferent and vnpreiudicate eye . i do reverence ( say he ) the call and judgement of the minister , especial when most of they concur in one opinion , and that the matter controverse , hold some affinity with their profession . howbeit , i doubt , lest in their exclaim or declaim against church-ale and saint feast , their ringleader do only regard the rind , and not pierce into the pith , and that the rest be chief sway by their example : even as the vulgar , rather stoop to the weight of their authority , then become persuade by the force of their reason . and first touch church-ale , these be my assertion , if not my proof : of thing induce by our forefather , some be institute to a good use , and pervert to a bad : again , some be both nought in the invention , and so continue in the practice . now that church-ale ought to be sort in the better rank of these twain , maybe gather from their cause and [ 70 ] effect , which i thus rasse up together : entertain of Christian love , conform of man behaviour to a civil conversation , compound of controversy , appeal of quarrel , raise a store , which may be concert partly to good and godly use , as relieve all sort of poor people , repair of church , build of bridge , amend of high way ; and partly for the prince service , by defray at a instant , such rate and tax as the magistrate impose for the country defence . brief , they tend to a instruct of the mind by amiable conference , and a enable of the body by commendable exercise . but i fear lest my friend will run himself out of breath , in this volubility of praise , step athwart he with these objection : that he must pardon my dissent from his opinion , touch the goodness of the institution : for take at best , it can not be martial with the sacred matter , but rather with the civil , if not with the profane ; that the very title of ale be somewhat nasty , and the thing it self have be corrupt with such a multitude of abuse , to wit , idleness , drunkenness , lasciviousness , vain disport of ministrelsie , dance , and disorderly night-watchings , that the best cure be to cut it clean away . as for his fore-remembered good cause and effect , i see not , but that if the people mind be guide by the true level of christian charity and duty , such necessary and profitable contribution may still be continue gratis , and the country ease of that charge to their purse and conscience , which ensue this gourmandize . his reply be , that if this ordinance can not reach unto that sanctity which depend on the first table , yet it succeed the same in the next degree , as appertain to the second . my exception against the title , he mock match with their scrupulous preciseness , who ( forsooth ) will not say Christmas , nor Michaelmas , as other folk do ; but Christ tide , and Michael tide : who ( quoth he ) by like consequence must also bind themselves to say , Tom tide , Lams tide , and candle tide . but if the name of ale relish so ill , whereas the liquour itself be the english man ancient and wholesome drink , and serve many for meat and cloth too ; he be content i shall call it church beer , or church wine , or what else i list : mary , for his part he will loqui cum vulgo , though he study sentire cum sapientibus . where i affirm , that the people may by other mean be train with a equal largesse to semblable work of charity , he suspect lest i do not enter into a through consideration of their nature and quality , which he have observe to be this : that they will soon depart with 12. pennyworth of ware , than sixpence in coin , and this shilling they will willing double , so they may share but some pittance thereof again . now in such indifferent matter , to serve their humour , for work they to a good purpose , can breed no manner of scandal . as for the argument of abuse , which i so large dilate , that shall rather conclude a reformation of the fault , than a abrogation of the fact . for to prosecute your own metaphor ( quoth he ) sure i hold he for a sorry surgeon , that can skill to salve a sore , but by take away the limb , and little better than the physician , who , to help the disease , will reave the life of his patient from he . Abuses , doubtless , great and many [ 71 ] have , by success of time , creep hereinto , as into what other almost , divine , or civil , do they not ? and yet in these public meeting , they be so present to every man sight , as shame somewhat restrain the excess , and they may much the soon be both espy and redress . if you think i go about to defend church-ale , with all their fault , you wrong your judgement , and your judgement wrong i . i will rather ( as a burgess of this ale-parliament ) enact certain law , by which such assembly shall be govern : namely , that the drink shall neither be too strong in taste , nor too often taste : that the guest shall be enterlard , after the persian custom , by age , young and old , distinguish by degree of the better and mean : and sever into sex , the man from the woman : that the meat shall be sauce with pleasant , but honest talk : that their song shall be of their ancestor honourable action : the principal time of the morning , i will have hallow to God service : the afternoon apply to manlike activity : and yet i will not altogether bar sober and open dance , until it be first thorough banish from marriage , Christmas revel , and ( our country pattern ) the court : all which shall be conclude , with a reasonable and seasonable portion of the night : and so ( say he ) will i conclude this part of my speech , with add only one word more for my better justification : that in defend feast , i maintain neither paradox , nor conceit in nubes , but a matter practise among we from our elder ancestor , with profitable and well please fruit , and not only by our nation , but , both in former age , by the best and strict discipline common wealth of the lacedaemonian , who have their ordinary sissitia , and now in our day , as well by the reform , as catholic Swisser , who place therein a principal Arcanum imperij . now touch the saint feast , if you taint they with suspect : of superstition , because they be hold upon those saint day , by who name the parish church be style , i will ward that blow with the shield of arch-saint austines authority , who in his 8. book of God city , and 27. Chap. in the like case , justifi a less allowable practice of the primitive Christians . summa , he close his discourse with this protection , that he appeal not from , but to the honourable respect censure of the reverend ministry , desire his speech may receive , not the allowance of a position , but the licence of a proposition : which my friend modest submission , i can not but embrace my self , and recommend it over to your favourable acceptation . my last note touch these feast , tend to a commendation of the guest , who ( though rude in their other fashion ) may for their discreet judgement in precedence , and preseance , read a lesson to our civil gentry . among they , at such public meeting , not wealth but age be most regard : so as ( save in a very notorious disproportion of estate ) the young rich reckon it a shame soon than a grace , to step or sit before the elder honest , and rather expect his turn for the best room , by succession , then intrude thereto by anticipation . pastime to delight the mind , the cornish man have guary miracle , and three man song : and for exercise of the body , hunt , hawk , shoot , wrestle , [ 72 ] hurl , and such other game . the guary miracle , in english , a miracle-play , be a kind of interlude , compile in Cornish out of some scripture history , with that grossness , which accompany the roman vetus Comedia . for represent it , they raise a earthen amphitheatre , in some open field , have the diameter of his enclose plain some 40. or 50. foot . the country people flock from all side , many mile off , to hear and see it : for they have therein , devil and device , to delight as well the eye as the ear : the player con not their part without book , but be prompt by one call the ordinary , who follow at their back with the book in his hand , and tell they soft what they must pronounce aloud . which manner once give occasion to a pleasant conceit gentleman , of practise a merry prank : for he undertake ( perhaps of set purpose ) a actor room , be accord lesson ( beforehand ) by the ordinary , that he must say after he . his turn come : quoth the ordinary , go forth man and show thy self . the gentleman step out upon the stage , and like a bad clarke in scripture matter , cleave more to the letter then the sense , pronounce those word aloud . oh ( say the fellow soft in his ear ) you mar all the play . and with this his passion , the actor make the audience in like sort acquaint . hereon the prompter fall to flat rail and curse in the bitter term he can devise : which the gentleman with a set gesture and countenance still sober relate , until the ordinary , drive at last into a mad rage , be fain to give over all . which trousse though it break off the interlude , yet defraud not the beholder , but dismiss they with a great deal more sport and laughter , than 20. such guary can have afford . they have also Cornish three man song , cunning contrive for the ditty , and pleasant for the note . among bodily pastime , shoot carry the preeminence ; to which in my young year i carry such affection , as i induce archery , persuade other to the like like , by this ensue Prosopopeia : my dear friend , i come to complain upon you , but to your self : to blame you , but for your good : to expostulate with you , but in the way of reconciliation . Alas , what my desert can justify your adandon my fellowship , and hang i thus up , to be smoke-starued over your chimney ? i be no stranger unto you , but by birth , your countrywoman : by dwell your neighbour : by education , your familiar : neither be my company shameful ; for i haunt the light and open field : nor my conversation dangerous : nay , it shield you from danger , and those not the least , but of great consequence , the danger of war . and as in fight i give you protection , so in peace i supply you pastime ; and both in war and peace , to your limb i yield active plyantnesse , and to your body healthful exercise : yea i provide you food when you be hungry , and help digestion when you be full . whence then proceed this unkind and usual strangeness ? be i heavy for burden ? forsooth , a few light stick of wood . be i cumbrous for carriage ? i couch a part of my self close under your girdle , and the other part serve for a walking-staff in your hand . be i unhandsome in your sight ? every piece of i be comely , and the whole keep [ 73 ] a harmonical proportion . last , be i costly to be provide ? or hard to be maintain ? no , cheapness be my purveyor , easiness my preserver , neither do i make you blow away your charge with my breath , or taint your nose with my scent , nor defile your face and finger with my colour , like that hellborn murderer , who you accept before i . i appeal then to your valiant prince , Edward , and Henry , to the battle of Cresey , poyter , Agincourt , and Floddon , to the region of Scotland , France , Spain , Italy , Cyprus , yea and jury , to be umpire of this controversy : all which ( i doubt not ) will with their evidence plain prove , that when my adverse party be yet scarce bear , or lie in her swaddle clout , through i only your ancestor defend their country , vanquish their enemy , succour their friend , enlarge their dominion , advance their religion , and make their name fearful to the present age , and their fame everlasting to those that ensue . wherefore , my dear friend , see i have so substantial evict the rightof my cause conform your will to reason , conform your reason by practice , and convert your practice to the good of your self and your country . if i be praiseworthy , esteem i : if necessary , admit i : if profitable , employ i : so shall you revoke my death to life , and show your self no degenerate issue of such honourable progenitor . and thus much for archery , who tale , if it be disorder , you must bear withal , for she be a woman , and her mind be passionate . and to give you some taste of the cornish man former sufficiency that way : for long shoot , their shaft be a cloth yard , their prick 24. score : for strength , they will pierce any ordinary armour : and one master Robert Arundel ( who i well know ) can shoot 12. score , with his right hand , with his left , and from behind his head . last , for near and well aim shoot , butt make they perfect in the one , and rove in the other : for prick , the first corrupter of archery , through too much preciseness , be then scarce know , and little practise . and in particular , i have hear by credible report of those , who profess and protest themselves to have be eye-witness , that one Robert bone of Antony shoot at a little bird , sit upon his cow back , and kill it , the bird ( i mean ) not the cow ; which be either very cunning in the performance , or very foolish in the attempt . the first of these somewhat resemble one Menelaus , mention by Zosimus , lib . 2. who nock three arrow , and shoot they all at once , will strike three several person , and may have deserve a double stipend in the grand signior guard , where the one half of his archer be left-handed , that they may not turn their tail to their sultan while they draw . the other may in some sort compare with that avo , report by saxon Gramaticus , for so good a markman , as with one arrow he cleave the fire of his adversary bow , the second he fix between his finger , and with the three strike his shaft which he be nock : or with that exploit of the father pierce a apple on his son head , attribute by the same saxon , to one Toko a Dane : and by the Swisser history , to Guillaum tell , the chief occasioner , and part-author of their liberty . [ 74 ] hurl take his denomination from throw of the ball , and be of two sort , in the east part of Cornwall , to goal , and in the west , to the country . for hurl to goal , there be 15. 20. or 30. player more or less , choose out on each side , who strip they - self into their slight apparel , and then join hand in rank one against another . out of these rank they match themselves by pair , one embrace another , and so pass away : every of which couple , be special to watch one another during the play . after this , they pitch two bush in the ground , some eight or ten foot asunder ; and direct against they , ten or twelve score off , other twain in like distance , which they term their goal . one of these be appoint by lot , to the one side , and the other to his adverse party . there be assign for their guard , a couple of their best stop hurler ; the residue draw into the midst between both goal , where some indifferent person throw up a ball , the which whosoever can catch , and carry through his adversary goal , have win the game . but therein consist one of Hercules his labour : for he that be once possess of the ball , have his contrary mate wait at inch , and assay to lay hold upon he . the other thrust he in the breast , with his close fist , to keep he off ; which they call butt , and place in welldo the same , no small point of manhood . if he escape the first , another take he in hand , and so a three , neither be he leave , until have meet ( as the Frenchman say ) Chausseura son pied , he either touch the ground with some part of his body , in wrestle , or cry , hold ; which be the word of yield . then must he cast the ball ( name deal ) to some one of his fellow , who catch the same in his hand , make away withal as before ; and if his hap or agility be so good , as to shake off or outrun his counter-wayter , at the goal , he find one or two fresh man , ready to receive and keep he off . it be therefore a very disadvantageable match , or extraordinary accident , that leese many goal : howbeit , that side carry away best reputation , which give most fall in the hurl , keep the ball long , and press his contrary near to their own goal . sometime one choose person on each party deal the ball . the hurler be bind to the observation of many law , as , that they must hurl man to man , and not two set upon one man at once : that the Hurler against the ball , must not but , nor handfast under girdle : that he who have the ball , must but only in the other breast : that he must deal no fore-ball , viz. he may not throw it to any of his mate , stand near the goal , than himself . last , in deal the ball , if any of the other part can catch it fly between , or ever the other have it fast , he thereby win the same to his side , which straightway of defendant become assailant , as the other , of assailant fall to be defendant . the least breach of these law , the hurler take for a just cause of go together by the ear , but with their fist only ; neither do any among they seek revenge for such wrong or hurt , but at the like play again . Theise hurl match be mostly use at wedding , where common the guest undertake to encounter all comer . [ 75 ] the hurl to the country , be more diffuse and confuse , as bind to few of these order : some two or more gentleman do common make this match , appoint that on such a holiday , they will bring to such a indifferent place , two , three , or more parish of the east or south quarter , to hurl against so many other , of the west or north . their goal be either those gentleman house , or some town or village , three or four mile asunder , of which either side make choice after the nearness to their dwelling . when they meet , there be neither compare of number , nor match of man : but a silver ball be cast up , and that company , which can catch , and carry it by force , or sleight , to their place assign , gain the ball and victory . whosoever get seizure of this ball , find himself general pursue by the adverse party ; neither will they leave , till ( without all respect ) he be lay flat on god dear earth : which fall once receive , disable he from any long detain the ball : he therefore throwet the same ( with like hazard of intercept , as in the other hurl ) to some one of his fellow , far before he , who make away withal in like manner . such as see where the ball be play , give notice thereof to their mate , cry , ware east , ware west , etc as the same be carry . the hurler take their next way over hill , dale , hedge , ditch ; yea , and thorough bush , brier , mire , plash and river whatsoever ; so as you shall sometime see 20. or 30. lie tug together in the water , scramble and scratch for the ball . a play ( very ) both rude and rough , and yet such , as be not destitute of policy , in some sort resemble the feat of war : for you shall have company lay out before , on the one side , to encounter they that come with the ball , and of the other party to succour they , in manner of a forward . again , other troop lie hover on the side , like wing , to help or stop their escape : and where the ball it self go , it resemble the join of the two main battle : the slow footed who come lag , supply the show of a rearward : yea , there be horseman place also on either party ( as it be in ambush ) and ready to ride away with the ball , if they can catch it at advantage . but they may not so steal the palm : for gallop any one of they never so fast , yet he shall be sure meet at some hedge corner , cross-lane , bridge , or deep water , which ( by cast the country ) they know he must needs touch at : and if his good fortune guard he not the better , he be like to pay the price of his theft , with his own and his horse overthrow to the ground . sometime , the whole company run with the ball , seven or eight mile out of the direct way , which they shall keep . sometime a footman get it by stealth , the better to escape unespy , will carry the same quite backward , and so , at last , get to the goal by a windlace : which once know to be win , all that side flock thither with great jollity : and if the same be a gentleman house , they give he the ball for a trophy , and the drink out of his beer to boot . the ball in this play may be compare to a infernal spirit : for whosoever catch it , fare straightways like a mad man , struggle and fight with those that go about to hold he : and no soon be the ball go from he , but he resign this fury to the [ 76 ] next recyuer , and himself become peaceable as before . i can well resolve , whether i shall more commend this game for the manhood and exercise , or condemn it for the boisterousness and harm which it beget : for as on the one side it make their body strong , hard , and nimble , and put a courage into their heart , to meet a enemy in the face : so on the other part , it be accompany with many danger , some of which do ever fall to the player share . for proof whereof , when the hurl be end , you shall see they retire home , as from a pitch battle , with bloody pate , bone break , and out of joint , and such bruise as serve to shorten their day ; yet all be good play , and never attorney nor crowner trouble for the matter . wrestle be as full of manliness ; more delightful , and less dangerous : which pastime , either cornish man derive from Corineus , their first pretend founder , or ( at least ) it minister some stuff to the farce of that fable . but to let that pass , their continual exercise in this play , have breed they so skilful a habit , as they presume , that neither the ancient greek Palestritae , nor the turk so much delight peluiander , not their , once countryman , and still neighbour , the breton , can bereave they of this laurel : and matchless , certes , shall they be , if their cunning be answerable to their practice : for you shall hardly find a assembly of boy , in Devon or Cornwall , where the most untoward among they , will not as ready give you a muster of this exercise , as you be prone to require it . for perform this play , the beholder cast themselves in a ring , which they call , make a place : into the middle space whereof , the two champion wrestler step forth , strip into their doublet and hose , and untruss , that they may so the better command the use of their limb , and first shake hand in token of friendship , they fall present to the effect of anger : for each , strive how to take hold of other , with his best advantage , and to bear his adverse party down : wherein , whosoever overthrow his mate in such sort , as that either his back , or the one shoulder , and contrary heel do touch the ground , be account to give the fall . if he be endanger , and make a narrow escape , it be call a foil . This have also his law , of take hold only above girdle , wear a girdle to take hold by , play three pull , for trial of the mastery , the fall-giuer to be exempt from play again with the taker , and bind to answer his successor , etc many sleight and trick appertain hereunto , in which , a skilful weak man will soon get the overhand of one that be strong and ignorant . such be then trip , fore-hip , inturne , the Faulx , forward and backward , the mare , and diverse other like . among cornish wrestler , now live , my friend John goit may just challenge the first place , not by prerogative of his service in her majesty guard ; but through have answer all challenge in that pastime without blemish . neither be his commendation bound within these limit , but his clean make body and active strength , extend ( with great agility ) to whatsoever other exercise , of the arm or leg : beside his ability ( upon often trial ) to take charge at sea , either as master , or captain . all which good part he grace with a good fellowlike , kind , and respectful carriage . [ 77 ] silver prize for this and other activity , be wont to be carry about by certain Circumforanei , or set up for bidale : but time or their abuse have now wear they out of date and use . the last point of this first book , be to plot down the cornish government , which offer a double consideration : the one , as a entire state of it self ; the other , as a part of the realm : both which shall be several handle . Cornwall , as a entire state , have at diverse time enjoy sundry title , of a kingdom , principality , duchy , and earldom ; as may appear by these few note , with which i have store my self out of our chronicle . [ anno mundi 2850. ] if there be a brute king of Britain , by the same authority it be to be prove , that there be likewise a Corineus duke of Cornwall , who daughter Gwendolene , Brutus elder son Locrine take to wife , and by she have issue Madan , that succeed his father in the kingdom . [ 3105. ] next he , i find Henninus duke , who marry Gonorille , one of king Leir daughter and heir , and on she beget Morgan : but while he attempt with his other brother in law , to wrest the kingdom from their wife father , by force of arm , before the course of nature shall cast the same upon they , Cordeilla , the three disherit sister , bring a army out of France to the old man succour , and in a pitch battle bereave Henninus of his life . [ 3476. ] Clotenus king of Cornwall , beget a son name Mulmutius Dunwallo , who , when this island have be long distress with the civil war of petty king , reduce the same again into one peaceable monarchy . [ 3574. ] Belinus , brother to that great terror of the roman , Brennus , have for his appannage ( as the french term it ) Loegria , wale , and Cornwall . [ 3908. ] Cassibelane , succeed his brother lord in the kingdom , give to his son Tennancius , the duchy of Cornwall . [ anno Dom. 231. ] after this island become a parcel of Iulius Caesar conquest , the same rest it self , or be rather vex a long time , under the government of such ruler , as the roman send hither . but the breton turn , at last , their long patience into a sudden fury , rise in arm , slay Alectus , the emperor Dioclesian deputy , and invest their leader Asclepiodotus duke of Cornwall , with the possession of the kingdom . [ 329. ] Conan meridock , nephew to Octavius , who the emperor Constantine appoint governor of this island , be duke of Cornwall . [ 351. ] at the synod of Arles in France , there be present one Corinius , son to Salomon duke of Cornwall . [ 383. ] after the abovenamed Octavius his decease , Maximianus , a roman , who marry his daughter , succeed he also in government : between who , and the fore-remembered Conan , grow great war ; which conclude at last in a peace , Maxim. pass with a army into France , conquer there Armorica ( name it little Britain ) and give the same in fee to Conan ; who be once peaceable settle , write over unto Dionethus , or Dionotus duke or king of Cornwall , ( as Matthew of west , term he ) to send he some maiden , who he may couple in marriage with his people ; whereon saint Ursula and her companion the 11000. virgin , be ship , and miscarry , as their well know hiftory report . [ page 78 ] Nicholas Gille , a french writer , deliver ( upon the credit of our british historian ) that about this time , Meroueus , a paynim king of France , cause his own son to be throw into the fire and burn , for that he have slay the king of Cornwall , as he return from a feast . [ 433. ] he also make mention of one Moigne , brother to Aurelius and uter-pendragon , duke of Cornwall , and governor of the realm , under the emperor Honorius . [ 443. ] Carodoc duke of Cornwall be employ ( say D. Kay ) by Octavius , about sound the university of Cambridge . [ 500 ] and upon Igerna wife to Gorlois , duke of Cornwall , Uter beget the worthy Arthur , and a daughter call Amy . [ 526. ] This Arthur discomfit in fight , one Childerick , a king of the saxon , and afterward , upon certain covenant , suffer he quiet to depart the realm . but Childerick violate the word of a king , bind with the solemnity of a oath , invade eftsoon the western coast , harrow the country as he pass , until Cador , earl of Cornwall , become God minister , to take vengeance of his perjury , by reave off his life . that mark sway the cornish sceptre , you can make question , unless you will , withal , shake the irrefragable authority of the round table romant . [ 603. ] Blederic duke of Cornwall , associate with other welsh king , darrayn a battle against Ethelferd , king of the Northumber , and by the valiant forego of his life , get his partner the victory . [ 688. ] Iuor , son to Alane king of little Britain , first win from the saxon , Cornwall , Devon , and Somerset shire , by force of arm , and then , take to wife Ethelburg , cousin to kentwin , king of Westsex , enjoy the same by composition . [ 720. ] Roderic , king of the breton in wale and Cornwall , ( under who , Bletius be prince of this last , and of Devon ) valiant repulse Adelred , king of Westsex , what time he assail he in Cornwall : yet in the end , be overmatched in number , and tire with continual onset , he be drive to quit the same , and retire himself into wale . [ 866. ] Polidor Virgil make mention of one Reginaldus come Britannorum , in the time of king Etheldred . [ 872. ] Dungarth king of corn , by mischance be drown . [ 900. ] Alpsius be record ( about this time ) for duke of Devon and Cornwall . [ 959. ] Orgerius duke of Cornwall , have a daughter name Alfride , the fame of who beauty , cause king Edgar to send earl Athelwold , for obtain she at her father hand in marriage . but the earl with the first sight of this fair lady , be so besot in her love , that prefer the accomplishment of his lust , before the duty of his allegiance , he return answer to the king , how the common report far exceed her private worth , which come much short of merit a partnership in so great a prince bed : and ( not long after ) beg and obtain the king good will , to wed she himself . but so brave a lustre can not lie long conceal , without shine forth into edgars knowledge , who find the truth of his ambassador falsehood , take Athelwold at a advantage , slay he , and marry she , be a widow , who he have woo a maid . [ page 79 ] hitherunto , these title of honour carry a kind of confusedness , and rather betoken a successive office , than a establish dignity . the follow age receive a more distinct form , and leave we a certeyn notice . [ 1067. ] what time William the bastard subdue this realm , one condor possess the earldom of Cornwall , and do homage for the same : he have issue another condor , who daughter and heir Agnes , be marry to Reignald earl of Bristol , base son to king Henry the first . this note i borrow out of a industrious collection , which set down all the noble man creation , arm , and principal descent , in every king day since the conquest : but master Camden , our clarentieulx , name he Cadoc , and say far , that Robert Morton , brother to William conqueror , by his mother herlot , be the first earl of norman blood , and that his son William succeed he ; who take part with duke Robert , against Henry the first , thereby get captivity , and lose his honour , with which that king invest the forementioned Reignald . in this variance , it be great reason , that the balance paunch on his side , who have both authority to establish his assertion , and a rare approve knowledge , to warrant his authority . he die issueless , Richard the first give this earldom to his brother John . [ 1257. ] John son , Henry the three , honour therewith his brother Richard king of the roman , a prince no less plentiful flow in wealth , than his brother be often drive to extreme shift , through neediness : which make that barbarous age to poetrize , Nummus ait pro i , nublt Cornubia Romae . money say , that for her sake , Rome do Cornwall , to wife take . he have issue , Henry earl of Cornwall , who decease issueless : and Edmond , who daughter and heir Isabella ( say my author ) be marry to Morice fitshard lord Barckleigh : but other affirm , that this Edmond die without issue . Edward then , second , degenerate in his choice , create his minion , Peter Gaveston , a Gascoyne , earl of this county , who posterity end in himself , and himself by a violent death . the last title of this earldom , expire in John of Eltham , young son to that king Edward . after which , king Edward the three , by act of parliament in the 11. year of his reign , erect the same to a duchy , the first in England , and grace it with his son , the black prince : for his heroical virtue do rather bestow , then receive estimation from whatsoever dignity . since which it be successive incorporate in the king elder son , and have be so enjoy , by Richard the second , Henry the five , Henry the sixth , Edward his son , Edward the five , Edward son to Richard the three , Arthur , and Henry , son to Henry the seven , and last , Edward the sixth : 10. Dukes in the whole . Theise Earles and duke have from the beginning , be privilege with royal jurisdiction or crown right , namely , give of liberty to send burgess to the parliament , return of writ , custom , toll , mine , treasure-trovee , ward , etc and ( to this end ) appoint their special officer , as sheriff , admiral , receiver , hauener , customer , butler , searcher , Comptroller , [ 80 ] gaugeor , excheator , feodary , auditor , clarke of the market , etc beside the lord warden , and those other beforeremembr , who function appertain to the jurisdiction of the stannary . to the preservation of which royalty , our parliament have ever carry a reverend regard . for by that act , 17. Edw. 4. which enjoin foreign merchant to bestow such money as they receive for their ware , in english commodity , or to pay the same unto Englishman , the king part of all forfeiture within Cornwall , be reserve to the duke . So do that , 11. H. 7 , concern the reformation of weight and measure , provide , that it shall not be hurtful or prejudicial to the prince , within the duchy of Cornwall , nor to any weight of the cunnage : and so do that 1. H. 8. touch excheator , exempt that officer in Cornwall . it shall seem , that the first earl bear a heavy hand in command over their subject : for both diverse ancient record ( as i have learn ) make mention of tribute , impose ( almost ) upon every thing of profit ; and it may far be gather , in that , as well town , as particular person , be fain to procure charter and grant from they , for corporation , fair , market , take or free from toll , mine , fish , fowl , hawk , hunt , and what not ? so as ( upon the matter ) the plight of a cornish inhabitant and a french pezant do differ very little . which bondage , one not long ago seek in part to reestablish , under pretence of receive a rent decay ever since 9 H. 2. and advance her majesty profit : and to this end procure letter patent , that none shall salt , dry , or pack any fish in Devon or Cornwall , without his licence and warrant . a matter that will , by consequence , have make he a absolute disposer of all the western ship and traffic , and their sea and land dependent . Few word , but fold up a multitude of inconvenience to her majesty , and the whole commonwealth . wherefore the cornish justice of the peace , become humble suitor to the lord of her highness privy council , for a necessary and speedy redress herein : and through the never fail forwardness , and back of sir Walter Ralegh , obtain a revocation . howbeit , this ill weed , rather cut off by the ground , then pluck up by the root , once , yea twice or thrice grow forth again , but yet , maugre the warmers and waterer , have by her majesty gracious breath be ever parch up , and ( as be hope ) will never shoot out hereafter , at least it shall still find a unite resistance , of most earnest suit , and pregnant reason , to beat it down . the earl have four house , build castlewise for their residence , viz. Trematon , Launceston , Restormel , and liskerd . but since the principality of wale and this duchy become unite in one person , the large scope , and great command of that , have rob this of his lord presence , and by consequence , the strength of these castle can not so guard they , against the battery of time , and neglect , but that , from fair building , they fall into foul reparation , and from foul reparation , be now sink into utter ruin . king H. the 8. affect his honour of newelm , and respect the commodity , which Wallingford castle may afford it , take this last by act of Parl. from the duchy , and in lieu thereof , annex certain manner lie in corn . fall [ 81 ] to the crown , through the mark of excester attainder : which queen marie afterward restore in tail to his son , the earl of Devon , and upon his issueles decease receive they again . it be against duty to make question , whether in this exchange , the king meaning go with his pretence ; and yet we find it a ordinary policy among prince , to send their successor , with a kind of libera , or honoraria legatio , into the remote quarter of their dominion , as if they will shun occasion of jealousy , spring from a over-near neighbourhood . howsoever , the same king , not long after , pass away , this castle , unto Christ college in Oxford , who use it as a place of retreat , when the university be visit with any contagious sickness . i have understand , that question be make among man of knowledge , what be become of this duchy . some hold it altogether extinct , for want of the king issue male : some aver , that it be suspend in nubes ( as they say ) pro tempore : and some suppose , that it continue in full power , and that her majesty have only custodiam ducatus , as of bishopric , seed vacant . penes Iudicem lie sit . once , every sheriff be summon to enter his account in the duchy exchequer , at Lostwithyel , and from thence , refer over to the exchequer above . Cornwall consider as a part of the realm , sort her government into two kind ; spiritual , and temporal . touch the spiritual : in ancient time this shire have his particular bishop : and i find , how in the year , 905. Forinosus the pope send a sharp letter to Edward the son of Alfride , reprove he , for suffer the west Saxons to be destitute of bishop seven year together . whereon , by the advice of his council , and archbishop Pleymund , he ordain seven bishop in one day ; among who Herstane be consecrate to Cornwall , and eadwolfe to Crediton , which last have three town in Cornwall , assign he , to wit , Pontium , coell , and Landwhitton , that thence he may yearly visit the people , to root out ( as my author say ) their error : for before , as much as in they lie , they withstand the truth , and obey not the apostolic decree . whereon i grind two collection : the first , that the light of the gospel take not his original shine into these part , from the romish bishop : the other that the cornish ( like their cousin the welsh ] can not be soon or easy induce to acknowledge his jurisdiction . the bishop see be former at saint petrock in Bodmyn ; but by reason the Dane burn there his church and palace , [ 979. ] the same remove to saint germane . after that , Lumigius , from a monk of Winchester , elect abbot of Tavistoke , [ 1031. ] and from that abbey , advance to the bishopric of creditune , by his grace with Canute king of the Angles , obtain a annexion of Cornwall ( late fall void ) and so make one diocese of that and Devon , as it have ever since continue . this bishopric have diverse fair house and large revenue in Cornwall : but one veyzy , bishop of the diocese in king H. the 8. time , conjecture ( as it be conceive ) that the cathedral church shall not long overlive the suppress monastery , make havoc of those live beforehand , some by long lease , and some by flat sell , so as he leave a poor remainder to his successor . [ 82 ] it owe subjection to the metropolitan of Canterbury , and have one only archdeaconry , which place be now supply by master Thomas sumaster , who adorn the gentility of his birth , with the honesty of his life , and by both sort of feed , approve himself a liberal and commendable pastor . certain peculiar there be , some appertain to the dignity of the cathedral church at Exon , to wit , saint probus , and saint Peran : and some to private person , as Burien and temple . [ anno mundi 3172. ] for religious house , i read , that in the time of paganism , Cunedag build a temple in Cornwall to Apollo , but where it stand i know not . since it make room to Christianity , my ( not overcurious ) enquiry have learn out these : pryory , at saint german , Bodmyn , Tywardreth . nunnery , at saint Martine . friary , at Launceston , Truro , Bodmyn . college , at Peryn , Crantock , Buryen . Hospitals , at Helston . of parish , the county have 161. as master Camden note , and as other have , about 180. doubtless , the hierarchy of our english church , if it be keep fast to his first institution , may with his far better effect , close up their mouth , who will thrust upon we their often vary discipline . but albeit neither our time can well brook it , nor the succeed will long hold it : yet it shall not do much amiss , to look upon the original beauty thereof , if ( at least ) i be able to trick the same true out , and do not blemish it with my pensil . at the plant of Christian religion , monastery and cathedral church be likewise found , which serve for seed plot of the ministry , and send they abroad in yearly progress , to labour the lord vineyard . afterwards , about the time of our last conquest , the country be sort by a more orderly manner into parish , and every parish commit to a spiritual father , call their parson , who step into that room , not by election ( as some imagine ) but mostly , by the nomination of he that either build the church , or endow the same with some livelihood , or be lord of the soil where it stand . as for vicarage , those day know few , for they grow up in more corrupt age , by the religious house encroachment . beside this incumbent , every parish have certain officer , as churchwarden , sideman , and 8. man , who duty bind they to see the building and ornament appertain to god service , decent maintain , and good order there reverent observe . and lest negligence , ignorance , or partiality , may admit or foist in abuse , and corruption , a archdeacon be appoint to take account of their do by a yearly visitation , and they there swear due to make it . he and they again have their ordinary , the bishop , every 3. year to overlook their action , and to examine , allow , and admit the minister , as they and the bishop be semblable subject to the metropolitanes survey every 7. year . for warn the clergy , and impart their superior direction , the curate choose yearly their Deanes rural . the bishop , in his cathedral church , be associate with certain prebendary , some resident , who serve as his ghostly counsel in point of his charge , and other not bind to ordinary residence , who be call to consultation , upon thing of great consequence : and for matter of principal importance , the archbishop have his provincial synod , and the whole clergy their national . [ 83 ] now then , if every one thus entrust , will remember that he have a soul to save or lose , by the well or ill discharge of so weighty a function , and do accord from time to time bestow his requisite endeavour , what the least fault can escape the espial of so many eye , or the right among so many hand ? but i have thrust my sickle overfar into another harvest : let my mistake be correct , and in regard of my good meaning , pardon . the temporal government of Cornwall , shoot out also into two branch , marshal , and civil . for martial affair , master Camden note out of Johannes Sarisburiensis , that the cornish man valiancy purchase they such reputation among our ancestor , as they ( together with those of Devon and Wiltshire ) be wont to be entrust , for the subsidiary cohort , or band of supply . a honour equal to the roman triarii , and the shoot-anker of the battle . with which concur the ancient , if not authentical testimony of Michael Cornubiensis , who have good reason to know the same , be that countryman , and more to report it : his verse , for which i have also be behold to m. Camden , be these :   Rex Arcturus nos primos Cornubienses Bellum facturus vocat , ut puta caesaris enses nobis non alijs , reliquis , that primitus ictum per quem pax lisque , nobis sit vtrumq ; relictum quid nos deterret , si firmiter in pede stemus , fraus ni nos superet , nihil est quod non superemus . i will now set down the principal commander and officer , touch these martial cause , together with the force of the shire . lord lieutenant general , sir Walter Ralegh . | sir Francis Godolphin , | | sir Nicholas Parker , | | sir Reignald Mohun , | Deputie | Peter Edgecumb , | or any 3. lieutenant | Bernard Greinuile , | of they . | Christopher Harris , | | Richard Carew , | colonel general , sir Nicholas Parker . Marshall , Bernard Greinuile . treasurer , Richard Carew . master of the ordinance , will . Treffry . colonel of the horse , John Arundel of trerise . sergeant mayor , Humphrey parck . quarter master , William carnsew . provost martial , John Harris . scout master , Otwell hill | Osburne . | rusall . corporal of the field , | Rattenbury . | sled Ammunition master , Leon . Blackdon . trench master , cook . [ 84 ] regiment . company , number , arm pike , musket , caliueri -------------------------------------------------- sir Fra. Godol . | 12. | 1200. | 470. | 490. | 240. | sir will . Beuil | 6. | 670. | 225. | 315. | 130. | sir rei . Mohun | 6. | 600. | 200. | 210. | 190. | Ber. Greinuile | 10. | 1000 | 370. | 390. | 240. | Ri. Carew | 5. | 500 | 170. | 300. | 30. | * 1 Antony rouse | 6. | 760. | 270. | 320. | 170. | Ch. trevanion | 5. | 500 | 180. | 190. | 130. | will . Treffry | 4. | 400. | 140. | 130. | 130. | * 2 sir Nic. Parker | 2. | 200. | 60. | 80. | 60. | * 3 ha Viuian | 1. | 100 | 40. | 40. | 20. | * 4 Ar. Harris | 1. | 100 | 40. | 40. | 20. | * 5 summa , | 58. | 6030. | 2165. | 2535. | 1330. | -------------------------------------------------- [ * 1 for Causam bay ] [ * 2 for foy ] [ * 3 Fpr Pendennis ] [ * 4 for saint maw ] [ * 5 for the mount ] this may serve for a general estimate of the cornish force , which i have gather , partly out of our certificate make to the lord 1599 partly by information from the sergeant mayor , and partly through my own knowledge . there be many more unarm pike , which i omit , as better fit a supply upon necessity , than to be expose ( for oppose ) to a enemy . the number as it stand , much exceed the shire proportion , if the same he compare with Devon and other county : which grow , for that their nearness on all quarter to the enemy , and their farness from timely succour by their friend , have force the commander , to call forth the uttermost number of able hand to fight , and rather by persuasion than authority , procure they to arm themselves beyond law and theirability . which commendable endeavour shall not , i hope , ought not , i be sure , turn they to the prejudice of any unwonted charge hereafter . they be all provide of powder , bullet , and match in competent sort , and order take for furnish of victual , and mount a three part of the shot ( at least ) upon cause of service . light horse , the lord in their direction , enjoin for order sake , and the lieutenant excuse it by insufficiency . hitherto neither have the commandment be revoke , nor the omission control . in the year 1588. when the spanish float Babel pretend the conquest of our island ( which like iosuahs army they compass , but unlike he can not with their blast threat overthrow our wall ) it please her majesty of her provident and gracious care , to furnish Cornwall with ordinance and munition , from her own store , as follow : | of cast iron , well mount upon carryage 2. sacres | with wheel , shod with iron , and fur - 2. minion | nish with ladle , sponge , and ram - 2. falcon | mer , with all other necessary . spare axeltree , six . spare pair of wheel , shod with iron , three . shot of iron for the say piece , of each sort , twenty . canon corn powder for the say ordinance , six hundred weight . fine corn powder , three thousand six hundred weight . lead , three thousand six hundred weight . match , three thousand six hundred weight . all which , save the ordinance itself , partly by piecemeal employment , and partly by overlong , or evil keep , be now grow to nought , or nought . [ 85 ] after the sudden surprise of pensant , anno 1595. by direction from the lord , order be take , that upon any alarm , the next captain shall forthwith put themselves with their company , into their assign seacoast town , who the adjoin land-force be appoint to second and three , as the opportunity of their dwelling afford best occasion . the year follow , by a new command , 4000 be allot out , and provide in a readiness to march for the aid of Devon , if cause so require , as the lord lieutenant of that county have the same order , upon like necessity , to send a equal number into Cornwall . last , anno 1599 when the spanish fleet be again expect , the cornish force voluntary assemble themselves , and make head , at the entrance , middle , and westpart of their south coast . as for soldier send into other place , Cornwall yield , upon every occasion , a proportionable supply to the want of Ireland ; neither be acquit from perform the like service for France , if the employment be in Britain or Normandy . which often venting notwithstanding , upon the instance of captain low , and the solicitation of his friend , there pass over this last year into Netherlands , at one time , 100 voluntary and upwards , there to serve under sir Francis Vere . and beside , they often make out man of war against the Spaniard . fort and castle there be ; some , old and wear out of date ; and some in present use , with allowance of garrison . among the first sort , i reckon these , appertayningto the duchy , as also Tintogel , and diverse round hold on the top of hill ; some single , some double , and treble trench , which be term , Castellan Denis , or dani , as raise by the Dane , when they be destine to become our scourge . moreover , in this rank we may muster the earthen bulwark , cast up in diverse place on the south coast , where any commodity of land seem to invite the enemy , which ( i guess ) take their original from the statute 4. H. 8. and be ever sithence due repair , as need require , by order to the captain of those limit . of the late sort , be a fort at Silley , call [ blank ] reduce to a more defensible plight , by her majesty order , and govern by the foreremember sir Francis Godolphin , who with his invention and purse , better his plot and allowance , and therein have so temper strength with delight , and both with use , as it serve for a sure hold , and a commodious dwell . the rest be saint Michael mount , pendenis fort , and saint maw castle , of which i shall have occasion to speak more particular in my second book . of beacon , through the nearness to the sea , and the advantage of the hilly situation , wellnear every parish be charge with one , which be watch , secundum usum , but ( so far as i can see ) not great add propositum : for the lord better digest instruction , have reduce the country , by other mean , to a like ready , and much less confuse way of assemble , upon any cause of service . for carry of such advertisement and letter , every thoroughfare weekly appoint a foot-post , to give [ 86 ] his hourly attendance , who dispatch be wellnear as speedy as the horse . the last branch of my division , and so of this book , lead i to entreat of Cornwall civil government , as it pass for a part of the realm ; and that may again be subdivide into jurisdiction particular , and general . the particular jurisdiction be exercise by constable , steward of court baron , and leet , franchise , hundred , and portreeue , and major ; of borough and corporation of the stannaries , we have speak already . the general , by the clarke of the market , coroner , vice-admiral , sheriff , justice of the peace , and judge of assize . constable of the hundred the shire have none , but this office for give of warning , and collection of rate , be supply by the deputy bailiff , who perform it not with that discretion , trust , secrecy , and speed , which be often requisite to the importance of the affair . i have know the judge move diverse time , for their opinion touch the erect of some , and find they of several resolution , which give little encouragement to a innovation . neither can the parish constable well brook the same , because it submit they to a subaltern command , more than of custom ; whereas now in their parish they be absolute , the least whereof have one , the middle size 2. the big 3. or 4. i will not wish the blaze of their authority blemish , if there be as much care use in choice of the person , as the credit of their place deserve . wise direction without diligent execution , prove fruitless . now , as the former be derive from her majesty to the lord , and from the lord to the justice ; so this late lie in the hand of the constable . watch and search oftentimes carry weighty consequence , and miscarry in the manage : and it be see in the last cornish rebellion , how the constable command and example , draw many of the not worst meaning people , into that extreme breach of duty . franchise , Cornwall have the duchy , Rialton , Clifton , Minhinet , Pawton , caruanton , Stoke Cliuisland , Medland , and kellylond , which have their bailiff as the hundred , to attend the public service . Hundreds there be but 9 east , west , trig , lesnewith , Stratton , powder , pider , Kerier , and penwith , which contain [ blank ] tithing : by these the shire be divide into limit , and all his rate proportion as follow : division . | east H. | trig H. | powder H. | kery . east | west H. N. | lesnew H. saint | pider H. W. | penwith . | Stratton H. in all rate , the east and south limit bear 3. part in 5. to the north and west . so in the eastern , do east hundred to that of west : in the southern , powder to pider : and in the western , kery to penwith . in the northern , trig bear 5. lesnewith and Stratton 4. apiece . there be the like proportion make of the parish in the eastern division , but with little satisfaction of diverse : neither will it ever fare otherwise , and therefore ( this notwithstanding ) i wish it follow in the residue . the convenient and usual place of assembly for the whole county , be Bodmyn : for the east and north , Launceston : for the south and west , Truro : for the east , liskerd : for the north , Camelford : for the south , saint colomb ; for the west , Helston . [ 87 ] for the hundred of east , Kellington : of west , Lanreath ; of trig , Bodmyn : of lesnewith , Camelford : of Stratton , that town : of powder , Grampond : of pider , saint columb : of Kerier , Helston : of penwith , pensant . east H. have parish 30. corporation 2. west H. parish 19 corporation 2. trig [ blank ] lesnewith [ blank ] Stratton [ blank ] powder [ blank ] pider [ blank ] kery [ blank ] penwith [ blank ] corporation be privilege with the administration of justice , within their liberty , more or less , accord to the purport of their charter . such be Saltash , Launceston , liskerd , eastloo , westloo , Bodmyn , Camelford , Lostwithiel , Padstowe , Grampond , Truro , Helston , Perin . the major and recorder , in some of these , be justice of the peace , for their own limit , and wellnear allof they have large exemption and jurisdiction . a garment ( in diverse man opinion ) over-rich and wide , for many of their wearish and ill-disposed body . they allege for themselves , that speedy justice be administer in their town , and that it save great expense , incident to assize trial , which poor artificer can undergo . but the other answer , that these trial be often post on , with more haste than good speed , while a ignorant fellow , of a sowter , become a magistrate , and take upon he peremptory judgement , in debt and controversy , great and doubtful . again , the nearness of commence their suit , draw on more expense , than the shortness of trial cut off , whereas long respite will make way to deliberation , and deliberation open the door to reason , which by the fume arise from choler boil heat , be much obscure . thus do the opportunity inure they to vexation ; vexation beget charge , and charge hatch poverty : which poverty , accompany with idleness ( for they can follow law , and work ) seek not to relieve itself by industry , but by subtlety , wherethrough they become altogether deprave in body , good , and mind . add hereunto that the mayor exercise his office but during one year , for the first half thereof be common to learn what he ought to do , and in the other half , feel his authority to wane , make friend of that Mammon , and serve other turn , to be requite with the like , borrow from justice , what he may lend to his purse , or complice : for as it have be well say , he can long be good , that know not why he be good . they conclude , how from these imperfect association , there spring pride among themselves , disdain at their neighbour , and monopoly against the commonwealth . this invective be somewhat deep steep in gall , and must therefore be interpret , not of all , but the worst . Surely , for my own part , i be of opinion , that how commodious soever this jurisdiction may prove among themselves , it fall out sundry time very distasteful and injurious towards stranger ; and stranger they reckon all that be not burgess . now , let such a one be arrest within their corporation , no surety but townsman can find acceptance , be his behaviour never so honest , [ 88 ] his cause never so just , his call never so regardful , and his ability never so sufficient ; yet if he have none acquaintance in the town , if the action bring , carry a show of weight , if the bringer be a man of sway , in , or near the town , if any other townsman of the high sort bear he a old grudge , he must be content to fret the cold iron with his leg , and his heart with grief : for what one , among they , will procure a everlasting enemy at his door , by become surety for a party , in who he possess none , or little interest ? the ancient use to grace their city with several title , as Numantia bellicosa , Thebae superbae , Corinthus ornata , Athenae doctae , Jerusalem sancta , Carthago emula , etc and the present italian do the like touch they , as roma santa , Venetia ricca , Florenza bella , Napoli gentile , Ferrara civil , Bologna grassa , Ravenna antiqua , etc in a imitation whereof , some of the idle dispose cornish man nick their town with by-word , as , the good fellowship of Padstowe , pride of Truro , gallant of foy , etc the clarke of the market office , have be heretofore so abuse by his deputy , to their private gain , that the same be taint with a kind of discredit , which notwithstanding , be right and due execute , will work a reformation of many disorder , and a great good to the commonwealth . four coroner , choose by the voice of the freeholder , do serve the shire , who for the present be , Bligh , tub , Trenance , and bastard . the vice-admiralty be exercise by m. Charles trevanion , a gentleman , through his virtue , as free from greediness , as through his fair livelihood , far from neediness : and by daily experience give proof , that a mind value his reputation at the due price , will easy repute all dishonest gain much inferior thereunto , and that in converse with the worst sort of people ( which his office oftentimes enforce ) he can no more be disgrace , than the sun beam by shine upon a dunghill will be blemish . i have here set down the name of those commissioner for the peace , who at this present make their ordinary residence in corn . as they stand place in the commission , where the priority be mostly defer to antiquity . Q. Fra. Godolphin m. 1. | Carolus trevanion 16. Q. Nic. Parker m. 2. | Thomas S. Aubin 17. Q. Iona . Trelawney m. 3. | q rob moil 18. Q. Reg. Mohun m. 4. | q ed Hancock . 19 Q. P. Petrus Edgecomb 5. | Tristramus Arscot 20. Q. Ric. Carew de Anth. 6. | Thomas lower 21. Q. Bern. Greinuile 7. | W. Treffry de Fowey 22. Q. Antonius rouse 8. | Johannes Hender 23. Petrus Courtney 9 | q Willi . Wray 24. Q. Tho. Chiuerton 10. | Georgius Kekiwiche 25. Q. Christ . Harris 11. | q Arth. Harris 26. Io. around . de trerise 12. | Io. Harris de lansre . 27. Th. Arun . de Taluerne 13. | q Degor . chamons 28. Q. Nic. Prideaux 14. | Johannes Trefusis 29. Q. Hannibal Viuian 15. | Otwel hill 30. their ordinary use be , to begin the quarter session for the east half of the shire , on the Tuesday and wednesdaye , at Bodmyn , and to adjourn the [ 89 ] same for the west half , to be end at Truro the Friday and Saturday follow , lean one day space for ride between . but about twenty year sithence , the eastern justice make the great number , and in this separation have far to ride , when they be dispose to attend both place , either in regard of their ease , or upon scruple of conscience , or for both together , call into question , whether this custom be as warrantable by right , as it be pleadable by prescription ; and whether it as much advance the administration of justice , as it ease the travel of the people . and thereupon they begin to appoint the entire session at either place one after another . this be sometime perform , and sometime break , by the western justice , so as several and contrary precept of summons be direct to the sheriff , with the great uncertainty , ill example , and trouble of the country . it happen , that one new associate , and not yet season with either humour , make this motion for a reconcilement , viz. that the session shall interchangeable one quarter begin at Bodmyn , and end at Truro ; and the next begin , at Truro , and end at Bodmyn ; and that no recognizance shall be discharge , or cause decide out of his own division . this proposition , as it give the western justice the great part of their will , so it salve a sore which chief grieve the eastern : for before , what be do in the beginning at one place , be , or may be undo in the end at the other : wherefore all party willing condescend hereunto , and it have ever since be accord observe . another variance have sometime fall out between Cornwall and Devon , about the time of keep their session . for whereas the statute 2. H. 5. enact that the justice shall hold the same in the first week after saint Michael , the Epiphanie , the clause of easter , and the translation of saint Thomas ( which , worthy blot out of the calendar , testae newbrigensi , be ever the seven of July ) and their oath bind they to a strict observation hereof : the question have grow , when those festival day fall upon a Monday , whether the session shall be proclaim for that week , or the next , and the general practice have go with the former . but the cornish justice , weigh , that prescription be no supersedeas for swear , upon debate of the matter , have resolve , and late accustom , in such case , to put it over unto the week ensue : and these be their reason : if the session must be keep in the first week after , it can admit a interpretation of the same week it self . again , the clause of easter , mention in the one , shall seem to make a construction of like meaning in the rest . beside , those , who suit themselves to the other fashion , do yet swerve therefrom , if those feast fall upon any late day in the week than Monday ; for than they defer it till the next : and yet , see no day certain be direct for begin the session ; if they will constant bind themselves to the former sense , when those day fall on the Friday , they ought to call it for the morrow follow . the judge of the circuit oracle , to which the commission of the peace refer the justice quaere , have resolve , that neither of these way tend to any breach of the law . once sure it be , that the terme-suiter may best speed their business , by support the former : for the end of these session deliver they space enough [ 90 ] to overtake the begin of the term . for the rest , equity bear more sway , than gravity , at the cornish bench , and in confusion they maintain equality : for though they speak more than one at once , yet not one man speech , or countenance , can carry a matter against the truth . neither do assertion , but proof in hear ; nor vouching , but show of law case , in decide , order the controversy : and as diversity in opinion breed no enmity , so overrule by most voice , be take for no disgrace . one only judge be wont , in three day at far , to dispatch the assize , and gayle delivery , at Launceston , the usual ( though not indifferent ) place , where they be hold . but malice and iniquity have so increase , through two contrary effect , wealth and poverty , that now necessity exact the presence of both , and ( not seldom ) a extent of time . i have hear the judge note , that beside their ordinary pain , they be trouble with more extraordinary supplication in Cornwall , then in any other shire : whereto they yet give no great encouragement , while the cause be on the backside , post over to gentleman hearing , and account seldom take or make , what have be do therein . very , we must acknowledge , that ever since our remembrance , God have bless this western circuit with special choice of upright and honest judge ; among who , this of our last be not the least : for they do so temper a quick conceit with a stay judgement , a strict severity in punish , with a mild mercy in remit , and a awful gravity at the bench , with a familiar kindness in conversation , as they make proof , that contrary virtue may , by the diverse way of love and reverence , meet in one only point of honour . the common jail of the shire for offender , be keep at Launceston : for that statute , 33. H. 8. which among other shire , give the cornish justice leave to alter the same , by a proviso , take it away again , in that this keepership be annex to the constableship of the castle , and that grant out in lease . i will conclude with the high jurisdiction , namely , the parliament , to which Cornwall , through the grace of his earl , send a equal , if not large number of burgess , to any other shire . the borough so privilege , more of favour ( as the case now stand with many of they ) than merit , be these follow : Launceston , downeuet , liskerd , Lostwithiel , Truro , Bodmyn , Helston , Saltash , Camelford , eastloo , westloo , Prury , Tregny , Kellington , bossimy , S. iue , s. germane , Meddishole , and saint maw : and because Quindec . be ordinary grant at parliament , together with the subsidy , i will here set down the ordinary rate of they . [ 91 ] Md. de 15. Cornub. in paroch . subsequent . ut patet . p. Hund. de Penwith Paroc . S. Iusti. 2li . 11s.8d . S. Hillary 2.18.8 S. gorian . 8.5.2 Caniborn . 4.2.0 S. gorgian . 1.15.6 Laundut . 6.16.5 S. Crowen . 2.2.2 Vthno . 0.12.6 S. Michaels . 2.11.3 Germogh . 0.10.8 S. Illogan . 4.7.10 S. Synan . 3.6.0 saint early . 3.11.8 S. Maddern . 4.12.0 S. Luduan . 2.16.6 S. Twynnock . 2.5.0 morueth . 0.17.6 S. Felis . 2.1.2 saint sylvan . 2.12.5 Kedruth . 1.12.5 S. Sancred . 1.14.0 saint winner . 3.6.0 saint ey . 3.6.8 saint pawl . 6.17.0 S. Sennar . 2.11.1 Woluele . 3.5.0 Sum. 81. 8. 6. Hund. de Kerier . Wennape . 2.8.0 saint melor . 2.4.0 S. Martyn . 0.18.8 saint briack . 2.3.0 saint gluuiack . 2.2.10 saint crade . 1.4.6 Constantyn . 3.6.4 wyneanton . 0.14.8 S. Mawnan . 1.8.0 S. Melan . 2.18.4 saint stidian . 2.19.4 saint keyran . 6.8.0 arwothel . 1.4.9 S. Wynwolny . 0.10.4 S. Landy . 1.10.4 saint rumon . parua . 0.7.2 S. Mawgan . 1.16.0 crewenne . 1.0.10 saint rumon . ma . 1.2.0 S. Sithne . 2.0.0 S. Antony . 0.8.0 S. Ewynne . 0.15.4 Corentun . 0.15.0 Burg. de Helston . 4.6.8 Minster 1.4.6 germock . 0.10.8 S. Budock . ma . 2.9.0 S. Wendron . 3.12.0 Burgus the perm . 2.0.0 Sum. 52.18.5 . Hund. de powder . Tywardreth 2.15.11 Elerky . 3.6.0 Argallas . 1.14.4 S. Keby . 1.2.1 Burg. the fowy . 2.8.4 Landreth . 0.17.8 Roche . 2.8.7 Eglosmerther . 0.18.0 Kenwen . 2.19.0 lanuoreck . 1.10.0 Eglosros 1.16.0 grogith . 0.14.4 Moresk . 2.0.0 fowy extra . 1.4.8 Manerium de | s. Samson . 1.15.0 pen . kn and | 0.10.4 S. Stephens . 3.6.3 Restormel . | gerend . 2.0.0 saint awstle . 6.14.11 Feock . 1.10.0 Mewan . 1.12.0 Burg. de Lostwi . 8.13.4 [ 92 ] Carhayes . 0.11.6 Laurocen . 0.17.0 S. Denis . 1.16.6 Ladock . 2.14.0 penkeuel . 0.11.8 Lanhorn . 1.14.8 S. Anthony . 0.12.2 saint ewe . 1.8.3 Burg. de mia . 0.5.6 Manerium de | s. goran 1.16.0 Towington in | 1.19.0 Burg. de grand . 0.14.6 P. S. austle . | Burg. de Truru . 12.1.10 saint crede . 2.1.0 saint ermet 1.14.0 saint iust. 1.16.0 landege . 2.7.0 Burg. de Tregony . 1.15.3 Lasullian . 1.10.6 S. Probus . 5.6.0 S. Aleyn . 3.4.6 Calendry 1.0.8 Hund. the pider . Lanhidrock . 0.17.8 saint ermet . 2.2.6 S. Peran . 2.6.8 S. Euoder . 3.0.0 S. Caranto . 2.13.0 S. Petrock mi . 0.6.4 saint vuel . 1.10.0 laneuet . 1.10.0 S. Agnes . 1.6.10 saint ede . 1.12.0 S. Petrock ma . 2.4.10 saint bruke . 2.7.0 S. Columb ma . 5.13.0 Newlyn . 3.17.4 saint columb mi . 4.11.0 maruy . 2.1.0 Burg. de meddi . 0.8.0 Withiel . 1.6.8 Oldstowe . 1.9.0 S. Colan . 1.4.6 lanherne . 3.0.0 Cuthbert . 2.0.0 saint wen 1.18.0 Hund. the trig . Teth. 2.9.6 egloshail . 2.3.8 minuer . 1.15.0 Bliston . 1.17.2 P. Bodmyn ext . 1.16.0 temple 0.5.0 bre road . 1.19.5 S. Laud. 1.6.0 Bur. de Bodmyn . 20.0.0 master the pennayn . 0.4.10 Maben . 1.10.9 S. Tweir . 1.16.8 saint eudelian . 1.8.0 Hellond . 0.19.0 Hund. the lesnewith . Cleder . 1.16.8 Bur. the castle | s. Warburg 1.18.4 boterel . | 0.7.0 S. Iuliet . 0.14.8 Oterham . 0.19.0 Bur. de Tintagle . 0.13.2 Lanteglos . 1.10.0 podistok . 4.5.2 S. Genis . 1.14.2 Mihelstowe . 0.19.0 lesnewith . 1.8.0 Bu. de Camelforth . 0.9.0 manner . de tintagle . 1.7.0 Alternon 1.18.6 minster . 1.4.6 David . 2.6.8 Treneglos . 1.6.8 Treualga . 1.0.0 Athawyn . 1.0.0 [ 93 ] Hund. de lesnewith . Kilkhamlond . 3.4.4 Bridgerule . 0.12.6 Iacobstow . 1.16.4 Moristow . 3.6.0 Poghwil . 0.19.0 Boyton . 1.9.0 launcel . 1.8.0 Stratton . 2.19.6 Ouerwynchurch . 2.0.0 Wyke . 1.15.0 Whitston . 1.13.0 Bur. de Kilkhamp . 1.0.2 Hund. de Westwibilsher . Niot . 2.7.0 Lanteglos . 5.0.0 Cardinham . 1.18.0 Burg. the liskerd . 6.14.0 morual . 1.17.0 Reprina . 0.8.0 saint clear . 2.1.7 Wynnock . 2.0.0 Tallan . 1.12.0 Burg. the loo . 1.10.0 Lansalwys . 1.9.0 Lanraythew . 1.8.6 vepe . 1.9.2 Villade . 1.13.0 manner . de liskerd . 1.13.0 S. Martyn de loo . 1.10.0 dulo . 1.18.6 brotheck . 0.18.0 Warlegan . 1.2.0 Kayn . 0.8.4 pleuiul . 2.7.0 Pynnock . 0.19.0 liskerd . 1.12.0 Hund. de Eastwibilshere . Antony . 1.11.0 Manerium de | lawlutton . 1.3.0 Tremeton . | 2.15.4 Southil . 0.18.0 Linkinhorne . 2.0.0 Piderwyn . 2.3.0 Seuiock . 1.4.0 Landilp . 0.17.6 Calstock . 3.6.0 Stoke . 2.9.0 S. Melan . 1.6.0 minhinet . 4.6.0 Rame . 1.11.0 egloskery . 2.5.0 saint I|have . 1.19.0 saint germyn . 6.10.0 S. Dominick . 1.4.0 Bur. de downuet . 2.16.8 Lawanneck . 1.10.0 lasant . 1.18.0 laurake . 1.19.0 saint John . 1.6.10 Burg. de Ash. 2.0.8 saint Stephens of | Pillaton . 0.15.4 Lanceston . | 4.16.0 Boskenna . 0.9.0 Quedock . 1.7.0 mere . 0.15.0 Northil . 1.12.0 Sum. tot . 15. and 10. in Cornub. 479.03 . [ 94 ] Md. postea sequuntur deductiones and allocat . de eisdem sum . appunctuat . per Edmund . Episc. Exon. and Thom. Bodul - get tunc un . milit . prae . Com. in anno 24. H. 6. ut pt . p. particulariter . trig . Parochia de | Aldehan . 0.15.0 Menefride . | 1.0.0 Maben . 0.15.0 Helland . 0.15.0 Egloshail 1.10.0 Burg. de Bodmyn . 6.0.0 temple . 0.3.0 saint tudy . 0.9.0 S. Bruer . 0.15.0 tooth . 1.10.0 Sum. 13. 12. 0. Hund. de Lesnowith . Cleder . 0.12.0 Oterham . 0.15.0 Burg. the botriscast . 0.6.0 advent . 0.6.0 Pondistoke . 2.0.0 Warburg . 0.10.0 mynster . 0.12.0 Lesnowith . 0.12.0 Bu. de Camelforth . 0.6.0 Treueglos . 0.18.0 S. Gennys . 0.15.0 Alternon . 0.10.0 S. David . 0.10.0 Sum. 8. 12. 0. Hund. de Stratton . Morestow . 1.10.0 Burgus de | poughwel . 0.12.0 Kilkampton . | 0.9.0 lancel . 0.10.0 Merwinchurch . 0.15.0 Boyton . 0.10.0 Whithton . 0.15.0 Kilkampton . 1.0.0 Iacobstow . 0.10.0 Stratton . 1.1.0 Sum. 7. 12. 0 Hund. de east . Calstok . 1.10.0 Rame 0.15.0 Lawanneck . 1.1.0 Quethiock . 0.12.0 saint John . 0.15.0 S. Domineck . 0.10.0 S. Iues. 1.0.0 Pederwyn . 0.8.0 minhinet . 3.0.0 saint germyn . 4.10.0 Manerium de | Antony . 0.15.0 Tremeton . | 1.5.0 Lawhitton . 0.15.0 Burgus de | s. Stephens . 2.0.0 downeue . | 1.0.0 laurake . 0.10.0 S. Melan . 1.0.0 egloskery . 0.15.0 Sum. 22. 1. 0. [ 95 ] Hund. de west . Burgus de | Lanrethow . 0.10.0 liskerd . | 1.0.0 saint vepe . 0.10.0 saint clear . 0.10.0 Manerium | morual . 0.10.0 the liskerd . | 0.12.0 talland . 0.10.0 S. Pynnock . 0.10.0 parish of liskerd . 0.18.0 nyot . 0.10.0 Lanteglos . 1.10.0 Sum. 7. 10. 0. Hund. de Penwith . Luduan . 0.9.0 saint sencrede . 0.15.0 Camborn . 1.0.0 S. Felix . 0.6.0 S. Senan . 0.13.0 S. Selenan . 0.10.0 S. gothian . 0.10.0 S. Michaels . 0.10.0 S. Ius t . 0.10.0 saint pawl . 1.0.0 S. Veryn . 2.0.0 saint thebut . 1.0.0 saint wynner . 0.10.0 saint grey . 0.9.0 Sum. 10. 2. 0. Hund. de Kerier . S. wenep . 0.10.0 S. Constantyn . 0.9.0 Mawnan . 0.6.0 crade . 0.10.0 Burg. de Helston . 1.10.0 Wynampton . 0.6.0 Melan . 0.10.0 stedian . 0.9.0 arwothel . 0.10.0 Ewyn . 0.10.0 Minster . 0.6.0 Sum. 5. 16. 0. Hund. de powder . Argallas . 0.10.0 Lamorek . 0.10.0 Keby . 0.9.0 S. Sampsons . 0.10.0 Burgus de | s. Gereus . 0.10.0 Truru . | 10.0.0 Burgus de | Roche . 0.18.0 Lostwithiel . | 8.0.0 Moresk . 0.10.0 lamhorn . 0.6.0 saint goran . 0.9.0 Tywardreth . 0.10.0 S. Allen . 0.5.0 S. Stephens . 0.10.0 Illerky . 0.10.0 Eglosros . 0.10.0 Sum. 19 17. 0. [ 96 ] ************************* miss scan ******************* 88 Hund. the pider . Lanhidrok . 0.11.0 S. Petrock minor . 0.6.0 S. Pyran . 0.15.0 S. Petrock maior . 0.10.0 S. Newlyn . 1.10.0 S. Breock . 0.15.0 S. Colan . 0.10.0 Withiel . 0.5.0 lamhern . 0.10.0 Carnenton . 0.10.0 saint eddy . 0.12.0 vwel . 0.10.0 saint enode . 0.15.0 Sum. tot . deduction . 15. and 10. 113. 1. 6. **************************************************************** the s five r five e y of c o r n wonderful a l L. the second book . in this second book i will first report what i have learn of Cornwall , and Cornishmen in general , and from thence descend to the particular place and person , as their noteworthy site , or any memorable action , or accident , of the former or late age , shall offer occasion . the high which my search can reach unto , i borrow out of Strabo , who write , that the western breton give aid unto the Armorici of France , against Caesar , which he pretend for one of the cause , why he invade this island . next i find , that about sixty year from the land of Hengist , [ anno do. 509. ] one Nazaleod , a mighty king among the breton , join battle with Certicus , sovereign of the westsaxons , and after long fight , with his own death accompany the overthrow of his army . [ 519. ] yet , the breton , thus abandon by fortune , will not so forsake themselves , but with renew courage , and force , cope once again with Certicus , and his son Kenrick , at [ 97 Certicesford , though equal destitute of success as before . [ 590. ] Gurmund , a arch pirate of the norwegian , be call by the saxon , out of his late conquer Ireland , to their aid , against Careticus king of the breton ; who he overcome in battle , and inforce his subject to seek safeguard by flight , some in wale , some in Cornwall , and some in little Breteigne : since which time , they can never recover again their ancient possession of the whole island . [ 688. ] howbeit , not long after , Iuor , son to Alane , king of the say little Breteigne , land in the west part , win from the saxon , Cornwall , Devon , and Somerset shire , by force of arm , and then establish his conquest , by a peaceable composition with his adverse party . [ 720. ] Adelred , king of wessex , invade Devon and Cornwall , who Roderick , king of the breton , and Blederick prince of those province , encounter and discomfit : [ 750. ] which notwithstanding , process of time reave from , he , and add such strength to his enemy , that he be drive to abandon Cornwall , and retire into wale . [ 809. ] So , the Cornishmen quit their liberty with their prince , stoop to the command of Egbert king of wessex , and with their territory ( say William Malmsburie ) enlarge his confine . [ 937. ] Athelstane handle they yet more extreme ; for he drive they out of Excester , where , till then , they bear equal sway with the saxon , and leave only the narrow angle on the west of tame river , for their inhabitant , which have ever since be their fatal bound . on their reguli ( as Vincentius deliver ) he impose a yearly tribute , of 20. livre . in gold , 300. livre . in silver , 25. ox , and hunt hound and hawk , at discretion . [ 997. ] to these affliction by home-neighbour of bondage , tribute , and banish , be join a four , of spoil by foreign enemy : for Roger Houedon tell we , that the Dane land in sundry place of Cornwall , foray the country , burn the town , and kill the people . [ 1068. ] to who succeed in the like occupation , Godwin , and Edmond magnus , king Harold two son , discomfit the force oppose against they , harrow Devon and Cornwall , and then retire with their prey into Ireland . [ 113. ] after the conquest , when king H. the first invade . Griffin ap Conan prince of Wales , he distribute his army into three portion , one of which ( wherein consist the force of the four part of England and Cornwall ) he commit to the lead of Gilbert earl of Strigill . [ 1227. ] in Henry the three time , by the testimony of Matthew Paris , William earl of Sarum , after long toss at sea , with much ado , about Christmas arrive in Cornwall ; and so afterward , do earl Richard , the king brother , at two several time : the late of which , be destitute of horse and treasure , he pray therein aid of his loyal . [ 1339. ] when Edward the three aver his right to the crown of France , by the evidence of arm , the french for a counterplea , make a unlawful entry into Devon and Cornwall ; but Hugh Courtney earl of Devon , remove it with posse comitatus , and recommit they to the wooden prison that bring they thither . yet will not the Scot take so much warn by their success , as example by their precedent , if at least , froissart [ 98 ] ignorance of our english name , breed not his mistake in the place . by his relation also , Cornwall near neighbour give opportunity of access , both to the earl Montford , when he appeal to that king aid , for recover his right in Britain ( albeit i can bring home Cepsee then design port of his land ) and after his captivity , to the messenger of his heroical countess , employ in the like errand . and from Cornwall , the earl of Sarum , Wil. de Mesuile and Philip de Courtney , set to sea , with 40. ship , beside bark , and 2000 man at arm , beside archer , in support of that quarrel . last , his authority inform i , that those soldier of Cornwall , who under their captain John apport and John Cornwall , have defend the fort of Bercherel in Britain , against the power of France , above a year space , in the end , for want of due succour , upon a honourable composition surrender the same . [ 1471. ] queen Margaret , wife to H. 6. upon her arrival out of France , after the loss of Barnet field , receive great aid , though to small purpose , from the Devon and Cornish man , under the conduct of Thomas , earl of that shire . [ 1485. ] and so much be those western people addict to that name , as they ready follow sir Edw. Courtney , and his brother Peter , bishop of Excester , what time the assist the duke of Buckingham , in his revolt against Richard the three . [ 1497. ] neither do his suppressour and successor , H. the 7. find they more loyal : for the cornish man repine at a subsidy late grant he by act of parliament , be induce to rebellion , by Thomas Flammock , a gentleman , and Michael Joseph , a blacksmith , with who they march to Taunton , there murder the provost of Perin , a commissioner for the say subsidy , and from thence to Welles , where Iames Touchet , lord aude , degenerate to their party , with which increase they pass by Sarisbury to Winchester , and so into Kent . but by this time , lord and commons be gather in strength sufficient , to make head against they , and soon after , black heath see the overthrow of their force , in battle , and London , the punishment of their seducer by justice . in the same fatal year of revolt , Perkin Warbeck , a counterfeit prince , land in Cornwall , go to Bodmyn , assemble a train of rakehels , assault Excester , receive the repulse , and in the end speed , as be know , and as he deserve . [ 1549. ] the last cornish rebellion , be first occasion by one kilter , and other his associate of a western parish , call , saint keueren , who imbrue their wicked hand in the guiltless blood of one m. body , as he sit in commission at Helston for matter of reformation in religion : and the year follow , it grow to a general revolt , under the conduct of Arundel , Wydeslade , Resogan , and other , follow by 6000. with which power they march into Devon , besiege and assault Excester , and give the lord Russell ( employ with a army against they ) more than one hot encounter , which yet ( as ever ) quail in their overthrow . in my particular view , i will make easy journey from place to place , as they lie in my way , take the hundred for my guide , until i have accomplish this wearisome voyage . [ 98 ] my first entrance must be by the hundred of east , so name for his site , and therein , at Plymouth haven . it borrow that name of the river Plym , which rise in Devon , and by the way baptize plymston , Plymstock , etc here empti it self into the sea . the haven part Devon and Cornwall wellnear every where , as tame river run : i say wellnear , because some few interlace place be except : a matter so sort at the first partition , either to satisfy the affection of some special person , or to appropriate the soil to the former lord , or that ( notwithstanding this severance ) there may still rest some cause of intercourse between the inhabitant of both county : as i have hear , a late great man ensue , and express the like consideration , in division of his land between two of his son . now though this haven thus bind both shire , yet do the jurisdiction of the water whole appertain to the duchy of Cornwall , and may therefore be claim as a part of that county . notwithstanding , i will forbear what i may , to intrude upon my good friend m. Hookers limit , and reserve to he the description of the far shore . the first promontory of this harbour on the west side , be Rame head , by his proportion , receive , and by his possession , give , that name and arm to his owner , who posterity convey it by intermarriage , from Durnford , to Edgecumb : on the top thereof rise a little vault chapel , which serve for a mark at sea . from thence trending Penlee point , you discover king sand and Causam bay , a open road , yet sometime afford succour to the worst sort of seafarer , as not subject to comptrolment of Plymouth fort . the shore be people with some dwell house , and many cellar , dear rent for a short usage , in save of Pilcherd . at which time , there flock a great concourse of sayner , and other , depend upon their labour . i have hear the inhabitant thereabouts to report , that the earl of Richmond ( afterward Henry the seven ) while he hover upon the coast , here by stealth refresh himself ; but be advertise of strait watch , keep for his surprise at Plymouth , he rich reward his host , hie speedy a shipboard , and escape happy to a better fortune . here also of late year , part of the cornish force twice encamp themselves , plant some ordinance , and raise a weak kind of fortification , therethrough to contest , if not repulse , the land of the expect enemy : and a strong watch be continual keep there , ever since one thousand , five hundred , ninety seven : at which time , a Spaniard ride on the bay , while most of the able people give their attendance at the county assize , send some close into the village , in the dark of the night , who hang up barrel of matter fit to take fire , upon certain door , which by a train shall have burn the house . but one of the inhabitant , espy these unwelcome guest , with the bounce of a calibre chase they aboard , and remove the barrel , before the train come to work their effect . the engineer of this practice , ( as have since appear by some examination ) be a Portugal , who sometime sail with sir John borowgh , and boast to have burn his ship : for which two honourable exploit , the king of Spain bestow on he two hundred ducat . [ 100 ] in the mouth of the harbour , lie saint Nicholas island , in fashion , losengy , in quantity , about 3. acre , strong fortify , careful guard , and subject to the commander of Plymmouth fort . when the cornish rebel , during Edw. the 6. reign , turmoil the quiet of those quarter , it yield a safe protection to diverse dutyful subject , who there shroud themselves . from this island , a range of rock reach over to the southwest shore , discover at the low water of spring tide , and leave only a narrow entrance in the midst , call the Yate , for ship to pass through , whereto they be direct by certain mark at land . upon this south shore , somewhat within the island , stand mount Edgecumb , a house build and name by sir Ric. Edgecumb , father to the now possessioner : and if comparison be as lawful in the make , as they prove odious in the match , i will presume to rank it , for health , pleasure , and commodity , with any subject house of his degree in England . it be seat against the north , on the decline of a hill , in the midst of a dear park , near a narrow entrance , through which the salt water break up into the country , to shape the great part of the haven . the house be build square , with a round turret at each end , garrete on the top , and the hall rise in the mid above the rest , which yield a stately sound , as you enter the same . in summer , the open casement admit a refresh coolness : in winter , the two close door exclude all offensive coldness : the parlour and dine chamber give you a large and diversify prospect of land and sea ; to which underlie saint Nicholas island , Plymmouth fort , and the town of Plymmouth , Stonehouse , Milbrook , and saltajh . it be supply with a never-failing spring of water , and the dwelling store with wood , timber , fruit , deer , and cony . the ground abundant answer a housekeeper necessity , for pasture , arable and meadow , and be replenish with a kind of stone , serve both for building , lime , and marl . on the seaclif grow great plenty of the best ore-wood , to satisfy the owner want , and accommodate his neighbour . a little below the house , in the summer evening , sayne-boate come and draw with their net for fish ; whither the gentry of the house walk down , take the pleasure of the sight , and sometime at all adventure , buy the profit of the draught . both side of the forementioned narrow entrance , together with the passage between , ( much haunt as the high way to PIymmouth ) the whole town of Stonehouse , and a great circuit of the land adjoin , appertain to m. edgecumb inheritance : these side be fence with blockhouse , and that next to mount Edgecumb , be wont to be plant with ordinance , which at come and part , with their base voice greet such guest as visit the house , neither have the opportunity of the harbour want occasion to bring they , or the owner a frank mind to invite they . for proof whereof , the erst remember sir Ric. ( a gentleman in who mildness and stoutness , diffidence and wisdom , deliberatenes of undertake , and sufficieney of effect , make a more commendable , than blaze mixture of virtue ) during Q. master reign , entertain at one time , for some good space , the admiral of the english , spanish , and Netherlands fleet , with many noble man beside . but not too much of this , lest a partial affection steal , at unware , into my commendation , as one , by my mother , descend from his loin , and by my birth , a member of the house . [ 101 ] certain old ruin , yet remain , confirm the neighbour report , that near the water side , there stand once a town , call west stone house , until the french by fire and sword overthrow it . in the year one thousand , five hundred , ninety nine , the Spaniard vaunt cause the cornish force to advance there a kind of fortification , and to plot the make of a bridge on barge over that strait , for inhibit the enemy access by boat and galley , into the more inward part of the haven . but it may be doubt , whether the bridge will have prove as impossible , as the sconce fall out unnecessary . master Peter Edgecumbe ( common call peer ) marry Margaret the daughter of sir Andrew lutterel , his father sir Richard marry [ blank ] the daughter of Tregian : he father sir peer marry [ blank ] the daughter , and heir of Stephan Durnford : and his father sir Richard , marry [ blank ] the daughter of tremayn . Theise name of peer and Richard , they have successive vary for six or seven descent . he bear for his arm , gules on a bend ermine , between two cotise , Or. 3. boar head cope , arg . arm as the three ; Langued as the field . a little inward from Mountedgecumb , lie a safe and commodious road for ship , call hamose , and compound of the word Hosea , and ham , accord to the nature of the place . here those vessel cast anchor , which be bind to the eastwards , as those do in Catwater , who will fare to the west ; because every wind that can erue they at sea , will from thence carry they out : which commodity other road do not so convenient afford . it be report , that in time past , there be a ordinary passage over this water , to a place on Devon side , call Horsecoue , but long since discontinue . at the high end of a creek , pass up from hence , Milbrook lurk between two hill , a village of some 80. house , and borrow his name from a mill and little brook , run therethrough . in my remembrance ( which extend not to above 40. year ) this village take great increase of wealth and building , through the just and industrious trade of fish , and have wellnear forty ship and bark at one time belong thereunto . but our late broil with Spain have let up a more compendious , though not so honest way of gain , and begin by little and little , to reduce these plain dealer , to their former undeserved plight . yet do they prescribe , in a suburbiall market ( as i may term it ) to Plymmouth , for their relief , by intercept , if not forestal , such corn and victual , as pass through their strait , can for want of time or weather , get over Crymell passage , to the other : and sure they be not unworthy of favour : for this town furnish more able mariner at every press for her highness service , than many other of far great blaze . it chance about twenty year sithence , that one Richaurd , wife to Richard Adams of this town , be deliver of two male child , the one ten week after the other , who live until baptism , and the late hitherto : which may happen , in that the woman bear twin , by some blow , slide , or other extraordinary accident , bring forth the first before his time , and the late in his due season . now , that a child bear in the seven month may live , both astrologer and physician [ 102 ] do affirm , but in the 8. they deny it ; and these be their reason : the astrologer hold , that the child in the mother womb , be successive govern every month , by the seven planet , begin at Saturn : after which reckon , he return to his rule the 8 , month , by his dreary influence , infortunate any birth that shall then casual befall : whereas his succeeder Jupiter , by a better disposition work a more beneficial effect . the physician deliver , that in the seven month , the child , by course of nature , turn it self in the mother belly ; wherefore , at that time , it be ready ( as half loose ) to take issue by any outward chance . Mary , in the eight , when it begin to settle again , and as yet retain some weakness of the former stir , it require a more forcible occasion , and that induce a slaughter violence . or if these conjectural reason suffice not to warrant a probability of the truth , plyny authority in a strange case , shall press they far : for he write , that a woman bring a bed of one child in the seven month , in the month follow , be also deliver of twin . a part of mountedgecumb , and of this Milbrook , though sever from Devon , by the general bind , yet , upon some of the foreremembered consideration , have be annex thereunto . aside of Milbrook , lie the Peninsula of Inswork , on who neckland stand a ancient house of the Champernons , and descend by his daughter and heir , to forteskew , Monck , and Treuilian , three gentleman of Devon . the site be natural both pleasant and profitable ; to which , the owner by his ingenious experiment , daily add a artificial surplusage . pass somewhat far up , you meet with the foot of Lyner , where it win fellowship with tame , that , till then , and this , yet long , retain their name , though their overweak stream be long before confound , by the predominant salt water . a little within this mouth of Lyner , stand East-Antony , the poor home of my ancestor , with which in this manner they be invest : sir John Lerchedekne , knight , and not priest , ( for he be so call of his family , and not by his call , as in Froissard you shall note the like , to be familiar among the nobility of Gascoigne ) by Cecill , the daughter and heir of Jordan of Haccumb , have issue 9 son , Ralph , Waryne , Richard , Otho , John , Robert , Martyn , Reignald , and Michael . Richard marry Jone , the daughter of John bosowr , that bear he Thomas , in who the heir male of this multiply hope take a end . Warine , afterward knight , take to wife Elizabeth , one of the daughter and heir to John Talbot de Castro Ricardi , and on she beget three daughter and heir . Allenor , wed to sir Walter Lucy : Margery , to sir Thomas Arundel of Taluerne : and Philip , to sir Hugh Courtney of Bauncton ( which i take be now name Boconnock . ) from Lucy descend the lord Faux , and other . Margery die childless , anno 1419. as be testify by her tombstone in West-Antony church , where she lie bury . sir Hugh Courtney be second son to Ed. earl of Devon , and have 2. wife : the first , Maud , daughter of the lord Beaumond ; to who child , for want of issue in the elder stock , that earldom devolve , and the late , our foreremembered fillip , who leave her inheritance to her only daughter Jone : and she take a pattern from her father fortune , espouse likewise 2. husband , viz. sir Nicholas baron of Carew , and sir Robert fere , brother to [ 103 ] John earl of Oxford : to sir Nicholas , she bear Thomas , Nicholas , Hugh , Alexander , and William : to sir Robert , John , and become widow of both . And , as after the father decease , good agreement between the mother and elder son have common weak continuance , because both be enfranchise to a sudden absolute jurisdiction , neither of they can easy temper the same with a requisite moderation : so it chance , that she and she fell at square , which discord ( with a unnatural extremity ) break forth into a blow , by he no less dear , then undutiful give his mother : for upon so just a cause , she disinherit he of all her land , be seventeen manor , and bestow they on her young son . this i learn by the report of sir Peter Carew , the elder of that name , and elder of our stock ( a gentleman , who rare worth my pen be not able to shadow , much less with his due lineament to represent ) at such time , as be a scholar in Oxford of fourteen year age , and three year stand , upon a wrong conceive opinion touch my sufficiency , i be there call to dispute ex tempore ( impar congressus Achilli ) with the matchless sir Ph. Sidney , in presence of the earl , Leycester , Warwick , and diverse other great personage . by the forementioned conveyance , she dispose of she say manor as follow : Haccumb , Ringmore , and Milton , she give to Nicholas : Lyham , Manedon , combhall , and Southtawton , to Hugh : East-Antony , Shoggebroke , and landegy , to Alexander : wicheband , Widebridge , Bokeland , and Bledeuagh , to William : and last , Roseworthy , bosewen , and tregennow , to John : all which she entail to they , and the issue of their body , substitute , for want thereof , the one to be heir to the other : and in witness hereof ( say she in her conveyance ) to each of these deed five time indent , i have set my seal ; and because my seal be to many unknown , have procure the seal of the mayor of the city of Exon , to be also adjoin . Thomas her elder son , repair this loss , in part , by match with one of carminowe , daughter and heir . from Nicholas , be descend Carew of Haccumb , who by virtue of this entail , succeed also to Hugh portion , as decease issueless . from William be come Carew of Crocum in Somerset shire , and from John Vere , the now earl of Oxford , derive his pedigree . Alexander marry Elizabeth the daughter of hatch , and beget John , who take to wife Thamesin , one of the daughter and heir of holland : their son sir Wymond , espouse Martha , the daughter of Edmund , and sister to sir Anthony Denny . sir Wymond have Thomas , the husband of Elizabeth Edgecumb , and they myself , link in matrimony with Julian , daughter to John Arundel of Trerice , and one of the heir to her mother Catherine Cosewarth , who have make i father of Richard , late wed to Bridget , daughter of John Chudleigh of Ashton in Devon . touch our stock in general , and my family in particular , be once vain dispose ( i will it have be but once ) i make this idle observation . CArew of ancient Carru be , and Carru be a plow , roman the trade , Frenchmen the word , i do the name avow . the old stock , and we a branch , at Phoebe govern . [ 104 ] from fire to son , do wax and wane , by thrift and lavish . the fire , not value at due price his wealth , it throw away : the son , by service or by match , repair this decay . the smell fence we sundry want , but want it without lack : for it|be no sense , to wish a weal , that bring a great wrack . through nature mark , we own our babe , by tip of the upper lip ; black-bearded all the race , save i , wrong dye by mothership . the baron wife , archdeacon heir , unto her young son give Antony , which down to i , by 4. descent have run . all which , and all their wife , express a turtle single love , and never do tha'duentrous change , of double wedding prove . we be the fist : to swerve herefrom , i will not though i can , as for my wife , God may dispose , she shall not , though she will . our family transplant it self , to grow in other shire , and country rather make then take , as best behoof appear . Children thrice three God have we lend , two son , and then a maid , by order bear , of which , one three we in the grave have lay . our elder daughter widow fall , before our young bear : so do hard hap unlooked come , so be our hope forlese . Mine treble have in either sex , those which my parent get , and yet but half they , which god my grandsire do allot : who grace in court , rare obtain , to th'yongst of those eighteen , three king of England godfather , for godmother , our queen . the arm of our family , be Or. 3. lion passant , sable : arm and Langued gules . it exceed good manner , to invite your long stay at our cold harbour ; and yet , for that diverse stranger have , either upon cause or kindness , pretend to like well of a saltwater pond there make ; and other , who dwelling afford a semblable opportunity , may ( perhaps ) take some light herefrom , to do the like : if they be so dispose , i will put my self to the pain of particular describe it , and you may ( notwithstanding ) at your pleasure , save the labour of peruse it ; wherein i will by the way interlace some note , for the imitater better instruction . there lie a creek of Hosea , between two hill , which deliver a little fresh rillet into the sea , receive for recompense , a large overflow of the salt water tide . this place be deepen to a pond , by cast up part of the Hosea to the head , part to the middle , and part to the side : the upper head stop out the fresh water , the low keep in the salt : the middle raise a island for the workmen [ 105 ] ease , the owner pleasure , and the fish succour . the Hosea thus advance , within short space , through the sun and wind , change his former softness , to a firm hardness . round about the pond , there be pitch a frith of three foot height , slope inward , to bar any otter from issue , if he there adventure his natural theft , as it will foreclose his entrance , but lose the pastime of his hunt , if the same decline outward . in one of the corner next the sea , stand a floodgate , to be draw up and let down through reigle in the side post , who mouth be encompass with a double frith , of two foot distance , each from other , and their middle space fill up with small stone : this serve to let in the salt water , and to keep in the fish , when the floodgate be take up : and therefore you must not make the frith too close , nor the compass too little , lest they too much stop the water passage . it rise of equal height with the bank , and they must outreach the high full sea mark , by two foot at least : neither ought your floodgate foot to stand even with the pond bottom , lest empty the water , it whole abandon the fish , but must leave about three foot depth within . in the half circle enclose between the floodgate and the compass frith , there be dig a round pit , of three foot diameter , and four foot depth , frithe on the side , which be continual feed with the water soak from the say floodgate , and serve to keep any fish alive , that you have before take , and so to save over often draw . the floodgate will hold water best , if his side be wall up with Cob the pond may not carry one continual depth , but contain some shallow place , to protect the small fish from the great , and for they all to play in , when the weather be hot . in the high bank there be also a floodgate , to let in the fresh water , during summer season , which the fish then best affect ; the rest of the year it be carry away by a trench , for avoid diverse discommodity . thus much for the make : now to the use . such as have the mean , may best benefit themselves , by let in the salt water every tide , which be easy do , in make that place , where the water enter , low than the bank and frith , and so suffer the tide to take his course forth and back , without stop or attendance : and in this case , you may place your floodgate even with the floor of your pond , and never take it up , but when you be dispose to view all your store . but my lie so high from the mouth of the haven , as i be drive to detain the last provision , until the come springtide have take two day increase ; at which time , the floodgate be hoist up , the old water let out , and the new admit . at full sea down go the floodgate again , and there abide , until the next day minister the like occasion : and after this manner be open and close , for six day in the whole , continue from thenceforth other ten day vnmedle withal , to wit , 8. day of the neap , and two of the spring . neither do all this require overlong , or busy pain or attendance : for if the former water be let out ( save in extreme cold weather ) before any new come in , or stop somewhat too late , it little skill , so as on the last day you keep the advantage , which the flood , then at high , do give you . and all these service about my pond , together with sundry other , be perform by a old fellow who i [ 106 ] keep for alm , and not for his work . the best mean of prevent leakage , be to let three or four shovel full of earth fall soft down , by the inner side of the floodgate , which will quurt up his chink . in winter season , six foot depth of water , at least , be requisite . now touch the fish , this be the manner : when the pilcherd sayner cut the most impair piece out of their net , they be buy for a trifle , and serve to make a less say , of foam 30. or 40. fathom length , and 2. in depth , for this purpose , wherewith , between midsummer and the end of August , when the full sea fall in the afternoon , my people make draught on the shallow place within harbour , and take small fish , cast they into the pond : they be keep and bring thither alive , in a boat half full of water , which enter through a little augre hole in the bottom , and so continue new . the fish thus take , be common base , Millet , guilthead , whiting , smelt , Flouk , plaice , and sole . the pond also breed crab , eel , and shrimp ; and ( in the beginning ) oyster grow upon bough of tree ( a indian miracle ) which be cast in thither , to serve as a hover for the fish . the base and millet do also spawn there , but whether they overlive their breeder raven , to any big growth , i be not certain . the pond will moreover keep shoot , peal , trought , and Sammon , in seasonable plight , but not in their wont reddish grain . they feed on salt vnmarchantable Pilcherd , small fish , call Brit , and bairn , tag-worme , lugge , little crab , and the liver of beast : the rest devour their meat , but the millet content themselves with suck it , and chaw of the sedge . every evening they come to a place certain in the pond , for receive their allow pittance , and in summer , approach very near , and in the top of the water plain discover themselves . they be first train hereunto , by throw in their bait at the pond mouth , as they resort thither , to take pleasure of the new enter water , and be now become alike tame , with those in the sicilian river Elorus , for which , Leonicus vouch the testimony of Apollodorus . if they be absent , a knock , like the chap of their meat , serve for a summons to call they , and confirm plyny assertion , that fish do hear . in the hot summer weather , they swim with the rhyme of the water ; and in the winter , keep the depth . lymy , or thick puddel water , kill they : they grow very fast , and fat , which also better their taste , and deliver they to the demander ready use , at all season , seasonable . they be take general , by a little say net : special the eel in weely : the flowk , by grope in the sand , at the mouth of the pond , where ( about lend ) they bury themselves to spawn ; and the base and millet by angle . the pleasure which i take at my friend pleasure herein , idle busy i thus to express the same . i wait not at the lawyer gate , ne shoulder clymer down the stair ; i vaunt not manhood by debate , i envy not the miser fear : but mean in state , and calm in spirit , my fishful pond be my delight . where equal distant island view his force bank , and otter cage : [ 107 ] where salt and fresh the pool renew , as spring and drought increase or assuage : where boat present his service press , and net become the fish nest ; there suck millet , swallow base , side-walking crab , wry-mouthed flock , and flip-fist eel , as evening pass , for safe bait at due place do look : bold to approach , quick to espy , greedy to catch , ready to fly . in heat the top , in cold the deep : in spring the mouth , the mid in neap : with changeless change by shoal they keep , fat , fruitful , ready , but not cheap : thus mean in state , and calm in spirit , my fishful pond be my delight . and again . stench-louing fly , their father heat , on mother , moisture do beget ; who feel force of sun too great , their course unto some water set , there mean of calmy air to prove , betwixt cool below and warmth above . but careless of foresight in weal , the evening dew droplode their wing , so force , down-fallen , for flight to fail , with buzz moan their bane they sing , flutter in wave , swim in air , that , weak to drown , and this , to bear . while thus they can nor live nor dye , nor water-gieued , escape away , [ 107 ] the fish and swallow it espy , and both they challenge for their prey ; the fish as catch within their toil , the swallow as their kindly spoil . the fish , like swallow , mount on high , the swallow , fish-like dive in wave , these , finlesse swim , those , wingless fly , one bend their diverse venture have , fish in the dry , swallow in wet , by kind against kind their prey to get . their push a bubble up do rear , the bubble drive the fly to brink : so fish in vain devour the air , swallow in vain the water drink , while fly escape , this sport i take . where pond do the ocean captive make . i carry once a purpose , to build a little wooden banquet house , on the island in my pond , which because some other may ( perhaps ) elsewhere put in execution , it will not do much amiss , to deliver you the plot , as the same be devise for i , by that perfect accomplish gentleman , the late sir Arthur Champernowne . the island be square , with four round at the corner , like mountedgecumb . this shall first have be planch over and rail about , with balister . in themidst , there shall have rise he board room , of the like fashion , but lesser proportion , so to leave sufficient space between that and the rail for a walk round about : this square room shall within side have be seel roundwise , and in three of the place where [ 108 ] the round join with the square , as many window shall have be set ; the four shall have serve for a door . of the 4. turret , shut out by this round , one shall have make a kitchen , the second , a store-house , to keep the fish implement , the three , a buttery , and the four a stair , for ascend to the next loft : which next loft shall have rise on the flat roof of the low , in a round form , but of a lesser size again , so to leave a second terrace , like the other : and as the square room below be seel round , so shall this upper round room be seel square , to the end , that where the side walk and sieling join , three window and a door may likewise find their place . the void space be - between the round and square , he will have turn to cupboard and box , for keep other necessary utensil , towards these fish feast . over-against this pond , lie beggar island , so call ( as our neighbour relate ) ever since my great grandsire espy 2. of that idle occupation , at a hot combat on the shore , while he be row homeward from Saltash , take they into his boat , and there set they on land , to try ( as in a list ) the uttermost of their quarrel : which place they can not quit , until the low water shall enfranchise they by wade and the respite , vent out the alye fume of their fury . about 40. year ago , it chance , that a boat ouer-fraighted with people , in row down the river from Saltash market , be by the extreme weather , sink , near to a place call Henpoint , and all the folk drown , save one only woman , name Agnes , the wife of one Cornish , who it please God so to protect and direct , that in her first pop up again ( which most live thing accustom ) she espy the boat ( after it have discharge his burden ) rise likewise , and float by she , full of water , whereon she get hold , sit astride upon one of his side , and by the wind and tide , be unusual , and almost miraculous drive athwart the channel , to a place call wilcoue , where she no soon step ashore , but the boat ( as have do his enjoin errand ) present recommit it self to the storm disposition . the woman thus free from one peril at sea , adventure another of little less consequence at land ; for be not yet thorough restore to her sense , she climb up the cliff in such a steep place , as the very consideration thereof , do ever sithence half amaze the beholder . but that ground be fore ordain to her good : for not long after , her husband take the same , with the rest of the tenement , in lease ; and it now serve she for a dwelling , and many other , by her charity , for a relief . her say husband , and their two only son , at several time , by one kind of misfortune , find their burial in the wave . the oyster dredge in this lyner , find a welcome acceptance , where the taste , and not appetite , be cater for the stomach , than those of the adjoin tame , which grow ( as i conjecture ) because lyner lesser stream leave they to be season , with a more kindly and better relish saltness . the next parish upon this river , be call Sheuiock , sometime the ancient dannye inheritance and inhabitant : by who daughter and heir , the same ( together with other fair possession ) descend to the earl of Devon . in [ 109 ] the church there lie two knight of that name , and one of their lady by her husband side , have their picture emboss on their tomb in the side wall , and their arm once paint round about ; but now by the malice , not of man , but of time , deface . they be hold to be father and son , and that the son slay in our war with France , be from thence bring home to be here inter . there run also a tale among the parishioner , how one of these dannye ancestor undertake to build the church , and his wife the barne adjoin , and that , cast up their account , upon finish of their work , the barne be find to cost three halfpence more than the church : and so it may well fall out : for it be a great barne , and a little church . in this parish stand crasthole , which by the high site , may more fit be term open hill , a poor village but a much frequent thoroughfare , somewhat infamous , not upon any present desert , but through a inveterate byeword , viz. that it be people with 12. dwelling , and 13. cuckold : for as the dwelling be more than double , so ( i hope ) the cuckold be less than single . howsoever , many wayfarer make themselves glee , by put the inhabitant in mind of this privilege ; who again , especial the woman ( like the campellians in the north , and the London barger ) forslow not to baigne they ( unless they plead their heel the fast ) with a worse perfume , than Jugurtha find fault with in the dungeon , where the roman bury he alive , to attend his languish and miserable death . upon Sheuiock abbut S. germane , the great parish in Cornwall , if you join to the store of people , the quantity and quality of the soil , wherethrough it afford commodious dwelling to sundry ancient gentleman , and wealthy farmour ; among which first sort , i may not ( without withdraw my testimony due to virtue ) omit m. George keckwitch of catch-french , a house so name ( by likelihood ) for some former memorable , though now forget accident , who continual , large , and inquisitive liberality to the poor , do in the late dear year , extraordinary extend it self to a invite emulation , but beyond the apprehensive imitation of any other in the shire . he have issue by Blanch , the daughter of sir Francis Godolphin : he father George , marry Buller : he grandsire [ blank ] their ancient dwell be in Essex , where this gentleman enjoy fair possession , and bear for his arm , Ar. two lion in bend passant saint cotife , G. the church town muster many inhabitant , and sundry ruin , but little wealth , occasion either through abandon their fish trade , as some conceive , or by their being abandon of the religious people , as the great sort imagine : for in former time , the bishop of Cornwall see , be from saint petrock in Bodmyn , remove hither ; as from hence , when the cornish diocese unite with Devon , it pass to Crediton : and last , from thence to Excester . but this first loss receive relief through a succeed priory , which at the general suppression , change his note with his coat , be now name port Eliot , and by the owner charity distribute , pro virili , the alm accustomable expect and expend at at such place . neither will it ( i think ) much displease you to hear , how the gentleman ancestor , of who master Eliot buy it , come by the same . [ 110 ] John Champernowne , son and heir apparent to sir fillip of Devon , in H. the 8. time , follow the court , and through his pleasant conceit , of which much may be speak , win some good grace with the king . now when the golden shower of the dissolve abbey land , rain welnere into every gaper mouth , some 2. or 3. gentleman , the king servant , and master champernowne acquaintance , wait at a door where the king be to pass forth , with purpose to beg such a matter at his hand : our gentleman become inquisitive to know their suit : they make strange to impart it . this while , out come the king : they kneel down , so do master Champernowne : they prefer their petition ; the king grant it : they render humble thank , and so do m. Champernowne : afterward , he require his share ; they deny it ; he appeal to the king : the king avow his equal meaning in the largesse ; whereon , the overtake companion be fain to allot he this priory for his partage . the parish church answer in bigness , the large proportion of the parish , and the surplusage of the priory ; a great part of who chancel anno 1592. fall sudden down , upon a Friday , very short after public service be end , which heavenly favour , of so little respite , save many person life , with who immediate before , it have be stuff : and the devout charge of the well dispose parishioner quick repair this ruin . at the town end , Cuddenbeak , a ancient house of the bishop , from a well advance promontory , which entitle it beak , take a pleasant prospect of the river . in this parish lie Bake , the mansion of the foreremember m. Ro. Moyle , who marry Anne daughter of m. lock , as he do mistress Vaughan , a gentlewoman suppress her rare learning , with a rare modesty , and yet express the same in her virtuous life and Christian decease . John father to Robert marry Agnes , daughter of Semtabyn : and his father [ blank ] daughter of forteskew , to who that dwell first descend . he bear for his arm , G. a moil passant , Ar. a part of this parish confine on the main sea and offer a fair land place , call Seaton , howbeit , by a handsome fence forbid any foe invasion : it be overlook , upon the one side of the river ( which there discharge his stream into the ocean ) by Keuerel , the ancient house of the langdon , gentleman , in former time , of fair revenue , who arm be Ar. a Cheuron between 3. bear head erase saint the house perhaps , borrow his name of Cheuereul , a french word , signify a wild goat ( as those high cliff afford they a commodious inhabitant ) and on the other , by Tregonnock , the dwell of m. Tho. smith , who in a quiet and honest retiredness , find that contentment , which many ambitious head , far and wide do vain seek for : he marry tremayn : he father Robert [ blank ] one of the daughter and heir to Killigrew : and his son John , Priscilla the daughter of m. Geo. Wadham . his arm , B. a saulty Ar. between 4. martlet O. leave saint , germane , and pass through laurake parish , in which m. Peter Courtney have a high seat house , call Wotton , you descend to noddetor bridge , where the river Lyner first mingle his fresh stream with the brinish wave : touch who name and quality , one delight in the solitary solace of his bank , and more affect his own recreation , then hunt after any other good like , descant thus : [ 111 ] who first give lyner name , or from what cause it come , hard it|be for certain to express : experience yet direct , by trial of effect , thereat to aim , and frame a guess , be|it , that as she thou bear'th , so thou do line the earth , with purseld stream of blue and white : or , as a line do guide , so thou do level slide , and throw into the sea thy mite ? be|it , that with twist line , the angler do untwine the fish life , by give breath . or , as the thresh lout , rush his lyner out , so Lyner on his course rush : or , as some puppy seat , line a mastiff great , and get whelp of mongrel kind : Lyner , the sea so line , and stream with wave combine , beget water fresh brin'de . item . when sun the earth lest shadow spare , and high stall in heaven his seat , than lyner peeble bone he bare , who like a lamb , do low bleat , and faint slide every rock , pluck from his foamy fleece a lock : before , a river , now a rill , before , a fence , now scarce a bound ; Children he overleap at will , small beast , his deep bottom sound . the heaven with brass enarch his head , and earth , of iron make his bed , but when the milder-mooded sky , his face in mourn weed do wrap , for absence of his clear eye , and drop tear in his centre lap , lyne gin lion-like to roar , and scorn old bank shall bound he more . then , second sea , he roll , and bear , rock in his womb , rick on his back . down-borne bridge , uptorn wear , witness , and wail , his force , their wrack . into man house fierce he break , and on each stop , his rage he wreak . Shepheard adiew' his swim flock , the hind his whelm harvest hope , the strong rampire fear|be he shock , plain scarce can serve to give he scope , nor hill a bar ; whereso he stray'th , ensue , loss , terror , ruin , death . in follow the course of Lyner , you fall down by master bond ancient house of earth , descend to his ancestor , from the daughter and heir of that name , to that of master wiuel , new and fair build , on which abbut master Bullers Shillingham , not so much behold to the owner inhabitancy as to nature pleasant and commodious seat . Bond marry with fountain , his father with fit : his [ 112 ] arm be Ar. on a Cheuron saint three besants . next , we take view of Trematon castle , as it do of the haven , and country adjoin . it be , or rather be , one of the duke foremention four house : for now all the inner building be sink into ruin : only there remain the iuie-tapissed wall of the keep , and base court , and a poor dwell for the keeper of the jail , to which prisoner be bring upon action , from all place appurtenant to that large lordship , if they can by suretyship discharge themselves , from the bailiefe arrest . i have receive information , from one aver eyewitness , that about fourscore year since , there be dig up in the parish chancel , a leaden coffin , which be open , show the proportion of a very big man , but when the hand go about to ascertain themselves , as well as their eye , the body verify , that omnis caro puluis . the party far tell i , how , a writing grave in the lead , express the same to be the burial of a duke , who heir be marry to the prince . but who it shall be , i can devise , albeit my best please conjecture , light upon Orgerius , because his daughter be marry to Edgar . at the last cornish commotion , s , Richard Greynuile the elder do , with his lady and follower , put themselves into this castle , and there for a while endure the rebel siege , encamp in three place against it , who want great ordinance , can have wrought the besiege small scathe , have his friend , or enemy keep faith and promise : but some of those within , slip by night over the wall , with their body after their heart , and those without , mingle humble entreating with rude menace , he be hereby win , to issue forth at a postern gate for parley . the while , a part of those rakehell , not know what honesty , and far less , how much the word of a soldier import , step between he and home , lay hold on his age vnweyldie body , and threaten to leave it liveless , if the enclose do not leave their resistance . So prosecute their first treachery against the prince , with suitable action towards his subject , they seize on the castle , and exercise the uttermost of their barbarous cruelty ( death except ) on the surprise prisoner . the silly gentlewoman , without regard of sex or shame , be strip from their apparel to their very smock , and some of their finger break , to pluck away their ring , and sir Richard himself make a exchange from Trematon castle , to that of Launceston , with the jail to boot . this castle vaunt the lord Warden his steward by patent , master Anthony rouse his bailiff by inheritance , and Richard Carew of Antony his keeper by lease . of the ancient officer , one yet retain the name , though not the place , viz. m. porter , to who ancestor , when Vantor be lord thereof , one by a deed before date , give land , lie without the gate , by the title of Russell Ianitori de Trematon , which he still enjoy . m. porter arm be saint three bell Ar. a canton Erm. it stand in saint Stephens parish : the sheaf whereof , together with other fair revenue , m. George Wadham enjoy in the right of his wife , the daughter and heir to master Hechins , liberal bestow in continual hospitality . master Hechins arm , be saint a cross Fleurty , [ 113 ] quarterly b and G. between 4. lion head erase saint langued of the second . m. Wadhams , G. a Cheuron between three rose Ar. the same parish also comprise Saltash , in old write , call Villa de esse ; esse he town : and such gentleman there have be of ancient descent and fair revenue . the word salt , be add thereunto , because it stand on the sea , and to distinguish it from other place of the same name . it be seat on the decline of a steep hill , consist of three street , which every shower wash clean , comprise between 80. and 100 household , underly the government of a mayor and his 10. brethren , and possess sundry large privilege over the whole haven , to wit , a yearly rent of boat and barge appertain to the harbour , anchorage of strange ship , crown of dead person , lay of arrest , and other admiral right , beside elect of burgess for the parliament , benefit of the passage , foreclose all other , save themselves , from dredge of oyster , except between Candlemas and Easter , weekly market , halfe-yeerely fair , etc the town be of late year well increase and adorn with building , and the townsman addict themselves to the honest trade of merchandise , which endow they with a competent wealth . some 7. or 8. ship belong thereunto . it be not long since , that the neighbour-minister successive bestow their pain in preach there , on the market day , and the border gentleman yield their presence . sermon end , the preacher resort to one ordinary , and the gentleman to another . This afford commendable effect to many work of love and charity : but , with the retort blame , from one to another , it be now whole give over . here , that great carack , which sir Francis Drake surprise , in her return from the east Indies , unload her freight , and through a negligent fire , meet with a unprope end . in this town also dwell one grisling , deaf from a long time , who , beside his merry conceit , of counterfeit by sign ( like the roman Pantomimi ) any kind of occupation or exercise , have a strange quality , to understand what you say , by mark the move of your lip , especial if you speak deliberate , of any ordinary matter , so as ( contrary to the rule of nature , and yet without the help of art ) he can see word as they pass forth of your mouth : and of this i have cause he to give often experiment . and if Plyny now live , i suppose he will afford a room , in his natural history , to a dog of this town , who ( as i have learn by the faithful report of master Thomas Parkins ) use daily to fetch meat at his house there , and to carry the same unto a blind mastiff , that lie in a brake without the town : yea , ( that moor be ) he will upon Sunday conduct he thither to dinner , and , the meal end , guide he back to his couch and covert again . i have almost forget to tell you , that there be a well in this town , who water will never boil peason to a seasonable softness . at the foot of Saltash , there abbut upon the sea , a rock , call ashtorre , alias , Effes Torre , which be invest with the jurisdiction of a manor , and claim the suit of many gentleman , as his freeholder in knight [ 114 ] service . below this , there be a rock on each side of the river , the one term the bull , the other the hen ; that on Devon , this on Cornwall side . the hen stand a little distant from the shore , which give occasion to a pack , how between it and the land , the queen great ship may sail ; but it be mean of the far distant . above Saltash , Cargreen , a fisher town , show it self , but can hardly muster a mean plight of dwelling or dweller : so may their care be green , because their wealth be wither . near thereunto be Clifton , a neat seat house , appertain to one of the arundel , descend by a young brother , from those of Trerice ; he marry hill , his father , coal . neither have your eye scarce quit that , when it receive Halton , the pleasant and commodious dwell of m. Anthony rouse , both which benefit , he empley to a kind and uninterrupt entertainment of such , as visit he upon his not spare invite , or their own occasion , who ( without the self guilt of a ungrateful wrong ) must witness , that his frankenesse confirm their welcome , by whatsoever mean , provision , the fuel of hospitality , can in the best manner supply . his ancestor be lord of little Modbury in Devon , before the descent of time grow to a distinguishment , by the date of write : which manor , together with other land , through a lineal succession , fall to be possess by Ralph , Wil. Ralph , John , Wil. Ralph , and Ralph , who daughter and heir Elizabeth , bestow the same , with her self , upon the family of the dimock , Robert , second son to the last mention Ralph , save one , have issue will , who marry Alice , the daughter and heir of Tho. of Edmerston . Wil. have another Wil. and he have John , and John again have Wil. This Wil. have Roger , who upon Julian , sister and coheir of John hill of fleet , beget John and Richard , father to the gentleman now live , and he match with Elizabeth , daughter of Thomas Southcott , and one of the heir to her mother , the daughter of Barnehouse : beside which , he succeed to his uncle John inheritance , who decease issueless : and be yet scarce enter the limit of a healthful old age , see his pedigree extend into two far descent . as for those outreaching man memory , i have see they very sufficient verify : he arm be , oh a eagle display B. prune her wing , arm and langued G. upon the top of a creek hereby , lie Crocadon , the mansion of m. Treuisa , a gentleman , derive himself from the ancient and weldeserue chronicler of that name : he bear G. a garb o a mile above Halton , stand cuttayle , another house of m. edgecumb , so name ( as we may conjecture ) of the french courtaile , in english , short cut ; because here , the salt water course be straighten , by the encroach bank . the building be ancient , large , strong and fair , and appurtenance with the necessary of wood , water , fish , park , and mill , with the devotion of ( in time past ) a rich furnish chapel , and with the charity of almshouse for certain poor people , who the owner use to relieve . it be report , and credit thereabouts , how sir Ric. Edgecumb the elder , be drive to hide himself in those his thick wood , which overlook the river , what time be suspect of favour the earl of Richmond party , against king R. the 3. he be hot pursue , and narrow search for . [ 115 ] which extremity teach he a sudden policy , to put a stone in his cap , and tumble the same into the water , while these ranger be fast at his heal , who look down after the noise , and see his cap swim thereon , suppose that he have desperate drown himself , give over their far hunt , and leave he liberty to shift away , and ship over into Britain : for a grateful remembrance of which delivery , he afterward build in the place of his lurk , a chapel , not yet utter decay . and thus have coast the cornish side of Plymmouth haven , i hold it not amiss , to make report of such great voyage , as , by the memory of our chronicle , or our own view , from this harbour , take their beginning or end . here the never enough commend black prince , attend by the earl of Warwick , Suffolk , Sarisbury , and Oxford , the lord chandos and other , commit himself to the sea , with a navy of 300. bottom , for land and maintain his father right in France ; and hither , after his glorious battle at Poitiers , he return , with the captive french king and his noble . here the lady Katherine , daughter to the king of Spain , and wife to our prince Arthur , take land , at her first arrival in England . here ship himself , the lord Darcy , send by king Henry the 8. with a lusty crew of soldier , for that Ferdinand just assistance , against the infidel : but use by he as a stale , for the unjust conquest of Christian Navarre here , mostly , have the troop of adventurer , make their Rendez vous , for attempt new discovery or inhabitance : as , Tho. Stukeleigh for Florida , sir Humphrey Gilbert for newfoundland , sir Richard Greynuile for virginea , sir Martyn Frobisher , and master Davies , for the northwest passage , sir Walter Raleigh for Guiana , etc here , count Mongomery make forth , with a more commendable meaning , then able mean , or welspeeding effect , for relieve the hard besiege , and sore distress rocheller . here , sir Fra. drake first extend the point of that liquid line , wherewith ( as a emulator of the sun glory ) he encompass the world . here , master Candish begin to second he , with a like heroical spirit , and fortunate success . here , don Antonio , king of Portugal , the earl of Cumberland , Essex , and Nottingham , the lord warden of the stannery , sir John Norrice , sir John Hawkins ( and who elsewhere , and not here ? ) have ever accustom to cut sail , in carry defiance , againt the imaginary new monarch ; and here to cast anchor , upon their return with spoil and honour . i omit the infinite swarm of single ship , and petty fleet , daily here man out to the same effect . and here , in eighty eight , the foreremembered lord admiral expect , and set forth , against that heaven-threatening Armado , which , to be taint with the shameful disgrace , and to blaze our renown with the bright lustre , term itself , invincible . but i may not grow ouer-lasciuious in extol . king R. the 2. anno 5. of his reign , by act of parliament , restrain all passenger from ship themselves in any other port then such as be there set down : of which Plymmouth be one . [ 116 ] from Plymmouth haven , pass far into the country , Hengsten down present his waste head and side to our sight . this name it borrow of Hengst , which in the saxon signify a horse , and to such least dainty beast it yield fit pasture . the country people have a by word , that , Hengsten down , well wrought , be worth London town , dear ybought . which grow from the store of tin , in former time , there dig up : but that gainful plenty be now fall to a scant-sauing scarcity . those work afford store of the forementioned cornish diamond , the neighbour inhabitant observe also , that when the top of Hengsten , be cap with a cloud , the same boad a shower within short time after . Roger Houeden report , that about anno 806. a fleet of Dane arrive in west-wale , with who the welsh join in insurrection against king Egbright , but he glorious discomfit they , at hengistendune , which i take to be this place ( if at least west-wale may , by interpretation , pass for Cornwall ) because the other province , of that time , be more common divide into north and south . this down be edge by Carybullock , sometime a park of the duke , but best brook that name , now it have lose his quality , through exchange deer for bullock . a little aside from hence , lie Landwhitton , now Lawhittan , which ( as i have elsewhere note ) be exempt unto Edwulff bishop of creditune , from the cornish diocese , to which yet , both for the temporalty , and spiritualty , the same owe present subjection . Mary , into what new name Pontium and coilleng there also mention , be now metamorphize , i must say amplio . those building common know by the name of Launston , and write Lanceston , be by the Cornishmen , call lesteeuan ( Lez in Cornish signify broad , and those be scatter erect ) and be ancient term Lanstaphadon , by interpretation , saint Stephens church : they consist of two borough , downeuet and Newport : that ( perhaps so call ) of down yield , as have a steep hill : this , of his new erection . with they join the parish of saint Thomas and S. Stephens . the parish church of Launceston itself , fetch his title of dedication , from mary Magdalen , who image be curious hew in a side of the wall , and the whole church fair build . the town be first found ( say m. Hooker ) by Eadulphus , brother to Alpsius , duke of Devon and Cornwall , and by his be gird with a wall , argue in time past to have carry some value . a new increase of wealth , express it self in the inhabitant late repair and enlarge building . they be govern by a mayor , and his scarlet-robde brethren , and reap benefit by their fair and market , and the county Assizes . the statute of 32. Henry 8. which take order touch sanctuary , endow this town with the privilege of one , but i find it not turn to any use . to the town there be adjoinant in site , but sequester in jurisdiction , a ancient castle , who steep rocky-footed keep , have his top environ with a treble wall , and in regard thereof , man say , be call , castle terrible . the base court comprise a decay chapel , a [ 117 ] large hall , for hold the shire-assize , the constable dwell house , and the common jail . about 60. year past , there be find certain leather coin in the castle wall , who fair stamp and strong substance , till then resist the assault of time , as they will now of covetousness . a little without the town , be found a friary , and anno 1128. a abbey , further by Reignald earl of Cornwall . about 2. mile distant from Launceston , penheale manor coast the high way , claim the right of ancient demain , and sometime appertain to the earl of Huntingdon , but purchase not long sithence by the late m. George Greinuile , who descend from a young brother of that family , and through his learning and wisdom , advance his credit to a especial good regard in his country . he marry Julian , one of the 6. daughter and heir of William viel : and Jane , the daughter to sir John Arundel of Trerice . Richard his father take to wife , one of kelwayes heir ; and Degory his grandfather , one of the inheritor to tregarthen : which help , together with his own good husbandry , have endow his son with a elder brother livelihood : he bear G. three rest O. in Lezant parish hereby , master Christopher Harris own a three part of trecarell ( the project : and onset of a sumptuous building ) as coheir to the last gentleman of that name , but admit no partner in the sweet temper mixture of bounty and thrift , gravity and pleasantness , kindness and stoutness ; which grace all his action . he bear saint three croissant within a border a neither may we forget master Coringtons house of Newton , old to he by succession , yet new , in respect of his own antiquity : diverse his ancestor have reap the praise and reputation of a stay carriage , howbeit one of they , through his rash , but merry prank , be to this day principal remember , by the name of the mad Corington . i have hear he deliver a observation , that , in eight lineal descent , no one bear heir of his house ever succeed to the land : he bear a , a saulty saint Trebigh , a privilege franchise , be by his lord , master William Wray , convert to a general welcomer of his friend and neighbour . he marry the daughter of sir William Courtney : he father the coheir of Killigrew . he bear saint a Fesse between three battelax A. pool , for his low and moist seat , be not unapt name , house sir Jonathan Trelawny , far beneath his worth and call : he marry sir Henry Killigrews daughter : his father , the coheir of Reskimer : he grandfather Lamellyns inheritrix . Poole stand in mynhinet parish , where sir Jonathan have a large privilege manor of the same name : the benefice be give by Excester college in Oxford , none but the fellow admittable , wherethrough it have successive be grace , with three well bear , well learned , and well-beloved incumbent ; doctor Tremayne , master billet , and master Denis . out of sir Jonathan house be also descend master Edward Trelawny , a gentleman qualify with many good part . their arm be A. a Cheuron , S. between three oke-leaue Vert. [ 118 ] sundry other gentleman rest behold to this hundred , for their dwelling , who , in a enuiable mediocrity of fortune do happy possess themselves , and communicate their sufficient mean to the service of their prince , the good of their neighbour , and the better of their own estate : of which sort be , m. Becket , who bear S. a Fesse , between three boar head cope , six cross crosslet Fichee . O. m. Tregodecke , who bear A. a Cheuron between three buckle saint m. spur , G. on a Cheuron o a rose of the first , and 2. mullet pierce S. m. Bligh , B. a Griffon sergeant O. arm G. between 3. croissant A. m. low , B. a Cheuron engrail O. between three rose A. m. Truisa G. a garb oh m. Chiuerton A. a castle S. stand on a hill V. Manaton , A. on a bend s. three mullet of the field , and some other . Stratton hundred STratton hundred extend the breadth of Cornwall , to the north , as that of east begin it on the south , and therefore it shall next succeed . his circuit be slender , but his fruitfulness great , and the inhabitant industry commendable , who reap a large benefit from their orchard and garden , but especial from their garlic ( the countrymans treacle ) which they vent , not only into Cornwall , but many other shire beside . Stratton , the only market town of this hundred , give the same his name , and ( if i mistake not ) take it from Strata , a street : other memorable matter to report thereof , i find not any . upon one side of the town , lie master chamond house and place of launcel , so call , for that it be sometime a cell , appertain to the abbot of Hartlond . this gentleman father , late decease , receive at God hand , a extraordinary favour , of long life . he serve in the office of a justice of peace , almost 60. year . he know above 50. several judge of the western circuit . he be uncle , and great uncle to at least 300. wherein yet , his uncle and neighbour , master Greynuile , parson of Kilkhampton , do exceed he . he marry one of the daughter and heir of Treuenner , and by she see five son , and two daughter , the young out-stepping 40. year . sir John Chamond his father , a man learn in the common law , be knight at the sepulchre , and by dame Jane , widow to sir John Arundel of Trerice , and daughter to sir Thomas Greynuile , have a elder son call Thomas , who two daughter , and heir , by Arscot , carry part of the land , to Tripcony , and trevanion , with who they match . master Chamond bear A. a Cheuron between 3. flower the luce : G. in launcel parish , also , stand Norton , the house of m. Tristan Arscot , a gentleman , who by his travail abroad in his young year , have the better enable himself , to discharge his call at home . he take to wife Eulalia , the widow of the wise , and virtuous m. Edmond Tremayne , and daughter of sir John Sentleger , who stately house of anery , in Devon , he purchase , and thither have late remove his residence ; he bear party per Cheuron b , et e , in chief two stag head cabase 0. [ 119 ] upon the north-sea , thereby , border stow , so single call , per eminentiam , as a place of great and good mark and scope , and the ancient dwell of the greynuiles famous family , from whence be issue diverse male branch , and whether the female have bring in a very populous kindred . master Bernard Greinuile , son and heir to sir Richard , be the present owner , and in a kind magnanimity , tread the honourable step of his ancestor . Tonacumb , late the house of master John Kempthorne , alias , lea , who marry Katherine , the daughter of sir peer Courtney , be , by his issueless decease , descend to his brother son : he bear A. three pineapple tree V. return to the westwards , we meet with Bude , a open sandy bay , in who mouth rise a little hill , by every sea-floud make a island , and thereon , a decay chapel : it spare road only to such small ship , as bring their tide with they , and leave they dry , when the ebb have carry away the salt-water . upon one side hereof , master Arundel of Trerice possess a pleasant-seated house , and demaine , call Efford , alias Ebbingford , and that not unproper , because every low water , there afford passage to the other shore : but now it may take a new name , for his better plight : for this gentleman have , to his great charge , build a salt-water mill , athwart this bay , who causey serve , as a very convenient bridge to save the wayfarers former trouble , let , and danger . it be receive by tradition , that his belsire , sir John Arundel , be forewarn , by a wot not what calker . how he shall be slay on the sand . for avoid which encounter , he always shun Efford , and dwell at Trerice , another of his house . but , as the proverb say , fata viam invenient , and as experience teach man curiosity , fato viam sternit . it happen , that what time the earl of Oxford surprise saint Michael mount by policy , and keep the same by strong hand , this sir John Arundel be sheriff of Cornwall , wherethrough , upon duty of his office , and commandment from the prince , he march thither , with posse comitatus , to besiege it , and there , in a skirmish on the sand , which divide the mount from the continent , he fulfil the effect of the prophecy , with the loss of his life , and in the say mount chapel lie bury . so Cambyses light on Ecbatana in Egypt , and Alexander Epirot , on acheros in Italy , to bring they to their end . so fillip of Macedon , and Atis the son of Croesus , find a chariot in a sword hilt , and a iron point weapon at the hunt of a boar , to delude their preventive weariness . so Amilcar sup in Siracusa , and the prince of Wales wear a crown through Cheapside , in another sort and sense than they imagine , or desire . and so pope Gerebert , and our king H. the 4 , travail no far , for meet their fatal Jerusalem , than the one to a chapel in Rome , the other to a chamber in Westminster . S. marie Wike stand in a fruitful soil , skirt with a moor , course for pasture , and cumbrous for traveller . wic , by master Lambert , signify a town : by master Camden , stationem , vel sinum , ubi exercitus agit . this village be the birthplace of Thomasine Bonaventure , i know not , whether by descent , or event , so call : [ 120 ] for-whiles in her girlish age she keep sheep on the foreremember moor , it chance , that a London merchant pass by , see she , heed she , like she , beg she of her poor parent , and carry she to his home . in process of time , her mistress be summon by death to appear in the other world , and her good thew , no less than her seemly personage , so much content her master , that he advance she from a servant to a wife , and leave she a wealthy widow . her second marriage befall with one Henry gall : her three and last , with sir John Perciual , lord mayor of London , who she also overlive . and to show , that virtue as well bare a part in the desert , as fortune in the mean of her preferment , she employ the whole residue of her life and last widowhood , to work no less bountiful , then charitable : namely , repair of high way , build of bridge , endow of maiden , relieve of prisoner , feed and apparel the poor , etc among the rest , at this saint mary Wike , she found a chauntery and free-school , together with fair lodging , for the schoolmaster , scholar , and officer , and add twenty pound of yearly revenue , for support the incident charge : wherein as the bent of her desire be holy , so God bless the same with all wish success : for diverse the best gentleman son of Devon and Cornwall be there virtuous train up , in both kind of divine and humane learning , under one cholwel , a honest and religious teacher , which cause the neighbour so much the rather , and the more to rue , that a petty smack only of popery , open a gap to the oppression of the whole , by the statute make in Edw. the 6. reign , touch the suppression of chauntery . such strange accident of extraordinary advancement be verify by the ample testimony of many history , and , among the rest , we read in Machiavelli ( howbeit control by the often reprove Iouius ) that Castruccio Caestracani climb from a base birth , to a far high estate . for be beget in Lucca , by unknown parent , and cast out , in his swaddle clout , to the wide world , he be take up by a widow , place by she with a clergy man her brother , give by he to a gentleman , call Francisco Guinigi , and by Guinigi leave tutor to his only son . from which step , his courage and wisdom raise he by degree , to the sovereignty of Lucca , the senatorship of room , the special favour of the emperor , and a near hope ( only by death prevent ) of subdue Florence . lesnewith hundred . lesnewith hundred take his name of a parish therein ( as Stratton do of a town ) memorable for nothing else . it may he derive , either from le , which in Cornish signify broad , and newith , which be new , as a new breadth , because it enlarge his limit far into Cornwall on both side , whereas Stratton be straighten on the one by Devon : or from le and gwith , which import broad ash tree , g , for Euphonias sake be turn into n . the first place which here offer itself to sight , be Bottreaux castle , seat on a bad harbour of the north sea , and suburb with a poor market town , yet entitle the owner in time past , with the stile of a baron , from who , by match it descend to the lord Hungerford , and [ 121 ] rest in the earl of Huntingdon . the diversify room of a prison , in the castle , for both sex , better preserve by the inhabitant memory , then descerneable by their own endurance , show the same , heretofore to have exercise some large jurisdiction . not far from thence , Tintogel , more famous for his antiquity , then regardable for his present estate , abbut likewise on the sea ; yet the ruin argue it , to have be once , no unworthy dwell for the cornish prince . the cement wherewith the stone be lay , resist the fret fury of the weather , better than themselves . half the building be raise on the continent , and the other half on a island , continue together ( within man remembrance ) by a drawbridge , but now divorce , by the downefalne steep cliff , on the far side , which , though it shut out the sea from his wont recourse , have yet more strengthen the late island : for , in pass thither , you must first descend with a dangerous decline , and then make a worse ascent , by a path , as every where narrow , so in many place , through his sticklenesse occasion , and through his steepness threaten , the ruin of your life , with the fail of your foot . at the top , two , or three terrify step , give you entrance to the hill , which suppli pasture for sheep , and cony : upon the same , i see , a decay chapel , a fair spring of water , a cave , reach once , by my guide report ; some far way under ground , and ( which you will perhaps suspect of untruth ) a hermit grave , hew out in the rock , and serve each body proportion for a burial . but , if that in wale carry a equal verity , the miracle will soon reap credit : for this be so slope inward at both end , that any tall stature shall find room by a little bend , as the short in the bottom by extend . the far point of this hill , be call black head , well know to the coast mariner . the high cliff be by sea unaccessible round about , save in one only place , towards the east , where they proffer a uneasy land place for boat , which be fence with a garrete wall , admit entrance through a gate , sometime of iron , as the name yet continue , express , and be within present command by a hardly climb hill . under the island run a cave , through which you may row at full sea , but not without a kind of horror , at the uncouthness of the place . m. Camden deliver we these verse out of a old poet , touch Tintogel . est locus abrini sinuoso littore ponti , Rupe situs media , refluus quern circuit aestus . fulminat hic late , turrito vertice Castrum , nomine Tindagium , vetere dixere Corini . which import in english : there be a place within the wind - ing shore of Severn sea , on mid of rock , about who foot , the tide turn-keeping play : a towry-topped castle here , wide blaze over all , which Corineus ancient brood , Tindagel castle call . it be not lay up among the least vaunt of this castle , that our victorious Arthur be here beget by the valiant Uter Pendragon , upon the fair Igerna , and [ 122 ] that without taint of bastardy , say Merlyn , because her husband die some hour before . of late time , Tintogel have keep long silence in our story , until H. the 3. reign , at which time ( by Mat Paris report ) his brother , earl ri grow into obloquy for privy receive there , and abet , his nephew David , against the king . after which , be turn from a palace [ 8 . R. 2. ] to a prison , it restrain one John Northamptons liberty , who for abuse the same , in his ruly mayoralty of London , be condemn hither , as a perpetual penitenciary . a see of ancienty belong to this castle , be cancel as unnecessary , by the late lord treasurer Burleigh . one collect the wonder of Cornwall , rime touch this , as follow : tintogel in his ruin vaunt , sometime the seat of king , and place which worthy Arthur breed , who praise the breton sing , a bridge these building join , who now the fall cliff divorce , yet strengthen so , the more it scorn , foe vain attempt force . there , cave above , entry admit , but thorowfare deny ; where that beneath allow both , in safe , but ghastly wise . a spring there wet his head , his foot a gate of iron guard : there measure due to each one length , the hermit grave award . in the mid of the wild moor of this hundred , far [ 122 ] from any dwelling or river , there lie a great stand water , call Dosmery pool , about a mile or better in compass , feed by no perceive spring , neither have any avoidance , until ( of late ) certain tynner bring a audit therefrom . the country people hold many strange conceit of this pool ; as , that it do ebb and flow , that it have a whirlpool in the midst thereof , and , that a faggot once throw thereinto , be take up at foy haven , 6. mile distant . wherefore , to try what truth rest in these report , some gentleman , dwell not far off , cause a boat and net to be carry thither over land . fish , they catch none , save a few eel upon hook : the pool prove no where past a fathom and half deep , and for a great way very shallow . touch the opinion of ebb and flow , it shall seem to be ground , partly upon the increase , which the rain flood bring thereinto from the border hill ( which perhaps give also the name ; for do , be , come , and maur , great ) and the decrease , occasion by the next drought , and partly , for that the wind do drive the wave to and fro , upon those sandy bank : and thus the miracle of Dosmery pool decease . of this other wonder he say , dosmery pool amid the moor , on top stand of a hill , more than a mile about , no stream it empt , nor any fill . Camelford , a market and fair ( but not fair ) town fetch his derivation from the river camel , which run through it , and that , from the cornish word cam , in english , crooked , as cam , from the often wind stream . the same be incorporate with a mayoralty , and name burgess to the parliament , yet step little before the [ 123 ] mean sort of borough , for store of inhabitant , or the inhabitant store . upon the river of camel , near to Camelford [ 525. ] , be that last dismal battle strike between the noble king Arthur , and his treacherous nephew mordr , wherein the one take his death , and the other his death wound . for testimony whereof , the old folk thereabouts will show you a stone , bear Arthur name , though now deprave to atry . master Camden let we understand , that this town be sometime term Gaffelford : wherethrough we may mark it for the list of a great fight between the breton and Devonshire man [ 812. ] , which Houeden assign to have be darrayn at Gauelford , and perhaps the same , which the say master Camden vouch out of Marianus Scotus [ 820. ] , and describe by these verse of a elder poet : ------------ naturam Cambala fontis , mutatam stupet esse svi , transcendit inundans sanguineus torren ripas , and ducit in aequor corpora caesorum , plures natare videre , et petere auxilium , quos vndis vita reliquit . the river camel wonder , that his fountain nature show so strange a change , the bloody stream vpswelling overflow his both side bank , and to the sea the slaughter body bear : full many swim , and sue for aid , while wave their life outwear . in our forefather day , when devotion as much exceed knowledge , as knowledge now come short of devotion , there be many bowssen place , for cure of mad man , and among the rest , one at alternunne in this hundred , call S. nun pool , which saint altar ( it may be ) by pars pro toto , give name to the church : and because the manner of this bowssen be not so unpleasing to hear , as it be easy to feel , i will ( if you please ) deliver you the practice , as i receive it from the beholder . the water run from saint nun well , fall into a square and close wall plot , which may be fill at what depth they list . upon this wall be the frantic person set to stand , his back towards the pool , and from thence with a sudden blow in the breast , tumble headlong into the pond : where a strong fellow , provide for the nonce , take he , and toss he up and down , alongst and athwart the water , until the patient , by forego his strength , have somewhat forget his fury . then be he convey to the church , and certain mass sing over he ; upon which handle , if his right wit return , saint nun have the thank : but if there appear small amendment , he be bowssen again , and again , while there remain in he any hope of life , for recovery . it may be , this device take original from that master of bedlam , who ( the fable say ) use to cure his patient of that impatience , by keep they bind in pool , up to the middle , and so more or less , after the fit of their fury . [ 124 ] trig hundred . the name of trig , in Cornish , signify a inhabitant ; howbeit , this hundred can vaunt any overlarge scope , or extraordinary plenty of dwelling : he chief town be Bodmyn ; in Cornish , Bos venna , common term Bodman , which ( by illusion , if not etymology ) a man may , not unapt , turn into Badham : for of all the town in Cornwall , i hold none more healthful seat , than Saltash , or more contagious , than this . it consist whole ( in a manner ) of one street , lead east and west , wellnear the space of a eastern mile , who south side be hide from the sun , by a high hill , so near coast it in most place , as neither can light have entrance to their stair , nor open air to their other room . their back house , of more necessary , then clean service , as kitchen , stable , etc be climb up unto by step , and their filth by every great shower , wash down through their house into the street . the other side be also overlook by a great hill , though somewhat far distant : and for a Corollarium , their conduit water run through the churchyard , the ordinary place of burial , for town and parish . it breed therefore little cause of marvel , that every general infection be here first admit , and last exclude : yet the many decay house , prove the town to have be once very populous ; and , in that respect , it may still retain the precedence , as support by a weekly market , the great of Cornwall , the quarter session for the east division , and half yearly fair . the jurisdiction thereof be administer by a mayor and his brethren , and upon warrant of their charter , they claim authority , to take acknowledgement of statute bond . in former time , the bishop of Cornwall ( as i have elsewhere relate ) hold his see at saint Petroos , in this town , until the danish pirate , fire their palace , [ 981. ] force they to remove the same , with their residence , unto saint germane . they be succeed by a priory , and friary ; which late , serve a while as a house of correction , for the shire , but with great charge , than benefit , or continuance . for other accident , i find , that Perkyn Warbeck , [ 11. h . 7 . ] after his land in the west part of Cornwall , make this town the Rendez vous of his assemble force , for achieve he , alike deserve , and speed enterprise against king Henry the seven . hither , also , in the last commotion , flock the rebel , [ 3. Ed. 6 . ] from all quarter of the shire , pitch their camp at the town end ; and here they imprison such gentleman , as they have pluck out of their hole , and house , until the fortune of war give verdict with the right of justice , for their well deserve evil speed . sir Anthony Kingston , then provost-marshal of the king army , have leave his name more memorable , then commendable among the townsman , for cause their mayor to erect a gallows before his own door , upon which , ( after have feast sir Anthony ) himself be hang . in like sort ( say they ) he truss up a miller man , thereby , for that he present himself in the other stead , say he can never do his master better service . [ 125 ] but man tongue , ready incline to the worst report , have leave out a part of the truth , in this tale , that the rest may carry the better grace . for sir Anthony do nothing herein , as a judge by discretion , but as a officer by direction ; and beside , he give the mayor sufficient watchworde of timely warn , and large space of respite ( more than which , in regard of his own peril , he can not afford ) to shift for safety , if a vneschewable destiny , have not halter he to that advancement . as for the miller man , he equal his master , in their common offence of rebellion , and therefore it deserve the praise of mercy , to spare one of the two , and not the blame of cruelty , to hang one for another . i shall perhaps have forget the free school here , maintain by her majesty liberality , be i not put in mind thereof through a fore-halfening of this rebellion , by a action of the scholar , which i will report from some of their own mouth . about a year before this stir be raise , the scholar , who accustomable divide themselves , for better exploiting their pastime , grow therethrough into two faction ; the one whereof , they call the old religion ; the other , the new . this once begin , be prosecute among they in all exercise , and , now and then , handle with some eagerness and roughness , each party know , and still keep the same companion , and captain . at last one of the boy , convert the spill of a old candlestick to a gun , charge it with powder and a stone , and ( through mischance , or ungraciousness ) therewith kill a calf : whereupon , the owner complain , the master whip , and the division end . by such token , sometime wonderful , sometime ridiculous , do God at his pleasure , foreshow future accident : as in the planet , before the battle at Thrasimenus , between Hannibal and the roman , by the fight together of the sun and moon . in bird , what time Brutus bring forth the remnant of his army at Philippi , against Caesar and Anthony , by the furious bicker between two eagle . in man , against the destruction of Jerusalem , by the encounter of chariot and army in the air . and before Alexander battle with Darius ; first , by a casual skirmish of the camp-stragler , under two captain , borrow the name of those prince ; and then by Alexander voluntary set those captain to a single combat . yea ( to bring these example near home ) the like have happen both before and sithence , among boy in other place . when Caesar be depart from Rome , to try the title of the world empire with Pompey , the town boy ( without any man command ) part in twain : the one side call themselves Pompeyans , the other caesarians ; and then darrayn a kind of battle ( but without arm ) the caesarians get the overhand . a like prank under the like assume name , and with like success and bode , they play , when Octavius and Anthony be , with like mean , to decide the like sovereignty . and to the same purpose , Procopius affirm , that the Samnite boy , when they drive their cattle to feed , after their usual manner of pastime , choose out among themselves , two of the best activity and seemelinesse ; the one , they name Bellisarius , general for Justinian the emperor in Italy , the other Vitiges king of the Goth , [ 126 ] against who he war . in the buckle of these counterfeit commander , it fall out , that Vitiges have the worst , who the adverse party with a jest and crake manner , hang up at the next tree , in earnest , but yet with no intent to kill he . this while it happen , that a wolf be descry : away run the boy : fast abide the imaginary felon , and so fast , that for want of timely rescouse , the breath post out of his body , and leave the same a liveless carcase . the which notify to the Samnite , quit the stripling ( or slipstring ) of their punishment , but increase the dismay of the elder people . a like accident befall sithence , high testimony of the ceremonious Texera , as a presage of Lewes the prince of condye death , 1569. four day before which , at xainte , the youth of all sort , from 9 to 22. year age , assemble , and ( of their own accord ) choose two commander , one they entitle the prince of Condy , the other mounsieur , who then lie in the field against he . for three day space , they violent assault each other , with stone , club , and other weapon , until at last it grow to pistole : by one of which , the imaginary prince receive a quell wound in his head , about 10. a clock in the morning : the very hour ( say this Portugal confessor ) that the prince himself , by a like shot be slaughter . the same author vouch a semblable chance , somewhat before the siege of rochel 1572. where , some of the boy band themselves , as for the mayor and other for the king ; who after 6. day skirmish , at last make a composition , and depart : even as that siege endure six month , and final break up in a peace . So do Mercurius Gallobelgicus give we to wit , that in the year 1594. of turkish Beglerbey of Greece , either seek by a fore-coniecture , to be ascertain himself , or desirous to nusle the young sort in martial exploit , lead out of Alba regalis , about 600. turkish boy , age between 11. and 14. year , and sever they into two troop , term the one , the christian , the other , the turkish battalion . those , he direct to call upon Jesus , these , upon Hala : both part he enjoin to bicker courageous , and egg they onward with the enticement of reward . the token be give , the force encounter , the fight be hot . in the end , the turk betake themselves to their heal , and Jesus party carry away the victory . but such occurrent do not always either forgo , or foresignify ; for sometime they fall out idle , and sometime not at all . howbeit , nicetaes Choniates take it very unkind , that God will not spare some watchword out of his prescience , to the constantinopolitanes , what time Baldwyn earl of Flaunders and other , first assist , and then conquer their city . touch Veall the mercurialist , i have speak in my former book . the youthly sort of Bodmyn townsman use sometime to sport themselves , by play the box with stranger , who they summon to halgauer . the name signify the goat moor , and such a place it be , lie a little without the town , and very full of quauemire . when these mate meet with any raw servingman , or other young master , who may serve and deserve to make pastime , they cause he to be solemn arrest , [ 127 ] for his appearance before the mayor of Halgauer , where he be charge with wear one spur , or go untruss , or want a girdle , or some such like felony : and after he have be arraign and try , with all requisite circumstance , judgement be give in formal term , and execute in some one ungracious prank or other , more to the scorn , then hurt of the party condemn . hence be spring the proverb , when we see one slovenly apparel , to say , he shall be present in halgau court . but now and then , they extend this merriment with the large , to the prejudice of overcredulous people , persuade they to fight with a dragon lurk in halgauer , or to see some strange matter there : which conclude at least , with a train they into the mire . within short space after the great fame disperse , touch the rare effect of Warwickshire well , some idle envious head raise a brute , that there rest no less virtue ( forsooth ) for heal all disease , in a plentiful spring , near unto Bodmyn , call scarlet well : which report grow so far , and so fast , that folk run flock thither in huge number , from all quarter . but the neighbour justice , find the abuse , and look into , the consequence , forbid the resort , sequester the spring , and suppress the miracle . howbeit , the water shall seem to be healthful , if not helpful : for it retain this extraordinary quality , that the same be weighty , than the ordinary of his kind , and will continue the best part of a year , without alteration of scent or taste ; only you shall see it represent many colour , like the rainbow , which ( in my conceit ) argue a run through some mineral vein , and therewithal a possess of some virtue . aside from this town , towards the north sea , extend a fruitful vein of land , comprise certain parish , which serve better than any other place in Cornwall for winter feed , and suitab enrich the farmour . herethrough , sundry gentleman have there plant their seat , as , in saint Kew , master carnsew , at Bokelly : in saint endelion , master Roscarrock , at his house of the same denomination : beside , master Penkeuel , Nichols , Barret , Flammock , Cauel , and diverse moor . carnsew , right carndeaw , purport in Cornish , a black rock : and such a one the heir own which give name to his ancient possess manor , as the manor to his ancestor . his house Bokelly may be derive from both , in Cornish , a goat and kelly which be lose : and the goat he give for his arm . this gentleman father marry the daughter of fit in Devon and leave behind he three son , Richard , Matthew and William , with two daughter : those , bring up in learning and experience abroad : these , in virtue and modesty at home : the fruit whereof , they taste and express , in a no less praiseworthy , then rare-continuing concord , have ( not through any constrain necessity , or constraintiue vow ) but on a voluntary choice , make their elder brother mansion a college of single live , and kind entertain . among who , i may not omit the young brother , who well qualify and sweet please sufficiency draw he out from this cloister , to converse with and assist his friend , and to who sound judgement , i owe the thankful acknowledgement of [ 128 ] many correct slipping in these my note . the arm of this family be thus blazon , S. a goat passant . A. attire and tripple 0. Roscarrock , in Cornish , mean a flower , and a rock , in english . Roses be his arm , and the north rocky cliff , which bind his demaine , perhaps add the rest . the heir have issue by the daughter of trevanion . his father marry the sole inheritrix to Pentire , who dwelling , Pentuan , be seat on the south sea , so as he may make use of either climate for his residence . the family be populous ; but of they two brother , Hugh , for his civil carriage , and kind hospitality , and Nicholas for his industrious delight in matter of history and antiquity , do merit a commend remembrance . they bear A. a Cheuron between 2. Roses , G. and a sea-tenche nayante proper . the little parish call temple , skirt this hundred , on the waste side thereof : a place , exempt from the bishop jurisdiction , as once appertain to the templar , but not so from disorder : for if common report communicate with truth , many a bad marriage bargain be there yearly slubber up . hundred of west . with trig hundred on the south side , confine that of west , but take his name from the relation which it bear to that of east : the circuit thereof be not so large , as fruitful . in enter the same , we will first pitch at the looe , two several corporation , distinguish by the addition of east and west , abut upon a navigable creek , and join by a fair bridge of many arch . they take that name from a fresh river , which there pay his tribute to the sea : and the river ( as i conjecture ) from his low passage , between steep coast hill : for loo , and low , after the cornish pronunciation , do little differ . east-loo vouch less antiquity , as late incorporate , but vaunt great wealth , as more commodious seat : yet the foundation of their house be ground on the sand , support ( naythelesse ) those poor building , with a sufficient stableness . their profit chief accru from their weekly market , and industrious fish , with boat of a middle size , able to brook , but not cross the sea : howbeit , they be not altogether destitute of big ship : among which , one have successive retain the name of the George of loo , ever since the first so call , do a great while sithence , in a furious fight , take 3. French man of war . the town towards the sea , be fence with a garrete wall , against any sudden attempt of the enemy . west-loo muster a endowment with the like mean , but in a mean degree , and have of late year somewhat relieve his former poverty . almost direct over against the bar haven of loo , extend saint George island , about half a mile in compass , and plentiful store with cony . when the season of the year yield opportunity , a great abundance of sundry sea-foul breed upon the strand , where they lie , and hatch their egg , without care of build any nest : at which time , repair thither , you shall see your head shadow with a cloud of old one , through their diversify cry , witness their general dislike of your disturbance , [ 129 ] and your foot pester with a large number of young one , some former , some new , and some not yet disclose ; at which time ( through the leave and kindness of master may , the owner ) you may make and take your choice . this gentleman arm , be g , a Cheuron vary between three crown . the middle market town of this hundred , be liskerd . le , in Cornish , be broad , and ker , be go . now , if i shall say , that it be so call , because the wideness of this hundred , here contract the traffic of the inhabitant , you may well think i jest , neither dare i avow it in earnest . but whencesoever you derive the name , hard it be , in regard of the antiquity , to deduce the town and castle from their first original ; and yet i will not join hand with they who term it Legio , as found by the roman , unless they can approve the same by a roman faith . of late time , the castle serve the earl of Cornwall for one of his house ; but now , that late be worm-eaten out of date and use . coynage , fair , and market , ( as vital spirit in a decay body ) keep the inner part of the town alive , while the ruine skirt accuse the injury of time , and the neglect of industry . S. clear parish , coast liskerd , brook his name by a more pierce , then profitable air , which in those open waste , scour away thrift , as well as sickness . thither i ride , to take view of a antiquity , call the other half stone ; which i find to be thus : there be two moor stone , pitch in the ground , very near together , the one of a more broad than thick squareness , about 8. foot in height , resemble the ordinary spill of a cross , and somewhat curious hew , with diaper work . the other come short of his fellow length , by the better half , but , wellnear , double it in breadth , and thickness , and be likewise handsome carve . they both be mortife in the top , leave a little edge at the one side , as to accommodate the place of somewhat else thereupon . in this latter , be grave certain letter , which i cause to be take out , and have here insert , for able capacity , than my own , to interpret . [ image , approx d o n l e r t : r o 3 a u i t p r o a n l m a where ' he be a greek alpha character ] why this shall be term , the other half stone , i can resolve with my self , and you much less . howbeit , i halt aim , it may proceed from one of these respect ; either , because it be the half of a monument , who other part rest elsewhere : or , for that it mean , after the dutch phrase and their own measure , a stone and half . for , in dutch , ander halb , ( another half ) import , one and a half , as Sesqui alter do in latin . it shall seem to be a bind stone : for some of the neighbour observe to i , that the [ 130 ] same limit just the half way , between Excester and the land end , and be distant full fifty mile from either . not far hence , in a open plain , be to be see certain stone , somewhat square , and fasten about a foot deep in the ground , of which , some six or eight stand upright in proportionable distance : they be term , the hurler . and alike strange observation , take place here , as at Stonehenge , to wit , that a redouble number , never euen with the first . but far strange be the country people report , that once they be man , and for their hurl upon the sabbath , so metamorphose . the like whereof , i remember to have read , touch some in Germany ( as i take it ) who for a semblable profanation , with dance , through the priest accurse , continue it on a whole year together . almost adjoin hereunto , be a heap of rock , which press one of a less size , fashion like a cheese , and therethrough term wringcheese . i know not well , whether i may refer to the parish of saint neot in this hundred , that which Mat west , report of king Alfred , namely , how come into Cornwall on hunt , he turn aside , for do he devotion , into a church , where S. guerijr and s. neot make their abode ( quaere , whether he mean not their burial ) or rather so resolve , because Asser so deliver it , and there find his orison second with a happy effect . next , i will relate you another of the cornish natural wonder , viz. S. kayne well : but lest you make a wonder first at the saint , before you take notice of the well , you must understand , that this be not Kayne the man-queller , but one of a gentle spirit , and mild sex , to wit , a woman . he who cause the spring to be picture , add this rhyme for a exposition : in name , in shape , in quality , this well be very quaint ; the name , to lot of Kayne befall , no ouer-holy saint . the shape , 4. tree of diverse kind , Withy , oak , elm and ash , make with their root a arch roof , who floor this spring do wash . the quality , that man or wife , who chance , or choice attain , first of this sacred stream to drink , thereby the mastery gain . in this hundred , the rubble of certain mine , and ruin of a fine house , convince Burchard Craneigh , the duchmans vain endeavour , in seek of silver ore : howbeit , he afterward light on a thrifty vein , of practise physic at London , where he grow famous , by the name of doctor Burcot . Killigarth , be interpret in english , signify , he have lose his j-vvg , or reach : and by his present fortune , ( in some sort ) justifi that name : for the same have late forgo sir William beuill , who it embrace as owner and inhabitant , by his sudden death , and be pass into the possession of the fair lady his widow , by her husband conveyance . it yield a large view of the south coast , and be it self , in sir William life time , much visit , [ 131 ] through his frank inviting . the mention of this knight , call to my remembrance , a sometime uncouth servant of he , who monstrous condition , partly resemble that Polyphemus , describe by Homer and Virgil , and lively imitate by Ariosto , in his Orco : or rather , that egyptian Polyphagus , in who ( by Suetonius report ) the emperor Nero take such pleasure . this fellow be take up by sir William , under a hedge , in the deep of winter , wellnear starve with cold , and hunger : he be of stature mean , of constitution lean , of face freckled , of composition , well proportion , of diet , natural , spare , and clean enough ; yet , at his master bid , he will devour nettle , thistle , the pith of artichoke , raw , and live bird , and fishy , with their scale , and feather , burn coal and candle , and whatsoever else , howsoever unsavoury , if it may be swallow : neither this a little , but in such quantity , as it often breed a second wonder , how his belly , shall contain so much : yet can no man , at any time , discover he do of that , which necessity of nature require . moreover , he will take a hot iron out of the fire , with his bare hand ; never change his apparel , but by constraint , and use to lie in straw , with his head down , and his heal upwards . spare he be of speech , and , instead of half his word , use this term size , as i will size he , for strike he , he be a good size , for man , etc ouer-sleeping , or some other accident , make he to lose a day , in his account of the week , so as he will not believe , but that Svnday be Saturday , Saturday Friday , etc to sir William he bear such faithfulness , that he will follow his horse , like a spanyell , without regard of way or weariness , wait at his chamber door , the night time , suffer none to come near he , and perform whatsoever he command , be it never so unlawful , or dangerous . on a time , his master , expect stranger , send he , with a panier , to his cater at the sea side , to fetch foam fish . in his way , he pass by a river , whereinto the tide then flow , and certain fisherman be draw their net : which after John size have a while behold , he cast to have a share among they , for his master . so into the water he leap , and there , for the space of a flight shoot , wade and wallow ( for swim he can not ) sometime up , and sometime down , carry his panier still before he , to his own extreme hazard of drown , and the beholder great pity ; until at last , all wet , and weary , out he scramble , and home he hi , with a bitter complaint to his master , of his ill fortune , that he can not catch some fish , as well as the rest , where so much be go . in this sort he continue for diverse year , until ( upon i wot not what veake , or unkindness ) away he get , and abroad he rogue : which remitter bring he the end , to his foredefer , and not avoid destiny : for as under a hedge he be find pine , so under a hedge he find his miserable death , through penury . sir William father marry the daughter of Militon : he grandfather , the daughter and heir of bear , who livelihood repair what the elder brother daughter have impair . the beuils arm be A. a bull passant G. arm and trip O. in the same parish where Killigarth be seat , master Murth inherit a house and demain . he marry Treffry ; his father , tregose . one of their ancestor , [ 132 ] within the memory of a next neighbour to the house , call Prake , ( burden with 110. year age ) entertain a british miller , as that people , for such idle occupation , prove more handy , than our own . but this fellow service befall commodious in the worst sense . for when , not long after his acceptance , war grow between we and France , he steal over into his country , return privy back again , with a french crew , surprise sudden his master , and his guest , at a Christmas supper , carry they speedy unto Lantreghey , and force the gentleman , to redeemme his enlargement , with the sale of a great part of his revenue . a little to the westwards from Killigarth , the poor harbour and village of Polpera couch between 2. steep hill , where plenty of fish be vent to the fish driver , who we call iowter . the warmth of this hundred , side the south , have entice many gentleman here to make choice of their dwelling , as m. Buller now sheriff at Tregarrick , sometime the wideslades inheritance , until the father rebellion forfeit it to the prince ; and the prince largesse reward therewith his subject . Wideslades son lead a walk life with his harp , to gentleman house , wherethrough , and by his other active quality , he be entitle , sir Tristan ; neither want he ( as some say ) a bele isound , the more apt to resemble his pattern . master Buller marry the daughter of one Williams , a counsellor at law in Devon : he father , a young branch of the ancient stock , plant in Somerset shire , take to wife the widow of Courtney , and daughter and heir to trethurffe ; by who dower , and his own endeavour , he purchase and leave to his son , fair possession , but not vnencumbr with title , which drive this gentleman to salve they all by new composition with the pretender : and for compass the same , to get a extraordinary experience in husbandry . his ancestor bare saint on a plain cross A. quarter pierce 4. eagles of the field . at saint winowe inhabit m. Thomas lower , commendable through his double provision , against the war , as have both furnish himself with great ordinance , for private defence of the county , and thrust forth his son to be train in martial knowledge and exercise , for the public service of the country . his wife be one of reskimer daughter and heir : his mother , the daughter of Treffrey : he house descend to his auncestour , by match with Vpton . he bear B. a Cheuron engrail O. between three rose A. laureast , be the inheritance of m. John Harris , a gentleman employ his sound judgement , and other praiseworthy part , to the service of his prince and country , and the good of his friend and himself . his wife be daughter and heir to hart ; his mother sister to m. Chr. Harris , which ( by his uncle yet want of issue ) entitle he with a fair expectance . he bear saint 3. croissant within a border A. Treworgy be owe by m. Kendal , and endow with a pleasant and profitable fish and command of the river , which flit under his house . he marry with Buller : he mother be daughter to moil of Bake , and bear a , a Cheuron between 3. dolphin saint master Glyn of Glynfoord , manifest , by this compound name , the antiqitie of his descent , and [ 133 ] the ordinary passage there , over foy river . the store of Sammons which it afford , cause his ancestor ta take the salmon spear for their arm : for he bear a , a Cheuron , between three salmon spear S. sundry moor gentleman this little hundred possess and possession , as Code , who bear A. a Cheuron , G. between three crow . May , G. a Cheuron vary between three crown . Achym , A. a maunche maltaile saint within a border of the first , charge with cinquefoyle , as the second grille , etc but want of information , and loathness to wax tedious , make i farthel up these , and omit the rest . it be hem in one the west , by the east side of foy haven , at who mouth stand hall , in Cornish , a moor , and ( perhaps ) such it be before better manurance reduce it to the present fruitfulness . the same descend to sir Reignald Mohun , from his ancestor , by their match with the daughter and heir of fits-williams ; and ( among other commodity ) be appurtenance with a walk , which if i can as plain show you , as my self have oftentimes delight see it , you may , and will avow the same , to be a place of diversify pleasing : i will therefore do my best , to trace you , a shadow thereof , by which you shall ( in part ) give a guess at the substance . it be cut out in the side of a steep hill , who foot the salt water wash , even levele , to serve for bowl , floore with sand , for soak up the rain , close with two thorn hedge , and bank with sweet send flower : it widen to a sufficient breadth , for the march of five or six in front , and extend , to not much less , than half a London mile : neither do it lead wearisome forthright , but yield vary , and yet , not overbusy turn , as the ground opportunity afford ; which advantage increase the prospect , and be convert on the foreside , into platform , for the plant of ordinance , and the walker sit ; and on the back part , into summer house , for their more private retreat and recreation . in pass along , your eye shall be call away from guide your foot , to descry by their far ken , the vast ocean , sparkle with ship , that continual this way trade , forth and back , to most quarter of the world . near home , they take view of all size cock , barge , and fisherboate , hover on the coast . again , contract your sight to a narrow scope , it light on the fair and commodious haven , where the tide daily present his double service , of flow and ebb , to carry and recarry whatsoever the inhabitant shall be please to charge he withal , and his creek ( like a young wanton lover ) fold about the land , with many embrace arm . this walk be guard upon the one side , by Portruan ; on the other , by Bodyneck , two fish village : behind , the rise hill bear off the cold northern blast : before , the town of Foy subject his whole length and breadth to your overlook : and direct under you , ride the home and foreign ship ; both of these , in so near a distance , that without trouble the passer , or borrow Stentor voice , you may from thence , not only call to , but confer with any in the say town or ship . mounsieur la Noue note , that in the great hall of [ 134 ] justice , at Paris , there be no room leave , for any more image of the french king : which some prophetical interpret , to signify a dissolution of that line , if not of the monarchy . but this halfening , the present flourish estate of that kingdom , utter convince of falsehood . a far true foretoken , touch the earl of devons progeny , i have see , at this place of hall , to wit , a kind of faggot , who age and paint , approve the credit tradition , that it be careful preserve by those noble man : but whether upon that prescience , or no , there my author fail i . this faggot , be all one piece of wood , and that natural grow , be wrap about the middle part with a bond , and part , at the end , into four stick , one of which , be , again subdivide into other twain . and in semblable manner the last Earles inheritance accrue unto 4. Cornish gentleman Mohun , Trelawny , Arundel of Taluerne , and trethurffe : and trethurffe portion , Courtney of Ladocke , and Viuian , do enjoy , as descend from his two daughter and heir . sir Reig. Mohun be widower of two wife ; the one , daughter to sir Henry Killigrew , the other , to sergeant heal : he father , sir William , marry , first , the daughter of Horsey , and one of the heir , by the common law , to sir John her late brother ; and next , the widow of Trelawny , who , overliving he , enjoy this hall , as part of her jointure ; a lady , grace her dignity , with her virtue , and no less express , then profess religion . Reignald , father to sir William , wed the daughter of sir William trevanion . the arm of the mohun be O. a cross engrail saint powder hundred . some impute the force of powder unto this , that the same be convert , at a instant , from his earthy substance , to a fiery , and from the fire , into air ; every of which change , require a great enlargement , one then other : wherefore it find a bar , over , under , and on the back and side , by the piece strong imprisonment , by consequence break forth with a sudden violence , at the mouth , where the way be least stop , and drive before it , the unsettle obstacle of the bullet , impart thereunto a portion of his fury . to which ( through want of a probable Etymon ) i may , in part , resemble the hundred of powder , not only for the name sake , but also because this parcel of the cornish earth extend it self wide , and comprise more parish , than any other hundred of the shire , as stretch east . and west , from foy to Falmouth : and south and north , welnere from one sea to the other . in describe the same , we must begin where we leave , to wit , at foy haven , in Cornish , foath . it receive this name of the river , and bestow the same on the town . his entrance be guard with blockhouse , and that on the town side , as also the town it self , fortify and fence with ordinance . the commendation of which industry , be principal due to the providence and direction of m. Wil. Treffry , a gentleman that have vow his rare gift of learning , wisdom , and courage , to the good of his country , and make proof thereof in many occurrent , and to who judicious correction , these my note have be not a little behold . his fair and ancient house , castlewise build [ 135 ] and sufficient flank , overlook the town and haven with a pleasant prospect , and yet be not exclude from the healthful air , and use of the country , which occasion his ancestor ( though endow elsewhere , with large revenue , of their own and their wife inheritance ) for many descent , to make , here their ordinary residence , as be witness by their toombe-stone , which i have see in the church . one of they , about 145. year sithence , valiant defend this his dwell , against the french , what time they have surprise the rest of the town . he marry one of tremayne heir : his father , the heir of Tresithny ; his grandfather , the daughter of Killigrew : and bear saint a Cheuron between three hawthorn A. but i will return to the town . during the warlike reign of our two valiant Edward , the first and three , the foyens addict themselves to back their prince quarrel , by cope with the enemy at sea , and make return of many prize : which purchase have advance they to a good estate of wealth , the same be ( when the quiet condition time give mean ) heedful and diligent employ , and better , by the more civil trade of merchandise ; and in both these vocation they so fortunate prosper , that it be report , 60. tall ship do , at one time , belong to the harbour , and that they assist the siege of Callais , with 47. sail . hereon , a full purse beget a stout stomach , our foyens take heart at grass , and chance about that time ( i speak upon the credit of tradition ) to sail near rye , and Winchelsea , they stiff refuse to veil their bonnet at the summons of those town ; which contempt ( by the better enable seafarers , reckon intolerable ) cause the ripier to make out with might and main against they ; howbeit , with a more hardy onset , then happy issue : for the foy man give they so rough entertainment at their welcome , that they be glad to forsake patch , without bid farewell : the merit of which exploit , afterward entitle they gallant of foy : and ( it may be ) they fight to eternize this memorable fact , after the greek and roman manner , by invest the town of Golant with that name : notwithstanding , quaere , whether a causeless ambition in the posterity , turn not rather Golant into gallant , for their great glory . once , the townsman vaunt , that for rescue certain ship of rye from the norman in Henry the three time , they bear the arm , and enjoy part of the privilege appertain to the cinque port , whereof there be some memory in their chancel window , with the name of fisart Bagga , their principal commander in that service . moreover , the prowess of one Nicholas , son to a widow , near foy , be deskant upon , in a old three man song , namely , how he fight brave at sea , with John Dory ( a Genowey , as i conjecture ) set forth by John the french king , and ( after much bloodshed on both side ) take , and slay he , in revenge of the great ravine , and cruelty , which he have forecommit , upon the english man good and body . yet their so often good success , sometime taste the sauce of crosser speed ; for Tho. Walsingham tell we , that sir Hugh Calueley , and sir Th. Percy , depute to guard the sea , by R. the 2. Anno. 1379. chance there to meet a cornish barge , belong to foy harbour , which have wear out his victual , and [ 136 ] time , limit for the like service , be then sail homeward , neither will be entreat by those knight , to join company with they : howbeit they buy this refusal very dear . for no soon be the english fleet pass out of sight , but that a flemish man of war light upon they , and ( after a long , and strong resistance ) overmaster they as well , at last in force , as they do at first in number , take the barge , sink it , and slaughter all the sailor , one only boy , except , who in the heat of the bicker , see which way the game will go , secret steal aboard the Fleming , and close hide himself among the ballast . over a while , this pirate cast anchor in a english harbour , where the boy , hear his Countrimens voice , that be come aboard , rise from his new burial , bewray the fact , and so wrought mean , for their punishment , and his own delivery . not long after , our foy gallant , unable to bear a low sail , in their fresh gale of fortune , begin to skum the sea , with their often piracy , ( avow themselves upon the earl of Warwick , who ragged staff be yet to be see , portray in many place of their church steeple , and in diverse private house ) as also to violate their duty at land , by insolent disobedience , to the prince officer , cut off ( among other prank ) a pursuivant ear : whereat king Edward the four conceive such indignation , as he send commissioner unto Lostwithiel , ( a town thereby ) who , under pretence of use their service , in sea affair , train thither the great number of the burgess ; and no soon come , then lay hold on , and in hold , their good be confiscate , one Harrington execute , the chain of their haven remove to Dartmouth , and their wont jollity transform into a sudden misery : from which they strive a long time , in vain , to relieve themselves : but now of late year do more and more aspire to a great amendment of their former defeat , though not to a equal height of their first abundance . where i may not pass in silence , the commendable desert of master Rashleigh the elder , descend from a young brother of a ancient house in Devon ; for his industrious judgement and adventure , in trade of merchandise , first open a light and way , to the townsmen new thrive , and leave his son large wealth , and possession ; who ( together with a daily better his estate ) convert the same to hospitality , and other action fit a gentleman well affect to his god , prince , and country . he marry the daughter of Bonithon ; his father , of lanyne , and bear saint a plain cross between 2. croissant A. anno 28. H. 6. there be a act of parliament make , to restrain the abuse of sea-officer , in wrong exaction at foy , and some other haven . the lord of Pomier , a norman , encourage by the [ 1457. ] civil war , wherewith our realm be then distress , furnish a navy within the river of say , and with the same in the night , burn a part of Foy , and other house confine : but upon approach of the country force , raise the next day by the sheriff , he make speed away to his ship , and with his ship to his home . in a high way near this town , there lie a big and long moor stone , contain the remainder of certain engrave letter , purport some memorable antiquity , as it shall seem , but past ability of read . [ 137 ] not many year sithence , a gentleman , dwell not far off , be persuade , by some information , or imagination , that treasure lie hide under this stone : wherefore , in a fair moonshine night , thither with certain good fellow he hy to dig it up ; a work they fall , their labour shorten , their hope increase , a pot of gold be the least of their expectation . but see the chance . in midst of their toil , the sky gather cloud , the moonlight be overcast with darkness , down fall a mighty shower , up rise a bluster tempest , the thunder crack , the lightning flame : in conclusion , our money-seekers wash , in stead of load ; or load with water , in stead of yellow earth , and more afraid , then hurt , be force to abandon their enterprise , and seek shelter of the next house they can get into . whether this proceed from a natural accident , or a work of the devil , i will not undertake to define . it may be , God give he such power over those , who begin a matter , upon covetousness to gain by extraordinary mean , and prosecute it with a wrong , in enter and break another man land , without his leave , and direct the end thereof , to the prince defraud , who prerogative challenge these casualty . a little beyond foy , the land open a large sandy drab bay , for the sea to overflow , which , and the village adjoin , be therethrough apt term Trewardreth , in english , the sandy town . Elder time , of more devotion than knowledge , here found a religious house , which , in king Henry the eight reign , undergo the common downfall . i have receive credible information , that some three year sithence , certain hedge divide a close on the seaside hereabout , chance , in their dig , upon a great chest of stone , artificial join , who cover , they ( over-greedy for booty ) rude break , and therewithal a great earthen pot enclose , which be guild and grave with letter , deface by this misadventure , and full of a black earth , the ash ( doubtless ) as that , the urna of some famous personage . upon a side of this bay , one m. Peter beuill first begin the experiment of make a saltwater pond , induce thereunto , by observe that the high summer tide bring with they young bass and millet , who at their ebb , they leave behind in little pit of the even ground , where they will live for many week without any reuisitation of the sea : who , as he better this natural pattern , so do i his artificial ; but yet with a thankful acknowledgement , by who i have profit . Lostwithiel shall seem to fetch his original from the cornish lostwithiall , which in English , sound a lion tail : for as the earl of this province give the lion in arm , and the lion principal strength ( man , say ) consist in his tail ; so this town claim the precedence , and his lord chief residence , and the place which he entrust with his exchequer , and where his weighty affair be manage . mayoralty , market , fair , and nomination of burgess for the parliament , it have common with the most : coinage of tin , only with three , other ; but the jail for the whole stannary , and keep of the county court , it self alone . yet all this can hardly raise it to a tolerable condition of wealth and inhabitant . wherefore i will [ 138 ] detain you no long , then until i have show you a solemn custom in time pass here yearly observe , and only of late day discontinue , which be thus : upon little easter Sunday , the freeholder of the town and manor , by themselves or their deputy , do there assemble : among who , one ( as it fall to his lot by turn ) brave apparel , gallant mount , with a crown on his head , a sceptre in his hand , a sword bear before he , and dutiful attend by all the rest also on horseback , ride through the principal street to the church : there the curate in his best besee , solemn receive he at the churchyard stile , and conduct he to hear divine service : after which , he repair with the same pomp , to a house foreprouide for that purpose , make a feast to his attendant , keep the table end himself , and be serve with kneel , assay , and all other rite due to the estate of a prince : with which dinner , the ceremony end , and every man return home again . the pedigree of this usage be derive from so many descent of age , that the cause and author outreach remembrance : howbeit , these circumstance offer a conjecture , that it shall betoken the royalty appertain to the honour of Cornwall . m. Wil. Kendal hospitality , while he live , and here keep house , deserve a special remembrance , because , for store of resort and frankness of entertainment , it exceed all other of his sort . this town anno 11. H. 7 , be by act of parliament assign , to keep the public weight and measure , ordain for the county . Lostwithiel subject it self to the command of Restormel castle , alias , Lestormel , sometime the duke principal house . it be seat in a park , upon the plain neck of a hill , back to the westwards , with another , somewhat high , and fall every other way , to end in a valley , water by the fishful river of Foy . his base court be rather to be conjecture , then discern , by the remnant of some few ruin ; among which , a oven of 14. foot largeness , through his exceed proportion , prove the like hospitality of those day . the inner court ground upon a entrench rock , be form round , have his utter wall thick , strong , and garrete : his flat roof cover with lead , and his large window take their light inward . it consist of two story , beisde the vault , and admit entrance and issue , by one only gate , fence with a Portcouliz . water be convey thither , by a conduit , from the high ground adjoin . certes , it may move compassion , that a palace , so healthful for air , so delightful for prospect , so necessary for commodity , so fair ( in regard of those day ) for building , and so strong for defence , shall in time of secure peace , and under the protection of his natural prince , be wrong with those spoiling , then which , it can endure no great , at the hand of any foreign and deadly enemy : for the park be dispark , the timber root up , the conduit pipe take away , the roof make sale of , the planching rot , the wall fall down , and the hew stone of the window , dourne and clauel , pluck out to serve private building : only there remain a utter defacement , to complain upon this unregarded distress . it now appertain by lease , to master Samuel , who marry Halse : he father ( a wise and pleasant conceit gentleman ) match with Tremayne . [ 139 ] after we have quit Restormel , Roche become our next place of sojourn , though hardly invite , with promise of any better entertainment , than the name carry write in his forehead , to wit , a huge , high and steep rock , seat in a plain , gird on either side , with ( as it be ) two substitute , and meritorious ( not doubt ) for the hermit , who dwell on the top thereof , be it but in regard of such a uneasy climb to his cell and chapel , a part of who natural wall be wrought out of the rock itself . near the foot of Roche , there lie a rock , level with the ground above , and hollow downwards , with a wind depth , which contain water , report by some of the neighbour , to ebb and flow as the sea . of these , as another cornish wonder . you neighbour-scorner , holy-prowd , go people roche cell , far from the world , near to the heaven , there , hermit , may you dwell . be|it true that spring in rock hereby , do tide-wise ebb and flow ? or have we fool with liar meet ? fame say it : be it so . from hence ascend easy the space of a mile , you shall have win the top of the cornish archbeacon Hainborough , which ( as little to great ) may for prospect compare with Rama in Palestina , Henius in Medica , Collalto in Italy , and Sceafel in the I|will of man : for if the weather darkness bind not your eyesight , within his ordinary extent , you shall thence plain discern , to the eastwards , a great part of Devon , to the west , very near the land end , to the north and south , the ocean , and sundry land scatter therein , wherethrough it pass also for a wonder . haynborough wide prospect , at once , both feed , and glut your eye , with Cornwall whole extent , as it in length and breadth do lie . at Ladocke , in this hundred , dwell master Peter Courtney , who double fetch his pedigree , from that honourable flock , and embrace the contentment of a quiet private life , before the public charge in his country , due to his call , and to which long sithence , he have be call . his father marry ( as i have show ) the daughter and coheir of trethurffe , himself Reskimers , his son the daughter of Saintabyn : he bear oh three Torteaux , and a file with as many Lambeaux , B. Leo Aser , in the delightful , and approve description of his country , tell we of a blind guide , who will ready and safe conduct strange traveller , over the huge desert , with which that region abound , and that the mean he use , be , in certain distance , to smell at the sand , which give he perfect notice of the place . likewise , Lewes Guicciardin , in his book of Netherlands , make report of one Martyn Catelyn , bear at weruicke in Flaunders , who fall blind before he attain two year age , grow , notwithstanding , by his own industry , without any teacher , to such a perfection in timber handicraft , as he can , not only turn , [ 140 ] and make virginal , organ , vyolon , and such like instrument , with great facility , order , and proportion , but also tune , and handsome play upon they , and beside , devise many serviceable tool for his science . Theise example i thrust out before i , to make way , for a not much less strange relation , touch one Edward bone , sometime servant to the say master Courtney : which fellow ( as by the assertion of diverse credible person , i have be inform ) deaf from his cradle , and consequent dumb , will yet be one of the first , to learn , and express to his master , any news that be stir in the country : especial , if there go speech of a sermon , within some miles distance , he will repair to the place , with the soon , and set himself direct against the preacher , look he steadfast in the face , while his sermon last : to which religious zeal , his honest life be also answerable . for , as he shun all lewd part himself , so , if he espy any in his fellow servant , ( which he can and will quick do ) his master shall straightways know it , and not rest free from importune , until , either the fellow have put away his fault , or their master his fellow . and to make his mind know , in this , and all other matter , he use very effectual sign , be able therethrough , to receive , and perform any enjoin errand . beside , he be afflict with so firm a memory , that he will not only know any party , who he have once see , for ever after , but also make he know to any other , by some special observation , and difference . upon a brother of he , God lay the like infirmity , but do not recompense it with the like rarity . somewhat near the place of his birth , there dwell another , so affect , or rather defect , who name be Kempe : which two , when they chance to meet , will use such kind embracement , such strange , often , and earnest tokening , and such hearty laughter , and other passionate gesture , that their want of a tongue , seem rather a hindrance to other conceive they , then to their conceive one another . Gwarnack , in this hundred , be the beuils ancient seat , who two daughter and heir , marry Arundel of Trerice , and Greinuile . Wolueden , alias , golden , fall unto Tregian , by match with the inheritrix thereof . Tregean signify the giant town : their son marry in lanherne house , their grandchild with the lord Stourtons daughter : he bear Erm. on a chief saint three martlet O. it stand in Probus parish , who high , and fair church tower , of hew moor stone , be build within compass of our remembrance , by the well dispose inhabitant : and here also dwell one Williams , a wealthy , and charitable farmer , grandfather to sixty person , now live , and able , late to ride twelve mile in a morning , for be witness to the christen of a child , to who he be great great grandfather . from hence , draw towards the south sea , we will touch at the late park of lanhadron , because there grow a oak , bear his leaf speckle with white , as do another , call painter oak , in the hundred of east : but whether the former partake any supernatural property , to foretoken the owner son ensue death , when his leaf be all of one colour ( as i have [ 141 ] hear some report ) let those affirm , who better know it : certain it be , that diverse ancient family in England be admonish by such prediction . Grampond , if it take that name from any great bridge , have now nomen sine re : for the bridge there be support with only a few arch , and the corporation but half , replenish with inhabitant , who may better vaunt of their town antiquity , than the town of their ability . of Pentuan i have speak before . for the present , it harbour master dart , who as diverse other gentleman , well descend , and accommodate in Devon , do yet rather make choice of a please and retire equality in the little cornish angle . he match with Roscarrocke . Penwarne , in the same parish of meuagesy , alias , saint meuie , and isy ( two nothing ambitious Saints , in rest satisfy with the partage of so petty a limit ) be vest in master Otwell hill , as heir to his mother , the daughter and heir to Cosowarth , to who it likewise accrue , by match with the daughter and heir of that name : a seat , through his fruitfulness , and other appurtenance , supply the owner large mean of hospitality , and by he so employ , who reckon to receive most good , when he do it . he derive himself from a populous , and well regard family in Lancashire , and marry the daughter of Denham : and bear G. a Cheuron , between three garb ermine . at the adjoin saint tue , dwell master Richard tremayn , descend from a young brother of Colocumb house , in Devon , who be learn in the law , be yet to learn , or at least to practise , how he may make other profit thereby , then by hoard up treasure of gratitude , in the mindful breast of poor and rich , on who he , gratis , bestow the fruit of his pain and knowledge . he marry coffin , he bear G. three arm in circle join at the tronke 0. with hand proper . Dudman , a wellknown foreland to most sailor , here shoulder out the ocean , to shape the same a large bosom between it self , and rame head , which be well-near twenty mile in distance . among sundry proverb , allot a impossible time of performance , the cornish man have this one , when rame-head and Dudman meet . who possession , yet , though not themselves , meet in sir peer Edgecumb , as enjoin that , in right of his wife , and this , by descent from his father . Bodrugan , a large demaine adjoin thereunto ( which i will not derive from sir Bars du Ganis , though the neighbour so say ) be the dwell of sir Henry Trenowith , a man of great livelihood , who change his name with the house , and lose house and hold , through attainder for rebellion , against king Henry the seven . the king bestow it , by a entail gift , upon sir Richard Edgecumb . next , lie the foreremembered Caryhayes ( kery have in Cornish , signify to bear his seed , or as some other define it , delight in seed ) descend to m. Charles trevanion , the present possessioner , by a long rank of ancestor , from arundel daughter and heir : his father marry the daughter of Morgan , and sister to the first lord humdons wife , which bring he a honourable ally . three of this gentleman elder brethren , Edward , John , and Hugh , forgo he in succession [ 142 ] to their father inheritance , and pass to the better world in a single life : himself by match the daughter and heir of Witchalse , who mother be coheir to Marwood , have raise issue unto they , and continue the hope of posterity . sir William trevanion , his grandsire , take to wife the say sir Richard edgecumb daughter . the treuanion arm be A. a Fesse B. charge with three Escalops O. between two chevron G. Roseland , be a circuit , contain certain parish hereabout , and benefit the owner with his fruitfulness , so that though the original of his name come ( perhaps ) as master Camden note , from his former thicket , yet his present estate better resemble a flowery effect . by this time we approach the limit of Falmouth haven , upon one of who creek , stand the market and incorporate town of Tregny , not special memorable ( in my knowledge ) for any extraordinary worth , or accident . of better regard be Truro , alias , Truru , or trisow , as the principal town of the haven , privilege with a mayraltie , and benefit with the general western session , coynage , market , fair , etc the shape of the town , and etymon of the name , may be learn out of this cornish prophetical rhyme . true ru , triu eu , Ombdina give try ru . which be to say , Truro consist of three street , and it shall in time be say , here Truro stand . a like mischief of a mystery , they observe , that in take T. from the town , there rest ru , ru , which in English sound , woe , woe : but whatsoever shall become thereof hereafter , for the present , i hold it to have get the start in wealth of any other cornish town , and to come behind none in building , Lanceston only except , where there be more use , and profit of fair lodging , through the county Assizes . i wish that they will likewise deserve praise , for get , and employ their riches , in some industrious trade , to the good of their country , as the harbour opportunity invit they . descend from Truro to the haven|be mouth , by water , you be overlooked , by sundry gentleman commodious seat , as Fentengollan , in english , the heart well , late appertain to master carmynow , by interpretation often love , and now to master Holcomb , who marry the daughter of master Peter Courtney . master Sayers house , Ardeuora , inhabit by master Thomas Peyton , a gentleman for his age and virtue , deserve a regardful estimation , [ blank ] master bescawne , [ blank ] master Sayers : but among all , upon that side of the river , taluerne , for pleasant prospect , large scope , and other housekeep commodity , challenge the preeminence : it be give to a young brother of Lanhearne , for some six or seven descent past , and have breed gentleman of good worth and call : among who , i may not forget the late kind , and valiant sir John Arundel , who match with Godolphin , nor John his virtuous , and hopeful succeed son , who marry with Carew ; though this remembrance renew that sorrow , which once i partly express in the ensue epitaph . [ 143 ] seek not , blind eye , the live with the dead , it|be earth you see : our Arundel be go , to join with Christ , as member to his head , and scorn , and pity , this our bootless moan . yet pardon we , sweet soul , man nature bear , we , to thy loss , shall sacrifice our tear . thou time have change to eternity , but timeless be that time , in our regard , since nought thou leave we , save the memory of thy dear worth , so soon not to be spare . soft be the grave , unto thy rest bone : short be the date , that we again atone . upon the east side of the haven|be entrance , saint Maryes , alias , saint maw castle , with his point-blank ordinance , comptrol any ship , that deserve a denial of admission or passage , and be command by master Viuian , a gentleman , who through his worth deserve , and with due care and judgement discharge , the marshal and civil government commit to his trust : he bear party per fesse Ar. and vnsase 6. in chief , a lion rampant G. we will close up this hundred , after our usual manner , with the gentleman of mark , but not orderly mark . such be tanner , who marry the daughter of Roscarrock : who bear A. on a chief saint three morion head oh pomeroy , a branch of Bery Pomeroy in Devon : he bear O. a lion rampant G. who match with tanner , and who daughter and heir apparent , have take to husband the young penkeuil , who bear A. two chevron , and in chief a lion passant G. polwheele , who name be deduce from his dwell : and his dwelling may be interpret , the miry work , link in wedlock with the coheir of Trencreeke , in english , the town of the borough . his mother be low of trelask . Polwheel bear saint a saulty engrail Erm. hearle , lineal descend from sundry knight , who wed trevanion : and his son Treffry . he birth A. a Fesse G. between 3. sheldrakes proper . Sawle , who espouse Rashleigh : and his father , Kendal , etc and bear A. a Cheuron between 3. falcon head erase saint pider hundred . i must now , for a while , bid the south sea farewell , until a new opportunity call i to end the other part of Falmouth haven , and take the hundred of pider in task , which confine with powder in situation , as it resemble the same in denomination . pider in Cornish be 4. in english , and this be the four hundred of Cornwall , if you begin your reckon from the Wester part , at penwith , which ( signify a head ) do seem so to require it . in enter this hundred , padstowe first present it self , a town and haven of suitable quality , for both ( though bad ) be the best , that the north Cornish coast possess . the borough give name to the harbour , and borrow it of Petrock and Stowe , contract the same into Padstowe . it have late purchase a corporation and reap great thrift , by traffic [ 144 ] with Ireland , for which it commodious lie . the harbour be bar with bank of sand , make ( through unite there weak force ) sufficient strong , to resist the ocean threaten billow , which ( divorce from their parent ) find their rage subdue by the other lowly submission . m. Nicholas Prideaux , from his new and stately house , thereby take a full and large prospect of the town , haven , and country adjoin , to all which , his wisdom be a stay , his authority a direction . he marry one of viels coheir ; and though endow with fair revenue in Devon , make Cornwall behold to his residence . he bear A. a Cheuron saint in chief a file with three Lambreaux G. the salt water leave Padstowe , flow up into the country , that it may embrace the river camel , and have perform this natural courtesy , eb away again , to yield he the free passage , by which mean they both undergo wade bridge , the long , strong , and fair that then shire can muster . it take his name of a ford adjoin , which afford a way , not so safe , as compendious , when the tide be out . Wade bridge deliver you into a waste ground , where 9 long and great stone , call the sister , stand in a rank together , and seem to have be so pitch , for continue the memory of somewhat , who notice be yet envy we by time . near to belowdy , common , and not unproper , term beelowzy , the top of a hill be environ with deep treble trench , which leave a large plain space in the midst : they call it Castellan dani , of which my former book make mention ; and it seem ( in time past ) to have be a matter of moment , the rather , for that a great causeway ( now cover with grass ) do lead unto it . saint Colombs be a big parish , and a mean market town , subject to the lordship and patronage of the Lanhearn arundel , who for many descent , lie there inter , as the inscription on their grave stone do testify . their name be derive from hirundelle , in french , a swallow , and out of France , at the conquest they come , and six swallow they give in arm . the country people entitle they , the great arundel : and great stroke , for love , live , and respect , in the country heretofore they bear . their say house of Lanhearne , stand in the next parish , call Mawgan : ladu be cornish for a bank , and on a bank the same be seat , what hearne may mean , ignorance bid i keep silence . it be appurtenance with a large scope of land , which ( while the owner there live ) be employ to frank hospitality ; yet the same want wood , in lieu whereof , they burn heath , and general , it be more regardable for profit , then commendale for pleasure . the gentleman now live , marry Anne the daughter of Henry Gerningham : he father ( a man of a goodly presence and kind magnanimity ) marry the daughter of the earl of Derby , and widow to the lord Stourton . he bear saint 6. swallow in pile A. little Colan have less worth the observation , unless you will deride , or pity , their simplicity , who seek at our lady Nants well there , to foreknow what fortune shall betide they , which be in this manner : upon palm Sunday , these idle-headed seeker resort thither , with a palm cross in one hand , and a offer [ 145 ] in the other : the offering fall to the priest share , the cross they throw into the well ; which if it swim , the party shall outlive that year ; if it sink , a short ensue death be bode : and perhaps , not altogether untrue , while a foolish conceit of this halfen might the soon help it onward . a contrary practice to the goddess Juno lake in Laconia : for there , if the wheaten cake , cast in upon her festival day , be by the water receive , it betoken good luck ; if reject , evil . the like be write by Pausanias , of Inus in Greece , and by other touch the offering throw into the furnace of mount Aetna in Sicill . from hence , by the double duty of consanguinity and affinity , i be call to stop at Cosowarth , which inhabitant alter the inhabitant from their former french name Escudifer , in english , iron shield , to his own , as they prove by old evidence , not need in the norman king new birth , to be distinguish with the raigners number . Cosowarth , in Cornish , import the high grove : and well store with tree it have be , neither be yet altogether destitute . John the heir of that house , have by the daughter of Williams , issue only one daughter Katherine , suffer part of his land to descend unto the child of her first husband , Alen hill : another part he intail in her second marriage , with Arundel of Trerice , to their issue . the house of Cosowarth , and the ancient inheritance there adjoin , he give to the heir male of his stock , by which conveyance , his uncle John succeed , who marry the daughter of sir Wil. lock , king H. the 8. merchant , and by he knight , for that with equal courage , and hazard , he take down the pope bull , set up at Antwerp against his sovereign . he have issue Thomas , Edward , Michael , John , and Robert . Thomas marry the daughter of Samtabyn , on who he beget John and Dorothy : John the elder and Robert , never taste the sweet and sour of bridal fruit . Michael take to wife Sidenhams daughter of Dulverton in Somerset shire , and be father only of issue female . he addict himself to a ecclesiastical life , and therein join poetry with divinity , endeavour to imitate the holy prophet David , who psalm , of his translation into english meet , receive the general applause , beyond a great many other well-deserving undertaker of the same task . John the young , succeed in this inheritance , upon just cause , good conscience , and grateful kindness , renew the intail which his father Thomas have cut off , and in a single estate , and the universal love of all that converse with he , make a short period of his long hope life : who decease i bewail in these rhyme . he that at sea and land amid his foe , by courage guide , seek , and escape his death , lo , here , among his friend , who like choose , and nature lend , have up resign his breath . unripen fruit in growth , precious in hope , rare in effect , have fortune give scope . our eye with tear perform thy obsequy , and heart with sigh , since hand can yield none aid , [ 146 ] our tongue with praise preserve thy memory , and thought with grief , since we behind be stay . coswarth farewell , death which we part atwaine , ever long , in life , shall we conjoin again . his sister marry Kendal . Edward his uncle , and heir , by virtue of these entail , marry the daughter of Arundel of Trerice , and from a civil courtier life in his young year , repose his elder age , on the good husbandry of the country , have raise posterity sufficient , for transplant the name into many other quarter . he bear A. on a Cheuron between three wing B. five bezant . against you have pass towards the west somewhat more than a mile , Trerice , ancient , Treres , offer you the view of his costly and commodious building . what tree be , you know already , res signify a rush of fleet away , and upon the decline of a hill the house be seat . in Edward the 3. reign , ralphe Arundel match with the heir of this land and name : since which time , his issue have there continue , and increase their livelihood , by sundry like inheritor , as saint John , Jew , Durant , thurlebear , etc precise to rip up the whole pedigree , be more tedious , then behooveful : and therefore i will only ( as by the way ) touch some few point , which may serve ( in part ) to show what place and regard they have bear in the common wealth . there be a indenture make , between huge Courtney , earl of Devon , Leiutenant to the king , for a sea voyage , in defence of the realm : and sir John Arundel of Trerice , for accompany he therein . he be sheriff of Cornwall . [ 8. H. 5. ] John earl of Huntingdon , under his seal of arm , [ 5. H. 6. ] make sir John Arundel of Trerice , seneschal of his household , as well in peace , as in war , give he ten pound fee , and allow he entertainment in his house , for one gentleman , three yeoman , one boy , and six horse . the same earl , still himself lieutenant general [ 8. H. 6. ] to John duke of Bedford , constable and admiral of England , write to the say sir John Arundel , than viceadmiral of Cornwall , for the release of a ship , which he have arrest by virtue of his office . the queen , by her letter , advertise John Arundel of [ 3. H. 7. ] Trerice esquire , that she be bring in childbed of [ 12. Oct. ] a prince . the king write to sir John Arundel of Trerice , that [ 11. H. 8 ] he shall give his attendance at Canterbury , about the entertainment of the emperor , who land be then and there expect . John Arundel of Trerice esquire , take prisoner , [ 14. H. 8. ] Duncane Campbell , a scot , in a fight at sea , as our chronicle mention , concern which , i think it not amiss , to insert a letter send he from Tho. duke of Norfolk ( to who he then belong ) that you may see the stile of those day . [ 147 ] by the duke of Norf. right well-beloved , in our hearty wife we commend we unto you , let you wit , that by your servant , this bearer , we have receive your letter , date at Truru the 5. day of this month of April , by which we perceive the goodly , valiant , and jeopardous enterprise , it have please God of late to send you , by the take of Duncane camel and other scots on the sea ; of which enterprise we have make relation unto the king highness , who be not a little joyous and glad , to hear of the same , and have require we instant in his name , to give you thank for your say valiant courage , and bold enterprise in the premise : and by these our letter , for the same your so do , we do not only thank you in our most effectual wise , but also promise you , that during our life , we will be glad to advance you to any preferment we can . and over this , you shall understand , our say sovereign lord pleasure be , that you shall come and repair to his highness , with diligence in your own person , bring with you the say captive , and the master of the scottish ship ; at which time , you shall not only be sure of his especial thank by mouth , and to know his further pleasure therein , but also of we to further any your reasonable pursuit unto his highness , or any other , during our life , to the best of our power , accord . write at Lambeth , the 11. day of April aforesaid . superscribe : to our right well-beloved servant , John Arundel of Trerice . the king write to sir John Ar. of Trerice , touch [ 35. H. 8. ] his discharge from the admiralty of the fleet , late commit unto he , and that he shall deliver the ship which he sail in , to sir Nic. point . the same year the king write to he again , that he shall attend he in his war against the french king , with his servant , tenant , and other , within his room and office , especial horseman . other letter from the king there be , who date be not express , neither can i by any mean hunt it out . one , to his servant John Arundel of Trerice esquire , will he , not to repair with his man , and to wait in the rearward of his army , as he have command he , but to keep they in a readiness for some other service . another , to sir John Arundel of Trerice , pray and desire he to the court , the Quindene of saint Hillarie next , wheresoever the king shall then be within the realm . there be also letter , direct to sir John Arundel of Trerice , from the king counsel , by some of which it it appear , that he be vice-admiral of the king [ Ed. 6. ] ship , in the west sea , and by other , that he have the good and land of certain rebel , give he , for his good service against they . the queen write to sir John Arundel of Trerice , [ 1. Mar ] pray and require he , that he , with his friend and neighbour , shall see the prince of Spain most honourable entertain , if he fortune to land in Cornwall . [ 148 ] [ 2. Mar. ] Shee write to he ( be then sheriff of Cornwall ) touch the election of the knight of the shire , and the burgess for the parliament . [ 2. and 3. ] Shee likewise write to he , that ( notwithstanding [ P. and m. ] the instruction to the justice ) he shall muster , and furnish his servant , tenant , and other , under his rule and office , with his friend , for the defence , and quiet of the country , withstand of enemy , and any other employment , as also to certify , what force of horse and foot he can arm . Theise few note i have cull out of many other . sir John Arundel , last mention , by his first wife , the coheir of beuill , have issue Roger , who die in his father life time ; and Katherine , marry to Prideaux : Roger by his wife Trendenham leave behind he a son , call John . sir John second wife , be daughter to erisy , and widow to Gourlyn , who bear he John , his succeeder in Trerice , and much other fair revenue , who due commendation , because another might better deliver then my self , who touch he as near , as Tacitus do Agricola ) i will therefore bind the same within his desert , and only say this , which all , who know he , shall testify with i : that , of his enemy , he will take no wrong , nor on they any revenge ; and be once reconcile , embrace they , without scruple or remnant of gall . over his kindred , he hold a wary and chary care , which bountiful be express , when occasion so require , repute himself , not only principal of the family , but a general father to they all . private respect ever , with he , give place to the common good : as for frank , well order , and continual hospitality , he outgo all show of competence : spare , but discreet of speech , better conceive , then deliver : equal stout , and kind , not upon lightness of humour , but soundness of judgement , incline to commiseration , ready to relieve . brief , so accomplish in virtue , that those , who for many year together wait in near place about he , and , by his example , learned to hate untruth , have often deep protest , how no curious observation of they , can ever descry in he , any one notorious vice . by his first foreremember wife , he have 4. daughter marry , to Carew , summaster , Cosowarth , and Denham : by his late , the daughter of sir Robert Denis , 2. son , and 2. daughter : the elder , even from his young year , begin where his father leave , and with so temperate a course , tread just in his footstep , that he inherit , as well his love , as his live . the young brother follow the Netherlands war , with so wel-liked a carriage , that he outgo his age , and time of service , in preferment . their mother equal her husband former child , and general all his kindred , in kind usage , with her own , and be by they all , again , so acknowledge and respect . of saint Peran , we have speak before , which too well brook his surname , in Sabulo : for the light sand , carry up by the north wind , from the sea shore , daily continue his cover , and mar the land adjoinant , so as the distress of this deluge , drive the inhabitant to remove their church : howbeit , when it meet with any cross brook , the same ( by a secret antipathy ) restrain , and bar his far encroach that way . in Withiell parish of this hundred , one Gidly , not many year sithence , dig down a little hillock , or [ 149 ] borough , call Borsneeuas , in english , cheapfull , therewith to thicken his other ground . in the bottom of which he find three white stone , trianglewise ( as pillar ) support another flat one , some two foot and a half square , and in the midst between they , and under it , a earthen pot , half full of a black slimy , and ill-fauouring substance , which ( doubtless ) be once the ash of some notable person , there commit to that manner of burial . saint Agnes , one of the high hill , which i special recite in my former book , by his entrails ( like Prometheus ) feed the tynners peck , or pick bill , with a long live profit , albeit , their scarcle eagle eye sometime mistake the shadow for the substance , and so offer up degenerate tear , as a late sacrifice to repentance . the neighbour have observe , that of two lake , near adjoin to this hill , and so each to other , the one will foster fish , and the other none at all . neither may i omit new Kaye , a place in the north coast of this hundred , so call , because in former time , the neighbour attempt , to supply the defect of nature , by art , in make there a key , for the road of ship , which conceit they still retain , though want of mean in themselves , or the place , have leave the effect in nubes : and only lend they the benefit of lestercockes and fisherboat . i can finish this hundred , with the relation of many more gentleman , either through want of they , or in my self . Trenance add to his own livelihood , the possession of Littleton , to who , as sister son , and general heir , he succeed and marry Kendal , and his son Roscarrocke : he bear A. a Fesse , between three sword saint there dwell also master Tredenick , who match with the daughter of Viuian , and his father , of marrow , who bear O. on a bend S. three buck head cabase A. as also langherne B. a Cheuron between 3. Escalops O. burlace , A. on a bend S. two hand tear in sunder a horse-shoe of the field ; and other . Kerier hundred . kery in Cornish , signify bear : and yet you must bear with i , if i forbear to derive Kerier herefrom , until i see some reason for my warrant : wherefore leave that , i will weave on my former web of Falmouth haven ; and first , a word or two touch then same in general , ere i descend to the yet undescribe west side in particular . the river Fala , fall here , into the sea wide-gaping mouth , have endow it with that name , in the very entrance of the harbour lie a rock , rather disgrace , then endamage the same : for with the ebb it be discover , and at the flood , mark by a pole purposely fix thereupon . for the rest , such as compare Plymmouth and Falmouth together , observe , that Plymmouth creek be mostly coast with plain shore ; Falmouth , with steep : which make that , the more delightful for prospect , this , the more safe for ride . again , they say that Falmouth lie far out in the trade way , and so offer a soon opportunity to wind-driven ship , than Plymmouth , but that Plymmouth have a better outlet , from his catwater , for sailor [ 150 ] bind to the westwards , and from hamoase for those that will fare to the east , than Falmouth . likewise as Plymmouth vaunt rich and fair town , and great plenty of fish then Falmouth : so Falmouth brag , that a hundred sail may anchor within his circuit , and no one of they see the other top , which Plymmouth can equal . howsoever they agree for competence among themselves , the worst of they , by most man judgement , have the precedence ( Milford only except ) of all other haven in England . and thus much of the whole . now to the part . on the west side , at the very come in , there rise a hill , call Pendenis , where king Henry the eight , when he take order for fortify the sea coast , cause a castle to be build , with allowance of a petty garrison , and some small store of ordinance . another , somewhat like thereto in plot , but different in sight , be s . maw then erect in the other side , at saint maw , of which castle , i have speak heretofore . saint maw lie low , and better to annoy ship : but Pendenis stand high , and strong to defend it self . it shall seem , the fortifier make his advantage of the commodity , afford by the ground , and shoot rather at a safe preferue the harbour , from sudden attempt of little fleet , and the master of pirate , than to withstand any great navy , or maigne invasion . but her majesty cast a equal eye to both , or rather a sharp sight to this late , as quicken through the enemy diverse pretence against these place ( whereof Falmouth , by miracle , not providence , escape one ) raise a new fort with a garrison , upon the hawe at Plymmouth , and at her great charge , with some little help of the country , add a increase of fortification and soldier to Pendenis . howbeit , his great strength consist in sir Nicholas Parker , the governor , who demean himself , no less kind , and frank towards his neighbour , for the present , than he do resolute , and valiant , against the enemy when he follow the war ; therethrough command , not only their body , by his authority , but also their heart , by his love , to live and die in his assistance , for their common preservation , and her highness service : he bear B. fretty , and A. a Fesse o after the decline hill have deliver you down from this castle , arwenacke entertain you , with a please view : for the same stand so far within the haven|be mouth , that it be protect from the sea storm , and yet so near thereunto , as it yield a ready passage out . beside the cliff , on which the house abbut , be steep enough to shoulder off the wave , and the ground about it , plain and large enough for use and recreation . it be owe by master John Killigrew , who marry the daughter of Monck , and heir to her mother [ blank ] and be son to sir John Killigrew , who match with Woluerstone : the stock be ancient , and diverse of the branch ( as i have elsewhere remember ) grow to great advancement , in call and livelihood , by their great desert : their arm be A. a eagle with two head display within a bordure Bezanty S. somewhat above arwenacke , trefuse point divide the harbour , and yield a several anker [ 151 ] place on each side thereof ; the one call carack ride , the other , king ride . this promontory be possess and inhabit by a gentleman of that name , who suitab to his name , give three fusil for his coat , in this sort : A. a Cheuron between three fusils saint he marry the coheir of Gaurigan , and m. Wil. Godolphin , late young brother to sir FraunciS , her other sister . upon the left hand from hence , at the top of a creek , Perin town have take up his seat , rather passable , then notable , for wealth , building , and inhabitant ; in all which , though near the haven mouth , it give Truro the preeminence : the like whereof i observe , touch diverse other town , of the same situation , in Devon , as Salcomb , and king bridge , Dartmouth , and Totnes , Topsham , and Excester : among which , those that stand high up in the country , afford therethrough , a fit opportunity of access , from all quarter , and so a speedyer and large vent of their commodity . in Perin be Glasney college , found [ 1256. ] by Walter Brounscomb , and benefit by John grandson , bishop of Excester [ 1327. ] , which see possess fair revenue thereabouts . upon another creek on the same side , Carclew have ( after the cornish manner ) wellnear metamorphose the name of master Bonithon , his owner , into his own . he marry the daughter of Viuian , his father of Killigrew , his grandfather of erisy , and bear A. a Cheuron between 3 , flower the luce . S. with any memorable act or accident , concern this haven , i can acquaint you , before my part therefrom , save only , that Philip , archduke of austriche , during his voyage from Netherlands towards Spain ( his wife kingdom ) be weather-driven into Weymouth , and , with a kind constraint , receive a more royal , then welcome entertainment , at the hand of king Henry the 7. from which he can not free himself , but by redeem his liberty , with de la pool captivity . This accomplish , he make choice to take ship again at Falmouth , that so by the short cut , he may leave least power in fortune , to thwart he any second encumbrance . Hailford , so call , of the fordible river hail , if elsewhere place , will carry the reputation of a good harbour ; but as it now stand , falmouth over-near neighbourhood lessen his use , and darken his reputation , as quit it only to the worst sort of seafarer , i mean , pirate , who guilty breast , with a eye in their back , look wary how they may go out , ere they will adventure to enter ; and this at vnfortify Hailford , can be control : in which regard , it not unproper brook his more common term of Helford , and the nickname of Stealfoord . his shore afford commodious seat , to the dwelling of Reskimer , who marry S. abin , and bear B. 3. bar A. in chief a wolf passant of the first : and tregose , who match with Kendal : he son with erisy , and bear B. two bar gemewes in chief a lion passant O. arm and langued G. and if your ear be not already cloy with relation of wonder , i will let you understand , how i be once carry to see one hereabout . it be ( forsooth ) a [ 152 ] great rock , lie upon the ground , his top deepen to a hollowness , not much unlike in fashion , but far exceed in proportion the long half of a egg . this ( they say ) hold water , which eb and flow as the sea , and , indeed , when i come thither , the tide be half out , and the pit half empty . by it there stand a chapel , and to it there belong a cover , so as the same seem , in former time , to carry some regard . but i have hear credible person so discredit this wonder , that i dare not offer it you , as probable , much less thrust it upon you , as approve . the name thereof be , hanterdauis , which ( turn penny to it ) signify half a tongue . more certain , though less wonderful , and yet , for the strangeness , well worth the view , be mainamber : main , be a rock , amber , as some say , signify Ambrose . and a great rock the same be , advance upon some other of a mean size , with so equal a counterpeyze , that the push of a finger , will sensible move it too and fro : but far to remove it , the unite force of many shoulder be overweak . wherefore the cornish wonder-gatherer , thus describe the same , be thou thy mother nature work , or proof of giant might : worthless and ragged though thou show , yet be thou worth the sight . this huge rock , one finger force apparent will move ; but to remove it , many strength shall all like feeble prove . Helston , in Cornish , Hellaz , in english , the green hall , be a well seat and people town , privilege , secundum usum , with the rest , and one of the 4. coinage place . under it run the river lo , who passage into the sea , be thwart by a sandy bank , which force the same to quurt back a great way , and so to make a pool of some mile in compass . it breed a peculiar kind of bastard trought , in bigness and goodness exceed such as live in the fresh water , but come short of those that frequent the salt . the foreremembered bank serve as a bridge , to deliver wayfarer , with a compendious passage , to the other side ; howbeit , sometime with more haste than good speed : for now and then , it be so press on the inside , with the increase river weight , and a portion of the utter sand , so wash down by the wave ; that at a sudden , out break the upper part of the pool , and away go a great deal of the sand , water , and fish : which instant , if it take any passenger tardy , shrewd endanger he , to flit for company : and some have so miscarry . to this pool adjoin m. Penrose his house , who kind entertainment have give i , and many other experience of these matter . he marry the daughter of Rashleigh : he bear A. 3. bend S. charge with 9 rest . of the field . those 2. river of hail and Lo , rise not far asunder , do enclose between they , as they run into the sea , a neck of land , particularize with the name of Meneag : and in regard of his fruitfulness , not unworthy of a severance . [ 153 ] within this circuit , lie trelawarren m. viuians house , and erisy , seat in 2. parish , and descend , by a long rank of ancestor , to the gentleman , of that name , now in ward . his father marry Carew : he grandsire , one of militons coheir , who overliving her husband , end the course of her long and well commend widowhood , in become lady to sir Nicholas Parker . the enzy bear saint a Cheuron , between 3. griffon sergeant oh clowance ( derive from cloow , which signify , to hear ) be the possession and dwell of m. saintabin , who very name ( beside the conquest roll ) deduce his first ancestor out of France . his grandfather marry Greinuile : his father , one of whittingtons coheir : which late couple , in a long and peaceable date of year , exercise a kind , liberal , and never discontinue hospitality . himself take to wife the daughter of Mallet , and with ripe knowledge and sound judgement , discharge the place which he bear in his country . he bear O. on a cross G. five bezaunt . Pengueraz , in Cornish import a head to help ; from which , some deduce the etymon of pengersick , a fair house , in a unfruitful soil , sometime the inhabitant of m. Militon , captain of the mount , and husband to Godolphin , who son be lose in his travail beyond the sea , enrich 6. distaf with his inheritance . they be bestow in marriage ( but by i not orderly marshal ) as follow : 1. to erisy , and sir Nicholas Parker . 2. to Lanine , 3. to trefuse , and Tregodeck , 4. to trenwith , Arundel , and hearle , 5. to Bonithon . 6. to abbot . not far from thence , rise godolghan-ball , or hill , at who foot stand a house of the same name , and so entitle his owner , though late decline ( with a mild accent ) to Godolphin : in Cornish , it signify , a white eagle : and such arm they carry in this sort : G. a eagle display with two head , between three flower the luce a this hill have , for diverse descent , supply those gentleman bountiful mind , with large mean accrue from their tynnework , and be now possess by sir Francis Godolphin knight , who zeal in religion , uprightness in justice , providence in government , and plentiful housekeeping , have win he a very great and reverent reputation in his country : and these virtue , together with his service to her majesty , be so sufficient know to those of high place , as my testimony can add little light thereunto : but by his labour and invention in tin matter , not only the whole country have feel a general benefit , so as the several owner have thereby get very great profit out of such refuse work , as they before have give over for unprofitable ; but her majesty have also receive increase of her custom by the same , at least to the value of 10. thousand pound . moreover , in those work which be of his own particular inheritance , he continual keep at work , three hundred person or thereabouts , and the yearly benefit , that out of those his work accru to her majesty , amount , communibus annis , to one thousand pound at the least , and sometime to much more . a matter very remorceable , and perchance not to be match again by any of his sort and condition in the whole realm . he succeed to the inheritance [ 154 ] of his uncle sir William Godolphin , who , as have be say before , demean himself very valiant in a charge which he bear at Boulogne , towards the latter end of the reign of king Henry the 8. and be like to leave the same to another sir William his son , who give hope , not only of the sustain , but increase of the reputation of his family . he match with Killigrew , his father with Bonython , his grandfather with Glynne , diverse other gentleman there dwell in this hundred , as lanyne , the husband of Kekewitch , his father marry Militon , and bear saint a castle , A. stand in wave B. over the same a falcon houerin with bell oh Pernwarne , that match with the coheir of Tencreek , who bear S. a Cheuron between three flower the luce A. Lagherne , who take to wife the daughter of Nants , and bear B. a Cheuron between three escalop , oh Nansperyan couple in matrimony , with [ blank ] and his two daughter and heir apparent , with Prideaux , and Matthew ; who bear A. three losenge saint penwith . hundred . my last labour , for close up this wearisome survey , be bound , as Cornwall it self , and so the west part of England , with penwith hundred . the name , in english signify , the head of Ashen tree , belike , for some such eminent mark , while the country be better store of timber . the Dane sail about penwith steort ( say Houeden [ 997. ] ) make foul havoc , in Devon and-Cornwall . upon the north sea , lie Nants , which import a valley , and house a gentleman , who therethrough , have wear out his former name , of trengoue , in english , the smith town , and assume this : he marry sir John arundel daughter of Trerice : and bear A. a cross haum saint during summer season , the seal haunt a cave , in the cliff thereby , and you shall see great store they , apparent show themselves , and approach very near the shore , at the sound of any loud music , or other such noise . beyond Nants , m. Basset possess tehiddy , who marry Godolphin , his father coffin : he bear oh three pile in point G. a canton Er. with a difference . and so , leave these private inhabitance , and keep still the north coast , we arrive at the town , and port of saint ie : both of mean plight , yet , with their best mean , ( and often , to good and necessary purpose ) succour distress ship . order have be take , and attempt make , for better the road , with a peer , but either want , or slackness , or impossibility , hitherto withhold the effect : the while , plenty of fish be here take , and sell very cheap . as you row to the westwards from hence , the sea flow into a large cave , far up , than any man dare yet adventure to discover , and the cliff thereabouts muster long strike of a glitter hue , which import a show of copper : and copper mine be find , and wrought in the ground adjoin . m. Camden observe , that near hereunto , stand the watchtower , mention by Orosius , and opposite place to such another in galitia . step over to the South-sea , ( for the distance [ 155 ] be in comparison , but a step ) saint Michael mount look so aloft , as it brook no concurrent , for the high place . Ptolomey term it Ocrinum , the cornish man , cara cowz in clowze , that be , the hoar rock in the wood . the same be sunder from the main land , by a sandy plain , of a slight shoot in breadth , passable , at the ebb , on foot ; with boat , on the flood . your arrival on the far side , be entertain by a open green , of some largeness , which finish where the hill begin , leave you to the conduction of a wind and craggy path ; and that at the top , deliver you into a little plain , occupy , for the great part , by a fort of the old make . it comprise lodging for the captain and his garrison , and a chapel for devotion . this latter , build by will . earl of Morton , to who William the conqueror his uncle , give much land in those quarter , and great haunt , while folk endure their merit , by far travail . they have a tie pit , not so much satisfy use , as relieve necessity . a little without the castle , there be a bad seat in a craggy place , call S. Michael chair , some what dangerous , for access , and therefore holy for the adventure . until Richard the first reign , the mount seem to have serve only for religion , and ( during his imprisonment ) to have be first fortify by Henry de la pomeray , who surprise it , and expulse the monk : howbeit soon after , when he become ascertain of his sovereign enlargement , the very fear of ensue harm wrought in he a present effect of the uttermost that any harm can bring , namely , his death : whereon , the old cell and new fort , be surrender to the archbishop of Canterbury , in the king behalf . thus Houeden report . but the descendents from this Pomeray , alias , Pomeroy , make a somewhat different relation of this accident : for they affirm , that a sergeant at arm of the king , come to their auncestour , at his castle of Bery Pomeroy , in Devon , receive kind entertainment for certain day together , and at his departure , be gratify with a liberal reward : in counterchange whereof , he then , and no soon , reveal his long conceal errand , flat arrest his host , to make his immediate appearance before the king , for answer a capital crime . which unexpected and il-carryed message , the gentleman , take in such despite , as with his dagger he stab the messenger to the heart : and then well know in so suparlatiue a offence , all hope of pardon foreclose , he abandon his home , get to a sister of his abide in this mount , bequethe a large portion of his land to the religious people there , for redeem his soul : and last , cause himself to be let blood unto death , for leave the remainder to his heir : from which time forward , this place continue rather a school of Mars , than the temple of peace . for short after the discomfiture of H. the 6. party , by Ed. the 4. [ 11. E. 4. ] at Barnet field , John earl of Oxford , who have make one , and one of the principal on the weak side , arrive here by ship , disguise himself , with some of his follower , in pilgrim habit , therethrough get entrance , master the garrison , and seize the place . which , thus politic win , he as valiant keep , and keep a long time defend against the king power , until reasonable condition sway he to a surrender . [ 156 ] a like surprise , but of late date , i read in popeliniere [ 2. vol. Lib. 31. ] , touch the like name and seat mount , in Normandy . during the last cornish commotion , diverse gentleman with their wife and family , flee to the protection of this place , where the rebel besiege they , first win the plain at the hill foot , by assault , when the water be out , and then ; the even ground on the top , by carry up great truss of hay before they , to blench the defendant sight , and dead their shot . after which , they can make but slender resistance : for no soon shall any one within , peep out his head , over those inflank wall , but he become a open mark to a whole shower of arrow . this disadvantage , together with the woman dismay , and decrease of victual , force a surrender to those rakehell mercy , who , nothing guilty of that effeminate virtue , spoil their good , imprison their body , and be rather by god gracious providence , than any want of will , purpose , or attempt , restrain from murder the principal person . here also [ 13. H. 7. ] , be the lady Katherine Gordon ( a unfit yoke-fellow for that counterfeit prince , Perkin Warbeck ) take by the lord Daubney , and convey to the king . of this , as the last wonder . who know not Mighels mount and chair , the pilgrim holy vaunt : both land , and island , twice a day , both fort , and port of haunt . under the mount extend a bay , for lesser vessel to lie at : and between it and the western shore , there be a indifferent good road for ship , save upon some wind , call the mount bay : where , by froissart report , sir Robert Knolles land , what time his return out of France , be by king Ed. the 3. command , and for his valiant exploit there , achieve , very gracious welcome . over-against the mount , front a town , of petty fortune , pertinent name marcaiew , of marhas diow , in english , the Thursdaies market ; for than it use this traffic . at the begin of king H. the 8. reign , it feel the frenchmens fiery indignation , who land there with 30. sail . but the smoke of those poor house , call in the country to the rescusse , make the place over hot for the enemy any long abode . Mousehole , in Cornish , be name Porternis , and in latin , Portus Insulae , both import one sense , to wit , the island haven , and so call , through a little island place before it . m. Holinshed tell we , that near hereunto , not many year sithence , certain tynner , as they be work , find spear head , battle-ax , and sword of copper , wrap in linen clout , and little impair through their long lie . Pensans , by interpretation , the saint head , be a market town , not so regardable for his substance , as memorable for his late accident of the Spaniard fire , which fall out in this manner : the three and twenty of July , 1595. soon after the sun be rise , and have chase a fog , which before keep the sea out of sight , 4. galley of the enemy present themselves upon the coast , over-against Mousehole , [ 157 ] and there in a fair bay , land about two hundred man , pike and shot , who forthwith send their forlese hope , consist of their base people , unto the straggle house of the country , about half a mile compass or more , by who be burn , not only the house they go by , but also the parish church of Paul , the force of the fire be such , as it utter ruin all the great stony pillar thereof : other of they in that time , burn that fisher town Mowsehole , the rest march as a guard for defence of these firer . the inhabitant be fear with the Spaniard land and burn , flee from their dwelling , and very mean weapon , meet with sir Francis Godolphin on a green , on the west side of penance , who that forenoon come from his house , for pacify some controversy in those western part , and from the hill espy the fire in that town , church , and house , hasten thither : who forthwith send to all the captain of those part , for their speedy repair with their company , and also send by post to sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins ( then at Plymmouth with a fleet bind for the Indies ) advertisement of the arrival of these four galley , and of their burn , advise they to look to themselves , if there be any great fleet of the enemy at sea , and to send west with all haste , what succour by sea or land they can spare . then sir Francis Godolphin advise that weak assembly , to retire into penance , and to prepare it for defence , until the come of the country force that he have send for . but they find themselves in number something above a hundred , wherein be about thirty or forty shot , though scarce one three of they be serviceable , insist to march against the enemy , to repel they from far spoil of their house . but while they be march towards they , the Spaniard return aboard their galley , and present remove they far into the bay , where they anchor again , before and near a lesser fisher town , call Newlyn . there again with all speed they land , and embattle in the slope of a hill , about four hundred pike and shot , send about two rank of soldier , three in a rank , up to the top of the hill , to discover what force or ambush of the country may lie in view : who espy none but those that be return with sir Francis Godolphin , from their forementioned fruitless march , give notice thereof to their embattle company . whereupon they forthwith march towards Penzance . upon their move , sir Francis Godolphin move also , to enter Penzance before they : and assoon as that weak number be enter into the open green be of three quarter of a mile length , the galley cease not to ply they all that way with their ordinance from their prowess , as busy as they can . of which shot , though none be hurt , but only a constable hors without any harm , save the show on his doublet of the bullet slide by his back , yet many in fearful manner , some fall flat to the ground , and other run away . sir Francis send after those that be enter Penzance before he , that they shall make their stand at the market place , himself [ 158 ] stay hindmost , to observe the enemy order , and which way they will make their approach . which do , he find at the say market place but only two resolute shot , who stand at his command , and some ten or twelve other that follow he , most of they his own servant ; the rest , surprise with fear , flee , who , neither with his persuasion , nor threaten with his rapier draw , he can recall . find himself thus abandon , and the enemy enter the town in three part , he be then force to depart , the enemy begin their fire some house behind he . the town thus fire , as also the forementioned little fisher town Newlyn , they return again to their galley . by this time , towards the evening , the cornish force increase in number , and amend in heart , encamp themselves on the green , near to the town of markesew and saint Michael mount , for defence thereof , and there spend out the night . the next day the enemy make show to land again on the west side of the bay ; but see the people , though few in number , yet resolute to resist , they desist from their enterprise : and beside , find themselves annoy by the shoot of bullet and arrow into their galley where they ride at anchor , they be force to remove they far off . soon after , viz. on the 25. of July in the morning , come thither sir Nic. Clifford , sir H. power , and certain other captain , who be send by the general from Plymmouth to the camp : as some of her majesty ship be also send , who be come as far as the lizard head , and those captain to the camp , matter there go on in provident and orderly sort , a plot be lay for intercept the enemy by ambush , if he thrust on shore again , whereto necessity must soon have press he , for renew his consume store of fresh water : but within one hour after the arrival of these captain , the wind , which be until then strong at southeast , with mist and rain , to have impeach the galley return , sudden change into the northwest , with very fair and clear weather , as if God have a purpose to preserve these his rod for a long time . the wind no soon come good , but away pack the galley with all the haste they can . thus have you a summary report of the Spaniard glorious enterprise , and the cornish man infamous cowardice , which ( be there any cause ) i can qualify by many reason , as , the suddenness of the attempt , the narrowness of the country , the openness of the town , the advantage of the galley ordinance on a people unprepared against such accident , through our long continue peace , and at that very time , for the most part , either in their tynneworke , or at sea , who ever the next day make resistance , even with a handful , and enter a vow resolution , to revenge their loss at the next encounter , if the enemy have land again . so may i likewise say , that all these circumstance meet in any other quarter of the realm , will hardly have produce much better effect . but i will not seek to thrust my countryman into any other folk company , for shift they out of sight . very such sudden surprise work more indignity [ 159 ] than damage , and more damage than disgrace , and have so be ever construe . Moscho , a head city in a populous dominion , be burn by the rogue Tartar , anno domini 1572 [ Liu. lib . 3. ] . the Capitol , a head fortress , in a populous city , be take by slave and outlaw , anno vrbis , 292. and yet , who therefore exalt the Tartar valiancy , above the Moschouite , or the roman slave and outlaw , above their master ? beside , such nap-taking assault , spoiling , and firing , have in our forefather day , between we and France , be very common ; and yet , who be so witless , as to twit either of both , for the same ? but least hold can the author , and actor of this tra-gedy take , to build any vaunt hereon : for oftentimes small troop of we , against far great force of they , yea ( sometime ) after forewarn , and preparance , have win , possess , ransack , sing , captive , and carry away the town , wealth , and inhabitant , not only of their Indies , but of Portugal and Spain it self . which number de dios , saint Domingo , Cartagena , the low town of the Groigne , Penecha , the suburb of Lisbon , and Cales will testify , beyond all exception . but our countryman leave reason and example , excuse themselves by destiny . in fatis they say ( and not in fatuis ) it be , that the cornish people shall undergo this misfortune : for a ancient prophecy , in their own language , have long run among they , how there shall land upon the rock of Merlin , those that will burn Paul church , pensant , and Newlyn . and indeed , so be the rock call , where the enemy first step on shore . the prophesy be this : Ewra teyre a war mean Merlyn Ara Lesky pawle Pensanz ha Newlyn . not far from the land end , there be a little village , call Trebegean , in english , the town of the giant grave : near whereunto , and within memory ( as i have be inform ) certain workman search for tin , discover a long square vault , which contain the bone of a excessive big carcase , and verify this etymology of the name . at saint Buriens , a parish of great circuit , and like benefit to the incumbent , king Athelstane accomplish his vow , in sound a college of priest , what time he have conquer the sillane land . Chiwarton signifi , a house on the green lay , and a castle on a green hill be give by the gentleman of that name , who , in a quiet single life , make no far use of his knowledge get in the law , during his young age , or that experience , wherewith a long course of year have sithence enrich he , then may tend , sine lucro , to the advancement of public justice , or , sine strepitu , to the advisement of his private acquaintance . he bear A. a castle S. stand on a hill . V. sundry other gentleman people that remote quarter as Lauelis , etc touch who i must plead , non sum informatus . Diogenes , after he have tire his scholar with a long lecture , find at last the void paper , be glad , my friend ( quoth he ) we be come to harbour . with the like comfort , in a unlike resemblance , i will refresh [ 160 ] you who have vouchsafe to travail in the rugged and wearyfome path of my ill-pleasing stile , that now your journey end with the land ; to who promontory ( by Pomp. Mela , call Bolerium : by Diodorus , Velerium : by Volaterane , he|will - nium : by the cornish , Pedn a laaz : and by the english , the land end ) be - cause we be arrive , i will here sit i down and rest . Deo gloria : mihi gratia . 1602. April . 23. the table of the first book . | accident . | general , in the first | element . the survey of | book , report her | inhabitant . Cornwall contai - | n a description | special , in the 2 . book , | Topographical , | contain matter | Historicall . accident , wherein be deliver the name and shape . fol. 1. climate . 2. the quantity , length and breadth . ibid . border . ibid . commodity of the situation . 3. discommodity . 4. temperature . 5. element . earth above , form , quality . 5. thing of life , grow , and feel . earth under , mineral . 6. precious , diamond , pearl , and agat . 7. water fresh , spring , river , pond . 26. therein the fish . 28. the take . 30. sea , thing liveless : live , fish , foul . thing of life , grow . mat . 18. herb . 19 corn , | dress . ibid . | kind . 20. Trees for fruit . ibid . fuel , timber . 21. thing of life , feeling . worm . 21. | venery . 22. beast , | meat . 23. | use . 24. bird . ibid . mineral . Stones for wall , window , cover , pave , ; yme . 6. metal : tin : 7. copper . 6. silver and gold . 7. tynnework . kind , find . 8. color , bigness . 10. | adventure . ibid . work , express the person : | captain . ibid . | labourer . ibid . manner , tool . ibid . loose earth , rock . 11. conveyance by water , engine , addit . ibid . tynne-dressing . break , stamp , dry , craze , wash . ibid . blow . 12. jurisdiction . Charter . 16. officer supreme : lord warden , vice-warden . 17. Inferior : steward , gaoler . 18. jury : great , petty . ibid . witness . ibid . order . share . 12. place : wastrel , several . 13. Bounds , doale , measure . ibid . | in time , 13. | | place . ibid . coinage | | and their | time . ibid . | post , 14. | | officer . ibid . price by free sale , preemption . 17. usury in tin : black , white . 15. sea : thing liveless . briny , salt-mil , land , haven . 26. sand , orewoods , shell and nut , ship . 27. sea : thing live . fish , partaker of the fresh . 28. therein the fashion , shelly , flat , round . 30. within haven . 29. their take , general and particular . 30. upon the coast . 31. save and vent . 33. foul : eatable , not eatable . 35. inhabitant : estate real . private : ground , house . 36. intercourse : bridge , high way . 53. traffic : market , fair ibid . weight and measure . 54. inhabitant : estate personal . name . 54. language . 55. number . 57 disposition ancient . ibid . disposition late , of mind , holiness . 58. science : divine . ibid . civilian . 59 physician . 60. statement , marshal , free school . 61. mechanical . 62. disposition late , of body : strength : ibid . activity , health . 63. | nobility and gentleman . ibid . degree : | townsman . 65. | husbandman . 66. poor . 67. recreation feast : saint , 69. harvest , church-ale . 68 pastime of the mind : song , 72. guary . 71. pastime of the body : shoot , 72. | goal , 73. hurl to | country , 74. wrestle , 75. game . 76. | governor , ibid . government , as a entire state : | royalty . 79. government , as a part of the realm , spiritual : archbishop , bishop , archdeacon , 82. peculiar . 81. government , as a part of | martial | commander , 83. the realm , temporal : | | force , ibid . order , fort . 84. beacon , post . 85. civil magistrate : judge , 89. justice , 88 viceadmiral , coroner , clarke of the market . 87. corporation , 86. parliament . 90. civil minister : constable , bailiff , 85. gaoler . 90. limit : hundred , franchise , parish . 86. proportion : place to meet , rate . ibid . the end of the first table . table of the fecond book . Topographicall . Historical COrnwall in general . 96. east hundred . 98. Plymmouth haven . 98. Edgecumb . 99 Rame head . ibid . Richaurd Adam strange Causam bay . ibid . childbirth . 103. S. Nicholas island . 99 Carew . ibid . the bridge . ibid . Lerchdeacon . 102. mountedgecumb . ibid . Agnes Cornish , her strange west Stonehouse . 100 escape from drown . 107. hamose . ibid . Danney . 108. Milbrook . 101. S. germane priory . ibid . Insworke . ibid . Kekewitch . 109. Antony . 102. S. germane chancel . ibid . Lyner river . ibid . Moyle . ibid . saltwater pond . 104. Smith . 110. banquet house . 107. Langdon . ibid . beggar island . ibid . fleet from Plymmouth ha - Sheuiock . 108. uen . 114. Crafthole . ibid . carrack burn . 113. S. germane . ibid . Trematon besiege . ibid . cuddenbeake . 109. bond 111. Seaton . 110. Grenuile . ibid . Wotton . ibid . porter . 112. Trematon castle . 111. Wadham . ibid . Saltash . 112. grisling understanding speech Ash torre . 113. by sight . 113. Henpoynt . ibid . a charitable dog . ibid . Cargreene . ibid . Arundel . ibid . Hengsten . 115. Rouse . ibid . Carybullock . ibid . treuice . 114. Lawhitton . ibid . Harris . 116. Lanceston . 116. Corington . 117. Wrey . ibid . Trelawney . ibid . Stratton hundred . 117. Straton town . 117. Chamond . 118. Bude . 118. Arscot . ibid . S. mary Wike . 119. Rempthorne . ibid . Thomasin Bonaventure . 119. lesnewith hundred . 120. Bottreaux caftle . ibid . John Northampton . 112. Tintogel . ibid . Earle Richard of corn - dosmery pool . 122. wall . ibid . Camelford . ibid . king Arthur . ibid . bousen . 123. trig hundred . ibid . Bodmyn . 123. Perkin Warbeck . 124. scarlet well . 126. child forhalfen . ibid . temple . 127. sir Anthony Kingston . ibid . Halgauer court . 126. carnsew . 127. Roscarrock . ibid . west hundred . 127. east and west loo . ibid . Beuill . 130. S. George island . 128. John size , a strange eater . ibid . liskerd . ibid . Murth . 131 saint neot . 129. Wideslade . ibid . S. Kaines well . ibid . Lower . 132. Polpera . 131. Kendal . ibid . fine house . 130. Glyn. ibid . hall walk . 132. Mohun . ibid . earl of devons faggot . 133. powder hundred . 134. Foy haven and town . 134. Treffry . 134. Trewardreth . 136. Nicholas of Foy . 135. Lostwithiel . 137. treasure none trove . 136. Restormel castle . ibid . a grave find . 137. Roche . 138. gallant of foy . 135. the tide well spring . ibid . Rashleigh . 136. Hainborough . ibid . bone , deaf and dumb . 139. S. Probus . 140. hill 140. lanhadron . ibid . Tremaine . ibid . Grampond . ibid . Bodrugan . 141. Dudman . 141. trauanion . ibid . Roseland . ibid . Lostwithiel custom . 137. Tregny . ibid . Truro . ibid . S. maw castle . 142. pider hundred . 143. Padstowe . 143. Prideaux . 143. Wade bridge . ibid . Cosowarth . 144. Ninus sister . ibid . Trerice . 145. Castellan Denis . ibid . Trenance . 148. S. colomb . 144. Tredenick . 149. Peran in Sabulo . 148. Nants well halfening . 144. Bors neeuas . ibid . S. Agnes hill ibid . new key . ibid . Kerier hundred . 149. Falmouth . 149. Trefuses . 150. Pendenis . ibid . Parker . ibid . Perin . 150. Killigrew . ibid . Hailford haven . 150. Carclew . 151. Hauterdauis . 151. Penrose . 152. mainamber . ibid . erisy . ibid . Helston . 152. Saintabyn . ibid . Lo pool . ibid . Militon . ibid . Meneag . ibid . Godolphin . 153. Penwith hundred . ibid . S. Ies. 154. Nants . 154. the cave . ibid . Pomeray . 154. S. Michael mount . ibid . Vere . 155. mount bay . 156. Pensants burn . 156. Pensants . ibid . Chiuerton . 159. Trebegean . 159. S. buriens . ibid . land end . ibid . f i n i s a e p i s t l e of Richard Carew Esq ; concern the excellency of the english tongue . ------------- London , print in the year m.dcc.xxiii . a epistle concern the excellency of the engliih tongue . it be more fit ( in respect of discretion ) that man shall first weigh matter with judgement , and then incline their affection where the great reason sway . but ordinary it fall out to the contrary ; for by custom we first settle our affection , and then afterward draw in those argument to approve it , which shall have forgo to persuade ourselves . in this preposterous course ( see that antiquity from our Elders and universality of our neighbour do entitle with a right ) i hold myself the moor free warrant delirare , not only cum vulgo , but also cum sapientibus , in seek out with what commendation i may attire our english language , as Stephanus have do for the french , and diverse of other nation , for they . Locutio be define animi sensus per vocem expressio . on which ground i build these consequence , that the first and principal point seek in every language , be that we may express the mean of our mind apt to each other . next , that we may do it ready and without more ado . then full , so as other may thorough conceive we . and last of all , handsome , that those to who we speak may take pleasure in hear we : so that whatever tongue will gain the race of perfection must run upon these four wheel , significancie , easiness , copiousness , and sweetness ; of which the two former import a necessity , the two latter a delight . now if i can prove , that our english language for all or the most part be comparable if not preferable to any other in use at this day , i hope the assent of any impartial reader will pass on my side . and how i endeavour to perform the same , this short labour shall manifest . i . to begin then with the significancie of the english tongue , it consist in the letter , word , and phrase . and because the greek and latin have ever bear away the prerogative from all other tongue , they shall serve as the touchstone whereby to make our trial . for letter , we have c more than the greek , king and y more than the Latines , and wonderful more than they both , or then the french and italian . in those common to they and we , we have the use of the greek b in our five , of our b they have none ; so have we of their [ uppercase lambda ] and [ uppercase theta ] in our the , which in the word that and thing express both ; but of our d they have none . likewise their t we turn to another use in yield , than they can ; and as for e , g , and i , neither greek nor Latines can make use of they as we do in these word , each , edge , joy . true it be , that we in pronounce the latin use they also after this manner ; but the same , in regard of the ancient and right roman delivery , altogether abusive ; as may appear by Scaliger , sir Thomas smith , Lipsius , and other . now , for the Significance of word , as every indiuiduum be but one , so in our native english-saxon language , we find many of they suitab express by one syllable : those consist of moor be borrow from other nation ; the example be infinite , and therefore i will omit they as sufficient notorious . again , for express our passion , our interjection be very apt and forcible ; as , find ourselves somewhat aggrieve , we cry , ah! if more deep , oh if we pity , alas ! when we bemoan , alack ! neither of they so effeminate as the italian Deh , or the french Helas : in detestation we say why ! ( as if therewithal we shall spit ) in attention , have ; in call , whowpe ; in hollow , wahalowe : all which ( in my ear ) seem to be derive from the very nature of those several affection . Grow from hence to the composition of word , and therein our language have a peculiar grace , a like significancy , and more short than the greek , for example , in Moldwarpe we express the nature of the animal ; in handkerchief the thing and the use ; in the word upright , that virtue by a metaphor ; in wisdom and doomsday , so many sentence as word ; and so of the rest : for i give only a taste , that may direct other to a full observation of what my sudden memory can represent unto i . it may pass also the master in this significancy , that all the proper name of our people do in a manner import somewhat , which from a peculiar note at first of some of the progenitor , in process of time invert itself in a possession of the posterity , even as we see the like often befall to those who father bear some uncouth christian name . yet for the most part we avoid the blemish give to the roman in like case , who distinguish their people by the imperfection of their body ; from whence grow their nasone , Labeones , Frontones , Dentones , and such like ; however , Macrobius colour the same : yea , so significant be our word , that among they sundry single one serve to express diverse thing ; as by the word bill be mean a weapon , a scroll , and a bird|be beak ; by grave may be understand , sober , burial-place , and to carve ; and so by light , mark , match , file , sore , and pray , the semblable . again , some sentence , in the same word carry a diverse sense , as till , desert ground ; some signify one thing forward and another backward , as feeler i be , no foe ; which to return with it be , of one see i relief . some signify one thing forward and another thing backward , as this , eye , do madam err ; some carry a contrary sense backward to that they do forward , as i do level ere view , view ere level do i . some deliver a contrary sense by the diverse point , as the epistle in dr. Wilsons rhetoric , and many such like , which a curious head , leisure , and time may pick out . neither may i omit the significancy of our proverb , concise in word , but plentiful in number , brief point at many great matter and under a circle of a few syllable prescribe sundry available caveat . last , our speech do not consist only of word , but in a sort even of deed ; as when we express a matter by metaphor , wherein the english be very fruitful and forcible . and so much for the significancy of our language in meaning . ii now for his easiness in learning ; the same also shoot out into branch , the one , of other learning our language , the second , of our learning that of other . for the first , the most part of our word , ( as i have touch ) be monasillable , and so the few in tale and the soon reduce to memory . nither be we load with those declension , flexion , and variation which be incident to many other tongue , but a few article govern all our verb and noun , and so we read a very short grammar . for easy learning of other language by we , let these serve as proof ; there be many italian word which the Frenchman can pronounce , accio , for which he say ashio ; many of the french which the italian can hardly dispense withal ; as bailler , Chagrin , Postillon ; many in we which neither of they can utter , as hedge , water , etc so that a stranger , though never so long conversant among we , carry evermore a watchword upon his tongue , to descry he by ; but turn a Englishman at any time of his age into what country soever , allow he due respite , and you shall see he profit so well , that the imitation of his utterance will in nothing differ from the pattern of that native language . the want of which towardness cost the ephramite their skin : nither do this cross my former assertion of other easy learn our language . for i mean of the sense and word , and not touch the pronunciation . Iii . but i must now enter into the large field of our tongue copiousness , and perhaps long wander up and down , without find easy way of issue , and yet leave many part thereof unsurvey . my first proof of our plenty , i borrow from the choice which be give we by the use of diverse language . the ground of our own appertain to the old saxon , little differ from the low dutch , because they more than any of their neighbour , have hitherto preserve that speech from any great foreign mixture : here among , the Briton have leave diverse of their word intersperse , as it be thereby make a continual claim to their possession . we may also trace the footstep of the danish bitter ( though not long during ) sovereignty in these part ; and the roman also impart unto we of his latin riches with no spare hand . our neighbour the french have be likewise content we shall take up by retail , as well their term as their fashion , or rather we retain yet but some remnant of that which once here bear all the sway , and daily renew the store . so have our italian traveller bring we acquaint with their sweet relish phrase , which ( so that their condition creep not in withal ) be the more tolerable ; yea even we seek to make our good of our late spanish enemy , and fear as little the hurt of his tongue , as the dint of his sword . see then we borrow ( and that not shameful ) from the dutch , the Britain , the roman , the Dane , the french , the italian , and Spaniard , how can our stock be other than exceed plentiful ? it may be object , that such patch make Littleton hotchpot of our tongue , and in effect , bring the same rather to a babelish confusion , than any one entire language . it may again be answer , that this theft of word be no less warrant by the privilege of a prescription ancient and universal , than be that of good among the lacedaemonian by a enact law : for so the greek rob the hebrew , the Latines the Greeks , ( which filch , Cicero with a large discourse in his book de oratore defend ) and ( in a manner ) all other christian nation the latin . for evidence hereof many sentence may be produce consist of word , that in their original be latin ; and yet ( save some small variance in their termination ) fall out all one with the french , dutch , and english ; as Ley , ceremonious person , offer prelate priest , clear candle flamme , in temple cloistre , in choleric temperature , clister purgation be pestelent , puler preservative , subtle factor , advocate notary practice , paper libel , register , regent , magesty in palace have triumphant throne , regiment , sceptre , vassal , supplication , and such like . then even as the italian potentate of these day make no difference in their pedigree and succession , between'the bed lawful or unlawful , where either a utterward or a better desert do force or entice they thereunto : so may the consent practice of these nation pass for a just legitimation of these bastard word , which either necessity or convenience have induce they to adopt . for our own part , we employ the borrow ware so far to our advantage , that we raise a profit of new word from the same stock , which yet in their own country be not marchantable . for example , we deduce diverse word from the latin , which in the latin itself can be yield : as the verb , to air , to beard , to cross , to flame , and their derivation , air , air , bearder , beard , beard , etc as also close , close , closeness , glose , hourly , majestical , majestical . in like sort we grass upon french word those bud , to which that soil afford no growth ; as , chief , faulty , slavish , preciseness . diverse word we derive also out of the latin at second hand by the french , and make good english , though both latin and french have their hand close in that behalf , as in these verb , pray , point , paze , press , rend , etc and also in the adverb , carp , current , colourable , active , etc again , in other language there fall out defect , while they want mean to deliver that which another tongue express , as ( by Cicero observation ) you can interpret INEPTUS , unapt , unfit , untoward , in greek . neither Porcus , CAPO , VERVEX , a barrow hog , a capon , a weather , as Cuiacius note ( * ) . no more can you express to stand in french , to tie in Cornish , nor knave in latin , ( for Nebulo be a cloudy fellow ) or in Irish ( ** ) , whereas you see our ability extend thereunto . ( * ) ad Tit. de verb signif . ( ** ) see the survey of Cornwall folio 55 ] moreover , the copiousness of our language appear in the diversity of our dialect ; for we have court and we have country English , we have northern and southern , gross and ordinary , which differ each from the other not only in the termination , but also in many word , term , and phrase , and express the same thing in diverse sort , yet all right english alike . neither can any tongue , as i be persuade , deliver a matter with more variety than we , both plain , and by Proverbes and metaphor : for example , when we will be rid of one , we use to say , be go , trudge , pack , be fare hence , away shift ; and by circumlocution , rather your room than your company , let|we see your back , come again when i bid you , when you be call , send for , entreat , will , desire , invite ; spare we your place , another in your stead , a ship of salt for you , save your credit , you be next the door , the door be open for you , there be no body hold you , no body tear your sleeve , etc likewise this word fortis , we may sinonymize after all these fashion , stout , hardy , valiant , doughty , courageous , adventurous , etc and in a word , to close up these proof of our copiousness , look into our imitation , of all sort of verse afford by any other language , and you shall find that sir PHILIP Sidney , m. Puttenham , m. STANIHURST , and diverse moor have make use how far we be within compass of a fore-imagined possibility in that behalf . IV. i come now to the last and sweet point , of the sweetness of our tongue , which shall appear the more plain if we match it with our neighbour . the italian be pleasant , but without sinew , as a still fleet water ; the french delicate , but even nice as a woman , scarce dare to open her lip , for fear of mar her countenance ; the spanish majestical , but fulsome , run too much on the five , and terrible like the devil in a play ; the dutch manlike , but withal very harsh , as one ready at every word to pick a quarrel . now we , in borrow from they , give the strength of consonant to the italian , the full sound of word to the french , the variety of termination to the spanish , and the mollify of more vowel to the dutch ; and so , like bee , gather the honey of their good property , and leave the dregs to themselves . and thus when substantialness combine with delightfullnesse , fullness with fineness , seemliness with portliness , and currantnesse with staidness , how can the language which consist of all these sound other than most full of sweetness ? again , the long word that we borrow be intermingle with the short of our own store , make up a perfect harmony , by cull from out which mixture ( with judgement ) you may frame your speech accord to the matter you must work on , majestical , pleasant , delicate , or manly , more or less , in what sort you please . add hereunto , that whatsoever grace any other language carry in verse or prose , in trope or metaphor , in echo and agnomination , they may all be lively and exact represent in we . will you have Plato vein ? read sir Thomas smith ; the ionicke ? sir Thomas moor ; Cicero ? Ascham ; Varro ? Chaucer ; Demosthenes ? sir John cheek ( * ) ; who have comprise all the figure of rhetoric . will you read Virgil ? take the earl of Surry ; Catullus ? Shakspeare , and barlow fragment ; Ovid ? Daniel ; Lucan ? Spencer ; martial ? sir John Davies , and other . will you have all in all for prose and verse ? take the miracle of our age , sir PHILIP Sidney . ( * ) in his treatise to the rebel . and thus , if my own eye be not blind by affection , i have make your to see , that the most renown of all other nation have lay up , as in a treasure , and entrust the divtisos orbe brttannos with the rare jewel of the lip perfection ; whether you respect the understanding for significancy , or the memory for easiness , or the conceit for plentifullnesse , or the ear for pleasantness : wherein if enough be deliver , to add more than enough be superfluous ; if too little , i leave it to be supply by better store capacity ; if aught amiss , i submit the same to the discipline of every able and impartial censurer . f i n i s. 