page [ unnumbered ] [ illustration ] Carolus inter Reges ut lilium inter flores Verolam . LINCO••• London . York . a roman a saxon a Dane a NO•••• chronicle of the king of England from the time of the roman government unto the reign of our sovereign lord king Charles . contain all passage of state and church , with all other observation proper for a chronicle . faithful collect out of author ancient and modern ; and digest into a new method . by sir R. Baker , knight . London , print for Daniel Frere , and be to be sell at his shop , at the red bull in little Britain . 1643. page [ unnumbered ] page [ unnumbered ] to the high and mighty prince Charles , prince of Wales , and duke of Cornwall : elder son of our sovereign lord , Charles , king of great Britain , France , and Ireland . sir , the dedication of chronicle have in all time be think worthy of the great prince : Gulielmus Gemiticen ? sis write a chronicle of the duke of Normandy , and dedicate it to Willi ? be the conqueror . Thomas walse ? ham write a chronicle of the king of England , and de ? dicate it to king Henry the six : and of late time , sir Francis bacon , Viscount saint Alban , and lord chancellor of England , write a history of the reign of king Henry the seven , and dedicate it to your royal grandfather of bless memory , king Iames : for indeed , as nothing make prince more illustrious than learning ; so no learning make they moor Ju ? dicious then history ; other learning may fill their mind with knowledge ; this only with judgement : and see it be judgement that must sit as precedent oh ? for all their action , it be fit that history shall sit as precedent over all their study . history give a a ? tedate to time ; and bring experience without grey hair : other knowledge make you but see quod antepede est ; history be the true perspective glass , that will make you see thing afar off : and though it page [ unnumbered ] make not man to become prophet , yet it make their conjecture to be little less than Oracles• but most illustrious prince , there accrue to your highness , by this chronicle , a great benefit than all this ; for if it be a excitation of great force to virtue , to have it say , et pater Aeneas and avunculus excitet Hector ; of how great force must it needs be , when you shall read the noble act of so many your worthy proge ? nitor ; some eternize for their valorous achieve ? ment in war : some for their prudent government in peace : some renown for mercy , some for justice : and although the example of your royal father be not among they , yet it may be sufficient that while you have the act of other upon record , you have his under view , by which he seem to say unto you , disce puer virtutem exme , verumque laborem ; fortunam ex a ? liis . and if in any of your progenitor , there appear , as it be Maculae in orbe Lunae , will it not invite you to a high orb , that your action may shine with the clear beam ? and then how happy will the eye be , that shall see you sit in your throne ? for my self , i shall account it happiness enough , that i have live to see the day of your illustrious father ; if it be not a great unhappiness to see they overcast with cloud ; and yet when these cloud shall be dispel , will it not make he shine with the great splendour ? and this as old as i be , i doubt not to live my self to see , and have once see it , shall then willing say my nunc dimittis , and l•ave the joy of your glorious time for another age : in the mean time prostrate my self humble at your foot ; and wish to your highness , as D•iphobus do to Aeneas ; — i decus , i nostrum , melioribus utere fatis . your most humble and most devote servant , Richard Baker . page [ unnumbered ] a epistle to the reader . this book , i suppose will no soon come abroad ; but the que ? scion will be ask , why any man will take so superfluous a labour , to write that which have be write by so many ; by some so copious , by some so elegant , that nothing can be ad ? dead : to which objection , i confess my self able to make a better answer than by precedent : for when many excellent man have write the story of the roman emperor , both accurate and elo ? quent ; yet Suetonius Tranquillus come after they , want not his part of commendation . for though he add nothing in the matter or substance , yet be alter much in the form and disposition , distinguish that into class and chapter , which the former have deliver in one continue narration : as be both less tedious to the reader , like a way mark out by mile ; and more plain ? lie inform , where distinction take away confusion . beside , many have write ? ten the reign of our english king , copious indeed , but so superfluous , that much may just be pare away ; some again elegant indeed , but so succinct , that much as just may be add : and this , if i have endeavour to do , i can ? not be blame ; if do it , i deserve acceptance . again , where many have write ? ten the reign of some of our king , excellent as in the way of history , yet i may say they have not do it so well in the way of chronicle ; for while they in ? sist whole upon matter of state , they whole omit mean accident , which yet be material as proper for a chronicle , as the other . for my self , if in some place i be find to set down whole passage , as they be already set down by other , and may seem rather to transcribe then to write ; yet this i suppose may be ex ? cuse , as be all of one common stock ; and no matter from whence the water come , so it come clean to the reader use . last , for the work it self ; i dare be bold to say , that it have be collect out of author both ancient and mo ? darn , with so great care and diligence , that if all other chronicle shall be lose , yet this only will be sufficient to inform posterity of all passage memorable or worthy to be know ; which of any other general chronicle , can perhaps be say . Richard baker . page [ unnumbered ] page [ unnumbered ] a catalogve of writer , both ancient and modern , out of who this chronicle have be collect . 1 gildas Britannicus , surna ? m the wise , be the first writer of our Eng ? lish nation ; who a ? among other his work ; write a treatise de Excidio britanniae , he be bear in the year 493. and die in the year 580. 2 Nennius a monk of Bangor , write the story of Britain , and live about the year 620. 3 venerable Bede , a saxon and a priest , write the ecclesiastical story of the Eng ? lish nation , from the come in of Ju ? lius Caesar , to the year 733. about which time he die . 4 Ethelwardus , a writer next to Bede the most ancient , write a general chronicle from the creation to the end of king ed ? gar . 5 Radulphus de Diceto , who live about the year 685. 6 Segebert king of the east angle , write a institution of law , in his late day become a monk , and be slay by Penda king of the mercians , in the year 652. 7 Cymbertus bishop of Lindsey , in the kingdom of Mercia , write the annal of that country , and live about the year 730 8 Daniel Wentanus a bishop , write the history of his province : and the act of the south Saxons , and die in the year 746. 9 Asserius Menevensis , bear in Pem ? brokeshire , bishop of Salisbury , write the story of Britain , and the act of king Alphred , and live about the year 890. 10 Alphredus the great , king of the an ? gle , •ourth son of king Ethelwolph ; writ , beside many other work , a col ? lection of chronicle , and die at win ? chester in the year 901. 11 Osbernus a Benedictine monk , write the life of the archbishop Dunstan , and other work : and live about the year 1020. 12 Colman•us Anglicus , write a Chroni ? cle and a catalogue of the english king , and live about the year 1040. in the time of king Harold the first . 13 Gulielmus Gemeticensis , a norman and a monk , write the life of the duke of Normandy , to William the conque ? ror , to who he dedicate his work : and after enlarge it to the death of king Henry the first , in the year 1135. at which time he live . 14 Marianus Scotus a monk , write a ? nals page [ unnumbered ] from the begin of the world to his own time , and die in the year 1086. 15 Alphredus a priest of Beverly , write a history , from the first original of the Britain to his own time , and live a ? about the year 1087. in the time of Will ? liam the conqueror . 16 Veremundus a Spaniard , and a priest , but who live much in Scotland , write the antiquity of the scottish nation , and live about the year 1090. 17 Lucianus a monk , and a english wri ? ter , and live in the first time of the norman . 18 Ingulphus abbot of Croyland , write from the year 664. to the year 1066. and live in the time of William the conque ? rour , who secretary he have be . 19 Turgotus a Englishman , first Deane of Durham , and afterward bishop of saint Andrew in Scotland , write a history of the king of Scotland , also chronicle of Durham , annal of his own time , and the life of king Malcolm , and live in the year 1098. in the time of king William Rufus . 20 G•lielmus Pictaviensis , write a trea ? tise of the life of William the conque ? rour . 21 Gualterus Mappaeus , write a book , de nugis curialium , and live about the conqueror time . 22 William of Malmesbury , a benedi ? ctine monk , write a history of the Eng ? lish nation , from the first come of the saxon into Britain , to his own time , which work he dedicate to Ro ? bert duke of Gloucester , base son of king Henry the first , and live to the first year of king Henry the second . 23 Florentius Bravonius , a monk of Worcester , compile a chronicle from the creation , to the year 1118. in which year he die ; his work be continue by another monk to the year 1163. 24 Eadmerus a monk of Canterbury , write the life of William the conque ? rour , William Rufus , and king hen ? ry the first , in who time he live . 25 Raradocus bear in wale , write the act of the Britain king , from God ? wallader to his own time , and live in the time of king Stephen . 26 Gervasius Dorobernensis , a bene ? dictine monk , write a history of the Eng ? lish nation , and live about the year 1120 27 Johannes Fiberius common call de Bever , write short annal of the english nation , and live about the year 1110. in the time of king Henry the first . 28 Henry , archdeacon of Huntington , write a history of the king of England , to the reign of king Stephen , in who time he live . 29 Geffrey of Monmouth , a Benedictine monk , and afterward bishop of Asaph , write a history of the Britain , and be the first that make mention of Brutus and of Merlin prophecy , for which he be much tax by diverse author of his own time ; and after ; he live about the year 1150. in the time of king Ste ? when . 30 William of Newborough , bear at the begin of king Stephens reign , write a history of the english nation , and bitter inveigh against Geffrey of Monmouth , as a deviser of fable . 31 Sylvester Gyraldus , bear in wale , and thereof call Cambrensis ; after long travail abroad be call home , and make secretary to king Henry the se ? cond ; and after be send tutor to his son John into Ireland ; he write the history of that nation very exquisite ; also a Itinerarium of Wales and Bri ? taine ; the life of Henry the second ; the act of king John , and a chronicle of the english nation , and live about the year 1190. in the time of king ri ? chard the first , and king John. 32 John of Hagulstad , a town in the north , a Benedictine monk in Durham , write the most memorable thing , from the nine year of king Henry the second , to the first year of king Richard the first , in who time he live , about the year 1190. 33 Roger Hoveden , a priest of Oxford , write the annal of the king of Eng ? land , and the memorable passage under the roman , Pict , saxon , Dane , and Normans ; he live in the time of king Richard the first , and die in the time of king John. 34 Johannes Tilberiensis , a secular priest , write a history of the english nation ; and live in the time of king Richard the first . 35 richardus Canonicus , travel with king Richard the first into Palestine ; and write of his journey and act there . page [ unnumbered ] 36 Aluredus Rivallensis , or de Rivallis , a cistersian monk , in the diocese of York , write the life of Edward king of England , and David king of Scot , and die in the year 1166. 37 Simon Dunelmensis , a Benedictine monk , write a history of the english nation , from the death of venerable Bede , to the year 1164. and live in the time of king Henry the second . 38 John de Oxenford , first Deane of sa ? lisbury , and after bishop of Norwich , write the british history , and continue it to his own time ; wherein he agree much with Geoffry of Monmouth ; and live about the year 1174. in the tim• of king Henry the second . 39 Johannes Sarisberiensis , write a ex ? cellent book de nugis Curialium ; and live about the year 1182. in the time of king Henry the second . 40 Gulielmus parvus , a canon regular in the province of York , write a Histo ? ry of the norman king ; and li•ed about the year•1216 . in the time of king John. 41 Johannes Campobellus , a scotch man write the history of the Scot , from the first original of the nation to his own time : and live in the year 1260. 42 John Breton a Englishman , bishop of Hereford , write a book de juribus a ? glicanis , and live in the year 1270. in the time of king Henry the three . 43 Thomas Wyke a Englishman , a canon regular of Osney near Oxford , write a short history from the comm•ng in of William the conqueror to his own time , and live in the year 1290. in the time of king Edward the first . 44 Thomas Langford a Englishman , a Dominican friar of Chemsford in es ? sex , write a universal chronicle , from the begin of the world to his own time , and live in the year 1320. in the time of king Edward the second . 45 Radulphus de Rizeto a Englishman , write a chronicle of the english nation , and live about the year 1210. in the time of king John. 46 Robertus Montensis , a benedictine monk , write a chronicle from the year 1112. to the year 1210. at which time he live . 47 Johannes Burgensis a Englishman , a benedictine monk , write annal of the english nation . 48 Thomas Spot•ey a Englishman , a benedictine friar of Canterbury , write the chronicle of Canterbury , and livre ? ve about the time of king Edward the second . 49 Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis , call Florilegus , for collect Flores Histo ? riarum , chief of bri•aine , contain from the begin of the world to the year 1307. about which time he live . 50 Ranulphus Higden , a benedictine monk of Chester , write a book which he call polychronicon , contain from the begin of the world to the sixteenth year of king Edward the three in who time he live . 51 Matthew Paris , a benedictine monk of saint Alban , write a history , chief ecclesiastical , of the english nation , from William the conqueror , to the last year of king Henry the three , and livre ? ve about the time of king Edward the three . 52 William Pachenton a Englishman , write a history of the english nation , and live about the tim• of king Edward the three . 53 Bartholmeus Anglicus , a franciscan friar , write a book entitle de Pro ? prietatibus rerum , and a chronicle of the Scot , and live in the year 1360. in the time of king Edward the three . 54 Nicholas Trivet , bear in Norfolk , of a worshipful family , become a domi ? dican friar , write many excellent work in divinity and philosophy ; also an ? nal of the english king , from king Stephen , to king Edward the second , and live in the year 1307. in the time of king Edward the three . 55. Alexander Essebiensis prior of a mo ? nastery of regular canon , write diverse learned work , among other a epitome of the british history : and live in the year 1360. in the time of king Edward the three . 56 John Froyssart bear in the low con ? try , write a chronicle in the french tongue , contain seventy four year ; namely , begin with king Edward the three , and •nding with king Henry the four , in who time he live ; who chronicle , sir John Bourchier knight translate into english , and John slay ? den a french man have late contract ? ed into a epitome . page [ unnumbered ] 57 Thomas de la moor , bear in glow ? cestershire , in the time of king Edward the first , by who as have twenty pound land , hold by knight service , he be make a knight , and afterward be very inward with king Edward the second , write a history of his life and death . 58 Thomas Rodbourne a Englishman , and a bishop , write a chronicle of he na ? cion , and live in the year 1412. in the time of king Henry the four . 59 John Trevisa bear in Glocestershire , a priest , translate polychronicon into English , add to it a eight book , in ? titule de memorabilibus eorum tem ? porum , contain from the year 1342. to the year 1460. he write also of the act of king Arthur , and description both of Britain and Ireland , and live in the time of king Edward the four . 60 John Harding a gentleman of a good family in the north , write a chronicle in verse , of the king of England , to the reign of king Edward the four ; wh•rein he all•dgeth many record , which he have get in Scotland , that testify the scottish king submission to the king of England he live in the year 1448. in the time of king Henry the six . 61 John Capgrave , bear in Kent , a hermit friar , write many learned work in divinity , and a catalogue of the Eng ? lish saint , and live in the year . 1464. in the time of king Edward the four . 62 John Lydgate , monk of saint ed ? mundsbury in Suffolk , write diverse work in verse , and some in prose : as the life of king Edward , and king e ? thelstan , of the round table of king be ? thur , and live in the year 1470. in the time of king Edward the four . 63 John Weathamstead , abbot of saint Alban , in his work of english affair , accuse Geffrey of Monmouth , of mere fabulousnesse , and live about the year 1440. 64 Gulielmus Elphinston a Scotchman , bishop of Aberdene , write the antiqui ? ti•s of Scotland , and the statute of counsel , and live in the year 1480. in the time of James the three king of Scotland . 65 George Buchanan a Scotchman , write the story of Scotland from Fergusius , to queen mary , in who time he live . 66 William Caxton a Englishman , write a chronicle to the three and twenty ? eth year of king Edward the four , which he call fructus temporum : also a description of Britain , the life of saint Edward , and the history of king be ? thur , and live in the year 1484. 67 Thomas Walsingham bear in nor ? folk , a Benedictine monk of saint all ? ban , write two history ; one short , the other large ; the first beginning from the year 1273. and continue to the year 1423. the other , begin at the come ? ming in of the norman , and continue ? ed to the begin of king Henry the six , to who he dedicate his work . 68 Robert Fabian a sheriff of London , write a concordance of history , from Brutus the first king of the Britain , to the last year of king Henry the second ; and another work from king Richard the first , to king Henry the seven , in who time he live . 69 sir Thomas Moore bear in London , lord chancellor of England ; beside many other learned work , write the life of king Richard the three ; and die for deny the king supremacy , in the reign of king Henry the eight , in the year 1535. 70 Hector Boethius a Scotchman , write a catalogue and history of the king of Scotland : also a description of that king ? dome , and live in the year 1526. in the time of James the five , king of Scot ? land . 71 Polydor Virgil , a italian , but make here in England archdeacon of well ; among other his learned work , write the history of England , from its first begin ? ning , to the thirtyeth year of king hen ? ry the eight , to who he dedicate his work . 72 Edward hall a lawyer , write a Chroni ? cle which he call the union of the two Ro ? ses , the red and the white , contain from the begin of king Henry the four , to the last year of king Henry the eight , and die in the year 1547. 73 John Leland , a Londoner , among di ? vers other work , write a book of the an ? tiquity of Britain , and of the famous man and bishop in it , and live in the year 1546. in the time of king Henry the eight . 74 John Rogers , first a papist , and after ? ward page [ unnumbered ] a protestant , among other his lear ? ned work write a history from the begin ? ning of the world ; and live most in she ? many , in the year 1548. in the time of king Edward the six . 75 Philip commine , a knight of Flan ? dear , write the life of Lewis and Charles the eight , king of France , wherein he handle many passage between they and the king of England their contempora ? rise . of the modern , these : 76 Richard Grafton a citizen of Lon ? don , write a chronicle from the begin of the world , to the begin of the reign of queen Elizabeth , in who time he live . 77 Raphaell Holinshed , a minister , write a large chronicle , from the conquest to the year 1577. and be continue by other , to the year 1586. 78 doctor Goodwin bishop of Hereford , write the life of king Henry the eight , king Edward the six , and queen ma ? ry , and live in the time of queen Elizabeth 79 doctor Heyward write the history of the first king , William the conqueror , William Rufus , and Henry the first , all ? so the reign of king Henry the four , and Edward the six , and live to the time of king James . 80 Samuel Daniel write a chronicle of the king of England , to the end of king Edward the three , and be continue by John Trussell to the begin of king Henry the seven . 81 sir Francis bacon Viscount , viscount S. Alban , have write a history of the reign of king Henry the seven , in a most elegant stile , and live in the time of king James . 82 John Fox write three large volume of the act and monument of the church ; particular treat of the english mar ? tyr in the reign of king Henry the eight , and queen marry , and live in the time of queen Elizabeth . 83 Thomas Cowper , bishop of Winche ? star , write chronicle note of all nation , special of England , from the begin of the world to his own time , and live in the time of queen Elizabeth . 84 William Camden king at arm , write the life of queen Elizabeth , and a description of Britain , and live in the time of king James . 85 William Martin esquire , write the reign of the king of England , from William the conqueror , to the end of king Henry the eight : to which be of ? terward add the reign of king ed ? ward the six , queen mary , and queen Elizabeth . 86 Francis Biondi a italian gentleman , and of the privy chamber to king Charles , have write in the italian tongue , the civil war between the two house of Lancaster and York , from king Richard the second , to king Henry the seven : translate elegant into English by Henry earl of Monmouth , now live . 87 Henry Isaacson a Londoner , have write a Chronology of all kingdom , from the begin of the world to the year 1630. be the five year of king Charles his reign . 88 Nicholas Harpsefield archdeacon of Canterbury , have write a chronicle of all the bishop of England , to which ed ? mund Campian the Jesuit , make a addition . 89 John Stow citizen of London , write a chronicle from Brutus to the end of queen Elizabeth , and be continue to this pre ? send time , be the 18. year of king Charles , by Edmund Howes a lon ? donor . 90 John speed a Londoner , write the sto ? ry of Britain , from the first beginning to the year 1605. be the second year of king James . 91 William Abington esquire , have write ? ten the reign of king Edward the four in a very fine stile , and be yet live . 92 Thomas Fuller bachelor of Divini ? ty , and prebendary of Sarum , have write ? ten the holy war in very fine language , wherein he relate the act of our king of England in the holy land , and be now live . 93 Andre du Chesne , a Frenchman , Geo ? grapher to the king of France , have write ? ten the history of England , Scotland and Ireland , from their first beginning , to the seventeenth year of our present soon ? reign lord king Charles . the end of the catalogue of author . page [ unnumbered ] page 1 a chronicle of the king of England from the time of the roman government , unto the reign of king Charles . of the first know time of this island . although we begin the aera of our computation from William call the conqueror , as though he be the first king of our english nation : yet before he ; be many other excellent king ; and their act perhaps as worthy to be know , if they can be know . but see after age can know nothing of former time but what be record by writing : it have follow that as the first writer be poet : so the first write have be fiction ; and nothing be deliver to posterity of the most ancient time , but very fable : such as be the story of Albina ( of who they say , this island be call all ? bion : though other say , ab albis rupibus , of the white cliff ) that she shall be• the elder of the two and thirty daughter of Dioclesian king of Syria , ( such as ne ? ver be ) who be marry to two and thirty king , in one night kill all their husband : for which fact , they be put in a ship , themselves alone without any Pylo• , so to try their adventure , and by chance arrive in this island , of who gy ? ant be beget . and if you like not of this ; then have you the story of Albion the son of Neptune , of who the island take its name . but when these be ex ? plode ; there follow another with great attestation , and yet as very a fable as these ; namely the story of the trojan brute , ( of who the island they say , be call Britain : though many other cause be give of the name : ) as likewise the story of Brutus cousin Corinaeus , ( of who they say , the country of Cornwall have its name , to who it be give , for overcome the giant Gogmagog : ) and that Brutus have three son , lectrine , Albanact , and Camber ; he give at his death to his elder son Locrine , all the land on this side Humber , and call it Lo•gria ; to his second son Albanact , all the land beyond Humber , of who it be call Albania , ( now Scotland : ) and to his young son Camber , all the land beyond the river of Severne , of who it be call Cambria , ( now wale : ) with other such stuff , which may please child , but not ripe judgement ; and be first broach by Geoffry arch ? deacon page 2 of Monmouth : for which all the writer of his time cry shame upon he ; and yet can scarce keep many at this day , from give credit to his fiction . and when we be once get out of fable , and come to some truth ; yet that truth be deliver in such slender draught , and such break piece , that very small benefit can be get by the know it , and be not till the time of Iulius Caesar , a thousand year after the fable of Brutus : at which time , the island be yet but in manner of a village , be without wall , as have no ship , ( which be in ? deed the true wall of a island ) but only certain small vessel , make of board and wicker . and as they have no ship , for defence without : so neither have they any fort , for defence within : scarce any house but such as be make of stake and bough of tree fasten together ; neither be it yet come to be a kingdom , but be govern by a number of petty ruler : so as Kent only have in it ( as Caesar call they ) four king ; Cingetorix , Carvilius , Taximagulus , and Segonax : which division , as it make the Britain the more easy to be conquer , so it make the roman the long in conquer . for if they have be one unite body , one or two battle may have make a conquest of the whole , where be thus divi ? dead , there be need to be as many battle as there be division ; so as it be man ? nigh year , before the roman can conquer the whole island ; even from the time of Iulius Caesar , to the time of the emperor Domitian ; not much less than two hundred year . it be true , after Caesar first come , the island grow sensible of this defect of their division , and thereupon by consent of a great part , make choice of Cassibelan , king of the trinovant , who have his seat at Verulam , to be general of their war ; which make indeed some little stop to the roman proceed , but after the loss of a battle or two , they fall again into a relapse of their former defect , and think it better to secure every one his own , by his own mean , then by a general power , to hazard all at once ; whereby it come afterward to be true : dum singuli pugnant , universi vincuntur . yet before the cou•try can be whole conquer ; at first by reason of the nation valour , seek to keep themselves free , and afterward by reason of the insolency of the garrison soldier , that seek to make they slave , many great opposition be make , among which the most memorable be that of Voadicia , a certain queen of the country , who have be by the roman soldier herself abuse , and her daughter ravish , use mean to levy a army of six score thousand man , who she lead herself into the field , and set upon the roman in their chief town , which be London , Verulam , and Camalodunum ( now Malden in Essex ; ) of who she fly above seventy thousand : but then in a second battle , have fourscore thousand of her own army slay , after which defeat , for avoid of slavery , she poison herself . this island for a long time , be so much esteem of the roman , that their emperor sometime come hither in person ; as first the emperor Adrian , in the year 124. who make a great wall of earth between England and Scotland , and ha ? ve set the country in order , return . after he sometime , Severus the empe ? ror in the year 212. come over into brit•ine to repress the incur•ions of the Pict and Scot , by who in a battle near York , he be wound and thereof die , or as other say , he die of age and sickness . afterwards in the year 305. constanti ? we the emperor come into Britain , and end his life at York , make that city fa ? mous for the death and burial of two great emperor ; and yet more famous for the honour do to Constantine the great , son of Constantius , who in that city be first salute emperor . but notwithstanding the great estimation the roman a long time make of this island , yet at last , after five hundred year they have keep it in subjection , they voluntary leave it : the charge of keep it , be great , than the benefit ; for to keep it in subjection , they maintain no few than fourscore thousand soldier in pay , and when war grow among themselves at home , they can no long spare so many abroad , but recall they home : but then , though they leave Britain , yet they leave not the Britain , but carry they , at least , a great part of they away with they ; of who the most be slay in their service , and the rest plant in that part of France , which of they be afterward , and be to this page 3 day call Britain . and now one will think , the island shall be in good case , be free from they that keep they in subjection , but it prove to be in worse case be at liberty , than it be before in servitude , for be deprive of their able man , and at the same time , their king Lucius happen to dye without issue , they be leave as a few loose stick without the bond of a governor : which the Pict and Scots observe , think now be the time to make the country their own , and thereupon make invasion upon it with all their force . whereupon the Britain|be have none leave of their native king to succeed ; and know they can ill manage the body of a army without a head : they make choice of warrant ? tigerne earl of Cornwall , one extract from the british line ; and he , whether so advise by his cabinet counsellor , the prophetical Merlin , or as find his own strength too weak to make resistance ; implore first aid of the roman , and they make answer , they have business enough to do of their own , and lea ? ving they to themselves , he then flee to the saxon for aid ; a warlike people of Germany , and who have great swarm than their hive will well hold . and here we may plain see how dangerous a thing it be for a nation , to call in stranger to their aid , and especial in any great number ; for though they come at first but mercenary , yet once admit , and find their own strength , they soon grow master , as here it prove with the saxon . but before we speak further of the come in of the saxon , who be at that time infidel , and bring with they their two idol , Woden and Frya , ( whereof two of our week day , Wednesday and Friday , take their name ; it will be fit to say something of the state of the christian church in this island . First then , it be record , that in the year 63. what time Arviragus reign here , Joseph of Arim• ? thena ( who bury the body of Christ ) come into this island , and lay the foundation of the christian faith in the western part , at a place call then Hvalon ; now Glastenbury ; and that there come with he , mary Magdalen , Lazarus , and Martha : and more than this , that Simon Zelotes one of the apostle suffer martyrdom here in Britain : and more than this , that both saint Peter and saint Paul come into this island and preach the gospel ; all which and more to this purpose , be record by author of good account : though it be hard believe , that person , and special woman of so great age , as these must needs be at this time , shall take so long a journey . but howsoever it be , certain it be , that the doctrine of Christianity be about this time plant in this island , though it make afterward but small progress , and that with some persecution ; as in which time , saint Alban suffer martyrdom at Verulam , and at Lichfield short after , no few than a thousand . after this , in the year 180 what time Lucius be king of this island , Eleutherius then bishop of Rome , send fa ? ganus and Damianus to he : upon who preach , the temple of the heathenish flamen and archflamins ( one and thirty in number ) be convert to so many by ? shop see ; whereof London , York , and Caerleyn ( now saint David ) be make the metropolitans of the province . and there be a table remain at this day , in the parish church of saint Peter on Cornhill London , which record ; that the founda ? cion thereof be lay by this king Lucius , and that this church be the cathe ? dral to that archbishop see . in the year 359. of council be hold at Ariminum in Italy ; where four hundred western bishop be assemble , whereof three go out of Britain , and give their voice against the Arian heresy . after this , about the year 420. rose up in this island , one Pelagius a monk , bring up in the monastery of Bangor in Wales , who spread the poison of his heresy , first in this his native country , and afterward all the world over . and these have be the chief passage in matter ecclesiastical within this island , when the saxon be call in , about the year 450. and now under the conduct of two brother , Hengist and Horsa , come over nine thousand saxon with their wife and child , to a••ist the Britain ag•inst the Scot , and be appoint the isle of thanet to inhabit . with which assistance the Britain give their enemy battle , and overcome they : so as they account the saxon as angel send from heaven , and then allow they ken also fo• their page 4 inhabit . not long after Hengist obtain of king Vortigern the property of so much ground , as he can enclose with a bull hide : which cut into thong , he there build the castle , facti de nomine , call Thong castle . and now have build it he invite V•rtigern to a feast , where fall in love with Rowena , the beauty ? full daughter of Hengist , and marry she , it put Hengist into such a height of bold ? ness , that he begin to aspire , send for great force to come over to he ; as mean to transplant himself hither , and to make this island his inheritance : which the british lord perceive , and not able to wean their king from his new wife , and her father Hengist , they depose he ; and in his place set up his son Vortimer , a true lover of his country : who present in a pitch battle near unto Aylesford in Kent , set upon the saxon ; where Catigern the brother of Vor•imer , and H•rs• , of Hengist , in single •ight hand to hand slay each other . in which place Catigern be bury , and a monument in memory of he erect , the stone whereof at this day be stand in a great plain in the parish of Aylesford ; which instead of Catigern , be corrupt call kits-cotyhouse . another the like monument be erect for Hors• , though now deface ; remember only by the town where it stand , call Horstead . three other battle after this be fight between the Britain and the saxon : one at Craford ; another at weppeds-fleete ; the three upon Colmore : in which last , the Britain|be get so great a victory , that the saxon be clean drive out of Kent , and in thanet also not suffer also to rest ; so as short after , Hengist with his Saxons depart the kingdom , as be now out of hope to make his fortune in this island . but while Vortimer be th•s intentive for his country livre ? berty ; Rowena the former king wife , be daughter to Hengist , be as intentive to bring it into servitude ; which know she can not do as long as Vortimer live , she use mean by poison , to take away his life , after he have be king the space of four year , and then by the witchcraft of fair word , so enchant the bri ? it|be nobility , that her husband Vortigern be again establish in the kingdom ; which be no soon don• , but Hengist , ( rely upon his son vortigern love ) with a mighty army attempt to return again into the island ; when be re ? sisted , he make a show , as if he desire nothing but to fetch away his daughter Rowena , and to have a friendly conference for continuance of amity : which moti ? on seem reasonable , a place and time of conference be appoint : the time upon the first of May ; the place upon the plain of Ambrii , now call Salisbury ; whither the plain meaning Britain|be come arm , accord to agreement ; but the fraudulent saxon under their long cassock have short skein hide , with which , upon a watchword give , they set upon the Britain , and of their unar ? med nobility slay three , some say five hundred , and take the king himself prisoner , who they will not release , till they be put in possession of these four county , Kent , Sussex , Suffolk , and Norfolk . whereupon Vortigern , whether fear a second depose , or whether so advise by his cabinet counseller the prophe ? ticall Merlin , betake he into wale , and there build he a strong castle for his safeguard ; while the saxon come daily in great swarm into the land , have at this time overrun all ; if Aurelius Ambrose a roman bear , but affect to the british nation , have not land at to•nes in Devonshire , to who resort great troop of Britain . his first expedition be against Vortigern , ( as the first cause of the Britain misery ) who castle he besiege ; and whether by wild fire , or by fire from heaven , both he and his castle , and all that be in it be burn to ash . to this Ambrose be ascribe the admirable monument in Wiltshire , now call stoneh••ge , in the place where the bri•aines have be treacherous •laugh ? tere and inter ; and of who the town of Ambersbury bear its name . after this he set upon the saxon , and in many batraile discom•ited they ; till at last fall ? ling sick in the city of Winchester , a saxon , in show a Britain , and in habit a Physi ? tian , be send unto he , who instead of physic , minister poison , whereof he die , in the year 497. after he have reign two and thirty year . after Ambrose , succeed Uter , ( some say his brother , other , a Britain ) call Pendragon , of his royal banner bear ever before he ; wherein be portray a page 5 dragon with a golden head , as in our english camp , it be at this day bear for the imperial standard . and he also in many battle discomfit the saxon , till after eighteen year reign he come to his end by treachery ; die by poison put into a well , whereof he usual drink ; in the year 515. after he succeed his son Arthur , beget of the fair lady Igren , wife of the duke of Cornwall , to who bed the art of Merlin bring he in the likeness of her husband ; and he in t•elve set battle discomfit the saxon ; but in one most memorable in which gi•ding himself with his sword call Callibourne , he fly upon his enemy , and with his own hand slay eight hundred of they ; which be but one of his wonderful deed , whereof there be so many report , that he may well be reckon among the fabulous , if there be not •now true to give they credit . among other his act , he Insti ? tute the order of knight of the round table , to the end there may be no que ? scion about precedence , and to teach heroical mind , nor to stand upon place , but merit . but this great prince , for all his great valour , be at last in a battle woun ? dead , whereof he die , in the year 542. after he have reign six and twenty year . after king Arthur succeed his cousin Constantine ; and after his three year reign , Aurelius Conanus the nephew of king Arthur ; who reign be so uncertain , that some say , he reign only two , some , three year , some again thirty , and some three and thirty . after Conanus succeed Vortiporus , who after many victory a ? against the saxon , and four year reign , die . after who succeed Malgo counterfeit ? nanus , and reign six year . after he Careticus , who set upon the saxon and beat , •led into the town of Chichester , whereupon the saxon catch certain sparrow and fasten fire to their foot , let they fly into the town , where light ? ing upon •traw , and other matter apt to take fire , the whole city in short space be burn ; and thereupon Careticus fly , secure himself among the mountain of wale , where he die , after he have unprosperous reign three year : and from that time forth , the Britain|be lose their whole kingdom in the east part of the island , and be confine in the west by the river Severne and Dee . after Careti ? cousin succeed Cadwan , who reign two and twenty year . after he his son Cadwallo , who reign eight and forty year , and then die ; who body be bu ? ried in saint Martins church near Ludgate , and his image of brass place upon the same gate , for a terror to the saxon . in his time , the doctrine of Mahomet begin to spread it self all the eastern world over . after Cadwallo succeed his son Cadwalladar ; in who time so great a famine , and afterward mortality happen , continue eleven year , that the land become in a manner desolate : in so much , that the king and many of his lord be drive to forsake their native con ? try , and Cadwalladar himself go to his cousin Alan king of little Britain in France . at which time the saxon take advantage of his absence , come over in swarm , and dispossess the forlese Britain|be off all they have , and divide the land among themselves . whereupon Cadwalladar , obtain assistance of his cou ? sin Alan , be come over to restrain their insolence ; when make prayer to God for good success , a angel appear to he , or at least to his seem he hear a voice , that forbid he the enterprise , declare that it be not god will , the Britain|be shall rule this land any long , and therefore bid he hie he to roam , and receive of pope Sergius the habit of religion , wherein he shall die and rest in peace . which accord he do : and in he end the blood of the british king ; in the year 689. so as Britain now , be no long brit•ine ; but a colony of the saxon . and now be time to speak of the heptarchy of the saxon ; so much speak of , by all Writers• and to show by what degree the britai•es lose , and the saxon get the whole possession of this island : for this heptarchy or division of this island into seven kingdom , come not in all at once , nor yet in a equal partition , but some good distance of time , one after another , and as the invadour have strength to expel the native . page 6 the first kingdom be of Kent . the first kingdom of the saxon begin by Hengist , in the year 455. con ? tain all ken , and continue 372. year , during the reign of seventeen king , of who as many as perform any memorable act , shall be re ? member , and for the rest , it will be no loss to pass they over in silence . of these seventeen king , Ethelbert be the five , be the first saxon Christian king of this island , convert by Austin the monk , who pope Gregory send hither to that purpose , with forty other , in the year 595. to who king Ethelbert give his chief city of Canterbury , and his own royal palace there , make since the ca ? thedrall of that see ; withdraw himself to re•ulver in the isle of thanet , where he erect a palace for himself and his successor . he give he also a old tem ? ple , stand without the east wall of the city , which he honour with the name of saint Paneras , and then add a monastery to it , and dedicate it to saint Peter and Paul , appoint it to be the place for the kentish king sepulcher . but in regard of Austin the procurer , both pan•ras , Peter , and Paul be soon forget , and it be ; and be to this day , call saint austines : which abbey saint Austin enrich with diverse relic which he bring with he from room ; among which be a part of Christ seamelesse coat , and of Aaron rod . this king after his own con ? version , convert also Sebert king of the east angle , and assist he in the buil ? ding of the cathedral church o• saint Paul London ; as also the church of saint Peter , on the west of London , then call thorny : and himself at Rochester build the ca ? thedrall church there , which he dedicate to the apostle saint Andrew ; and die , when he have reign six and fifty year , be bury at Canterbury . and thus by this first saxon kingdom , be all Kent lop off from the Britain dominion ; and this be their first impair , and this happen in the reign of Ambrose be ? before speak of . the six king of Kent be ethelbald ; who at first a apostata , be afterward convert , and build a chapel within the monastery of saint Peter and Paul at Canterbury . the seven king be Ercombert , a virtuous and religious prince , who first command the observe of Lent ; and in his day , the archbi ? shop Honorius divide Kent into parish . the eight king be Egbert , who obtai ? ned the kingdom by murder his nephew : who sister the lady Dompnena , found the abbey of Minster in Kent . the eleven king be wither , who foum ? dead the priory of saint Merton at Dover . the last be baldr , who overcome by Egbert king of the west Saxons , leave Kent a province to that kingdom , in the year 827. the second kingdom be of the south Saxons . the second kingdom of the heptarchy , be of the south Saxons , and be ? begin by Ella , in the year 488. contain Sussex and Surrey , and continue 113 year , during the reign of five king only , of who Cissa be the second found the city of Chichester , and reign as some say threescore and six ? ten year . and than berthan be the last king , be overcome by ine king of the west Saxons , and his country become a province to that kingdom , in the year 601. and thus as ken before , so now Sussex and Surrey be lop off from the Britain dominion : and this be a second impair , which also happen in the reign of the british king Ambrose . page 7 the three kingdom be of the west Saxons . the three kingdom of the heptarchy , be of the west Saxons , and begin by Cerdic , in the year 519. contain Cornwall , Devonshire , Dorse•shire , so ? mersetshire , Wiltshire , Hampshire , and Barkeshire , and continue 561. year , during the reign of nineteen king , of who this Cerdic be the first : in who time , Porth a saxon land in the west , at a place from he call afterward Portesmouth , and aid Cerdic in his conquest . and this happen in the reign of king Arthur : and as Kent , Sussex , and Surrey before , so now these seven other shire be lop off from the Britain dominion : and this be a three impai ? ring . the six king of the west Saxons be Kingills , who be the first Christi ? a king of this kingdom , convert by Berynus a italian divine , to who he give the city of Dorchester , near to Oxford ; who therein erect his Episcopal see . the seven king be Kenwald , who at first a apostata be afterward con ? vert , and found the cathedral of Winchester , and the abbey of Mamesbery ; who wife Segburg also build a house of devotion in the isle of Sheppey , wherein herself become a nun , and be afterward elect abbess of Ely . the eleven king be ine , who ordain many good law , which be yet extant in the saxon tongue , and be translate into latin , by the learned master William Lam ? bert . this king build a college at well bear the name of saint Andrews , which of ? terward king Kenulph make a Episcopal see . he also in most stately manner new build the abbey of Glastonbury ; and out of his devotion to the see of room , he enjoin every one of his subject , that possess in his house of any one kind of good to the value of nineteen penny , to pay yearly upon Lammas day , one pen ? nigh to the pope ; which at first be contribute under the name of the king alm , but afterward be pay by the name of Peter penny . at last he go to roam , and there take upon he the habit of religion , and therein die . his wife also become a veil nun , and afterward be make abbess of bark near London . the thirteenth king be cuthr , who first permit the body of the dead to be bury within the wall of their city , which before be use to be bury in the field . the fourteen be Sigebert , who for his cruelty and exacti ? once , be by his subject force to fly into the wood to hide himself , where by a swineherd he be slay . the fifteen be Kenwolph , who found the cathe ? drall church of saint Andrews at well , and be afterward slay by kynoard , who he have banish . the sixteenth king be Brithrick , who queen Ethelburg , ha ? ve prepare a poison for another , the king chance to taste it , and thereof die . in fear of which chance the queen flee into France ; where Charles the then king for her excellent beauty , offer she the choice of himself or his son in marriage : but she out of her lustful humour choose the son , be thereupon de ? bard of both , and thrust into a monastery , where commit adultery , she be dri ? when from thence , and end her life in great misery . for her sake the west Saxons ordain a law , that no king wife shall hereafter have the title or majesty of a queen , which for many year after be severe execute . the four kingdom be of the east Saxons . the four kingdom of the heptarchy be of the east Saxons , and begin by Erchenwyn , in the year 527. contain Essex and Middlesex , and continue 281 year , during the reign of fourteen king ; of who the three be Sebert , who first build the cathedral of saint Paul London , which have former be the temple of Diana : he likewise found the church of saint Peter in the west of London , at a place call thorny , where some time stand the temple of Apollo , which be overthrow by a earthquake , king Lucius new build for the service of God ; and that again be decay , this king restore to a great beauty , and with page 8 his queen Athelgarda be there bury . the nine king be Sebba , who after thirty year peaceable reign relinquish the crown , and take upon he a re ? ligious habit , in the monastery of saint Paul London ; where die , his body be in ? tumb in a coffin of grey marble , the cover coap , and as yet stand in the north wall of the chancel of the same church . the twelve be Offa , famous for the beauty of his countenance , who both enlarge with building , and enrich ? ed with land the church of Westminster , and after eight year reign go to roam , and be there shear a monk , and in that habit die . the fourteenth be suthr , who Egbert king of the west Saxons subdue , and make his kingdom a province to his own . and thus beside the former shire , these two also be lop off from the Britain dominion , and this be a four impair . the five kingdom be of Northumberland . the five kingdom be of Northumberland , and begin by Ella and Ida , in the year 547. contain Yorkshire , Durham , Lancashire , Westmoreland , Cumberland , and Northumberland , and continue 379. year , during the reign of three and twenty king , of who nothing be record of these two first , but that they build the castle of Bamburg . the seven king be Ethel ? fryd , who at caerlegion ( now Westchester ) make a slaughter of twelve hundred christian monk , and be himself afterward slay , by Redwald king of the east angle . the thirteenth king be osr , who wife Cutburga , out of a loathe weariness of wedlock , sue out a divorce from her husband , and build a nunnery at Winburne in Dorsetshire , where in a religious habit she end her life . the six ? teenth king be Cednulph , who after eight year reign , leave his royal robe , and put on the habit of a monk , in the isle of Lindesfern or holy island . unto this king the venerable b•de , a saxon and a priest in the monastery of Peter and Paul at Werimouth near to Durham , Dedicate• his work of the english history , which he continue from the first entrance of the saxon into this island , to the year 731. contain after his own account 285. year . the seventeenth king be Egbert , who after twenty year reign forsake the world also , and shore himself a monk ; whose-brother be archbishop of York , erect a notable library there , and store it with a infinite number of learned book . the last king be Oswald , after who this kingdom yield to the protection of Egbert king of the west Saxons , who be now in the year 926. become absolute monarch of the whole island . and thus by the erection of this five kingdom , be the six nor ? therne shire lop off from the Britain dominion , and this be a five impai ? ring . the six kingdom be of Mercia . the six kingdom be of Mercia , and begin in Crida , in the year 522. contain Huntington , Rutland , Lincoln , Nottingham , Warwickshire , Leycester , Northampton , Derbyshire , Oxfordshire , Cheshire , Shropshire , Glostershire , Stafford ? shire , Buckinghamshire , Bedfordshire , and Hartfordshire , and continue 202. year , du ? ring the reign of twenty king ; eight of who in a continue succession keep the imperial crown of the heptarchy : for though other reign as king in their own territory , yet among they ever one be the supreme head of the rest , and be call king of engle-lond , till Egbert the west saxon bring they all into one . the five of these king of Mercia be Penda , who be the first Christian king of the mercians , and lay the foundation of a fair church at Medeshamstead , now call Peterborough . the seven king be Ethelred , who reign thirty year , •nd then give over the crown , and become a monk in the monastery of Bradney in Lincolnshire , where in the year 716. he die . the eight king be ken ? red , page 9 who after four year reign go to roam , where he take upon he the ha ? bit of a monk , and after other four year dye . the ten king be ethelbald , who at first be give to much lasciviousness of life , but be reprehend for it by Boniface archbishop of ment , be so far convert that he found the mo ? nastery of Crowland , drive in mighty pile of oak into that marish ground , where he lay a great and goodly build of stone ; and after two and forty year reign be slay in a battle by cuthr king of the west Saxons . the eleven king be Offa , who great enlarge his dominion ; reign nine and thirty year , and found the monastery of saint Alban . the thirteenth king be Kenwolph , who reign two and twenty year , and found the monastery of Winchcomb in the county of Gloucester , where his body be inter . the eighteenth king be withlafe , who overcome by Egbert king of the west Saxons , hold his country of ? terward as his substitute and tributary , acknowledge Egbert as now the sole monarch of this island . and by erection of this mercian kingdom , be seven ? ten shire mo•e lop off from the Britain dominion , and be a six and a great impair , so as now they be drive into a narrow room . the seven kingdom be of the east angle . the seven kingdom be of the east angle , and begin by uffa , in the year 575. contain Suffolk , Norfolk , Cambridgeshire , and the isle of Ely , and continue 353. year , during the reign of fifteen king , of who the five be Sigebert , who first bring the light of the gospel into his dominion , and build a school for education of youth , but whether at Oxford or Cambridge , be leave a quaere ; and after three year reign shore himself a monk in the abbey of Cumbreburg , which himself have build : but be afterward violent draw from thence by his subject the east angle , to resist the mercian king Penda , and refuse to use any other weapon but only a white wand , be in a battle by he slay . the seven king be Anna , who after thirteen year reign , be also slay by Penda the mercian king . this king Anna be memorable chie•ly for the holiness of his child , of who his son Erkenwald be bishop of London , and build the abbey of bark near London . his elder daughter Etheldrid be twice marry , and yet continue a virgin still , and at last become a nun , and be remember to posterity by the name of saint Audrie . his second daughter name Sexburg , his three name Ethelburg , his four ( a natural daughter ) name Withburg : all enter in ? to monastery , and be canonize all for saint . the fourteen king be Ethel ? bert , a learned and religious prince , who be invite by Offa the mercian king to marry Elfrid his daughter , come for that purpose to offa court , then seat at sut ? ton Walleys in the county of Hereford , and there by he be cruel murder . in who memorial notwithstanding , he afterward build a fair church at Hereford , the cathedral of that see , as though he can expiate a murder of the live , by a monument to the dead , and be not rather a monument of his own impiety . the fifteen king be Edmund , who assault by the Dane for his possession , be more assault for his profession : for continue constant in his christian faith , those pagan first beat he with bat , then scourge he with whip , •nd last bind he to a stake , and with their arrow shoot he to death ; who body be bury at the town where Sigebert the east Anglian king , one of his predecessor , have build a church , and where afterward ( in honour of he ) be build another most spacious , of a wonderful frame of timber , and the name of the town upon the occasion of his burial there , call to this day saint Edmunds bury . this church and place , Suenus the danish king burn to ash : but when his son Canute have get possession of the english crown , terrify with a vision of the seem saint Edmund ; in a religious devotion to expiate his father sacrilege , he build it anew most sumptuous , and offer his own crown upon the martyr tomb . after the death of this Edmund , the east angle country be possess by the Dane , and so page 10 continue the space of fifty year , until that Edmund surname the elder , expel those Danes , and make that kingdom a province to the west Saxons . by that which have be say , it plain appear , by what degree the Britain lose , and the saxon get the whole possession of this island . for after that Vortigern in the year 455. have call in the saxon , every Britain king that succeed he , lose some part or other of it to the Saxon• , till at last in the year 689. C•dw•llader the last Britain king lose all ; and then the saxon king strive among they ? self for sovereignty , they still gain one upon another , till at last in the year 818 Egbert king of the west Saxons reduce they all under his subjection , and then cause ? say all the south of the island to be call England , accord to the angle of who himself come ; after who they be no long proper call saxon king , but king of England , and so continue till the Dane , in the year 1017. make a interruption ; of who succession now come the time to speak . of the saxon that reign sole king of this island , and may proper be call English king . EGbert the eighteenth king of the west Saxons , be now become the first of the king of England , in who time the Dane begin first to infest the land ; as think they may do as much against the saxon , as the saxon have do against the Britain ; but though they make diverse invasion , and do great spoil , yet they be still repel . this king reign six and thirty year , and die in the year 836. be bury at Winchester . of his issue , his daughter Edith be make governess of a monastery of lady , by she plant in a place which the king her brother have give she , call Pollesworth , situate in Arden , in the north part of the county of Warwick , where she die and be buri•d , and the place in memory of her call st edyth of Pollesworth . to Egbert succeed his son Ethelwolph , who in his youth be so addict to a religious life , that he be first make Deacon , and after bishop of Winchester ; but his father die , he be entreat by his people to take upon he the crown , and by pope Gregory the four , be to that end absolve of his vow . his reign be infest with many and great invasion of the Dane , to who notwithstanding he give incredible overthrow . in the time of his reign , remember his former religious profession , he ordain that riches and land due to holy church , shall be free from all tribute or regal service , and in great devotion go himself to roam , where he live a year ; confirm the grant of Peter penny , and agree be ? side to pay yearly to roam three hundred mark . return home through France , and be a widower , he there marry Judith , the beautiful daughter of Charles the bald then emperor ; in honour of who , in his own court , he ever place she in a chair of estate , with all other majestical compliment of a q••ene , contrary to the law of the west Saxons former make ; which so much this ? please his lord , that for it they be ready to depose he ; but howsoever he live not long after , have reign one and twenty year . his young son Neoto , be much addict to learning , and be one of the first divinity reader in the university of Oxford , and found a monastery in Cornwall , which of he be call Neotestock ; and be dead his body be inter in the county of Hun ? tington , at a place then call Arnulphsbury , and afterward , in regard of his inter ? ment , saint neote , and now saint N•edes . this king be famous , for have four son , who all of they be king of this land successive . first after he reign his elder son Ethelbald , in the year 857. who to his eternal shame , take to wife Judith his father widow , reign but two year and die , be bury at Shirborn in Dorsetshire , at that time the Episcopal see . from this Judith , marry afterward to the earl of Flanders , after diverse descent , come Maude the wife of William the conqueror , from who be descend all our king ever since . page 11 next to the old reign the second son Ethelbert , all who reign , which be only five year , be perpetual disquiet with invasion of the Dane , which yet be at last repel . he die in the year 866. and be bury at Shir ? bear in Dorsetshire . next to the second reign his three son Ethelred , who reign be more this ? quiet with the Dane than any other before : for they invade the land , under the lead of hunger , and hubba , spoil all the country as they go , not spare religious place ; among other , the goodly monastery of Bradney , Crowland , Peter ? borough , Ely , and Huntington , they lay level with the ground : the monk and nun they murder or ravish ; at which time a rare example of chastity and fortitude be see in the nun of Coldingham . for to avoid the ba•barous pollution of these pagan , they deform themselves by cut off their upper lip and nose . Ninus battle in one year this king fight with the Dane , in most o• they victorious ; but at last receive a wound whereof he die , and be bury in the church at Winborne in Dorsetshire . next to the three reign his four son Alfred , in who time come over grea ? ter swarm of Danes then ever before , and have now get foot in the north , the west , and south part of this island , leave this king nothing of all his great Monar ? chy , but only Somerset , Hampton , and Wiltshire ; and not these neither altogether free , so as he be force sometime to fly into the fen and marish ground to secure himself , where he live by fish and fowl , and hunt of wild beast , till at last learn policy from adversity , and gather courage from misery , he when ? tur in the habit of a common minstrel , to enter the Dane camp ; where ha ? ve view the manner of their encamp , and observe their security , he retur ? ned back , show his lord in what condition he find they : whereupon set upon they at unaware , he not only make of they a great slaughter , but bring upon they a great terror : for present upon this the Dane sue for peace , and deliver hostage for performance of these condition ; that their king shall re ? ceive baptism , and their great army depart quiet out of the land but though upon this agreement they depart for the present into France , yet the year follow ? king they return with great force , forage all part of the country in most cruel manner , though still encounter by this valorous prince , till he end his life in the year 901. after he have reign nine and twenty year . the virtue of this king , if they be not incredible , they be at least admirable , whereof these may be instance . the day and night contain four and twenty hour , he design equal to three special use , observe they by the burn of a taper set in his chapel ; ( there be at that time , no other way of distinguish they ) eight hour he spend in contemplation , read and prayer : eight in provision for himself , his health and recreation : and the other eight in the affair of the commonwealth and state . his kingdom likewise he divide into shire , Hun ? dread and tithing ; ordain that no man may remove out of his hundred without security : by which course he so suppress thief and robber , which have former increase by the long war , that it be say a boy or girl may open ? lie carry a bag of gold or silver , and carry it safe all the country over . Besid•s his great piety , he be also learned ; and •s far as it may be a commendation in a prince , a skilful musician and a excellent poet . all former law he cause to be survey , and make choice of the best , which he translate into the english tongue ; as also the pastoral of saint Gregory , the history of Bede , and Boetius his con ? solation of philosophy ; the psalm of David likewise he begin to translate , but die before he can finish it . and so great a love he have to learning , that he make a law , that all freeman of the kingdom , possess two hide of land , shall bring up their son in learning , till they be fifteen year of age at least , that so they may be train to know God , to be man of understanding , and to live happy . his building be many , both for god service and for other public use : as at Edlingsey a monastery , at Winchester a new Minster , and at shaftesb•ry a house of nun ; whereof he make his daughter Ethelgeda the abbess ; but his page 12 foundation of the university of Oxford , exceed all the rest : which he begin in the year 895. and to furnish it with able scholar , draw thither out of France , Grimbaldus and Scotus , and out of wale , Asser , ( who write his life ) who le ? cture he honour often with his own presence . and for a stock of frugality , he make a survey of the kingdom ; and have all the particular of his estate , re ? gistred in a book ; which he keep in his treasury at Winchester . he reign see ? when and twenty year , and die be bury in the cathedral church of saint Peter at Winchester , though remove afterward , into the church of the new Mona ? stery , without the north-gate of the city call hide . his wife elsewith , Foun ? dead a monastery of nun at Winchester , and be there bury . their second daughter Ethelgeda , take upon she the vow of virginity ; and by her father ap ? appointment be make a nun of Shaftesbery , in the county of Dorset , in the mo ? nastery •ounded there by he , who be also account the founder of the town it self . king Alfred be decease , his son Edward ( call Edward the elder ) suc ? ceed : not so learned as his father ; but in valour his equal , and superior in fortune . for , first , he overcome his cousin Ethelwald , who aspire to the crown ; then the Dane , who chief leader he •lew in battle ; last the welsh ; but these last , more by humility show to their prince Leolyn , then by force of a•mes . but yet he must not have all the glory of his time ; some must be impar ? t to his sister Elflede ; who be marry to Ethelred earl of Mercia , have by he a daughter , but with so grievous pa•nes in her travail , that ever after she re ? fuse the nuptial bed of her husband , say , it be a foolish pleasure , that bring with it so excessive pain . and thereupon after her husband death , make choice to follow the war ; assist her brother both against the welsh , and against the Dane , who she bring to be at her dispose . die she be bury at Gloce ? star , in the monastery of saint Peter , which her husband and her self have build . king edw•rd himself , after four and twenty year reign , decease at fare ? don in Berkshire , in the year 924. and be bury in the new monastery of Win ? chester , which his father begin , and himself whole finish : have have by his three wife , six son and nine daughter , of who his elder son athel ? stan succeed he in the kingdom , who his grandfather king Alfred have with his own hand Knighted• in a extraordinary manner ; put upon he a pur ? ple robe , and gird he with a girdle wrought with pearl . his second son Elfred , he so love , that he cause he to be crown king with himself , which yet he enjoy but a short time , be take away by death . his three son else ? ward , present upon his father death , die himself also . his four son ed ? win , be by his brother Athelstan , out of jealousy of state , put into a little pinnace , without either tackle or oar , accompany only with one page ; with grief whereof , the young prince leap into the sea and drown himself . his five , and six son , Edmund , and Edred , come in succession to be king of England . of his daughter , the elder Edytha , be marry to sithricke the danish king of Northumberland , and he decease , she enter into a monastery , which she begin at Tamworth in Warwickshire , and there die . his second daughter Elflede , take upon she the vow of virginity , in the monastery of Ramsey , in the county of south ? hampton , where she die and be inter . his three daughter Eguina , be first marry to Charles the simple , king of France , and after his decease , to Herbert , ea•le of Vermandois . his four daughter ethelhild , become a nun in the mo ? nastery of Wilton , which be sometime the head town , give name to the whole county of Wil•shire , and ancient call ellandon . that we may see in those first time of religion , when there be lea•t knowledge , there be most the ? votion . his five daughter edhold , be marry to Hugh , surname the great , earl of Paris , and constable of France . and edgith his six daughter , to Otho , the emperor of the west , •urnamed the great . his seven daughter Elgina , be marry to a duke of Italy . his nine Edgina , to Lewis prince of Aquitaine in France . page 13 after the death of king Edward , his elder son Athelstan succeed , and be crown at Kingston upon Thames , in the county of Surrey , by Athelmu• arch ? bishop of Canterbury , in the year 924. the beginning of who reign , be more ? lest with the treason of one Elfrid a nobleman , who be apprehend and send to roam to purge himself , and there deny the act upon his oath , fall sudden down , and within three day die , to the eternal •errour of all per ? jure person . present upon this , another disaster befall king Athelstan , for have cause his brother Edwyns death , ( as before be show ) chief pro ? cure by his cupbearers suggestion : it happen not long after , that his cup ? bearer , in his service at a festival , stumble with one foot , and recover he ? self with the other , and say merry , see how one brother help another ; his word put the king in remembrance of his brother , who death he have cause , and with remorse thereof , not only cause his cupbearer to be put to death , but do also seven yeare• penance : and build the two monastery of Middleton , and mi ? chelnesse , in the county of Dorset , in expiation of his offence . this king ordai ? ned many good law ; and those to bind as well the clergy , as the Laity ; ah ? among which , one be the attachment of felon , that steal a•ove twelve penny , and be above twelve year old . of this king , there be one act relate , that may seem ridiculous ; another that may seem miraculous ; for what more ridicu ? love , then that , go to visit the tomb of saint John of Beverley , and have nothing else of worth to offer , he offer his knife in devotion to the saint ? yet the mirac•lous be more apparent : for go to encounter the Dane , and pray to God for good success , he pray withal , that God will show some sign of his rightful cause , and thereupon strike with his sword , he strike it a ell deep into a hard stone , which stand so cleave a long time after . but whether this be true or no , this certain be true , that he obtain many great victory against the Dane , against the Scot , against the ir•sh , and against the welsh , who prince he bring to be his tributary , enter covenant at heref•rd , to pay he yearly twenty pound weight of gold , three hundred of silver , and five and twenty hun ? dread head of cattle , beside a certain number of hawk and hound . last , he join Northumberland to the rest of his monarchy , and enlarge his domini ? of|we beyond any of his predecessor , which make all neighbour prince to seek his friendship , and to gratify he with rare present , as huge king of France send he the sword of Constantine the great , in the hilt whereof , be one of the nail that fasten Christ to his cross ; he send he also the spear of Charles the Grea• , repute to be the same that pierce Christ side ; as also part of the cross whereon Christ suffer , and a piece of the thorny crown put upon his head . likewise Otho the emperor , who have marry his sister , send he a vessel of pre ? tious stone , artificial make , wherein be see landscape with vine , corn , and man , all of they seem so artificial to move , as if they be grow , and alive . likewise the king of Norway send he a goodly ship , with a gild ste•ne , purple •ayles , and the deck garnish all with gold . of these account holy relic , king Athelstan give part to the abbey of saint Swithin in Winchester , and the rest to the monastery of Mamesbury , whereof Adelm be the founder , and his tutelar saint . he new build the monastery of Wilton , michelnesse , and Middleton ; found saint germane in Cornwall , saint Petrocus at Bodmyn , and the priory of Pilton ; new wall and beautify the city of Exeter , and enrich either with jewel or land , every special abbey of the land but the chief of his work for the service of God , and good of his subject , be the translati ? on of the bible into the saxon tongue , which be then the mother tongue of the land he reign fifteen• year , die at glocest•r , and be bury at mame ? berry , in the year 940. have never be marry . after the death of Athelstan , his brother Edmund , the five son of his father succeed ; and be crown at Kingston upon Thames ; but no soon be the crown set upon his head , but the Dane be upon his back ; and in Northumber ? land make insurrection , who yet he not only repress in that part ; but take page 14 from they the town of Lincoln , Leycester , Derby , Stafford and Nottingham ; come ? pelling they withal to receive baptism , and to become his subject , so as the country be whole he as far as Humber . Cumberland also , which have be a entire kingdom of it self , and be now aid by Leolyn king of South-wales , he utter waste , and give it to Malcolme king of Scot , to hold of he by feal ? ty . after his return home , he •et himself to ordain law for the good of his people ; which master Lambert have since transla•ed into latin . but after all his noble act both in war and peace , he come at last to a lamentable end ; for at his manor of pucklekerk , in the county of Gloucester , interpose himself to part a fray between two of his servant , he be thrust through the body , and so wound that he die , and be bury at Glastenbury , after he have reign five year and seven month , leave behind he two young son , Edwyn , and Edgar . king Edmund die , his brother Edred , in the minority of his nephew , be crown at Kingston upon Thames , by otho archbishop of Canterbury , in the year 946. not as protector ; ( it seem that kind of authority be not yet come in use ) but as king himself , though with purpose to resign , when the right heir shall come of age , which at this time need not , for while the right heir be scarce yet fourteen year old , he resign to he the kingdom , by resign his life to nature , after he have twice repress the rebel Northumbrians , and twice forgive their rebel , which yet be not a simple rebellion ; for they have send for anlafe the Dane out of Ireland , and make he their king ; which place for four year he hold ; and then weary of his government , they thrust he out and take one Hericus to be their king , who not long after they put down also ; and then partly allure by the lenity of king Edred ; and partly force by his arm ; they submit themselves to he , and ask forgiveness ; to who he , as a merciful prince , giant a act of oblivion , and receive they again into protection . this prince be so devout and humble , that he submit his body to be chastise at the will of Dunstan abbot of Glastenbury , and commit all his treasure and jewel to his custody . the stately abbey of Mich at Abington near Oxford , build by king Inas , but destroy by the Dane , he new re-edify ; endow it with revenue and land , the charter whereof he confirm with seal of gold . he ordain faint german in Cornwall , to be a bishop see , which there continue , till by ca ? nutus iter be annex to the Episcopal see of Kyrton in Devonshire ; both which see be afterward by king Edward the confessor , translate to the city of exce ? ter . he leave behind he two son , Elfred , and bertfr , and be bury in the old minster , without the city of Winchester ; who bone with other king , be to this day preserve in a gild coffer , fix upon the wall , in the south side of the choir . after Edred , not any of his son , but his nephew Edwyn , the elder son of king Edmund succeed , and be anoint and crown at Kingston upon Thames , by otho archbishop of Canterbury , in the year 955. this prince , though scarce fourteen year old , and in age but a child , yet be able to commit sin as a man ; for upon the very day of his coronation , and in sight of his lord , as they sit in counsel , he shameful abuse a lady of great estate , and his near kinswoman , and to mend the matter , short after slay her husband , the more free to enjoy his incestuous pleasure . and whether for this infamous fact , or for thrust the monk out of the monastery of Mamesbury , and Glastenbury , and place marry priest in their room , as also for banish Dunstan the holy ab ? not of Glastenbury out of the realm , a great part of his subject heart be so tur ? ned against he , that the mercians and Northumbrians revolt , and swear fealty to his young brother Edgar , with grief whereof , after four year reign , he end his life , and be bury in the church of the new abbey of Hyde , at win ? chester . after Edwyn , succeed his young brother Edgar , at the age of sixteen year ; but his coronation , when , and where , and by who , so uncertain , that some say page 15 he be crown at Kingston upon Thames , by otho archbishop of Canterbury , in the first year of his reign , other say , not till the twelve , and William of Mames ? berry , not till the thirtyeth : another chronicle say , in his eleven year ; and that in the city of bath , by the hand of Dunstan archbishop of Canterbury . this king , by reason of the tranquillity of his reign , be surname the peaceable ; for as he be something incline to the Dane , so the Dane never offer to stir in all his time ; and as for the saxon , they acknowledge he their sole soon ? reign , without division of province or title . his act be , some virtuous , some politic , some just , some pious , and yet all these not without some mix ? ture of vice . to repress dunkennesse , which the Dane have bring in ; he ma•e a law , ordain a size , by certain pin in the pot , with penalty to any , that shall presume to drink deep than the mark . it be a politic device which he use for the destruction of wolf , that in his day do great annoyance to the land for , the tribute impose on the prince of wale , by king Athelstan , he whole remit , appoint in lieu thereof a certain number of wolf yearly to be pay ; whereof the prince of North-wales , for his part be to pay three hun ? dread ; which continue for three year space : and in the four year , there be not a wolf to be find ; and so the tribute cease . he have in his navy royal , three thousand and six hundred ship , which he divide into three part , appoint ? ting every one of they to a several quarter , to scour the sea , and to secure the coast from pirate : and leave his officer may be careless , or corrupt ; he will himself in person sail about all the coast of his kingdom every sum ? mer . it be a notable act of justice , that in his circuit , and progress through the country , he will take special account of the demeanour of his lord ; and special for his judge ; who he severe punish , if he find they delinquent . war he have none in all his reign , only towards his end , the Welshman move some rebellion ; against who he go with a mighty army , and chastise the author ; but when his soldier have get great spoil , and make prey upon the innocent country people ; he command they to restore it all back again ; which , if it make some few english angry , it make the whole country of the welsh well please , and sound forth his praise . his pious act be , that he build and prepare seven and forty monastery , and mean to have make they up fifty , but be prevent by death . but now his mixture of vice mar all ; e ? special be a vice opposite to all those virtue , which be lasciviousness . for first , he deflower a sacred nun , call Wolfchild ; on who yet he beget a saint , the chaste Edyth . after she , another virgin , call Ethelflede , for she excel ? lend beauty surname the white , on who he beget his elder son Edward ; for which fact he do seven year penance , enjoin he by the archbishop Dun ? stan . after this he chance to hear of a virgin , daughter to a western duke , exceed praise for her beauty , and come to Andover , command she to his bed but the mother , tender of her daughter honour , bring in the dark her maid to he ; who in the morning , make haste to rise , and the king not suf ? fear she to depart , she tell he what great work she have to do ; and how she shall incur her lady displeasure , if it be not do ; by which word , the king perceive the deceit , turn it to a jest , but so well like her company , that he keep himself true to she ever after , till he marry . but now his marriage it self happen by a great vice than any of these ; for hear of the admirable beauty of El•rida , the only daughter of Ordganus duke of Devonshire , founder of tavestocke abbey in that country , he send his great favourite Earle Ethelwold , ( who can well judge of beauty ) to try the truth thereof ; with commission , that if he find she such as fame report , he shall seize she for he , and he will make she his queen . the young earl , upon sight of the lady , be so surprise with her love , that he begin to woo she for himself , and get she fa ? there|be good will , so as the king will give his consent . hereupon the earl post ? ed to the king , relate to he , that the maid be fair indeed , but nothing a ? swerable to the fame that go of she : yet desire the king that he may marry page 16 she , as be her father heir , thereby to raise his fortune . the king consen ? t , and the marriage be solemnize . soon after , the fame of her beauty be ? begin to spread more than before , so as the king much doubt that he have be abuse , mean to try the truth himself , and thereupon take occasion of hunt in the duke park , come to his house : who come Ethelwold suspect , ac ? quaint his wife with the wrong he have do both she , and the king , and there ? fore to prevent the king displeasure , entreat she by all the persuasion he can use , to cloth her self in such attire , as may be least fit to set she forth ; but she consider that now be the time , to make the most of her beauty , and long to be a queen ; will not be accessary to her own wrong , but deck her self in her rich ornament ; which so improve her beauty , that the king at her first sight be strike with admiration , and mean to be revenge of his perfidious favourite ; yet dissemble his passion , till he can take he at advantage , he then with a javelin run he through ; and have thereby make the fair Elfrid a with ? dough , take she to be his wife . this king found the monastery of Ramsey in Hamshire , reign sixteen year , live seven and thirty , and with great fu ? n•rall pomp be bury in the abbey of Glastenbury . he have child by his first wife Ethelfleda , one son name Edward ; and by his second wife Elfrid , two son , one name Edmund , who die young , the other Ethelred . he have also one na ? turall daughter , name edgyth , by a lady name Wolfchild , the daughter of Wol ? holm , the son of bird , the son of nest ; which two latter bear in their name , the memory of their fortune ; the last of they be find in a eagles nest , by king Alfred as he be a hunt . this edgyth build the monastery and church of saint Dennis at Wilton , and be there bury . after the death of king Edgar , succeed his son Edward , but not without some opposition , for queen Elfrid combine with diverse of the lord , to make her son Ethelred king , say that prince Edward be illegitimate ; on the other side , the archbishop Dunstan , and the monk stand for Edward , abet his ti ? tle as be lawful bear ; but while the counsel be assemble to argue their right , the archbishop come in with his banner and cross , and not stay for debate de jure , de facto present Prince Edward for their lawful king , and the assembly consist most of clergy man , draw the approbation of the rest ; and thereupon prince Edward be admit , be but twelve year of age , and be crown king at Kingston upon Thames , by archbishop Dunstan , in the year 975. in the begin of his reign , it fall into debate whether marry priest be to be allow to live in monastery upon the revenue of the church . the mercian duke Alferus , favour the cause of the marry priest , destroy ? ed the monastery in his province , cast out the monk , and restore again the ancient revenue to the priest and their wife . on the other side , Edelwyn duke of the east angle , and brithnoth earl of Essex , who stand for the monk , cast marry priest out of their province . the matter be debate in a council at Westminster , the monk cause be like to have the foil , till it be refer to the rood , place on the refectory wall , where the counsel sit . for to this gréat oracle , saint Dunstan desire they devout to pray , and to give diligent ear for a answer ; when sudden a voice be hear to say , God forbid it shall be so , God forbid it shall be so . this be think authority sufficient , to suppress the priest , till they persuade the people , that this be but a cunning practice of the monk , in place behind the wall , a man of their own , who through a trunk utter these word in the mouth of the rood , whereupon another assem ? bly be appoint at Cleve in Wiltshire , whither repair the prelate , with most of all the lord and gentleman of the kingdom . the synod be set , and the matter at the height of discuss , it happen that the joist of the room , where the synod be hold , sudden break , and the floor with all the people thereon , fall down , whereof many be hurt , and some slay . only the archbishop Dunstan then precedent , and mouth for the monk , remain hurt ; which whether it be do by practice , or be miraculous , it serve the monk turn page 17 for justify their cause ; and marry priest be thereupon discard . it be infinite and indeed ridiculous , to speak of all the miracle report to be do by this saint Dunstan , which may be fit for a legend , but not for a chronicle . but now a most lamentable disaster , come to be remember : for king Edward , hunt one time in the island of purbacke : not far from Corfe castle ; where his mother in law queen Elfrid , with his brother prince Ethelred , be then resi ? ding , he out of his love to both , will needs himself alone go visit they ; where the cruel woman , out of ambition to bring she own son to the crown , cause ? sed one to run he into the back with a knife , as he be drink a cup of wine on horse back at his depart , who feel himself hurt , set spur to his horse , think thereby to get to his company , but the wound be mortal , and he fain ? ting thorough loss of much blood , fall from his horse ; but one foot be entangle in the stirrup , he be thereby rueful drag up and down , through wood , and land : and last leave dead at corfes gate ; for which untimely death , he be ever after call by •he name of Edward the martyr . he reign only three year and •ix month , and be bury first at Winchester , without all funeral pomp ; but after three year , by duke Alferus remove , and with great solemnity inter in the minster of Shaftsbury . queen Elfrid , to expiate this her bloody fact , build the two monastery of Almesbery , and Worwell , in the county of Wil•shire , and Southampton , in which latter , with great repentance , she live till her death . after the death of Edward the martyr , die at the age of sixteen year , his half brother Ethelred , at the age of twelve year , in the year 979. be crow ? ned king at Kingston upon Thames , by Dunstan archbishop of Canterbury , though much against his will ; which king , by reason of his backwardness in action , be common call the unready . before who time , for two and twenty year past• ; the Dane have live as quiet inmate with the english , but whether weary of so long do nothing , or find now opportunity of do something , in the second year of this king , they begin to stir , and invite from home moor for ? ces , who in seven ship arrive upon the coast of Kent , they spoil all the con ? try , special the isle of thanet , and continue this course of forage the king ? dome , sometime in one part , and sometime in another , for eleven year toge ? there : till at last in the year 991. the king , by advice of his lord , of who Siri ? cius , the now archbishop of Canterbury be chief , be content to pay they ten thousand pound , upon condition they shall quiet depart the realm . This serve the turn for the present , but be so far from satisfy they , that it do but give they the great appetite : for the year follow they come again , and that with a great fleet than before , against who the king prepare a compe ? tent navy , and commit it to Elfricke , earl of Mercia , but he prove treache ? rous ( as indeed all other for the most part do , who the king employ against the Dane , as with who they be alliance in blood ) the dan•s so prevailed• that for the next composition , they have sixteen thousand pound give they , and a year after , twenty thousand ; and so every year more and more , till it come at last to forty thousand : by which mean , the land be empty of all coin , and the english be bring so low , that they be fain to till , and ear the ground , while the Dane sit idle , and eat the fruit of their labour ; abuse the wife and daughter of their host where they lie , and yet i• every place , for every fear , be call lord-dane ; ( which afterward become a word of derision , when one will signify a lazy lubber . ) in this distress state , the king at last bethink himself of a course : he send forth a secret commission , into every city within his dominion , that at a appoint time , they shall massacre all the Dane that be among they ; the day be the thirteenth of November , be the festival of saint Bricius , in the year 1002. his command be accord perform , and with such rigour , that in Oxford the Dane for refuge take into the church of saint frideswyde , as into a sanctuary , when the english , neither regard place nor person , set the church on site , wherein man ? nigh of the Dane be burn , and the library thereof utter deface . and who page 18 will not now think , but that England by this fact have clean shake off the danish yoke for ever ? yet it prove clean otherwise : for the news of this mass ? sacre , add a new edge of revenge , to the old edge of ambition : make the Dane sharp set against the english , then ever they have be before ; so as the year follow , their king sweyne , with a mighty navy , enter the country , raze , and level with the ground the city of Exeter , all along from the east gate to the west ; against who the king levy a army , and make general over it , the earl Edricke , his great favourite ; who he have create duke of Mercia ; and give he his daughter edgyth in marriage ; yet all this great favour can not keep he from be treacherous , for be send ambassador to the Dane , to mediate for peace , he reveal to they the weakness of the land , and trea ? cherous dissuade they from consent to any truce . upon this king Ethel ? read give order , that every three hundred and ten hide of land shall build a ship , and every eight hide , find a complete armour furnish , yet all this great preparation come to nothing , but only to make a show . after this , the king see no end of their invasion , nor promise keep upon any composition ; ( for three danish prince , with a great fleet , be now new arrive ) he intend to adventure once for all , and to commit his cause to God , by the fortune of a battle . to which end he secret gather a mighty power , and come unacustomated ? look for , when the enemy be unprepared , he have certain give a end to the quarrel , if the wicked edricke have not dissuade he from fight , and put he into a causeless fear , by forge tale . after this , the Dane forage many country ; burn Oxford , The•ford , and Cambridge : and last enter Wiltshire , which be the seven shire in number , they have lay waste like a wilderness . the year after , they make a new expedition , and besiege Canterbury ; which by treason of a churchman they win , take Alphegus the archbishop , and fly nine hundred monk , and man of religion , beside many citizen , without all mercy ; for they tithe the people , slay all by nine , and reserve only the ten to live ; so that of all the monk in the town , there be but four save , and of the lay people , four thousand eight hundred , by which account master Lambert collect , that there die in this massacre , three and forty thousand , and two hundred person . the archbishop Alphegus , for that he refuse to charge his tenant with three thousand pound to pay for his ransom , they most cruel stone to death at Green•wich . Turkillus the leader of these murderer , take into his possession all Norfolk and Suffolk , over who he tyrannize in most savage manner ; the rest compound with the english for eight thousand pound , quiet ? lie for a while sojourn among they . the year follow come king sweyne a ? gain , and with a great navy arrive in the mouth of Humber , and land at gain ? borough , to who the Northumbrians , and the people of Lindsey , yield they ? self ; so that now over all the north from Watlingstreete , he reign sole king , and exact pledge of they for their further obedience . from the north he pass ? say into the south , subdue all before he , till he come to London , where he be so valiant encounter by the Londoner , that he be glad to retire , in which re ? tire notwithstanding he enter bath ; where Ethelmore earl of Devonshire , with his western people , submit himself to he . yet after this , between he and the english be strike a fierce battle , which have be with good success , if the treachery of some in turn to the Dane , have not hinder it . after this the Dane proceed on victorious , and have get most part of the land , and even London also by submission : whereupon the unfortunate king Ethelred send his wife Emma , with her two son , Edward and Alfred , to her brother , duke of Normandy , himself also the winter follow pass thither , leave the Dane lord it in his realm . Sweyne now as a absolute king , extort from the en ? glish both victual , and pay for his soldier ; and demand such a composi ? cion for preserve of saint Edmund monastery in Suffolk , as the inhabitant be not able , and therefore refuse to pay ; he thereupon threaten spoil , both to the place , and to the martyr bone there inter , when sudden , in the midst of page 19 his jollity ( say Hoveden ) he cry out , that he be strike by saint Edmund with a sword , be then in the midst of his lord : and no man see from who hand it come , and so with great horror and torment , three day af•er ; upon the three of February , he end his life at Thetford , or ( as other say ) at Gaynsborough . and now who will not think , but this be a fair opportunity offer to the english , to free themselves whole from the danish yoke ? but when all be don• , either cross by treachery , or frustrate by misfortune , nothing prosper . I• be true , upon this occasion of sweyne death , king Ethelred return out of nor ? mandy , but at his come , Canute the son o Sweyne , have get the peopl• of Lindsey to be at his devotion , and to find he both horse and man against their own king ; so as Ethelred be now to encounter as well his own Subjects• as the Dane , which he do so valiant , that he make Canute glad to return into den ? mark , as utter hopeless of any good to be do in England . and now one will certain think the Dane have be remove , root and branch , out of England , and never like to trouble the land any more ; and indeed there be all the appearance of probability for it that can be . but it be a true say , that which will be , shall be , let all be do that can be . for now turkill the Dane , who have before revolt to king Ethelred , grow sensible of his fault , which be this , or no way to be redeem ; and tender of his countrymen case , which be now or never to be help ; with nine of his ship sail into Denmark , and first excuse himself to Canute for his former defection , as though he have do it of purpose , to learn all advantage against the english , which now he can disco ? ver to he , he so prevail with Canute once again to try his fortune , that with a navy of two hundred ship he set sail for England , and land at Sandwich , where he give the english a great overthrow , and pass victorious through the county of Dorset , Somerset , and Wilts . when ( Ethelred lie dangerous sick at Cossam ) the manage of the war be commit to prince Edmund his son , who prepare to give the Dane battle , have sudden notice give he , that his brother in law Edricke , mean to betray he into his enemy hand , which make he suspend his proceed ; and Edricke perceive his design to be discover , cast off the mask , and with forty of the king ship flee open to the enemy ; and thereupon , all the west country submit themselves unto Canute . by this time king Ethelred have recover his sickness , prepare to go on with the battle , which his son Edmund have intend , but his force be assemble , he likewise have sudden notice give he , that his subject mean to betray he to the Dane . hereupon he withdraw himself to London , as the place in which he most confide ; where fall into a relapse of his former sickness , he end his unfortunate day , in the year 1016. when he have reign 37. year ; and be bury in the cathedral church of saint Paul , who bone as yet remain in the north wall of the chancel , in a chest of grey marble ; adjoin to that of Sebba king of the east Saxons . he have by his two wife , eight son , and four daughter ; of who , his young name Goda , be marry to one Walter de Maigne , a nobleman of Normandy ; by who she have a son name Rodolph , which Rodolph have a son name Harold , create afterward by king William the conqueror , baron of Sudeley , in the county of Gloucester , and ancestor to the ba ? ron of that place succeed , and of the lord chandowe of Sudeley now be . Ethelred be dead , his three son Edmund call Ironside ( of his ability in en ? during labour ) but the elder living at his father death , succeed , and be crow ? ned at Kingston upon Thames , by Levingus archbishop of Canterbury , in the year 1016. a great part of the english both fear and favour , and indeed out of fear favour Canute ; especial the clergy , who at Southampton ordain he their king , and swear feaalty to he : but the Londoner stand firm to prince ed ? mund , and be the principal author of his election . Canute before the death of king Ethelred , have besiege the city , and now with a large trench encompass it : but the new king Edmund come on , raise the siege , and make Canute fly to the isle of Sheppey , where have stay the winter , the spring follow , he assail page 20 the west of England , and at Penham in Dorse•shire , a battle be fight , and the Dane discomfit . after this , in Worc•stershire at a place call Sherostan , another battle be fight , where the Dane be like again to be discomfit , but the trai ? terous Edrick perceive it , he cut off the head of a soldier like unto king edm•nd both in hair and countenance , and shake his bloody sword , with the gasp head , cry to the army of the english , fly you wretch fly , and get away , for your king be slay ; behold , here be his head : but king Edmund have notice of this treacherous strata ? gem , haste to show himself where he may best be see : who sight so encourage his man , that they have get that day a final victory , if night have not prevent they . duke Edrick excuse his fact , as be mistake in the countenance of the man , and desirous to save the blood of the english ; upon which false colour he be receive into favour again . after this , Canute secret in the night break up his camp , and march towards London , which in a sort be still besiege by the danish ship : but king Edmund hear of his departure , follow he , and with small ado remove the siege , and in triumphant manner enter the city . after this , near unto Otford in Kent , be another great battle fight , in which Canute lose four thousand five hundred man , and king Edmund only six hundred ; the rest of the Dane save themselves by •light ; who if king Edmund have pur•ued , it be think that day have end the war between these two nation for ever . but the ever traitorous Edrick , keep king Edmund from pursue they , by tell he of ambush and other danger : so as Canutu• have leisure to pass over into Essex , but thither also king Edmund follow he ; where at Ashdone three mile from saffron Walden , another battle be fight , in which •he Danes be at the point to be overthrow , the traitorous Edrick with all his force revoult to their side , by which treachery the english lose the day . there die of king Edmund nobility , duke Alfred , duke Goodwyn , duke Athelward , duke Athelwyn , earl Urchill , Codnoth bishop of Lincoln , Woolsey abbot of Ramsey , with many other . the remembrance of which battle be retain to this day , by certain small hill there remain , whence have be dig the bone of man , armour , and horsebridle . after this ; at dereherst near to the river Severn• , another battle be ready to be fight ; when sudden a certain captain step forth , and for save of blood u•ed great per ? swasion , that either they shall try the matter by single combat , or else divide the kingdom betwixt they . upon this the combat be agree on , and the two prince enter into a small island call Alney , adjoin to the city of Gloucester , in come ? pleat armour assail each other , at first on horseback , and after on foot : when Canute have receive a dangerous wound , and find himself overmatch in strength , desire a compromise , and with a loud voice use these word . what necessity shall move we most valiant prince , for obtain of a title to endanger our life ? be it not better to lay malice aside , and condescend to a love agree ? mean ? let we therefore become swear brother , and divide the kingdom between we . this motion be by king Edmund accept , and thus be the kingdom divi ? dead between these two prince ; Edmund enjoy that part which lie upon the coast of France , and Canute the rest . but now duke Edrick have his last and grea ? test act of treachery to play : for king Edmund be retire to a place for nature n•cessity , he thirst from under the draught a sharp spear into his body , and then cut off his head , present it to Canute , with these fawn word , all hail , thou sole monarch now of England , for here behold the head of thy copartner , which for thy sake i have adventure to cut off . Canute though ambitious enough of sovereign ? ty , yet aba•hed at so disloyal a fact , reply and vow , that in reward of that sir ? vice his own head shall be advance above all the peer of his kingdom , which soon after he perform ; for by his command the false Edricks head be cut off , and place upon the high gate in London . the death of this king in this man ? ner , some say be act at Oxford ; other , that he die of natural sickness in Lon ? don , but howsoever he come to his death , his reign be but only seven month , and his body be bury at Glasten•ury , near to his grandfather king Edgar . this king Edmund have by his wife Algyt• , two son ; the old name Edward , surname page 21 the outlaw , because he live out of England in Hungary as a banish man , for fear of king Canute : but when his uncle king Edward the confessor , have obtain the crown , he be recall , and honourable entertain till he die . he marry Aga ? tha , sister to queen Sophia , wife to Salomon king of Hungary , and daughter to the emperor Henry the second ; by who he have Edgar surname Atheling , the right heir of the english crown , though he never enjoy it . king Edmund have also two daughter , Margaret and Christian , of who the young become a veil nun at Ramsey in Hampshire ; the elder Margaret , after sole heir to the saxon mo ? narchie , marry Malcolme the three king of Scotland , from which princely bed in a lineal descent , our high and mighty monarch king Iames the first , do in his most royal person , unite the Britain , Saxons , norman , and scottish imperial crown in one . of the first danish king in England . CAnutus be possess of half the kingdom by composition with king ed ? mund , now after his death seize upon the whole , and to prevent all further question , he call a council of the english nobility , wherein it be pro ? pound , whether in the agreement betwixt edm•nd and he , any claim of title to the crown have be reserve for king Edmund brethren or son : to which ( not dare to say otherwise ) they absolute answer no , and thereupon take all of they the oath of allegiance to Canute . be thus clear of all opposite he prepare with great solemnity for his coronation , which be perform at Lon ? don , by the hand of Levingus surname Elstane , archbishop of Canterbury , in the year 1017. be the first Dane that reign monarch of England . but Canute not think himself sufficient safe , as long as any that may pretend , be in the people eye , cause first Edwyn the son of king Ethelred , and brother of ed ? mund , to abjure the realm , who be yet afterward recall , and treacherous murder by his own man , and his body bury at Tavestock in Devonshire . next be the two son of Edmund Ironside , Edward and Edmund , who to the end the people may not see he shed the blood of innocent , he send to his half brother king of Sweden to be make away . then remain Edward and Alfred , the son of king Ethelred , and they their mother queen Emma have send away before to her brother the duke of Normandy , there to be in safety : so as none of the royal blood be now leave in the land , to give Canute any fear of competition . after this , he take to wife the virtuous lady Emma , the relict of king Ethelred , by which match he procure to himself three great benefit : one that he win the love of the people by marry a lady who they so entire love ; another , that he get the alliance of the duke of Normandi• , a neighbou•ing prince of great power ; the three , that by marry the mother , he secure himself against the son : as likewise queen Emma be not unwilling persuade to the match , upon agreement to make her issue , if he have any by she , to inherit the crown of England . and to win the love of the people more , he cause great number of his Dane , who pester the country , to return home , bestow among they for their satis ? faction four score and two thousand pound . and to win the love of the peo ? ple yet more , he now set himself to the make of good lawes• in a parliament at Oxford , whereof , for a pattern of those time , some that concern religion , may not unfit be here relate . first , for the celebration of divine service , it be or ? dain , that all ceremony tend to the increase of reverence and devotion shall be use as need require . second , that upon the sabbath day , all public fair , market , synod , hunt , and all secular action shall be forbear , unless some urgent necessity shall require it . third , that every christian shall thrice in the year receive the bless sacrament of the lord supper . four , that if a mi ? nister of the altar kill a man , or commit any notorious crime , he shall be deprive both of his order and dignity . five , th•t a marry woman convict page 22 of adultery , shall have her nose and ear cut off . sixthly , that a widow marry within a twelvemonth after her husband decease , shall lose her jointure . Theise and many other good law be make , whereby the kingdom remain during all his time , in a most peaceable state and government . in the three year of his reign , he hear how the vandale take advantage of his absence , have enter Denmark , and annoy his subject ; whereupon with a great army of English he pass over the sea , and give they battle , but with ill success the first day ; when prepare for the next day battle , the earl Goodwyn who be general of the english , se ? cret in the dead of the night , set upon the Vandal camp , and with a great slaugh ? ter of their soldier , make their two prince Ulfus and anlave , to fly the field . in the morning it be tell Canute , that the english be flee , for that their station be leave , and not a man of they to be find , which do not a little trouble his pa ? tience : but he go in person to see the truth , find the great overthrow the Eng ? lish have give , for which service ever after , he hold the english , and especial the earl Goodwyn in great estimation . after this , return home he make a prospe ? rous expedition against Malcolme king of Scot ; and at last , in the fifteen year of his reign , weary with the honourable trouble of the world , and out of devo ? cion , he take a journey to roam , to visit the sepulchre of saint Peter and Paul , from whence he write to the bishop and nobility of England , that they shall careful administer justice , and never seek to advance his profit by any undue way , or with the detriment of any man . at his return fro ? Rome , he build in Essex the church of Ashdone , where he get the victory against king Edmund ; in Norfolk , the abbey of saint benet , which saint he great reverence ; and in Suffolk the monastery of saint Edmund , which saint he deadly fear . to the church of Winchester he give many rich jewel , whereof one be a cross , value to be worth as much as the whole revenue of England amount to in one year . to Coventry he give the arm of the great saint Austin , which he buy at Pavia in his return from room , for which he pay a hundred talent of silver and one of gold . one strange act be record , which he do for convince his fawn flatterer , who use to tell he that his power be more than humane . for be one time at Southampton , he come ? mand that his chair of state shall be set on the shore when the sea begin to flow , and then sit down there in the presence of his many attendant , he speak thus to that element : i charge thou that thou presume not to enter my land , nor wet these robe of thy lord that be about i . but the sea give no heed to his command , but keep on his usual course of tide , first wet his skirt , and after his thigh , whereupon sudden rise , he thus speak in the hear of they all . let all the world inhabitant know , that vain and weak be the power of their king ; and that none be worthy of the name of king , but he that keep both heaven and earth and sea in obedience . after which time he will never •uffer the crown to be set upon his head , but present crown therewith the picture of Christ on the cross at Winchester : from which example arise perhaps the custom , to hang up the armour of worthy man in church , as offering consecrate to he who be the lord of battle . when he have reign nineteen year , he decease at Shaf ? te•bery in the county of Dorset , the twelve of November , in the year 1035. and be bury in the church of the old monastery at Winchester , which be after new build , his bone with many other english saxon king , be take up , and be preserve in gild coff•rs , fix upon the wall of the choir in that cathedral church . he have by his two wife , three son , sweyne , and Harold by his first wife alfgive ; and hardicnute by his second wife queen Emma , and two daughter , of who the old , call Guinhilda , be marry to the roman emperor Henry the three , who be accuse of adultery , and none find to defend her cause , at last a english page adventure to maintain her innocency against a mighty gy ? antlike-combatant ; who in fight , at one blow cut the sinew of he adversa ? rise leg , with another he fell he to the ground , and then with his sword take his head from his shoulder , redeem both the empress life and honour . but the empress after this hard usage forsake her husband bed , and take upon she the page 23 veil of a nun , in the town of Burges in Flanders , where she devout spend the r•st of her life . of the second danish king in England . king Canute die leave his kingdom of Norway , to his elder son Sweyn• , and his kingdom of England , to his young son hardikn•te , who he have by his wife Emma , but he be at the time of his father death in Denmark , Harold his old brother , by a former wife , take advan ? tage of his absence , lay claim to the crown . for determine of which right , the lord assemble at Oxford , where queen Emma plead for her son Har ? diknute , urge the covenant of Can•tus at their marriage , and his last will at his death ; as also earl Goodwyn of Kent do the like , be leave guardian of she I|will ? dren , and keeper of his last will . but Harold presence , together with the favour of the Londoner , Dane , and Northumbrians , so wrought with the lord , that the absent hardiknute be neglect , and Harold be proclaim and crown king at Oxford , by •lnothus archbishop of Canterbury , in the year 1036. Harold have now attain the crown , be not so jealous of his brother Har ? diknute , as of his mother in law queen Emma , and her son by king Ethelre• who be beyond sea , and therefore how to secure himself against these , be his first care . for effect whereof , he frame a letter , as write by queen Em ? ma , to her two son Edward and Alfred ; instigate they to attempt the crown usurp by Harold , against their right : to which letter , come first to the hand of Alfred , he suspect no fraud , return answer , that he will short come over , and follow her counsel . and thereupon with a small fleet , and some few soldier , lend he by Baldwyn earl of Flaunders , he take the sea for England , where come to shore , earl Goodwyn meet he , and bind himself by oath to be his guide to his mother queen Emma , but be wrought firm for Harold , he lead he and his company a contrary way , and lodge they at Guilford , make know to king Harold what he have do , who present commit they all to slaughter , spare only every ten man , for service or sale . prince Alfred he ? self he send prisoner to the isle of Ely , where have his eye inhumane put out , in grief and torment he end his life . some add a more horrible kind of cruelty , as that his belly be open , and one end of his bowel draw out , and fasten to a stake , his body prick with needle , or poignard , and force about , till all his entrail be extract . this do , he then set upon queen Emma , con ? fiscate her good , and banish she the realm . and now further to secure he ? self , he keep the sea with sixteen danish ship , to the maintenance whereof , he charge the english with great payment ; by which , if he procure the safety of his person , he certain procure the hatred of his subject . this king for his swiftness in run be call Harefoot ; but though by his swiftness he out ? run his brother for the kingdom , yet can he not run so fast , but that death quick overtake he ; for have reign only four year and some month , he die at Oxford• and be bury at Westminster ; have never have wife or child . of the three and last danish king in England . king Harold be dead , the lord to make amends for their former neg ? lect , send now for hardiknute , and offer he their allegiance , who ac ? cept their offer , and thereupon take sea , arrive upon the coast of Kent , the six day after he have set sail out of Denmark ; and with great pomp convey to London , be there crown king by Elnothus archbishop of Canterbury , in the year 1040. his first act , be to be revenge of his decease page 24 brother Harold , who body he cause to be dig up , and throw into the Thames , where it remain till a fisherman find it , and bury it in the church yard of saint Clement without temple bar , common call saint clement Dane , because it be the bury place of the Dane , as some write . but towards his mo ? there , and half brother prince edw•rd , he show true natural affection , invite they both to return into England ; where he receive they with all the honour , that from a son or brother can be expect . but now , as the king Harold , for his swiftness in run be surname hare ? foo•e ; so this king for his intemperance in diet , may have be surname swines-mouth , or Bocc•di Porco ; for his table be spread every day four time , and furnish with all kind of curious dish , as delight in nothing but gor ? mandize and swill ; and as for manage the state , he commit it whole to his mother q•eene Emma , and to the politic earl of Kent , Godwyn ; who find this weakness in the king , begin to think himself of aspiring• and to make the better way for it , he seek by all mean to alien the subject heart from the prince , among other course , he cause he to lay heavy tax upon they ; only for ship-money to pay his Dane , amount to two and thirty thousand pound : which be so offensive to the people , that the citizen of Worcester slay two of his officer , Thursta• and Fe•dax , that come to collect it . but this king have soon the reward of his intemperance ; for in a solemn assembly and Ban ? quet at Lambeth , revel and carouse , he sudden fall down without speech , or breath , after he have reign only two year , and be bury at Winchester . his death be so welcome to his subject , that the day of his death , be to this day come ? mon celebrate with open pastime in the street , and be call hocks-tide , signify scorn or contempt , which fall upon the Dane by his death . for with he end ? ed the reign of the Dane in England ; after they have miserable afflict the king ? dome , for the space of two hundred and forty year , though in regal govern ? mean , but only six and twenty . of english king again , and first of Edward the confessor . king hardiknute die without issue , as have never be marry , and the danish line clean extinguish , Edward , for his piety call the confess ? sour , half brother to the decease hardiknute , and son to king Ethelred by his wife queen Emma , be by a general consent admit king of England , and be crown at Winchester by Edsyne archbishop of Canterbury , on easter day , in the year 1042. being then of the age of forty year . he be bear at Islip , near to Oxford , and after his father death , for safety send into France , to the duke of Normandy his mother brother , from whence he now come , to take upon he the crown of England . his act for gain the people love , be first , the remit the yearly tribute of forty thousand pound , gather by the name of danegelt , which have be impose by his father , and for forty year together pay out of all man land , but only the clergy ; and then , from the di ? vers law of the mercians , west Saxons , Danes , and Northumbrians , he select the best , and make of they one body certain , and write in latin , be in a sort the fountain of those which at this day we term the common law , though the form of plead , and process therein , be afterward bring in by the con ? querour . the reign of this king be very peaceable : only in his six year , the danish pirate enter the port of Sandwich ; which with all the sea-coast of Essex they spoil , and then in Flanders make merchandise of their prey . as like ? wise the irish , with thirty ship enter Severne , and with the assistance of Griffith king of Southwales , burn or •lew all in their way , till at last , Reese the brother of Griffith be slay at B•lenden , and his head present to king Edward at Gloucester . his domestical trouble be only by earl G•dwyn and his son ; who yet of ? ter many contestation and affront , be reconcile , and Godwyn receive again page 25 into as great favour as before . but though king Edward forgive his treason , yet the divine providence do not ; for soon after , as he sit at table with the king , on easter Monday , he be sudden strike with death , and on the Thursday fol ? low die , and be bury at Winchester . some make his death more exem ? plar ; as that justify himself for prince Alfreds death , he shall pray to God , that if he be any way guilty of it , he may never swallow down one morsel of bread , and thereupon by the just judgement of God , be choke by the first morsel he offer to eat . in this king time , such abundance of snow fall in January , continue till the middle of march follow , that almost all cattle and foul perish , and there ? withal a excessive dearth follow . two act be relate of this king , that seem nothing correspondent to the ge ? nerall opinion have of his virtue , one concern his mother , the other touch his wife . that concern his mother queen Emma be this , that because after king ethelreds death , she marry the danish king Canute , and seem to favour her issue by he , more than her issue by king Ethelred , therefore he dispossess she of all her good ; and commit she to custody , in the abbey of Worwell ; and more than this , so far hearken to a aspersion cast upon she , of unchaste familiarity with alwyne bishop of Winchester , that for her purgation , she be fain to pass the trial of fire ordeal , which be in this manner ; nine ploughshare red hot we•e lay in unequal distance , which she must pass barefoot and blindfold ; and if she pass they unhurt , than she be judge innocent , if otherwise , guilty . and this trial she pass , and come off fair , to the great astonishment of all behol ? dear . the other touch his wife be this ; he have marry Editha the beau ? tifull , and indeed virtuous daughter of the earl Godwyn , and because he have a ? ken displeasure against the father , he will show no kindness to the daughter ; he have make she his wife , but converse not with she as his wife , only at board , bu• not at bed , or if at bed , no otherwise then David with Abishagh , and yet be con ? tent to hear she accuse of incontinency , whereof if she be guilty , he can not be innocent . so as , what the virtue be , for which after his death , he shall be repute a saint , do not easy appear . it seem he be chaste , but not without injury to his wife ; pious , but not without ungratefulness to his mother ; just in his present government , but not without neglect of posterity ; for through his want of providence in that point , he leave the crown to so doubtful succession , that soon after his decease it be translate out of english into french , and the kingdom make servile to a four foreign nation . one ability he have which raise he above the pitch of ordinary king , and yet at this day be ordinary with king , that by his only touch and lay his hand upon it , he cure a disease , which from his cure , be call the king evil . his mother queen Emma , in memory of the nine ploughshare she have pass in her trial , give nine manor to the minster of Winchester , and himself remember the wrong he have do she , bestow on the same place , the island of Portland in Dorsetshire , be about seven mile in compass . he make also of a little monastery in the west of London• by the river of Thames , a most beautiful church , ( call of the place Westminster ) where he provide for his own sepulchre , and another dedicate to saint mar ? garet , stand without the abbey . this of Westminster he endow with many rich revenue , and confirm his charter under his broad seal , be the first of the king of England , who use that large and stately impression in their charter and patent . he found also the college of saint mary Otterey in Devonshire , and give unto it the village of Otereg , and remove the bishop see from criding ¦ ton to Exeter , as to a place of far more dignity : and when he have reign the space of three and twenty year and six month , he end his life , the four of January , in that room of his palace at Westminster , which be now call the paint chamber , in the year 1066. and be bury in the church at Westminster , which he have build . page 26 of Harold the second english king after the Dane . king Edward the confessor , be himself without issue , have in his life time , send into Hungary for his nephew Edward call the outlaw , the son of Edmund Ironside ; with a purpose to design he his successor in the crown , but he die soon after his come into England , king Edward then give his son Edgar the name of Atheling ; as to say ; prince Edgar mean to design he for his successor , but be prevent by death , before the successor be full establish , and Edgar Atheling , though he have right , yet be young , and not of power to make good his right , Harold the son of earl Goodwyn step into the throne , and never stand upon ceremony , set himself the crown upon his own head , wherein , though as a violater of holy rite , he offend the clergy , yet not any either of clergy or Layity , dare oppose he , as be at that time the most martial man in the kingdom ; and such a one , as the state of the realm stand at that time in need of , and beside his own worthiness have the assistance of Edwyn and Marchar , the two great earl of Yorkshire and Chester , who sister algyth he have marry . it be true withal , that king Edward have appoint the crown after his own decease , sometime to William duke of Normandy , sometime to Edgar Atheling , and sometime to this Harold , so as he be crown by Aldred archbishop of York , as not come in by intrusion or wrong , but by the appointment of king Edward , though that appointment of king edwa•d , be rather to make he regent , during the minority of Edgar , than to make he absolute king , but howsoever , be once in the throne , he be then able to make his own title , and to make prince Edgar some amends , he create he earl of Oxford , which be indeed to use he like a child , take away a je ? well , and please he with a apple . yet Harold have once get into the throne , he c•rryed himself with great valour and justice , for the time he sit in it , which be but very short , as be indeed but totter from the very beginning , and that chief by mean of his own brother to•stayne , who by divert his force to suppress a rebellion , make he of less force to resist a invasion . but now that we have show how Harold enter the throne , we must forbear to show how he be cast out , till we come to he that cast he out , who because he be not only of another family , but of another nation , we must necessary take the beginning from a deep root , and indeed , see in he , we shall join our island to the continent , which be a large world : our king hereafter , will afford a large extent for matter of discourse then heretofore they have do . page 27 the life of king William the first , call the conqverour . his parentage and descent . there be six duke of Normandy in France , in a direct line succeed from father to son . the first be Rol ? lo , who of a private man in Denmark , come forth with the exuberancy of his nation , wrest by force of arm from Charles the simple king of France , to be make duke of Normandy . the second be William his son , call long espee , or long sword . the three be Richard his son , call the hardy , who have Richard , and a daughter call Emma , marry to Ethelred king of England , father of Edward the confessor . the four be Richard the second his son , call the good . the five be Richard the three his son , who by a first wife have three son , Richard , Robert and William , and by a second , two other son , William earl of argue , and ma•ger , archbishop of Roan . so as Richard his elder son by his first wife suc ? ceed he by the name of Richard the four , and die without issue , the duke ? dome descend to Robert his second son by his first wife ; which Robert be fa ? there to our William the conqueror , of who it be thus record : that ride one time abroad , he happen to pass by a company of country maid that be a dance , where stay a while to look upon they , he be so take with the hand ? somnesse and graceful carriage of one of they who name be Arlotte , a skinners daughter , ( from whence as some think our word harlot come ) that affection command he , and authority she , he cause she that night to be bring to his bed ; where be together , what be do or say between they be no matter for history to record , though some historian have record both ; make she not so modest as be fit for a maid : only ten month after , it appear that at this time our duke William be beget ; who prove a man of extraordinary spirit , we may attribute it to the heat of affection in which he be beget . his succeed in the dukedom , notwithstanding his bastardy . it appear by many example , that bastardy in those day be no bar to succession , till a law be afterward make to make it a bar . it bring some disgrace where the mother be mean , but no impediment where the father be noble ; and even his bastardy seem to have some allay , if it be true ( as some write ) that his father take the say Arlotte afterward to be his wife , and yet perhaps he have not the dukedom so much by succession , as by gift . for when he be a ? about page 28 nine year old , his father call his nobility together , cause they to swear allegiance to this base son of he , and to take he for their liege lord after his decease . neither be this in those day infrequent , for prince to confer their principality after their own decease upon who they please ; count it as lawful to appoint successor after they , as substitute under they ; even in our time and kingdom , the duke of Northumberland prevail with king Edward the six , to exclude his two sister , mary and Elizabeth , and to appoint the lady Jane grey , daughter of the duke of Suffolk , to succeed he . his education and tuition in his minority . his father have declare and appoint he to be his successor , go soon after ( whether out of devotion , or to do penance for procure his brother death , whereof he be suspect ) into the holy land , in which journey he die , have leave the tuition of his young son to his two brother , and the guardian ? ship to the king of France , in who court for a time he be bring up . a strange confidence , to commit the tuition of a son that be base , to pretender that be legi•i•ate , and to a king of France , who aim at nothing more , than to reannex this dukedom to his crown . but it seem his confidence be ground upon the proximity of blood in his brother , and upon the merit of his own service for ? mer do to the king of France ; which though it prove well enough with he , yet be not too betake into example to follow . his trouble in his minority . first , Roger de tresny , who derive his pedigree direct from Rollo , and have win much honour by his valour in the war , ( notwithstanding the oath of all ? geance he have former take ) take exception to his bastardy , and invite compli ? ces to assist he in recover the dukedom to • legitimate race : a fal•e pretext if the fate of duke William have not be against it ; who though he be himself but young , and can not do much in his own person , yet the divine providence raise he up friend that supply he with assistance , and particular Roger de Beaumont , by who valour this Roger the tresny , with his two brother , be defeat and slay . after Roger de Tres•y , William de Arques his uncle lay claim to the duchy , and assist by the king of France come to a battle , but by the valour of count Gyfford , the duke general , be likewise defeat : and these be trou ? bl•s before he arrive to seventeen year of age . after this , one guy earl of Bur ? goigne , grandchild to Richard the second , duke of Normandy , grow sensible also of his right to the dukedom , and join with Viscount needle , and the earl of Bes•in , two powerful norman , conspire duke William death , and have effect it , if a certain fool about he , have not steal away in the night , to the place where the duke be , and never leave knock and cry at the gate , till he be admit to his presence , will he to fly for his life instant , or he will be murder . the duke consider that be relate by a fool , it be like to be the more palpable , and that there may be danger in stay , none in go , ride instant away , all alone , towards Falaise , his principal castle , but miss his way , he happ•ned to pass where a gentleman be stand at his door , of who he ask the way , and be by he , as know he , direct ; which he have no soon do , but the conspirator come present inquire if such a one have not pass that way , which the gentleman affirm , and undertake to be their guide to overtake he , but lead they of purpose a contrary way , the duke by this mean , come safe to f•l•ise ; and from thence journey to the king of France , complain of his inj•ries ; and implore his aid , as one that wa••is ho ? mager , and commit to his care• by his •ervant his father . the king of France move with his distre•se , and remembrance of his father meri•s , though he wish ? •d he be less than he be , yet he •o aid he , that he make he great than he page 29 be ; for himself in person , suffer much in the battle , procure he the victo ? ry . by which we may see that folly , and fortune , and even enemy themselves be all assistant to the destiny ; or to say better , indeed to the divine providence . many other affront be offer he , some by mean prince ; some afterward by the king of France himself , who be now grow jealous of his greatness ; all which he encounter with such dexterity , that make his bastardy , as it be become legitimate , and virtue her self to grow proud of his person . his carriage afterward in peace . by this time he be come to the age of two and twenty year , and where all this while he have show himself a valiant general in war , he now begin to show himself a provident governor in peace , compose and order his state , wherein he so carry himself , that as his subject do both fear and love he , so his neighbour prince do both fear and hate he , or if not hate he , at least emulate he . his incitement for invade of England . he be now grow about fifty year old : a age that may well have be ? rest all ambitious thought in he , but who can think himself too old for a kingdom ; when Galba for attain the roman empire , be content to buckle on armour , be fourscore year old ? the d•ke in his time of peace come over into England to visit his cousin king Edward , who beside his princely entertainment , make he at that time ( as some think ) a promise to leave he his successor in the kingdom ; and Harold after this , go over to the Duk• in norman ? die , for procure some friend of he to be release , the better to effect it , take his solemn oath to assist he for obtain the kingdom . so as have the word of Edward , and the oath of Harold , he have now sufficient obligation to expect it . but hear of the death of king Edward , and that Harold be crown king , he think himself not more forget by Edward , then wrong by Harold ; and therefore send messenger to he to put he in mind of king Edward p•omise , and his own oath : but Harold puff up with the conceit of be a king , as though that very name be enough to expiate all breach of oath , and that nothing can bind he , who have now the fetter in his own hand ; return only sleight an ? swer , that his oath be force , and void in it self , as be make without con ? send of the kingdom . whereupon the duke thus slight by Harold , endeavour to make he a honest man by force , assure himself , he shall find he the wea ? ker enemy , for find he a perjure friend . the reason that facilitate his conquest of England . duke William incense with Harold answer , acquaint his nobility with his purpose , who with some ado consent to aid he , as likewise many other great lord of France , but special Baldwyn earl of Flanders , who daughter he have marry ; and who be at that time guardian of the young king of France , procure aid from he also ; and to make the enterprise the more successful , pope Alexander the second send he a banner with a Agnus of gold , and one o• the hair of saint Peter . so as the preparation of the duke , both by sea and land be very great , have three hundred sail of ship , and as some write , 890• and as one norman , above a thousand , and as Cemeticensis , three thousand : and though Harold have likewise provide a warlike fleet to encounter he , yet it be at tha• time unfortunate divert another way ; for taustay•e his brother , be then in rebellion in the north , and Harold Harfager : king of Norway , at the same time in ? vade those part , and perhaps upon a bruit , that the Dukes• fleet be not yet ready to come forth , remove both his fleet and army thither : where though he page 30 get they victory at Stamford , with the death both of his brother toustayne , and of the king of No•way , yet it make way for the duke to land quiet , and he enter the kingdom , as one may enter a house , when the door be all leave open . by this mean king har•lds ship , ( the best wall of defence to a island ) be ut ? ter frustrate : and as for his land force , they be by his battle at Stamford , exceed both weaken and impair ; yet hear that duke William be lan ? dead at Pemsey , not far from Hastings in Sussex , he repair thither with all speed , and gather together his break force , and increase they by all the mean he can , make himself ready to give the duke battle . duke William in the mean time , as soon as he have land his man , send his ship present away , that there may be no think of any thing , but either death or victory . and then go himself on land , it be say , his foot slip , and he fall down ; which some that stand by , take for a ill sign , no ( say he ) i have by this , take possession ? on of this land and indeed presage be but as animus ejus qui praesagit , as in this duke fall it afterward fall out . many way of composition , between duke William , and king Harold be propound , yet Harold will hearken to none , as nothing doubt of success , and perhaps think it a disgrace , to capitulate for that , which be now his own : and when one of his brother call gyrth , be less interest , and therefore clear sight , entreat he to consider what a fearful thing it be to break a oath , which he so solemn have swear : ha ? roll seem to conceive , that nothing which he do , be a private man , can be of force to bind he now be a prince ; and so on the fourteenth day of Octo ? ber , be Saturday , in the year 1066. ( which day he like the better , because it be his birthday , hope , that the day of his birth will not so much degene ? rate , to prove the day of his death , though even this also breed no good blood to the action , for the soldier of Harold , think thereby to honour their king birthday , spend the night before in revel and drink , where the soldier of the duke , out of consideration of their next day work , spend the night in quietness and devotion ) they join battle , ( the kentishman be place in the forefront , as by a ancient custom be their due , and king Harold with his Londoner , lead the main battle ) where though their army be not much unequal in number , ( for they be each of they near about threescore thou•and man ) yet there be great odds in the expertness of their soldier , and more in the advantage of their weapon : for , the duke have with he all the flower of France and Flanders , where king Harold have lose his best man , in his late battle : and for advantage of weapon , the norman have long bow and arrow , which of the english at that time , be not at all in use : what marvel then that the nor ? man get the victory , though king Harold lose his life , yet lose no reputation ; and though the english soldier show no less valour , in be conquer , than the norman do in conquer . one circumstance may not be omit , that king •arold as a expert general , have order his man in so firm a body , that no force of the norman can disorder their rank , till duke William• use a stratagem , command his man to retire , and to counterfeit flight ; by which he draw the english on , upon a hollow ground , cover with earth , whereinto many of they fall , and perish , and beside into a ambush of his horseman , which unexpect ? ed fall upon they , and cut they in piece . withal , there seem one great er ? rour to have be commit ( at least , if it be a error , and not rather a ne ? ce•sity ) that there be not a supplemental army provide ; ( as his brother gyrth will have have it ) which may have come on if the first have fail , and will have be of great advantage against a weary army . but when sic visum est superis , all humane force be weak and can withstand , all humane providence be unprovide , and can prevent . the body of Harold at his mother thyrace suit be recover , and lie bury in Waltham abbey , which he have begin to build , at least to repair . but here Gyraldus Cambrensis tell a strange story , that ha ? roll be not slay in the battle , but only wound and lose his left eye , and then escape by flight to Chester , where he afterward lead a holy anchorets life . page 31 How duke William proceed after his victory at Hastings . as his valour win he the victory , so his victory win he a crown ; that now of a old duke , he be sudden become a young king : and indeed , nothing so much renew life , and make the year in a manner young again : as addition of honour , special when it be the fruit of merit . First therefore , ha ? ve give public thanks to God for his happy success , he lead his army to ? ward London , not the direct way ( perhaps doubt some new encounter ) but coast about through part of Kent , through Sussex , Surrey , Hampshire and bark ? shire , where at Wallingford he pass over the Thames ; and then through Oxford•shire , Buckinghamshire , and Hartfordshire , until he come to Barkehamstead , where there come unto he Aldred archbishop of York , Woolstan bishop of Worcester , willfere , bishop of Hereford , and many other prelate , accompany with Edgar Atheling , with earl Edwyn and Mar•har , brother , and man of the great sway in the kingdom , and many other of the nobility . it be true , upon the defeat at Hastings , earl Edwyn and Marchar , have a purpose to set up Edgar Atheling , as next heir of the royal blood ; and grandchild to Edmund •ronside , and so be ? love of the people , that he be call their darling : but consider his young year , and other inability , but special find the mind of the bishop , ( who at that time bear all the sway ) to be otherwise incline , they desist from that course , and thus the duke , without any opposition , come to London , be re ? ceive by bishop , and lord and all , with great joy , though small gladness , and if he have not their heart , yet he have their knee , for in most humble manner they submit themselves to he , acknowledge he for their sovereign lord , and upon Christmas-day after , he be crown at Westminster by Aldred archbishop of York , the archbishop of Canterbury Stigand , not be admit to do that office , for some defect in his investiture ; and perhaps for some aspersion in his manner . how he reward his follower . : though he have have the name of conqueror , yet he use not the king ? dome as get by conquest , for he take no man live from he , nor di ? spossess any of their good , but such only , who demerit make unworthy to hold they ; as appear by his act to one warren a norman , to who he have gi ? when the castle of Sherborne in Norfolk ; for when Sherborne , who be owner of it , acquaint the king , that the castle be he ; and that he have never bear arm against he ; he present command Warren , to deliver it quiet up unto him• only vacancy of office , and fill up the place of those who be slay or flee , be the present mean he make use of , for prefer his follower . one special preferment we can omit , that where one Herlowyn a nobleman in nor ? mandy , have marry his mother Arlette , and have by she a son name Hugh Lu. ? pus , he give to the say Hugh , the earldom of Chester , to hold of he as free by his sword , as himself hold England by his crown , by virtue of which grant , the say Hugh ordain under he four baron , Nigell he make baron of Halton : Malbanke , baron of Nantwich : Eustace baron of mawpase ; and Vernon , baron of Shipbrooke : such a honour , as no subject before or since , ever enjoy the like . what mean he use for secure himself in the kingdom : beside the oath of fealty , which he take of all his lord both spiritual and temporal , at his coronation ; in Lent follow , go into Normandy , he take along with he the great part of the great man of the kingdom , of who , Edwyn and Marchar , the two earl of Northumberland and Mercia , Stigand page 32 archbishop of Canterbury , Edgar Atheling , Waltheoff son to syward former earl of Northumberland , and Agelnothus abbot of Glastenbury be the chief ; leave the care of the kingdom in his absence to Odo bishop of Bayeux , his Bro ? there by the mother ; and to William fit Osburne , who he have make earl of he ? reford . and to abate the greatness of the prelate , which at that time be grow in a manner unlimited , he ordain that from thenceforth , they shall not come ? man with any temporal authority whatsoever . and because the common peo ? ple be no less to be fear for their number , than the nobility for their greatness , he first take from they all their armour , to the end , that leave they without sting , they may afterward be but drone . and because there be seldom any danger from singular number , but all the danger rise from plurality : therefore to prevent conspiracy and combination , which be common contrive in the night , he command that in all town and village , a bell shall be ring at eight a clock in the evening , and that in every house they shall then put out their fire and light ( which be call Couure Feu ) and go to bed and for more security he erect castle in the most doubtful place of the kingdom . one at York , another at Lincoln , a three at Nottingham , ( at that time call Snottingham ) and a four at Hastings , where he first land . by these mean the kingdom be quiet all the time of his be away in Normandy , save only that Edrick the forester , in the county of Hereford , call in to his aid the king of wale , make some small disturbance . and indeed all the state of the kingdom may in his very person find something to make they apt to tolerate his government . for first , the people may think themselves in a sort advance , be now make member of a great body ; when the dukedom of Normandy shall come to be annex to the kingdom of England ; and by experience of his good govern ? mean be a duke , they may well hope , he will not govern worse be make a king . and the nobility may be well content , as have a king of their former king choose , and though a stranger , yet no alien , as have in he many vein of the same blood , and therefore likely also to have some ve•nes of the same goodness , of their good king Edward . but special the clergy can not choose but be content , as have a king who come commend to they , by a commend as strong as a command , the pope benediction . what trouble or insurrection be during his reign . but the body of a state be more obnoxious to crudity and ill humour , than the state of a natural body ; it be impossible to continue long without distem ? per ; notwithstanding any preservative that can be apply . and therefore in the second year of his reign , break forth the discontentment of Edgar Etheling , just the first , as have most cause , be the next of the late royal blood , and therefore most apt to be sensible of servitude ; who take along with he his more ? the Agatha , and his two sister , Margaret and Christine ; steal secret away to sea , with intention to pass into Hungary , the country where he be bear ; but by cont•ary wind be cast upon the coast of Scotland , where the king Malcolme , not only most kind entertain he , but for a strict bond of kindness , take his sist•r Margaret to wife , by who he have many child , out of which , in the second generation after , a match be find , by which in the person of king Henry the second , the sax•n and norman blood be conjoin , the union where ? of continue in the race of our king of England to this day . not long after to ed ? gar in Scotland , come the two great earl , Edwyn and Marchar , brother to aga ? than the late king Harold wife ; also Hereward , Gospatrick , and syward , with many other lord ; and short after Stigand and Aldred archbishop , with diverse of the clergy . and these lord be together in Scotland , do but watch opportu ? nity , to recover that , which for want of take opportunity they have lose ; and assist by the Scot , they invade the north part , spoil the country , and kill ? ling many for the fault they have themselves commit , but all they can do , be but to forage the country , and so return . page 31 after this , in the three year of his reign , the two son of swain king of Denmark , Harold and Canute , with a fleet of 240. ship , enter Humber , and inva ? dead the north part , with who the english lord in Scotland join , and •orra ? ge all the country , till they come near to York . when the norman that be in the town , to save the city , set fire on the suburb ; but the fire not so content , by assistance of a violent wind , take hold of the city it self , burn a great part of it , and which perhaps be more worth than the city , a library of excellent book , and the norman that be leave in defence of the city , to the number of three thousand , be all slay . king William hear hereof be so much incense , that with all speed he raise a army , and enter Northumberland , waste the country that already lie waste ; and yet for all his great rage , be content with a great sum of money , to purchase the Dane departure . by these devastation in many shire of the kingdom , but especial in Northumberland , so great a dearth and famine follow , that man be glad to eat horse and dog , cat and rat , and what el•e be most abhorrent to nature ; and between York and Durham , the space of 60. mile , for nine year together , there be so utter desolation , as that nei ? there any house be leave stand , nor any ground till . many other insurrection there be in his reign ; as at Exeter , at Oxford , in the isle of Ely , and many time by the Scot in the northern part ; but all these be easy suppress , for they be but scatter force ; et dum singuli pugnant , universi vincuntur ; whereas if they have unite themselves into a army , they may perhaps have make it a war , which now be little more than rout and riot . yet some write , that king William grant Cumberland to Malcolme king of Scot , to hold from he conditional , that the Scot shall not attempt any thing prejudicial to the crown of England , for which grant king Malcolme do he homage . the great and last be a insurrection raise in Normandy , by his son Robert , the more dangerous because unnatural , for by the instigation and assistance of Phi ? lip king of France , ( emulous now of king William greatness ) he enter Normandy , and claim it as in his own right . his father indeed have make he a promise of it long before , but Robert impatient of delay , as count so long stay to be little better than disinherit , endeavour by strong hand to wrest it from his father . but his father king William hear hereof , with a strong army pass over into Normandy , where in a battle meet hand to hand with his son , be by he unhorse , and hurt in the arm : but his son perceive he by his voice to be his father , sudden leap off his horse , take up his father , cast himself down at his foot , and humble intreat his pardon ; which as a father he easy grant , they ? brace his son , and ever after , the son from the father have fatherly love , and the father from the son a filial obedience . but though his father do thus par ? don he , yet it seem there be a Nemesis , or to say better , a divine providence , that do not pardon he ; for after this , it be observe he never prosper in any thing he undertake . it can perhaps be discover , whether the king severity beget his subject insurrection , or his subject insurrection the king severity ; but which of they soever be the mother , it be certain they be nurse each of they to o ? ther . his aptness to forget injury . certain there be no such goodness of nature , as aptness to be reconcile ; of which virtue it seem king William have a large proportion , for he seldom re ? member injury after submission . Edric the first that rebel against he , he pla ? ce in office near about he . Gospatric who have be a factious man , and a plot ? ter of conspiracy against he , he make earl of Gloucester , and trust he with man ? nage a war against Malcolme king of Scot . Eustace earl of Boleyne , who in the king absence in Normandy attempt to seize upon Dover castle , he receive after ? ward into great favour and respect . the earl Marchar and Syward , with Wolnoth the brother of Harold , a little before his death , he release out of prison . Edgar , who as page 32 next heir to the saxon king , have often attempt by arm to recover his right , he not only after twice defection pardon , but give he also allowance as a prince : it be say twenty shilling a day , or rather a pound weight of silver , and other large live beside ; so as Edgar find the sweetness of safety , and the pleasure of a country life , spend the rest of his day ( which be many ) retire from court , neither envy nor be envy . only Waltheoff earl of Northumberland , and Northam•ton , of all the english nobility be put to death in all the time of this king reign ; and not he neither , till he have twice falsify his oath of allege ? ance . of new acquest to this kingdom , by this king mean . in the thirteenth year of his reign , he subdue wale , and make it tributary to he , as before in the seven year of his reign , he bring Malcolme king of Scot to do he homage , and thereupon to give he hostage ; that if England make he great than he be before , a king of a duke ; he no less make Eng ? land great than it be before , three kingdom in one . of his exaction and course for raise of money . as his taxation be many in number , so they be various in kind , not all ? way bring in money direct , but sometime oblique save it . the first tax he lay upon his subject be in the first year of his reign , after his re ? turn out of Normandy ; a grievous tax all writer say , but none what tax it be . in the three year of his reign he ransack all monastery , and all the gold and silver of either chalice or shrine , he take to his own use . likewise he sess all bishop and abbot what number of soldier they shall find to serve he in his war : also the stranger which he maintain in pay , he dipserse into Religi ? ous house , and some also among the nobility to be maintain at their charge . many other taxation he make , but last of all in the eighteenth year of his reign , by the advice of Roger earl of Hertford , he cause the whole realm to be descri ? bed in a censuall roll , ( whereof he take a precedent from king Alfred ) so as there be not one hide of land , but both the yearly rent , and the owner thereof be therein set down : how many Ploughlands , what pasture , fen or marsh , what wood , farm , and tenement be in every shire , and what every one be worth : also how many villain every man have ; what beast , what cattle , what f•es , what other good , what rent or commodity his possession do yield . this book be call the roll of Winton , because it be keep in the city of win ? chester . by the English it be call doomsday book , either by reason of the ge ? nerality thereof , or else corrupt , instead of Domu• dei book , for that it be lay in the church of Winchester , in a place call Domu• dei . accord to this roll taxa ? tion be impose ; sometime two shilling , and at this time six shilling upon e ? very hide of land , ( a Hyde contain as some account it , twenty acre , bu• as master Lambert prove , a hundred acre . ) in all those land which he give to any man , he reserve dominion in chief to himself , as also a yearly rent , and likewise a fine whensoever the tenant do alien or dye . Theise be bind to he by oath of fealty and homage , and if any die , his heir be within age , the king receive the profit of his land , and have the custody and dispose of the heir body , until his age of one and twenty year . to be short , his greediness of money be so great , that he spare not his own brother Odo , but find accusati ? once against him• to the end he may seize upon his treasure ; which be infinite great , and which he have gather in hope to buy the papacy . only one kind of profit he forbear to meddle with , that be , vacancy of abbey and bishopric , which he always reserve for the successor : but than he take another course of far great profit , for he compel all man to make new fine at his pleasure , for confirmation of any grant or privilege former grant by any prince of the page 35 realm : by which devise he get into his possession , the great part of all the ri ? che of the land , as well of the clergy , as of the Laity . and one particular may not be omit that be report of he , which be this : the monk of Ely to pur ? chase their peace , agree to give he seven hundred mark , when come to pay it , there want a groat in the weight , ( for in those day great sum be not pay by tale , but by weight ) which the king understanding , deny they all come ? position for peace , until with much suit he be entreat to accept of a thousand mark moor . of his law and ordinance , and court of justice erect by he . although at his coronation he have take a oath to observe the law of king Edward then in use , yet afterward ( perhaps count his coronation oath but a matter of course ) he abrogate many , and in their stead bring in the law of Normandy ; command they to be write in french , and also that all cause shall be plead , and all matter of form dispatch in french ; upon a pretense to dignify the french tongue , but with a purpose to entrap man through ignorance of the language , as indeed it do : or perhaps to make the Normans lan ? guage predominant in the kingdom as he have make their person ; which yet he be so far from effect , that there be not so much as any footstep remain of the norman language in the english tongue . form of judgement , and trial by fire and water , call ordeal , former use , be in short time after the conquest disuse , and in the end utter abrogate by the pope , as derive from paganism . that of combat continue long , but of no ordinary use : and all action both cri ? minall and real , begin now to be whole adjudge by the verdict of twelve man , accord to the custom of Normandy , where the like form be use , and call by the name of inquest , with the same caution for the juror , as it be here continue to this day ; though by the law of Ethelred it appear , that the trial by twelve man be in use long before his time . and where before the bishop and the alder ? man be the absolute judge to determine all business in every shire , and the by ? shop , in many case , share in the benefit of the mulct with the king ; now he confine the clergy within the privince of their own ecclesiastical Jurisdicti ? on , to deal only in business concern rule of soul , accord to the canon and law Episcopal . and where the cause of the kingdom be before de ? termine in every shire , and by a law of king Edward , all matter in question be upon special penalty decide in their gemote , or conventicle hold monthly in e ? very hundred : now he ordain that four time in the year , for certain day , the same business shall be determine in such place as he will appoint , where he constitute judge to attend for that purpose . also he decree there shall be sheriff in every shire , and justice of peace for punishment of malefactor . final ? lie he ordain his council of state , his chancery , his exchequer , ( Scaccarium cor ? rupt call so , of the word Statarium , or rather of the board or table where the officer sit ; ) also his court of justice , which always remove with his court . Theise place he furnish with officer , and assign four term in the year for determine controversy among the people . the place of these court be Westminster , where king William Rufus afterward build a stately palace . now for his provisionary revenue , the king tenant who hold land of the crown , pay he no money at all , but only corn and other victual ; and a just note of the quality and quantity of every man ratement , be take through out all the shire of the kingdom , and levy ever certain , for maintenance of the king house . only the kentish man procure the continuance of their ancient law by a trick ; for king William ride towards Dover , at Sw•nscombe two mile from Gravesend , the kentish man meet he , but in the form of a move wood , by reason of the great bough they have cut and carry in their hand , and compass the king a ? bout , they only make suit for the continuan• of their law , which the king without any great scruple grant , and glad he be so rid of they . a strange con ? ceite page 36 in the kentish man , to hazard themselves moor , for the preserve a simple cu ? stome ; then for preserve the liberty of themselves and their country : but such be the violence of conceit , till it be master by time , or rather so very a changeling be humane reason , that what they then cut down great wood to defend , they have since be content to see abolish , without cut down so much as a twig . but one law especial he make , extreme distasteful to all the gen ? try of the land : for where before they may at their pleasure hunt and take deer which they find abroad in the wood ; now it be ordain , under a great penalty , no less than put out their eye ; that none shall presume to kill or take any of they , as reserve they only for his own delight . and in ? deed so great delight he take in that kind of sport , that he depopulate a great part of Hamshire , the space of thirty mile , where there have be ( say Car•on ) six and twenty town , and fourscore religious house , and make it a habitati ? on for such kind of beast ; which be then , and to this day be call the new-forest . but the lamentable disaster that have happen to this king issue , do plain show , that there be a power , that observe all our action , and which we may know to be memorem fandi atque nefandi . but in the first year of this king Raign• , he grant to the city of London , their first charter and liberty , in as large form , as they enjoy they in the time of king Edward the confessor , which he grant at the suit of William a norman , bishop of London ; in grateful remem ? brance whereof , the lord major and alderman , upon the solemn day of their resort to Pauls , do still use to walk to the Gravestone , where this bishop lie in ? ter . also this king be the first , that bring the Jew to inhabit here in England , as likewise he make a law , that whosoever force a woman , shall lose his genital : and in his time , long bow come first into use in England , which as they be the weapon with which France under this king conquer England : so they be the weapon with which England under after-king , conquer fra•ce ; as if it be not enough for we to beat they , if we do not beat they with their own weapon . this king also appoint a constable of Dover ca ? stle , and a lord warden of the cinque-port , with immunity as they be at this day . Affaires of the church in his reign . in the twelve year of his reign , lanfrank archbishop of Canterbury , hold a synod at London , where among other thing , he remove bishop see , from small town to great city , as from Silliway to Chichester ; from Kyrton to exce ? ter ; from well to bath ; from Shirborne to Salisbury ; from Dorchester to Lincoln ; and from Lichfield to Chester ; and from thence again to Coventry ; and not long before , the bishopric of lindafferne , otherwise call holy land , upon the ri ? for Tweed , have be translate to Durham . in the six year of his reign , a controversy arise between the two archbishop of Canterbury and York , they appeal to roam , and the pope remit it to the king and bishop of England . hereupon a synod be hold at Windsor , where sentence be give on lanfrank then archbishop of Canterbury side : that in matter of religion , the archbishop of yo•ke , shall ever be subject to the archbishop of Canterbury : only at roam it be decree , for matter of title , that the see of York shall be style primus angliae , and the see of Canterbury , primus totius angliae , as it be at this day . and as the archbishop of York owe obedience to the archbishop of Canterbury ; so all the bishop of Scotland owe obedience to the archbishop of York , as to the primate of Scotland . but as this king take down the prelate in temporalty , for he ordain they shall exercise no temporal authority at all ; so in spiritualty , he rather raise they , as may be see by a passage between Aldred archbishop of York , and the king : for at a time , upon the repulse of a certain suit , the archbishop in great discontentment offer to depart , when the king , in awe of his displeasure , stay page 37 he , fall down at his foot , desire pardon , and promise to grant his suit . the king all this while be down at the archbishop feet• the nobleman that be present , put he in mind that he shall cause the king to arise , nay ( say the archbishop ) let he alone , let he find what it be to anger saint Peter . and as by this story , we see the insult pride of a prelate in those day : so by ano ? there , we may see the equivocate falsehood of a prelate at that time ; for St• ? gand archbishop of Canterbury will often swear , he have not one penny upon the earth , when under the earth it be afterward find he have hide great trea ? sure . also it be memorable , but scarce credible of another bishop , who be accuse of simony , and deny i• , the cardinal before who he be to a ? swer , tell he , that a bishopric be the gift of the holy ghost , and therefore to buy a bishopric , be against the holy ghost , and thereupon bid he say , glow ? ry be to the father , and to the son , and to the holy ghast ; which the bishop beginning , and oft essay , can never say , [ and to the holy ghost ] but say it plain when he be put out of his bishopric . and yet be not the church in that age so barren of virtue , but that it afford some good bishop , as William bishop of Durham , founder of university college in Oxford , but special by ? shop Woolstan ; who , upon lanfranke report , to be insufficient for the place , for want of learning , the king command to put off his pontifical robe , and to leave his bishopric : when sudden out of a divine inspiration , Woolstan a ? swer : a better than you , oh king , bestow these robe upon i , and to he i will restore they . and therewithal go to saint Edward shrine , who have make he a bishop , and put off his robe , he strike his staff upon saint ed ? ward monument , which stick so fast in the stone of it , that by no strength it can be draw forth , till he draw it forth himself : which so terrify both lanfrank and the king , that they entreat he to take his robe again , and keep his by ? shopricke . also Oswald bishop of Salisbury , who devise a form of prayer to be daily use in his church , and be use afterward in other church , from whence proceed the common say of secundum usum Sarum . in this king time be Berengarius , who deny the true body of Christ to be in the sacrament ; all ? so in his time , pope Gregory the seven , remove marry priest from execu ? ting divine service , whereof great trouble arise in England . work of piety , by he , and other in his time . this king found the abbey of baltell in Sussex , where he overcome Harold ; the abbey of Selby in Yorkshire ; and a three near London , call saint savi ? we . he found also the priory of saint Nicholas at Exeter ; and give great privilege to saint martins le grand in London ; which church be found be ? before the conquest , by Ingelricus and Emardus his brother , cousin to king ed ? ward the confessor . Theise be this king work of piety in England , but in Normandy he found also a abbey at Caen : where his wife Maude build like ? wise a monastery of nun . he give also to the church of saint Stephens in Caen , two manor in Dorsetshire , one manor in Devonshire , another in Essex , much land in Barkeshire , some in Norfolk , a mansion house in Woodstreet ; London , with many advowsons of church , and even he give his crown and regal ornament to the say church , be of his own foundation , for the redempti ? on whereof , his son Henry give the manor of Brydeton in Dorsetshire . in this king time , Robert , son to Hyldebert la•ie , found the priory of pon•fraite ; Henry Earle Ferrer found a priory within his castle at Tutbury ; Alwyn child , a citizen of London , found the monastery of saint saviour at Bermondsey in Southwark , and give to the monk there diverse rent in London : also in this king time , Mauric• bishop of London , after the fire of the former church of saint Paul in London , begin the foundation of the new church , a work so admi ? rabble , that many think it will never have be finish . towards the buil ? ding of the east end whereof , the king give the choice stone of his castle , at page 38 the west end of the city , upon the bank of the river Thames ; which castle ha ? ve be at that time fire , in place thereof Edward Kilwarby archbishop of Canterbury , do afterward found a monastery of Blackfriar . the king also give the manor of Storford to the same Maurice , and to his successor in that see ; after who decease , Richard his next successor , bestow all the rent of his bishopric , to advance the build of this church , maintain himself by his private patrimony ; and yet all he can do , make no great show , but the finish ? ing of the work be leave to many other succeed bishop . in the fifteen year of this king reign , William bishop of Durham , found university college in Oxford : also one Gylbert a norman lord , found the abbey of Merton in Sur ? rey , seven mile from London ; and Thomas archbishop of York , first build the minster of York . in this king sixteenth year , his brother duke Robert , be send against the Scot , build a fort , where at this day stand new castle up ? on tine : but the town and wall w•re build afterward by king John . also in this king time , ledes castle in Kent be build by Creveken , and the castle of Oxford , by Robert d' oily : two noble man that come into England with he . Osmond bishop of Salisbury build the new church there ; also Waring earl of Shrewesbury , build two abbey , one in the suburb of Shrewesbury , and another at wenlock . casualty happen in his time . in the twentyeth year of his reign , so great a fire happen in London , that from the west-gate to the east-gate , it consume house and church all the way , and among the rest the church of saint Paul , the most grievous fire that ever happen in that city . also this year , by reason of distemperature of wea ? there , there ensue a famine : and afterward a miserable mortality of man and cattle . also this year in the province of Wales , upon the sea shore , be find the body of Gawen , sister son to Arthur , the great king of the Britain : repor ? t to be fourteen foot in length . also in this king time , a great lord •itting at a feast , be set upon by mouse , and though he be remove from land to sea , and from sea again to land , yet the mouse still follow he , and at last devou ? read he . of his wife and child . he have to wi•e , and her only ; Mathilde or Maude , daughter to Baldwyn earl of Flanders . she be crown queen of England , the second year of his reign : the seventeenth year of his reign , she die ; a woman only memo ? rabble for this , that nothing memorable be record of she , but that she build a nunnery at Caen in Normandy , where she lie bury . by she he have four son and fiv• daughter . his son be , Robert , Richard , William , and Henry : of who Robert the elder , call court-cayse , of his short thigh , or court-hose , of his short breeches , or Courtois , of his courteous behaviour : ( for so many be the comment upon his name ) succeed his father in the duchy of Normandy . Richard his second son , be kill by misfortune , hunt in the new-forest . William his three son , call Rufus , succeed his father in the kingdom of England . Henry his young son call Beauclerke , for his learning , have by his father will , five thousand pound in money , and the inheritance also of his mo ? there . his daughter be Cicelie , c•nstance , Adela , Margaret , and Elinor , of who Cicelie be abbess of Caen in Normandy . Constance be marry to Alan earl of Britain . Adela to Stephen earl of Blois . Margaret affiance to Harold king of Eng ? land , but never marry , and die young . Elinor , betroth to Alphonsus king of gallitia , but desire to dye a virgin , she have her wish , spend her time so much in prayer , that with continual kneel , her knee be brawned . page 39 of his personage and condition . he be but mean of stature , yet big of body , and therewithal so strong , that few be able to draw his bow : grow in year , he be bald before ; his beard always shave , after the manner of the norman ; and where in his young ? ere time , he be much give to that infirmity of youth , which grow out of strength of youth , incontinency : after he be once marry , whether out of satiety , or out of grace , he be never know to offend in that kind . of so perfect health , that he be never sick , till that sickness whereof he die . of a stern count ? nance , yet of a affable nature : in war , as expert as valiant : in peace , as pro ? vident as prudent : and in all his enterprise , as fortunate , as bold and hardy . much give to hunt and feast , wherein he be no less pleasant than mag ? nificent . he make no great proficience in learning ; as have have his education in the licentiousness of the french court : yet he favour learned man ; and draw out of Italy , Lanfranke , Anselme , Durand , Traherne , and diverse other , famous at that time for learning and piety . very devout he be , and always hold the clergy in exceed great reverence : and this be one special honour attribute unto he , that from he we begin the computation of our king of Eng ? land . his place of residence . his Christmas he common keep at Gloucester ; his easter at Wi•chester ; and his Whi•sontide at Westminster ; and once in the year , at one of these place will be new crown ; as though by often put on his crown , he think to make it sit the easy upon his head . and for the house which the king of England have in those day in London ; i find that at Westminster be a palace , the ancient ha ? bitation of the king of England , from the time of Edward the confessor : which in the reign of king Henry the eight , be by casual fire burn down to the ground . a very large and stately palace this be , and in that age , for build incomparable . the remain whereof , be the chamber of assemble the high court of parliament , and the next unto it , wherein ancient they be wont to begin the parliament , call saint Edward paint chamber , because the tra ? dition hold , that the say king Edward die in it . adjoin unto this , be the Whitehall , wherein at this day the court of request be keep ; beneath this be the great hall , where court of justice be now keep : this hall which we now have , be build by king Richard the second , out of the ground ; as appear by his arm engrave in the stone work : ( when he have pluck down the old hall , build before by William Rufus ) and make it his own habitation . but the aforesaid palace , after it be burn down in anno 15•2 . lay desolate , and king Henry the eight short after translate the king seat , to a house not far off , build by car ? dinall Woolsey• and be call white-hall . the tower of London also be anci ? ent use by the king of England to lodge in . other house they ancient have ; one where Bridewell now stand , out of the ruin whereof , the now Bridewell be build . another call the tower royal , now the king wardrobe . another in Bucklersbury , call sernes tower . another where now the Popes-head ta ? verne be , over against the old exchange ; and oftentimes they make use of Baynard castle . but these be all long since demolish , that we may see palace and place have their fa•es and period as well as man . his death and burial . towards the end of his reign , he appoint his two son Robert and Henry with joint authority , governor of Normandy : these go together , to visit the king of France , lie at Constance , where entertain the time with variety of page 40 sport ; Henry play with Lewis the dolphin of France at chess , and win much money of he , Lewis grow so choleric , that he throw the chessman at Henry face ; call he the son of a bastard : and thereupon Henry strike Lew ? be with the chessboard , and have present slay he , if his brother Robert have not step in , and stay he . upon this the king of France invade Normandy , and draw Robert , king William elder son , to join with he against his fa ? there : but king William come present over with a army , be soon recon ? cile to his son , yet be corpulent and in year , be by this mean much distemper in body , and so retire to roan , where he stay , as not be well in health . the french king hear of his sickness , scoffing say , that he lie in childbed of his great belly . which so incense king William , that he swear by God resurrection and his brightness , ( his usual oath ) that assoon as he shall be church of that child , he will offer a thousand light in France ; and indeed he perform it ; for he enter France in arm , and •et many town and cornfield on fire , in which he be so violent , that by reason of his travail and the unreasonable heat , be in the month of August , it bring upon he a relapse of his sickness , and withal , leap on horseback over a ditch , his fat belly do bear so hard upon the pommel of his saddle , that he take a rupture in his inner part ; whereupon return to roan , his sickness so increase , that in short time he die ; and that which be scarce credible , yet record for certain , the very same day he die at roan , his death be know at room , a thousand mile off . in all the time of his sickness , he retain to the very last , his memo ? ry and speech : and show many demonstration of devotion , and true contri ? cion , special for his severity use towards the english . and thus he who be a conqueror of man , be conquer himself by death ; the nine day of Septem ? ber , when he have reign twenty year , and near eleven month , in the three ? score and four year of his age : i may well say , he be conquer by death ; see death use he more despitefully• than ever he live use any who he have conquer : for no soon be the breath out of his body , but his attendant purloin what they can lay hand on , forsake he and flee : leave his bo ? die almost naked upon the ground . afterwards , William archbishop of roan , command his body shall be convey to Caen , but his command be little re ? guard : till at last , one h•rlewyne , a country knight , at his own charge cause his body to be embalm , and convey thither ; where the abbot and monk meet the corpse , sudden in the midst of their solemnity , a violent fire break out in the town , with the fright whereof , every man leave the place ; and thus be his body the second time leave forlese . in the end a few monk retur ? ned and accompany the hearse to the abbey church ; but when the divine office be end , and the body ready to be lay in the grave , one Anselme fit Arthur , stand up , and claim that ground to have be the floor of his father house , which king William have violent wrest from he ; and thereupon charge they , as they will answer it before the dreadful face of God , not to cover his body with the earth of his inheritance . whereupon after some pause , agreement be make with he , and three pound be pay in hand for the ground break up , and a hundred pound more afterward for the ground it self , pay he by Henry the king young son , who only of all his son be present at the funeral . and yet this be not all , but when his body be to be put in the earth , it happen that the sepulchre of stone which stand within the g•ave , be hew somewhat too straight for his fat belly , so as they be fain to press it down with some violence , with which , whether his bowel burst , or whether some excrement be force out of their natural passage ; such a intolerable stink proceed from he , that none be able to endure it , but make all the haste they can to be go . and yet neither be this the last of his misery : for in the year , 1562. when Castillion take the city of Caen , certain dissolute soul ? diers open his tomb , and not find the treasure they expect , throw forth his bone with great derision : whereof some be afterward bring into England . page 41 so that if we consider his many trouble in life , and after his death , we may well think , that notwithstanding all his greatness , a very mean man will hardly be persuade to change fortune with he . man of note in his time . man of learning in his time , be but rare in this island , yet some there be , particular Marianus Scotus , a historiographer , and Alpheredus a monk o•Beverley , a writer also of historical argument . and as for man of valour , they be not to be expect in a time of servitude , but as if all the english valour be now remain in the kentish man , they only make resistance , when all other country have submit . page 42 the reign of king William the second . king William the second call Rufus , second son to William the conqueror , appoint successor by his father will ; be upon the five of October , in the year 1087. by lanfrank arch ? bishop of Canterbury , crown at Westminster king of England . wherein his father seem to have follow the example of Jacob , who give to his young son Joseph , the land which he have take with his sword and his bow : for with his sword and his bow , have king William get the land of England ; and therefore may just bestow it on which of his son he please . and be ? side , there be cause enough , why he shall show this son of his some extra ? ordinary favour , see in the rebellion of his brother Robert , yet he stand firm ? lie for his father ; and in his quarrel incur no small hazard of his life , as where ? in he receive diverse wound : and perhaps also , his father think the rough dis ? position of this son , fit to bridle the insurrection of the english , than the soft ? lie disposition of his son Robert . but though he have thus quiet get the crown , he must not look to hold it so ; and indeed at his very beginning be assault with two trouble in one : for both his brother Robert prepare to recover it from he , and the lord of the king ? dome combine with Robert to assist he in it . the first mover of this trouble be Odo bishop of Bayeux , his uncle , who find himself not to bear the sway he expect , and special for a old grudge he bear to Lanfranke , archbishop of Canterbury , as by who mean , in the former king time he have be imprison ( the archbishop tell he , that though he may not imprison a bishop , yet he may imprison a earl of Kent , as this Odo be make not long before ) he draw man ? nigh other bishop and temporal lord to join with him• in behalf of duke Ro ? bert , against the king : but though the storm be violent for a while , yet it soon pass over ; that indeed of his lord , with more difficulty : but that of his bro ? ther Robert with more cost : for it be at last agree , that Rufus shall pay he three thousand mark a year , during his life , and leave he the kingdom after his own decease . but there be difficulty in repress his rebel lord , by rea ? son of their spread themselves abroad in many quarter . for Odo fortify he ? self in Kent ; Roger Montgomery , earl of Shrewsbury , in Norfolk , Suffolk , and Cambridgeshire ; Hugh de grandmenill , in Leycestershire , and Northamptonshire ; Ro ? bert page 43 Mowbray earl of Northumberland , possess himself of Bristol ; William bishop of Durham , of the north part of the realm ; and diverse other of the clergy , and nobility , fortify themselves in Herefordshire , Shropshire , Worcestershire , and all the country adjoin to wale , think by this mean to distract the king that he shall not know where to begin , nor whither to turn he . but this course , as it make it hard to repress they sudden , so it make it easy to repress they at leisure ; for be thus divide , they be but as single stick , that be easy break ; where if they have unite themselves , as into a faggot , they may have make a strength of far great resistance . but the king have lanfrank archbishop of Canterbury , and Woolstan bishop of Worcester , firm of his side : partly by their authority and love among the people ; but chief by his own promise , to restore their ancient law , and to allow they liberty of hunt in his forest , he so firm win the heart of all unto he ; that some of the re ? bell lord he reconcile with fair word , as Robert Montgomery ; ( a principal sinew of the faction ) some again he master by strong hand , and Odo the chief engineer of all the work , he besiege in the castle of Rochester , take he pri ? soon , and force he to abjure the realm . and thus this great rebellion be suppress : in which it be observable , that though so many hot blood be up , yet there be but little blood spill . a happy rebellion for the english ; for the rebel lord and bishop be all norman , the king have none to trust to , but the english , who for their faithfulness to he in this service , he ever after re ? spected more than he have do befo•e . after this storm be over in the south , there arise another in the north ; for now Malcolme king of Scot , think it a fit time to do some feat when king William be trouble at home ; invade Northumberland , and have burn and spoil the country , return home laden with booty . which king William hear , he take his brother Robert along with he , and with a mighty army en ? ters Scotland , bring Malcolme to acknowledge his ancient homage : and upon faith give , return to London . after this , duke Robert find his brother king William , not to keep his promise , in pay his pension , complain to the king of France , and with his aid , assault and take some town , which he before have deliver in pawn for money to his brother king William ; who hear of it , hasten into Normandy with a army , and by the mediation of money take off the king of France , and make his brother , be leave destitute of assistance , to ask he pardon : a wise and merciful course in king William ; for to buy his peace with the king of France , do cost he but money , where to have purchase it by war , must beside money , have cost the life of many . after this Malcolme , king of Scot , come in kindness to visit king William at Gloucester : but the king not vouchsafe so much as to see he , put he into so great a indignation , that return home , he make ready a army , invade Northumberland , make great spoil and get great spoil , but by Robert Mowbray , the king lieute ? nant there , be take in ambush , and together with his elder son Edward , de ? feat and slay . this king Malcolme be a most valiant prince , as may appear by a act of his of a extraordinary strain ; for hear of a conspiracy plot to murder he , whereof one be author , who name be not record , he dissem ? bleed the know it , till be abroad one day a hunt , he take the fellow a ? part from the company , and be alone , say unto he : here now be a fit time and place , to do that manful , which you have intend to do treacherous ; draw your weapon , and if you kill i , none be present , you can incur no danger : with which speech of the king , the fellow be so daunt , that present ? lie he fall down at his foot , confess his fault , humble ask forgiveness , and be ? king grant he , be ever after serviceable and faithful to he . the death of king Malcolme and his son , be so grievous , and so grievous take of Mar ? garet his queen , the sister of Edgar Atheling , that she make it she prayer , and have it grant , not to overlive they , and so , within three day after die : a woe ? man as full of virtue all her life , as at this time of sorrow ; who yet i shall page 44 not break order to mention , but for one pious act of she , in cause a most bar ? barous custom of Scotland to be abrogate , that when a man marry , his lord shall lie the first night with his bride . which custom by her endeavour be all ? tere to a payment in money . after these trouble be end in the north , a new trouble arise in the west ; for now the welsh man hear of king William distraction , enter upon the en ? glish border , make spoil and havoc of man and town : who king Will ? liam go with a army to encounter , but can do no good upon they , till he be fain to return to London , and provide he a strong army . about this time also Robert Mowbray earl of Northumberland , by who Malcolme king of Scots be in king William service former slay , find his service not reward ? ed as he expect , enter into conspiracy against the king ; but the king be inform of the practice , seize sudden upon many of his compl•ces , and he ? self , after many devise and shift for flight , be take and put in prison , in the ca ? stle of Windsor . after this , king William to take a further revenge of the welsh , and to make a absolute conquest of that unquiet people , with a far great army than ever before , enter wale , and think with new device of castle and fort , utter to subdue they , but they defend themselves , with their wood , and mountainous passage , tyre and weary out the king and his army , so as he leave the business to two Hughes , one , earl of Salop , the other of Chester , who first invade and take Anglesey , ( their island of refuge ) where they use all kind of cruelty , pull out of eye , and cut off hand and nose : in prosecute of which business , huge earl of Salop be slay , but huge earl of Chester , en ? tread wale , and in the end , with the slaughter of Rees , the last king of Wales , make a absolute conquest of the country . for after this , though they often rebel , yet they be in a true subjection . and these for the most part , be all the trou ? bles of his reign : where we may observe , that none of they do ever overtake he , but still he meet they , and from none of they he ever flee , but be still the pursuer , and yet so many as may well have take away all the comfort of a crown , and have make he willing to change his diadem for a pair of bead , but that ambition , though sometime weary , yet never ty•es . his exaction and course for raise of money . in the second year of his reign , lanfrank archbishop of Canterbury die , who have keep the kingdom and king in some good order , but assoon as he be dead , the king , as though he be then get loose , range without reins , in all licentiousness : prey especial upon the clergy , as among who he find the rich booty . when bishopric or abbey be vacant , it be familiar with he to seize they into his own hand , as this of Lanfranke , he keep to his own use four year together , and long will have keep it , if a sickness of his body have not heal this disease of his mind : for find himself in some hazard of death , he then confer the archbishopric of Canterbury upon a ? selme , and the bishopric of Lincoln , upon Robert bloet , two eminent man of that time ; but assoon as he be well again , it repent he of that he have do , and be not quiet , till he have draw from the say bloet , five thousand pound , and from Anselme also good sum of money . for he re ? pent not more in time of sickness for the evil he have do in health , then be in health , he repent he of the good he have do in sickness ; that it may in a manner be say , there be nothing make he sick but health , and nothing make he be in health but sickness . but this prey upon the clergy be grow into such a custom with he , that he keep in his hand at one time , three bishopric , Canterbury , Winchester , and Salisbury ; and twelve abbey ; all which he let out to farm , and receive the profit : and from this king , the use be say to have rise first in England , that the king succeed have the temporalty of bishop see , as long as they remain void . Having agree to pay the king of France a great page 45 sum of money , he raise it in this manner ; he cause twenty thousand man to be levy , under pretence for his war in Normandy ; but when they be ready to be ship , it be signify to they from the king , that whosoever will pay ten shilling towards the levy of soldier in Normandy , shall be excuse from go , and stay at home ; which be so plausible a offer to the army , that scarce a man be find that accept not the condition . when duke Robert go into the holy land he pawn his d•tchy of Normandy to his brother king Will ? liam for 6666. pound , or as some write , for 12600. which money king William take up part by a grievous imposition : so that bishop melt their plate , and the temporal lord spoil their tenant for the payment thereof : and part by loan ; but chief of religious person . he sell the abbey of Glastenbury to Thurstan for five hundred pound ; and when he build Westminster hall , he make that a oc ? casion to lay a heavy tax upon the people , who grudge at it , as do of pur ? pose . he usual sell all spiritual preferment , to they will give most ; and take fine of priest for fornication : as also he take money of Jew , to cause such of they as be convert , to renounce Christianity , and return to judaisme , as make more benefit by their unbelief then by their conversion . he cause diverse of the nobility to pay grievous fine for transgress his law , though the fault be never so small . he set forth a proclamation that none shall go out of the realm without his licence , by which he draw much money from many ; for either they must tarry at home and live discontent , or else content he for give they leave to go abroad . and from thence the custom or law of ne exeas Reg ? no , seem to have take its beginning : for precedent of servitude be sure to live , where precedent of liberty be common stillborn . Theise be his way for raise of money , wherein promoter and informer be his darling servant ; and the most officious of all be Ralph bishop of Durham , of who he will often say , there be not such another man in the world to serve a king turn . and yet he be not so greedy of lucre but that he do some act that may serve for ex ? ample : as one time , a abbey be vacant , two monk of the covent come suitor to he for the place , offer great sum , and each of they out-bidding the other ; whereupon the king look about , and espy another monk stan ? ding not far off , ask he what he will give for the place ? who answer , he neither have any thing to give , nor will give any thing if he have it : well ( say the king ) thou have speak honest , thou be fit to be abbot than either of these ; and so bestow the place upon he gratis . of his magnanimity . word be bring he as he sit at dinner , that his city of man in nor ? mandy be besiege , and in great danger to be take , if not present re ? lieu : whereupon the king ask which way man lay ; and then cause Masons present to take down the wall , to make he passage the next way , and so ride instant towards the sea his lord about he , advise he to stay till his peo ? ple be ready : no ( say he ) but such as love i i know will follow i . And be come on shipboard , and the weather grow very tempestuous , he be advise by the master of his ship , to stay for some calm season : no ( say he ) fear nothing , i never yet hear of any king that be drown . and thereby come to mans•nexpected , he present disperse the besieger , and take Helias Count de la flesh , who have be author of the tumult , prisoner ; who vaun ? ting to the king , and say , now indeed you have take i by a wile ; but if i be at liberty again , you shall find i to do other manner of feat : at which the king laugh ; well then ( say he ) go your way and do your worst , and let we see what feat you will do . be reconcile to his brother Robert , he assist he to recover the fort of mount saint Michael , which their brother Henry do forcible hold in Normandy : during which siege , straggle one time alone upon the shore , he be set upon by three horseman , who assault he so fierce , that they page 46 drove he from his saddle , and his saddle from his horse ; but he take up his saddle , and withal draw out his sword , defend himself till rescue come : and be afterward blame for be so obstinate to save his saddle , he answer : it will have anger i at the very heart , that the knave shall have brag they have win the saddle from i . of his justness in keep his word . this virtue special be commend in he , and he will often say , that even God himself be oblige by his word . but if we observe the course of his life , we shall find that howsoever he may keep his word in small matter , yet cer ? tain not in great• for he keep not his word with his brother Robert , to who he promise to leave the kingdom of England after his decease , but perform it not . nor he keep not his word with his subject , for in the rebellion of the nor ? man lord , he promise the english , if they will now stick to he , they shall have their ancient law restore , and be allow liberty to hunt in his forest ; which promise he either keep not at all , or at least soon break . nor he keep not his word with God himself ; for be sick at Gloucester , and in some hazard of his life , he make a solemn vow , that if he recover , he will lead a new life , and give over all his disorderly course : but be recover , he grow more disor ? der then he be before that if denomination be make from the great action , it can be true say that he be just of his word ; but such be the privilege of prince over their subject , that if they make a promise it must be believe ; and if they break it , it must not be question . of his incontinency . much be speak of his lascivious life in general , but nothing in particular : for neither be mention any violence he ever offer to any ; nor be any woman name to have be his concubine , and prince concubine be seldom con ? ceal . it be true he be never marry , and of a strong constitution of body , and so probable he may be incline to that vice ; but probability be not always con ? clude , and therefore whether it be a true accusation , or but a slander , it may well be doubt : only one base son of he be speak of , call Bertrannus , who he advance in honour , and match in a noble family . but why shall we more look for par ? ticular of his incontinency , then of his prodigality ? for he be tax no less for be prodigal , then for be incontinent ; and yet of his prodigality there be not so much as one instance record , unless we take this for a instance ; that when his chamberlain bring he a pair of hose , which because they be new , he ask what they cost ? And be tell they cost three shilling , in a great chafe he throw they away ; ask he , if he think a pair of hose of three shilling , to be fit for a king to wear ? get thou go ( say he ) and let i have a pair of a mark . his chamberlain go , and bringng he another pair scarce so good as the former , and tell he they cost a mark ; i marry ( say the king ) these be something like , and be better satisfy with hear what they cost , then with see what they be worth : and yet be this no imputation to his wisdom , for to say the truth , it be no defect of wisdom in a king to be igno ? rant what his clothes be worth . of his waver in religion . he appoint a disputation to be hold between Christians and Jew , and be ? before the day come , the Jew bring the king a present , to the end they may have a indifferent hear ; the king take the present , encourage they to quit themselves like man : and swear by saint Luke face ( his usual oath ) that if they prevail in disputation , he will himself turn Jew , and be of their Reli ? gion . page 47 a young Jew on a time be convert to the christian faith , who fa ? there be much trouble at it , present the king sixty mark , entreat he to make his son to return to his judaisme ; whereupon the king send for his son , command he without more ado to return to the religion of his nation . but the young man answer , he wonder his majesty will use such word ; for be ? king a christian , he shall rather persuade he to Christianity : with which an ? swer the king be so confound , that he command the yo•g man to get h•m out of his sight . but his father find the king can do no good upon his son , require his money again ; nay ( say the king ) i have take pain enough for it , and yet that you may see how kind i will deal , you shall have one half ; and the other half you can in conscience deny i . there be fifty gentle ? man accuse for hunt and kill the king deer , which they deny , and be therefore condemn to the trial of fire ; which by God merciful judgement they pass through untouched : the king hear it , and deceive of the confiscation he expect , be say in a great chafe to say ; how happen this ? be God a just judge in suffer it ? now a murrain take he that believe it . it seem also he doubt of many point of religion , then in credit . for he will often prote•t , that he believe not that saint can profit any man in god sight , and therefore neither will he , nor any other that be wise ( as he affirm ) make intercession either to Peter , or to any other for help . Affaires of the church in his time . the king claim the investiture of bishop to be his right , and forbid ap ? peal and intercourse to roam ; ( for no Appeales have ever be use till a ? selme in this king reign appeal to the pope ) upon who complaint the pope be about to excommunicate the king , but have a little before Excommunica ? t the emperor Henry the four ( the first Christian prince with sovereign author•ty , that be ever excommunicate by any pope ) he forbear at that time to do it , lest by make excommunication common , he shall make it be slight . at this time great contention arise between the king and the archbishop a ? selme : and ans•lme not yield to the king in any point prejudicial to the pope authority ; nor the king yield to Anselme in any point prejudicial to his own prerogative ; ( which be point indeed incompatible ) the contention continue long and hot , and the hot , because there be at that time two pope on foot at once : one elect by the conclave , call Urbanus the second ; another set up by the emperor , call Clement the three : for Anselme hold with Urban , the king with Clement : and thus not agree in a three , it be impossible they shall agree be ? tween themselves ; and this contention , though palliate with pretension , sometime of one side , sometime of another , yet break out again , and be renew both in this king time , and in the time of many king after . Anselme often threthe his go to roam , the king tell he plain he will not thrust he out of the realm , but if he will go without his leave , he will then keep he out du ? ring his pleasure ; and beside , he shall carry nothing out of the realm wi•h he : yet Anselme venture it , and the king perform it ; for William warlewast be send to rifle he in his passage at sea of all he have , neither be he suffer to return as long as the king live ; during all which time , the king take the profit of his archbishopric to his own use . it may not be amiss to show a passage here con ? cern the first cause of contention between the king and Anselme , which some say be this ; the king require a thousand mark of he for have prefer he to that see : which Anselme refuse to give , as judge it no less simony to give after the preferment then before : but yet afterward offer five hundred pound , the king refuse to accept it , as be worth ( he say ) five time as much : whereupon Anselme tell he , your grace may have i , and all that be i , to serve your turn in a friendly manner ; but in the way of servitude and bondage , you shall never have i nor i : which word so anger the king , that they page 48 can never after be reconcile . in this king reign pope Urbane exhort all christian prince to join together for recovery of Jerusalem and the holy land : and by the solicit of Peter a hermit , there assemble for that enterprise , un ? there the conduct of godefry of Boulogne , to the number of three hundred thou ? sand man ; among who be Robert duke of Normandy , who so valiant carry himself in the action , that after Jerusalem be win , the kingdom of it ( as some write ) be offer to he : but he look moor after the kingdom of England , and therefore refuse it ; it be observe he never prosper all his life after . in this king reign , although he have no command in Ireland , yet their bishop of Dublin be send over to Anselme archbishop of Canterbury , to be consecrate by he ; and the citizen of Waterford also desire to have a bishop , procure Murcherdach , king of Ireland , to write to Anselme , to give his consent . also in this king day , the pope forbid the marriage of priest . work of piety of this king , or by other in his time . this king give to the monk of Southwark , the church of saint saviour of Be•mondsey , and Bermondsey it self ; he also found at York the hospital of saint Leonards : he give the church of saint Peter in the city of bath to be a bishop see . Hugh earl of Chester , in this king day build the abbey of Chester : Oswald bishop of Salisbury , found the cathedral church of Salisbury : Remigius bishop of Dorchester , to the end his bishopric may be remove to lin ? colne ; begin to build the cathedral church of Lincoln ; and lanfrank archbishop of Canterbury build two hospital without the city ; the one of saint John , the other at Harbaldowne , repair Christ church , and cause five and twen ? thy manor to be restore to that see , which have unjust be withhold . he re ? pair also the abbey of saint Alban , and the church of Rochester , where for four secular priest , he place to the number of fifty monk . in the six year of this king reign , William Warren the first earl of Surrey , and gundr his wife , found the abbey of Lewis in Sussex : and Warren earl of Shrewsbury build two abbey , one in the suburb of Shrewsbury , the other at Wenlock . in his twelve year , Robert losaunge , bishop of Thetford , remove his see from Thetford to Norwich , and found there a fair monastery . his building and structure . this king enlarge the tower of London , and compass it with new wall : he also build the great hall at Westminster , be 270. foot in length , and 74. in breadth ; but think it too little , he intend to have build another hall which shall have stretch from the Thames to the king street . he repair the city and castle of Carlile , which have be waste by the Dane two hundred year before , and because it have but few inhabitant , he bring a colony thither out of the southern part . he finish Newcastle upon Tyne , and many other ca ? stle he erect or repair upon the border of Scotland ; many also upon the fron ? tire , and within the very breast of wale . casualty happen in his reign . in the four year of his reign , on saint Luke day , above six hundred house in London be throw down with tempest ; and the roof of saint mary bow church in cheap , be so raise , that in the fall six of the beam be 27. foot long , be drive so deep into the ground : ( the street be not then pave with stone ) that not above four foot remain in sight , and yet stand in such rank and order as the workman have place they upon the church . also in this king reign all the land in Kent , sometime belong to earl Godwin , be by break in of the sea cover with sand , and be call godwin sand to this day . in his page 49 eleven year , at a town call Finchamstead in the county of Berkshire , a well cast out blood , as before it have do water : and after by the space of fifteen day , great flame of fire be see in sundry place and at sundry time . of his personage and condition . he be but mean of stature , thick and square body , his belly swell some ? what round , his face be read , his hai•e deep yellow , whereof he be call Rufus ; his forehead four square like a window ; his eye spot , and not one like another ; his speech unpleasant , and not easy utter , special when he be more ? ve with anger . concern the quality of his mind , they may best be know by look upon the action of his life ; in which we shall find he be never more assure , then when he be least sure , never less deject , then when in most extre ? mity ; be like a cube , that which way soever he fall , he be still upon his bot ? tome . for his delight to pass the time , there be none in more request with he then hunt , a delight hereditary to he , which be the cause that as his father have begin the great new forest , so he enlarge it to a far great extent . other delight of his we find not any , unless we shall reckon his war for delight : for though they be oftentimes force upon he , when he can not avoid they ; yet sometime he enter into they when he need not , but for his pleasure . and in general , it may be say that one of his great virtue , be that which be one of the great virtue , magnanimity ; and his worst vice , be that which be the worst of vice , irreligion . presage that precede his death . at Finchamstead in Berkshire , near unto Abington , a spring cast up liquor for the space of fifteen day , in substance and colour like to blood . the night be ? before the king be kill , a certain monk dream , that he see the king gnaw the image of Christ crucify with his tooth ; and that as he be about to bite away the leg of the same image , Christ with his foot spurn he down to the ground : and that as he lie on the earth , there come out of his mouth a flame of fire , with abundance of smoke . This be relate to the king by Robert fit Mam ? mon , he make a jest of it , say ; this monk will fain have something for his dream : go , give he a hundred shilling ; but bid he look that he dream more auspicious dream hereafter . also the same night , the king himself dream that the vein of his arm be break , and that the blood issue out in great a ? bundance : and many other like passage there be , by which it seem he have friend somewhere , as well as Iulius Caesar , that do all they can to give he war ? ning : but that as Caesar , so his malus genius will not suffer he to take it . of his death and burial . king William have keep his Christmas at Gloucester , his easter at Winchester , his Whitsuntide at Westminster , notwithstanding forewarn by many sign of some great disaster towards he , will needs the day after Lammas , go a hunt in the new forest ; yet something resent the many presage , he stay within all the forenoon : about dinner time , a artificer come and bring he six crossbow arrow , very strong and sharp ; whereof four he keep himself , and the other two he deliver to sir Walter Tyrell , a knight of Normandy his bow-bearer ; say , here Tyrell , take you two , for you know how to shoot they to purpose : and so have at dinner drink more liberal than his custom , as it be in contempt of presage , out he ride into the new forest , where sir Walter Tyrell shoot at a deer , the arrow glance against a tree , or as some write , gra ? z upon the back of the deer , and fly forward , hit the king upon the breast ; with which he instant fall down dead . thus it be deliver by a common con ? send page 50 of all ; only one Sugerius , a writer that live at that time , and be a fami ? liar acquaintance of the say tyrel ; against the current of all writer , aff•irmes that he have often hear the say sir Walter swear that he be not in the forest with the king all that day . i have be the long upon this point , because a more pregnant example of God judgement remain not any where upon record . for not only this king at this time , but before this , a brother of his name Richard , a young prince of great hope ; and also a nephew of he , the son of his brother Robert , come all in this place to violent death : that although king William the foum ? der of the forest , escape the punishment in his own person , yet it be double and treble upon he in his issue . thus die king William ruf•s , in •he three and forty year of his age , and twelve and some month of his reign . his body be draw in a collier cart with one horse to the city of Winchester , where the day follow it be bury in the cathedral church of saint Swithen , and be lay there in the choir under a marble stone , till afterward it be translate , and lay by king Canute bone . man of note i• his time . for man of valour , he must stand alone by himself : for man of learning , there be Lanfranke , a Lombard , but bishop of Canterbury : also Robert a Lorraine , who epitomize the chronicle of Marianus Scotus : also Turgotus a english man , deane of Durham , who write the annal of his own time , and diverse other work : but especial Osmund bishop of Salisbury , who compose the ordinary of ? fice , or book of prayer . page 51 the reign of king Henry the first . of his come to the crown . although Henry come not to the crown , as his brother will ? liam do , by the gift of his father , yet he come to it by the prophesy of his father : for , when his father make his will , and divide all his estate in land be ? between his two elder son , give to Henry his young only a portion in money , with which division he perceive he to be much discontent ; he say unto he , content thy self harry , for the time will come , that thy turn shall be serve as well as they . and now the time be come that his prediction be accomplish ; for on the five of August , in the year 1100. he be crown king of England , at Westminster , by Maurice bishop of London , ( as Deane of all the bishop of England , and therefore may do it with ? out any prejudice to the archbishop of Canterbury , though he have be present , who be indeed at this time in exile . ) but though it appear fuisse in fatis , to be decree by the divine providence that it shall be so , yet it will not have be so , if his own endeavour have not be concur . and therefore be in the new forest , when his brother king William be kill , he never stay to come ? plement the disaster , but ride present to Winchester , and there , not without some opposition of the keeper , seis•d upon his brother treasure , as know treasure to be the mean for get of friend , and friend the mean for get the crown ; and have now get the first mean , he make use of it for the s•cond , and both of they together bring he to this he be . yet withal there be circumstance in his own person that conduce to it ; his brother be bear , when their father be but a duke , he , when he be a king ; Robert be a for ? rainer , be bear in Normandy , himself a native , bear at Selby in Yorkshire ; and it be not the least circumstance , that he be call Beauclerke , as to say , a good scholar , have be breed in Cambridge ; not perhaps that his learning be so great , but that it be great , either in respect of that age , which have but little ; or in respect of his brother , who have none at all : and the people have be oppress before , by the ill government of two king , that be illiterate ; can not choose but be glad to come under the government of a king •hat be learn . and though his brother Robert , as be the elder , have right unto it , yet he as out of sight be out of mind , and perhaps neglect , as be himself negligent ; withal it be give out , that he be choose king of Jerusalem , and therefore no look for he to come home ; and to give force to all these reason , Henry new ? borough earl of Warwick be a principal •urtherer . page 52 his course for establish himself in the kingdom . it be a hard matter to keep that safe , which be unjust get ; and therefore he take all possible care to overcome that hardness : which he effect by these mean ; first , he call Anselme archbishop of Canterbury home from exile ; place William Gyfford a learned man , in the bishopric of Winchester ; and Mona ? stery that have be long vacant , he furnish with good abbot . and because it be no less please to the people , to have bad instrument punish , than the good to be advance , he cast Ralph bishop of Durham , ( a principal cause of their late oppression ) into prison : then mitigate the rigour of the new law ; and pro ? miss restitution of the old . and that there may be no abuse in measure , he or ? dain a measure , make by the length of his own arm , which be call a yard . he restore to his subject the use of light and fire in the night , which before have be forbid after eight a clock at night . he acquit the people from the tax of Danegelt , and from all other unjust payment , which have be impose upon they by the two former king . he give free liberty to the nobility and gentry of the realm , to enclose park for deer , and Warren for cony ; and such like game . and because he know Scotland may be a ill neighbour to he , if not tie by some bond , and none so sure as the bond of alliance , he therefore take matild sister of the present king Edgar to be his wife . his trouble during his reign . RAlph bishop of Durham , the late king William great instrument for exaction , that have by this king be commit to the tower , make a escape , and pass ? sing over to duke Robert in Normandy ; incense he , not to suffer himself to be baffle by a young brother ; as for his brother William , there be some rea ? son , because his father have give he the kingdom by his will , but what can Henry pretend , who have his portion give he in money ? beside , it be a a ? greement with his brother William , with consent of all the lord of the re•lme , that the survivor of they shall succeed . with such like instigation , and with ? all assure he , there be many in England will take his part ; he easy per ? swade the duke to that , from which he can hardly have dissuade he ; who thereupon with a convenient army , put to sea , and land at Portsmouth , while Henry wait for his come about Hastings ; and be land there , much peo ? ple resort to he , that it be like to have be a bloody business ; but by i ? diation of friend , work upon the flexible nature of duke Robert , it be bring at last to this agreement , that king Henry shall pay to duke Robert , three thousand mark yearly , and duke Robert shall succeed he in the kingdom , if he sur ? vived . and thus , this cloud , that threaten so great a storm , bring with it , •ather sunshine and fair weather : for now , to his possession of the kingdom , there be add a right , and he may now justify his be a king , without any scan ? dall or usurpation . after this , another little cloud arise , but be soon disper ? sed : for Robert de belesme earl of Shrewsbury , a rash young man of disposition , but more through discontentment , though discontent for nothing , but that ha ? ve a great estate , he be not a king as well as some other , fortify the town of Shrewsbury , and the castle of Bridgenorth , and get many Welshman to assist he , but the king come with a mighty army , so terrify the welsh , that they aban ? don the earl , and leave he a prey to the king in his person , and more in his e ? state , for the king seize his estate into his hand , but for his person he only ba ? nisht it the realm . for as yet , the shed of blood and put to death , though for great treasonable practise , be not much in use ; policy of state be not yet grow to that height of severity . the like attempt , and upon the like occasi ? on , be make by William earl of mortaigne in Normandy , and of Cornwall in Eng ? land , uncle to the king , only for deny he the earldom of Kent , which because he can not obtain , he enter into treasonable practise , by which he page 53 lose they earldom he have before . but these trouble be but as the labour of a woman that be safe deliver ; painful for a time , but end in joy : and indeed for the most part this king have the fortune to be a gainer by his loss . after this , duke Robert come in kindness into England , to visit• his brother Henry ; where he be so well please with his entertainment , that in re ? quitall thereof , and to do a favour to the queen , that be his god-daughter ; he release to king Henry , the three thousand mark , which he be yearly to pay he . but return into Normandy , and consider better what he have do , he so repent he , that he spare not to give out , that his brother have direct cou ? sen he . which come to king Henry ear , so incense he , that he pre ? sent send over a mighty army , which forage the country , and win many town and city , and soon after go over himself ; where he so prevail , that he leave duke Robert but only roan in all Normandy to put his head in , and this do , return into England . and now duke Robert begin to be sensible of his own weakness , and therefore come over into England to try the u••ermost of his brother good nature ; himself have send he a tun of wine to refresh he withal , when in a siege he be ready to perish for want of water : and it can be , but that gratefulness and natural affection , meet together , must needs work something in the mind of a brother . thus resolve , he present himself to the king , refer both his dukedom and himself , and all difference and debate to his will and pleasure . but whether incense with the scandalous word , duke Robert have give out of he , or whether aspire to join Normandy to England , as his father have do before ; king Henry scarce vouchsafe to hear he speak , at least vouchsafe not to make he any answer , but in a sullen man ? ner turn away , and so leave he : which scornful usage put the duke into such indignation , that he resolve to set his whole state at stake , and either to redeem his disgrace , or to forfeit his life . So return into Normandy , he use all his force in raise of force , but king Henry suspect his intention , and not use to give insurrection time to ripen , come upon he so sudden with a mighty be ? my|night , that he draw he to a battle before he be half ready to fight . yet desire of revenge so animate the duke , and the duke his soldier , that never battle be more fierce fight , and the norman seem at first to have the better , till king Henry show himself in the army , put such courage into his soldier , that they quick make good the advantage they have in number , and king Henry ob ? tain a complete victory , both in slaughter of man , ( of who there wer• slay above ten thousand ) and in take of prisoner , ( to the number of four hun ? dread ) among who , beside diverse other great one , as the earl of mortaigne , William Crispin , and William Ferreis , be duke Robert himself , who the king , ( have first take order for all thing , in his new state of Normandy ) bring over with he into England , and commit he to the castle of Cardyffe in wale , where he remain a prisoner till he die , use for a time with reasonable liberty for recreation , till attempt to make a esc•pe , it be think fit to put out his eye ; which though it increase his misery , yet it shorten not his life , for he livre ? ve many year after , in all , from the time of his first imprisonment , six and twenty . and thus this great duke , who in his birth be the joy of nature , in his life be the scorn of fortune ; and it be not unworthy the observe , that the english win Normandy , the very same day forty year , the norman have win England . such revolution of fortune there be in kingdom , and so unstable be the state of all worldly greatness . and now be king Henry as great as ever his father be , and as greatness draw envy , as much envy as ever his father be ; and as envy make enemy , as much oppose as ever his father be : for now fulke earl of Angio• , and baldwyne earl of Flanders , upon small occasion , and Lewis the gross king of France , upon none , but such as envy suggest , seek to place William , son to duke Robert , in his right to Normandy , assault the king dominion , per ? hap to try whether greatness have not make he unwieldy ; but king Henry , to page 54 show that greatness have make he more active , go over into Normandy with a mighty army , and at nice encounter the french king , where a bloody battle be fight , with exceed valour on both side , but at last king Henry repel the french king , and recover nice , and after many other conflict between they , with variety of fortune , at l•st the king make peace with the earl of Angiou ; confirm by a marriage of the earl daughter with his son William• and upon this also the two king grow to a peace , in which William , son to king Henry , be about seventeen year of age , be invest into the duchy of Normandy , do homage for the same to the king of France : from whence it be afterward a custom , that the king of England elder son ( as long as nor ? mandy remain in their hand ) be make always duke of Normandy . after this , Charles earl of Flanders , be slay at Brussels by a conspiracy of his own people , and leave no issue behind h•m , Lewis king of France invest Will ? liam , son to d•ke Robert , in the earldom of Flanders , as descend from ea•le Baldwyn , who daughter Maude be wife to king William the first , and grandmother to this William : so as William now have get this step of ad ? vanc•ment , seek to go on , and to recover Normandy , and be thereof , by as ? sist••ce of the king of France , in a fair possibility , when in a certain light con ? •l•ct , receive a wound in his hand , the thread of his fair possibility be upon a sudden cut off , and of that light wound , he short after die . king Henry now in perfect peace abroad , be not without some little disquie ? thing at home , and march through powis-land in south wale , to repress some insurrection of the welsh , he come to certain strait , where his main army can not pass , in which place the king be smite with a arrow full upon the breast , whereat he swear by our lord death ( his usual oath ) that it be no welsh arm , have shoot that arrow , yet in this dist•esse , for a thousand head of cat ? tell , he have the passage leave open , and come safe off . and these be his trou ? bles of arm , both at home and abroad , during all his reign . his taxation and way for raise of money . towards the marriage of his daughter Maude with the emperor , he obtain at his first parliament at Salisbury , three shilling upon every hide of land , throughout the kingdom ; which be afterward draw to a custom , to receive aid from the subject , whensoever the king give his old daughter in marri ? age . beside this he have no more in all his reign , but only one supply for his war in France ; but he keep bishopric and abbey void in his hand , and that of Canterbury five year together . by a act of parliament , or rather by a synod of bishop hold at London , he be authorise to punish marriage , and incontinency of priest ; which the bishop afterward repent , for he suffer priest to have wife for fine , or rather take fine of they whether they have wife or no , b•cause they may have they if they will . Punishments which before his time be mutilation of member , he make Pecuniary . and the pro ? vision of his house , which be use to be pay in kind , be in his time rate at certain prize , and receive in money . by this chapter and the next before , it appear there be in this king day , but few trouble at home , nor but few taxation ; whereo• the one may be think to be cause of the other , the first per ? hap of the second , but certain the second of the first . law first institute in his t•me . he first institute the form of the high court of parliament : for before his time , only certain of the nobility , and prelate of the realm be call to consultation , about the most important affair of state , but he cause the come ? mons also to be assemble , by knight and burgess of their own appointment , and make the court to consist of three part , the nobility , the clergy , and the page 55 common people , represent the whole body of the realm , and appoint they to sit in several chamber , the king , the bishop , and lord of the realm in one chamber , and the commons in another , to confer together by they ? •elves . other order of that court he ordain , as they be in use at this day . the first council of this sort be hold at Salisbury , on the 19 day of April , in the 16. year of his reign . he forbid the wear of long hair ; which at that time be frequent , after the manner of the french . he command robber upon the high way , to be hang without redemption : of who a famous one at that time be one Dunne , and of he , the place where he most use , by reason of the great wood thereabouts , be to this day call Dunstable , where the king build the bo ¦ rough as now it stand . counterfeiter of money he punish with pull out their eye , or cut off their privy member , a punishment both less than death , and great . Affaires of the church in his time . at his first come to the crown , he fo•bore his claim to the investit•res of bishop , but after he have be king some time , he claim that both to invest bishop , and to allow , or hinder appeal to roam , belong to he . in these , Anselme archbishop of Canterbury oppose he , affirm that both of they belong to the pope . the contention at last be bring to the pope , to who king Henry send William warlewast , elect bishop of Exeter , who say to the pope , that his master will not , for the crown of his realm , lose the Autho ? rity of invest his prelate , the pope start up and answer , neither will i lose the dispose of spiritual promotion in England , for the king head that wear the crown ; before God ( say he ) i avow it . So the contention grow long and hot , and many messenger be send to and fro about it , the conclusion be ( which prove no conclusion ) that the king shall receive homage of bishop elect ; but shall not invest they by staff and ring : to which the king say no•hing for the present , but forbear not to do it ever the less : for five year after the death of Anselme , Ralph bishop of Rochester , be by the king make archbishop of can ? terbury , and notwithstanding all former decree , and threaten of the pope , he receive his investiture of the king . about this time a canon be make a ? against the marriage of priest , to which purpose Johannes Cremensis , a priest car•dinall , by the king licence come into England , and hold a solemn synod at Lon ? don , where inveigh sharp against it , affirm it to be no better than profess adultery , he be himself the night follow , take in bed with a common har ? lot . even Anselme himself , the most earnest enforcer of single life , die not , it seem , a virgin , for else he will never in his write make such lamentation for the loss thereof . Anselme about this time die , Rodulph succeed in the see of Canterbury , and Thomas die , Thurstine succeed in the archbishopric of York : between which two prelate , there arise great contention ; Rodulph will not consecrate Thurstine , unless he will profess obedience ; Thurstine be con ? tent to embrace his benediction , but profess obedience he will not : in this con ? tention the king take part with Rodulph , the pope with Thurstine : after many passage in the business , upon the pope threaten to excommunicate the king , Thurstine enter upon his bishopric , and the king connive . in the ten year of his reign , the abbey of Ely be make a bishop see , and Cambridgeshire be appoint for the diocese thereof , which because it belong before to the Ju ? risdiction of Lincoln , the king give the bishop of Lincoln , in recompense there ? of , the manor of Spalding . this king also create a bishopric at Carlile , and endow it with many honour . in his time , the order of the templar begin , and in the 27. year of his reign , the grey friar , by procurement of the king , come first into England , and have their first house build at Canterbury . i may here have leave to tell two story of churchman , for refresh of the reader : Guy ? mond the king chaplain , observe that unworthy man for the most part be page 56 advance to the best dignity of the church , as he celebrate divine service be ? before he , and be to read the•e word out of saint Iames , [ it rain not upon the earth , three year and vi month ] he read it thus ; it rain not upon the earth , one , one , one year , and five one month . the king observe his rea ? ding , and afterward blame he for it , but Guymond answer , that he do it of purpose , for that such reader be soon prefer by his majesty . the king smile , and in short time after , pre•erred he to the government of saint frides ? wid in Oxford . the other be this , Thomas archbishop of York fall sick , his physician tell he , that nothing will do he good , but to company with a woman ; to who he answer that the remedy be worse than the disea•e , and so die a virgin . this king grant to the church of Canterbury , and to Willi ? be and his successor , the custody , and constableship of the castle of Rochester for ever . work of piety do by this king , or by other in his time . this king found and erect the priory of Dunstable , the abbey of Circester , the abbey of read , and the abbey of Shirborne . he also new build the castle of Windsor , with a college there : he make also the navigable river , be ? between Torkesay and Lincoln , a work of great charge , but great use . his wife queen Maude , pass over the river of lieu , be somewhat endanger , where ? upon she cause two stone-bridge to be build , one at the head of the town of Stratford , the other over another stream there , call channel-bridge , and pave the way between they with gravel . she give also certain manor , and a mill call wyggon mill , for repair the same bridge and way . Theise be the first stone-bridge that be make in England , and because they be arch oh ? for like a bow , the town of Stratford be afterward call Bow. this queen also found the priory of the holy Trinity , now call Christ church , within the east gate of London call Aldgate ; and a hospital of saint Giles in the field , without the west part of the city . in this king time Jordan brifet baron , found the house of saint John of Jerusalem , near to Smithfield , in London , and give 14. Acres of ground , lie in the field next to Clerkenwell , to build thereupon a house of nun , wherein he with myrioll his wife be bury in the chap ? ter house . Robert Fitsham , who come out of Normandy with the conqueror , found anew the church of Teukesbury , and be there bury . Herbert bishop of Norwich , found the cathedral church there . the priory and hospital of saint Bartholomew in Smithfield , be found by a minstrel of the king , name reior who become first prior there . before this time Smithfield be a laystall of all ordure and filth , and the place where felon be put to execution . Hugh la ? cy found the monastery of saint John at Lanthony , near to Gloucester . Iuga bay ? nard , lady of little Dunmow , found the church there , and give to maintain it , half a hide of land this lady Iuga be late wife to Baynard , that first build Baynard castle in London . Eud• the king sewer , found the monastery of saint John at Colchester , of black canon , and those be the first of that order in England . Simon earl of Northampton , and man his wife , found the monastery of saint Andrew in Northhampton . in the seven year of this king reign , the first canon enter into the church of our lady in south ? work , call saint marry Overey ; found by William pountlarge knight , and will ? liam dancye , Normans . Robert the first earl of Gloucester , the king base son , build the castle of Bristol and Cardyffe , with the priory of saint Iames in Bri ? stow : and his son Earle William begin the abbey of Kensham . Geffrey Clin ? tun , treasurer , and chamberlain to the king , found the priory at Kenelworth , of regular canon . Henry earl of Warwick , and Margaret his wife , found the college of saint Mar• , in the town of Warwick ; and Roger de Belemond his son , and Ellyne his wife , translate the same college into the castle of war ? wick , in the year 1123. Roger bishop of Salisbury build the devise in Wiltshire ; page 57 the castle also of Mamesbury and Shirborne . he repair the castle of Salisbury , and environ it with a wall ; he also build the stately church of Salisbury : desti ? ned to a long life than any of his other work . Ralph , bishop of Durham , begin to build the castle of Norham , upon the bank of the river of Tweed . in the 32. year of this king reign , the priory of Norton in Cheshire , be found by one William , the son of Nychel , and the abbey of Cumbermere in the same shire . the college of secular canon also in the castle of Leycester , and the abbey with ? out the north gate of the same town , call saint mary de Prato . also in this king reign , be found the monastery of Plimpton in Devonshire , with the cathedral church of exet•r ; the priory of Merton , the hospital of Kepar , the pri ? ory of Oseney near Oxford by Robert the oily knight : and the hospital of saint cross near Winchester by Henry Blois bishop there : also Robert earl of Ferrer found the abbey of merivall : and indeed so many in his time be build , that one will think the inhabitant of England to be all carpenter and mason , that be able to finish so many great building in so short a time as this king reign . • casualty happen in his time . in this king day all the four element be guilty of do much mischief , but chief the water : for king Henry return into England after his conquest of Normandy , leave his son William with his sister mary countess of perch ; Richard his son by a concubine ; the earl of Chester with his wife Lucy , the king niece by his sister Adela , and other lord and lady , and passenger to the num ? ber of 180. to follow after he : who take ship ( and •he best ship the king have ) whether by carelessness , or drunkenness of the saylours , be all drown . the prince indeed be get into the ship-boat , and out of danger ; but hear the lamentable cry of his sister , compassion wrought so in he , that he turn a ? about his boat to take she in , which overcharge with the multitude , overturned , and they all perish : none escape but only one saylour , who have be a butcher , who by swim all night upon the mast , come safe to land a accident not more grievous than exemplary ; for among other conclusion , from hence we may gather , that no state be so uncertain as prosperity ; no fall so sudden as into ad ? versity ; and that the rule [ he that stand , let he take heed he fall not ] can all ? way be observe , because a man happen sometime to fall before it be possible for he to take heed . another great mischief be in this king day wrought by the water ; for by the break in of the sea , a great part of Flanders be draw ? ned : whereupon a great number of Fleming be suitor to king Henry for some place to inhabit ; he assign they a part in Wal•• near the sea , call Pembroke ? shire , where they have inhabit to this day : the king by this one action , work two good effect , both show compassion to distress stranger , and put a bri ? dle upon unquiet native . but the water have another way to do mischief as much by defect , as this be by excess ; for upon the ten of October , the river of Medway many mile together do so fail of water , that in the midst of the channel , the small vessel can not pass : and the same day also in the Thames , between the tower of London and the bridge , man wade over on foot for the space of two day : also at another time the river of Trent at Nottingham be dry up a whole day . now for the earth , though natural it be without motion , yet it move some ? time when it be to do mischief , special be assist by the air ; as in this king day , it move with so great a violence that many building be shake down , and Malmesbery say , that the house wherein he sit , be lift up with a double remove , and at the three time settle again in the proper place . also in diverse pla ? ces iter yield forth a hideous noise , and cast forth flame at certain rift many day together , which neither by water , nor by any other mean can be sup ? press . but yet the active element of fire be busy of all , for first Chichester with the principal monastery be burn down to the ground : from west-cheap page 58 in London to Aldgate , a long tract of building be consume with fire : Worcester also and Rochester , even in the king presence ; then Winchester , bath , Gloucester , Lincoln , Peterborough , and other place , do also partake of this calamity , that there can be n• charge the fire with any partiality : and to speak of one for ? rain casualty , because a strange one . in Lombardy this year be a earthquake that continue forty day , and remove a town from the place where it stand , a great way off . of his wife and child . at his first come to the crown , he marry matild or Maude , sister to ed ? gar then king of Scotland , and daughter to Malcolme by Margaret the sister of Edgar Etheling . This matild , if she be not a veil nun , she be at least bring up in a nunnery , and thereby grow so averse from marriage , that when the more ? cion be first make she to marry with king Henry , she utter refuse it , as resol ? ve though perhaps not vow , to die a virgin ; till at last importune , and even force by the authority of her brother , she rather yield than consent ; for she do it with so ill a will , that it be say she pray , if ever she have issue by the marri ? age , that it may not prosper : and indeed it prosper but untoward , as will be see in the sequel . but though she make this imprecation before she know what it be to be a mother , yet when she come to be a mother , she show her self no less love and tender of her child , then loyal and obsequious to her husband . and to make amends for this seem impiety towards her child , there be a story relate of her real piety towards the poor : for a brother of she come one more ? ning to visit she in her chamber , find she sit among a company of lazar peo ? ple , wash and dress their ulcer and sore ; and then kiss they afterward when she have do : who wonder at it , and say to she , how can she think the king shall like to kiss that mouth , which have kiss such filthy ulcerous people ? she answer ; she have a great king to kiss , who she know will like she never the worse for it . by this queen matild , king Henry , accord to some writer , have four child ; but as the receive opin•on be , only two , a son name William , and a daughter call mawde ; of who the son at fourteen year old have fealty swear to he by the nobility of Shrewsbury : at seventeen marry the daughter of f•lke earl of Anjou : and at eighteen be unfortunate drown , as have be show . the daughter live to be a empress , and afterward a duchess ; but can never come to be a queen , though bear to a kingdom ; as shall be show hereafter . she survive her second husband seventeen year , live a widow , and at r•an in Normandy die , and be bury there in the ab ? bey of Bec ; though there be • tradition that she be bury at read , in the ab ? bey there beside her father : but •t appear to have be a custom in those day , for great personage to have their monument erect in diverse place . after the death of this queen matild , who die at Westminster , in the eighteenth year of his reign , king Henry marry Ade•za , the daughter of Godfrey duke of lord ? rain ; who though she be a beautiful and accomplish lady , yet have he never any iss•e by she . when she be to be crown , Ralph archbishop of canter ? bury , who be to do the office , come to king Henry , sit crown in his chair of state , ask he who have set the crown upon his head ? the king an ? swear , he have now forget , it be so long since . well ( say the archbishop ) whosoever do it , do i wrong , to who it belong ; and as long as you hold it thus , i will do no office at this coronation . than ( say the king ) do what you think good : whereupon the archbishop take the crown off from the king head ; and after , at the people entreaty , set it on again , and then proceed to crown the queen . by concubine king Henry have many child ; it be say seven son , and as many daughter : of who , some perish in the great shipwreck ; of the rest , two of the son , Reynold and Robert , be make earl : Rey ? nold of Cornwall , Robert of Gloucester , and be a great assister of his sister mawde , in page 59 her trouble with king Stephen , who after many act of valour perform by he , in the twelve year of king Stephen , die , and be bury at Bristol . the daughter be all marry to prince and noble man of England and France , from who be descend many worthy family : particular one of those daughter by an•e C•• ? bet , be marry to fits-herbert , lord Chamberlaine to the King• from which fits-•erbert , our family ( absit i•vidia verbo ) be by female descend ; pass by the na•es of Cummin , chenduit , Brimpton , Stokes , Foxcote , Dyneley , and so to b•ker . of his incontinency . of this enough have be say , in say he have so many child basely• be ? get : but if comparison be mad• between his brother •ufus and he , it may be say , that howsoever they may be equal in looseness of life ; yet in that looseness , William Rufus be the base , and king Henry the more noble ; for king Henry have certain select concubine , to who he keep h•mselfe constant ; where king William take only such as he find : constant to the pleasure , but not to the person . his course for establish the succession in mawde and her issue . he marry his only daughter mawde , be but six year old , to the empe ? rour hen•y the four ; but he leave she a widow without issue• he marry she again to G••ffrey Plantagenet , son to fulke duke of Anjo• : not the great prince that be a suitor for she ; but the fit prince for king Henry turn : for Anjou be neighbour upon Normandy , a great security to it , if a friend ; and as great a danger , if a enemy . and have thus place she in marri••• , h• now consider how to establish her succession in the crown of England• whereu•on he call his nobility together , and among they D•vid king o•Scots , and cause they to give their oath of allegiance to she and her issue : and a• think •e can never ma•e her succession •ure enough , he cause his lord the year ••ter again to tak• the like oath , and after that a three time also ; as conceive that be double and treble , it will make the tie of allegiance the strong : wherein nothing please he so much , as that Stephen , earl of •loi• , be the first man that take the oath , because he be know to be , at least known• he may be , a pretender . but the king shall have consider that N•ll• fides Reg•i• and therefore no oath , though never so often iterate , sufficient to warrant loyalty in person so deep interest , as Stephen be : yet providence can do no more , and the king be well satisfy with it ; especial when he see his daughter a mother of two son : for this , though it give he not assu•ance , yet it ga•e he assure hope to have the crown perpetuate in his poste•ity . of Ireland in his time . the king of England as yet have nothing to do with Ireland , then ? ? ? be govern by its own king : and the people of both Nations• ? ? ? they be ne•ghbours , yet divide by a rough sea , but little ••quai•ted ; but now begin intercourse to be more frequent : and murc•••d••h , ch••fe king of the irish , bear such awful respect to king Henry , that he will do nothing but by his counsel , and with his good like . who king Henry use as his vicegerent in his absence . he be absent sometime in Normandy , three or four year together ; during which time , he commit common the care of the realm to Roger by ? shop of •alisbury , a politic prelate ; and one as fit to be the second in government , as king Henry to be the first . page 60 his pers•••ge a•d condition . he be a person tall and strong , •••ad breast , his limb well kni• , and full furnish with •lesh ; his face well f•shioned , his colour clear , his eye large and fair , his eyebrow large and thick , his hair• black , and •omewhat thin•• to ? ward his forehead ; his countenance pleasan• , special when h• be dispose to mirth . a private man , vilify , and think to have but little in he : but come to the crown , never any man show more excellent ability : so true be the say ? king , Magistratus indicat virum . his natural affection in a direct line be strong ; in a oblique , but weak ; for no man ever love child more , no• a brother l•••e . though a king in act , yet he always ac•ed not a king ; but in ba•••ls some••m•s the part of a common soldier , though with more than common valou••s at a ba• ? tell in France , where he so far hazard himself , that though he lose not his life , yet he lose his blood . of his death and burial . a discontent of mind upon some difference between he and his son in law , the earl of Anjo• , bring upon he a distemper , which increase by eat , against his physiti•ns advise , of a l•mprey ; a meat always pl••s•ng ? ? ? him• but never agree with he ; cast he into a ••aver , which in few •aye• put a p••i•d to his life : so cer•aine it be , that one intemperate action be eno••h to overthrow the temperance of a whole life ; as of this king Henry it be said• th•• he seldom do ea• but when he be hungry , never do drink but when he be •thirst• yet this but on•e yield to his sensual appetite , make h•m forfe•• all benefit of his former abstinence : though some write he too•• his d••th by the f•ll off his h•rs• . he die upon the first of D••ember at night , in •he ye•re 1135. when he have reign five and thirty year , live threescore and seven . his bowel , brain , and eye , be bu•ied at roan in No•mandy where he die : the rest of •i• body be stuff with salt , wrap in ox hide , and bring over in••England , and with hono•rable exequy , bury in the monastery of •e•ding• which himself have found . his physiti•n that •ooke out his brain , with the intolerable stinch short after die . in this king Henry end the line of the n•rmans , as touch the hei•es male ; and then c•me in the fre•ch , by the title of heir general . man of n•te in his time . man of learning in his time be many• first , Stephen Harding a Benedictine monk , who be founder of the Cistercian Orde•• then Anselme , archbi ? shop of C••terbury , who be•ides his activeness in matter of state , write many great and learned book . then walt•r C•l••• , archdeacon of Oxford , who deliver a history write in the british tongue , from Brutus to Cadwallader , to Geoffry of mon ? •••••h to translat• , and add forty year of his own •ime . also ? ? ? a Mon• of W••c•ster , who write D• reb•s gestis anglorum . also E•dm•r•s , a m••k of C••terbury , who ••sides oth•r w••ks , write the history of his own t•me , under the two willi••s and h•••y the first . page 61 the reign of king Stephen . after the decease of king Henry , present step upon the stage of royalty , Stephen earl of Boleyne , son to Stephen earl of •loys , by Adela , daughter of king William the conq•••our ; and though there be two other before he , ma•de the Em ? press , and Theobald his old brother , she in a substantial right , he in a colourable , yet take advantage of be Pri••• Occ• ? pan , the first invader , ( as be quick here after king Henry death , where the other stay linger about other aff•ires ) he solicit all the or ? dear o• the realm , bishop , and lord , and people , to receive he for their so ? ver•ine : wherein beside his own large promise , what great matter he will do for they all , he have the assistance also of Henry his brother , bishop of Winchest•r•nd the pope legate , and of Roger , bishop of Salisbury , his great friend : ( ? ? ? the most powerful man at that time in the state ) who partly by force of reason , but more indeed by force then reason , procure the state to accept he for their king ; and so upon saint Steph•ns day , in anno 1135. he be crown at Westminster , in presence of but three bishop , few of the nobility , and not one abbot , by Willi ? a archbishop of Canterbury , with great solemnity . that which put • scruple in man mind , and make they averse at first , from consent to Stephe• , be the oath they have take to receive king Henry daugh••r Maude to be their q•een , after his decease ; but the weight of this scruple be something abate , when it be urge , that no precedent can be show , that ever the crown have be set upon a woman head . and Roger , bishop of Salisbury , bring another reason , be ? cause they have take that oath but upon condition , that the king shoul• not marry he• out of the realm without their consent , and the king have brok•n the con ? dition , be just cause to nullify their obligation : to which be add , th•• the oath have be exact by authority , which be a •ind of force , it may have the plea of per min•s , and therefore void . and yet more than all these , h•gh big•t , sometime stew••d to king Henry , immediate after his decease , come oh ? ve• into England , and take a voluntary oath before diverse lord of the land , that he be present a little before king Henry death , when he adopt and choose his nephew Stephen to be his successor , because his daughter M••d• have gr•e ? vous at that tim• displease he . but howsoever their breach of oath be thus pallia•ed ; it be certain that many of they , as well bishop as other lord , come afterward to a evil end at least •o many calamity before their end . what course he take to establish himself in the kingdom . it be a true say , ? ? ? reb•s opti•• servat•• Imperium , quibu• p••atur ; and this be Stephens course , he get the kingdom by pro•ises , and he establish it by page 62 performance ; he please the people with ease they of tax and imposition ; he please the clergy with forbear to keep bishopric and abbey va ? cant , and with exempt they from the authority of the temporal magistrate ; he please the nobility with allow they to build Castle• upon their own land ; he please the gen••y with give they liberty to hunt the king deer in their own wood ; and beside with advance many of they in honour : and for his brother Theobald , who be the elder , be before he in pretence to the crown , he please he with a grant to pay he two thousand mark a year ; and then to strengthen himself abroad no less than at home , he marry his son E•stace to Constance a daughter of Lewis king of France , which alliance alone may be think a sufficient security against all opposition . and yet one thing more , which establish he more than these , at least these the more for this , that he have seise• upon king •enries tre•sure , which amount to a hundred thousand pound , beside• plate and •ewels of inestimable value , which he spe•t no• ? ? ? vain riot , but employ to his best advantage , both in procure of friend , and in levy of soldier out of Britain and Flanders . of he trouble in his reign . there may well be make a chapter of the trouble of his reign , see his whole reign be in a manner but one continue trouble , at lea•t no long intermissio ? , then as to give he breath against new encounter ; till at last , when he grow towards his l•st , he rather leave to be in trouble , then be at quiet , be force to make his add ? versary his he•re ; and to leave his crown to he that have seek his life . for he be no soon set in his chair of state , but he be present disquiet and make to rise , by the provocation of David king of Scot , who solicit by some lord of England , but chief by ma•de the empress ( who right he have swear to de ? fend ) with a mighty army enter N•rthumberland , take Carlile , and Newcastle , and be proceed further , till king Stephen with a great army come a ? against he , yet rather buy his peace then win it ; for to recover Newcastle out of his hand , he be fain to let king David hold Cumberland , and his son Henry the earldom of Huntington , as their inheritance ; for which , the father will not for he , as be engage , but the son for he , as be free , do ho ? mage to king Stephen . no soon be this trouble over , but he be present under another ; for be ? king fain somewhat ill at ease• it be bruit abroad that he be dead ; which •o distract man mind , that every one think it wisdom to shift for himself ; and the great lord make a contrary use of castle , to that which king Stephen intend , when he give liberty to build they ; for the king intend they for his own defence against his enemy , and they make use of they in their own de ? fence against the king ; for now huge big•t earl of Norfolk possess himself of N•rwich , Baldwyn river of Oxford , and Robert Quesqu•rius of other castle . in these difficulty king Stephen , though he can not in person be in all place at onc• , yet in care he was• and there most , where be most danger ; employ other against the rest : against Baldwyn he go himself , who , drive before out of Oxford , and get to the isle of wight , the king fo••owed and drive he all ? so from thence , and at last into exile . and now England afford he once again to take a little breath , but then nor ? mandy present begin with he afresh : for now G•offrey Pl••tagenet duke of a ? jou , in right of Maude his wife , enter upon his town there , and •ee•es to get possession of the country ; when king Stephen pass over with a army , and be ? •ests his proceed : and after some small defeat of his enemy , bring the matter at last to a pecuniary composition : he to pay the duke five thousand mark a year , and the duke to relinquish his claim to Normandy . this do , he return into England , where new commotion be attend him• for the lord in his absence , resent his breach of promise , upon which they have a• ? mit page 63 he to the crown , make use every one of their castle , and stand upon their guard : the lord Talbot hold Hereford ; earl Robert ma•ds brother , Bristol ; William Lovel , the castle of Cary ; Paganell , the castle of ludl•w ; William Moun• , the castle of Dunster ; Robert nicholor of Lincoln , the castle of Warham ; Eustace the son of John , the castle of Melton ; William the son of Alan , the castle of Shrewsbury ; and withal David king of Scot , never regard his former agree ? mean , enter Northumberland with a army , commit so great cruelty , in ra ? vish of maid , murder of infant , slaughter of priest , even at the all ? tar , that never any barbarous nation commit great . thus the kingdom from the one end to the other be in combustion , that if the king have have as man ? nigh hand as Briareus , there will have be work enough for they all . yet all this dismay not the king , but as have learn this lesson , tu ne cede malis , sed contra audentior into , grow the more in confidence , the less he be in assurance ; and as if danger be the fuel of courage , the more erect in himself , the less he be uphold by other ; and so , venture what his rebel at home will do in his absence , he pass himself in person against David king of Scot ; as be the most dangerous , and therefore the first to be repress : but find it hard to draw he to a battle , and impossible without a battle to do any good upon he ; he leave the care of that quarrel to Thurstine archbishop of York , and return himself home , if it may be call home , where he scarce have a safe place to put his head in . but though many lord be rebellious against he , yet some there be stick firm to he , by who assistance and his own industry , partly by enticement , partly by enforcement , he reduce most of they to obedience , and all of they to submission ; when in the mean time Thurstine archbishop of York ; and in his sickness , Ralph bishop of Durham , assist with William earl of Aumerle , William Piperell of Nottingham , and Hubert de Lacy , fight a memo ? rabble battle against David king of Scot ; wherein though king David himself , and his son Henry perform wonderful act of prowess , yet the english get the victory , with the slaughter of eleven thousand Scot in the fight , beside man ? nigh other slay in the flight ; where of the english none of account be slay , but only a brother of Hubert lacyes , and some small number of common soldier . this victory infinite please and comfort king Stephen , who not long after to make a absolute suppression of the Scot , pass again with a army , and enforce king David to demand a peace , deliver his son Henry into king Stephens hand for a pledge ; and come homeward , by the way he besiege Ludlow , one of rebel nest , where prince Henry of Scotland have be take pri ? soon , if king Stephen in his own person have not rescue he . after this , once again the king get a little breathe time , but it be but to prepare he for great encounter : for now Maud the empress her self in per ? son come into play ; in who the oath before take be to have its trial ; for till now , though never so real intend , yet it can not actual be perform ; for how can they receive she for queen , who come not in place to be receive ? but now that she come in person , now be the time of trial , how the oath will work ; and work it do indeed with many , and that strong ; for Maude come ? ming into England , with Robert earl of Gloucester her brother ; be most joyful receive at Arundel castle , by William de Aubigny , who have marry Adeliza the queen dowager of the late king Henry , and have the say castle and county assign she for her dower . king Stephen have intelligence hereof , come to Arundel castle wi•h a army , and besiege it ; but either divert by ill counsel , or else find the castle to be inexpugnable , he leave the siege , and suff ? red the empress to pass to Bristol . the king hear , that Ra•ulph earl of Chester , son in law to Robert earl of Gloucester , have possess himself of the city of Lincoln , thither he go with a army and besiege it : thither also come the say earl of Chester , and Robert earl of Gloucester to raise his siege ; at which time , a most fierce battle be fight between they , upon Candlemas day ; where ? in it be memorable what wonder of valour king Stephen perform ; for , when page 64 all his man about he be either flee or slay ; yet he keep the field himself alone : no man dare to come near he : horrentibus inimicis incomparabilem ictuum ejus in ? manitatem , say Hoveden : yet overmastered at last by multitude , he be take prisoner , and bring to Maude the empress ; who send he to be keep in safe cu ? stody in the castle of bris•ow , where he remain till All-hollantide after . and now the empress have get king Stephen into her hand , she take her journey to London ; receive in all place , as she go , peaceable , and at London joyful ; where queen matild make humble suit un•o she , for the liberty of king Stephen her husband ; and that he may but be allow to live a private life : the Londoner also make suit to have the law of king Edward restore ; but the empress not only reject both their suit , but return they answer in harsh and insult language ; indeed most unseasonable ; and which give a stop to the current of all her fortune : for queen matild find thereby , how high the empress pulse do beat ; send present to her son Eustace , be then in Kent , to raise force with all speed , with who , the Londoner , as much discontent as she , do after ? ward join ; and hen•y bishop of Winchester , as much discontent as either of they , fortify his castle at Waltham and Farnham ; and special Winchester , where he stay himsel•e , attend upon what coast the next wind of the Em ? press will blow . of all these thing the empress have intelligence , and there ? upon secret in the night she flee to Oxford , send straight charge , to have king Stephen more narrow watch , more hardly use ; put ( as some write ) into fetch ? ter ; and feed with very bare and poor commons ; withal she send to she un ? kle David king of Scot , to come unto she with all speed possible , who come accord , they fall into consultation what be first to be do ; the lot fall upon Winchester , as be their great adversary , now , no less in appearance then in power : so Winchester they besiege ; which queen matild hear , she with her son Eustace and the Londoner , come present to the succour , where a fierce battle be fight , the end be , that the party of queen matild prevail , and the empress to make she escape , be fain to be lay upon a horse back in man ? ner of a dead corpse , and so convey to Gloucester ; while earl Robert her brother disdain to fly , be take prisoner , who queen matild cause to be use the more hardly , in retaliation of the hard usage which the empress before have show to king Stephen . thing stand in these term , proposition be make by the lord for pacification , but such be the high spirit of the empress , and her bro ? ther Robert , that no condition will please they , unless the empress may enjoy the crown . but after long debate , whether by agreement between they ? self , or by connivance of the keeper , both king Stephen and Earle Robert get to be at liberty . when the first thing king Stephen do , be to look out the Em ? press , to requite the kindness she have show he in prison ; and hear she to be at Oxford , he lay siege to the town , and bring the empress to such di ? stress , that she have no way to free her self but by flight ; and no way to flee but with manifest danger , yet she effect it by this devise : it be in the winter sea ? son , when frost and snow cover all the ground over ; she therefore clad her self , and her four servant that be with she in white clothes , which be of the colour of snow , make she pass the watch without be discern , and by this mean come safe to her friend at Wallingford . yet Mamesbury who live at that time , confess he can never learn certain by what mean she make she e ? escape . but howsoever she escape this present danger ; yet it leave such a impres ? sion of fear upon she , that she never after have any mind to appear upon this stage of war , but leave the prosecution of it to her son Henry , who be now about sixteen year of age , and be forward of his age , and able to bear Armes• be by his great uncle David king of Scot , knight , to make he more for ? ward . it be now the nine year of king Stephens reign , when Ralph earl of vhe ? star , keep possession of the city of Lincoln , be in the night time assault by the king ; but the earl perceive the king force to be but small , sudden be ? sue page 65 forth , and repel the king with the slaughter of fourscore of his man . yet two year after this , the earl be reconcile to the king , and come of his own accord to wait upon he , when perfidious he be detain by the king ; and not set at liberty , till he have surrender into the king hand all the castle that be in his possession ; which though it bring the king some present benefit , yet it wrought he a great future loss ; for it lose he his credit with all man , and no man afterward will trust his word . now be duke Henry come to the age of nineteen year , and be in possession ? on of the dukedom of Anjou , by the death of his father Geffrey Plantagenet ; and not long after this , he marry Eleanor the daughter and heir of William duke of Guyen , by who he have that duchy , and also the earldom of Poicton : nor ? mandy he have by his mother ; but more by the people inclination . so as be possess now of four great principality , this greatness of estate add to the greatness of his spirit , make he aspire to recover his right in England ; and oh ? for he come , bring with he but small force , but promise himself great , from the people of this kingdom : and many indeed resort to he ; with who he fall present , and besiege Marleborough ; but by the king great force be repel . after this , their army continue in the field still ; rather watch advantage to be do , than do any thing ; sometime advance when no enemy be near , and then retire when the enemy come ; till at last it be like to come to a set battle , when sudden Eustace king Stephens only son unfortunate die ? ed : unfortunate for himself , but fortunate for the kingdom ; for now king Stephen be leave destitute of issue to succeed , be the more easy draw to con ? dition of peace , as likewise the empress Maude , have late lose her brother Robert earl of Gloucester , and mile earl of Hereford , ( her two best champion ) be no less willing of peace than he ; which be further by the lord of both side , be at last conclude upon these condition , that Stephen shall hold the kingdom of England during his life , and adopt duke Henry as his heir to succeed he . and this agreement thus make , and in a parliament at Winchester confirm , duke Henry ever after account king Stephen no less than a father , and king Stephen , duke Henry no less than a son : and well he may , if it be true which some write , that the empress , when a battle be to be fight between king Stephen and her son , go privy to he , ask he how he can find in his heart to fight against he that be his own son ? can he forget the familia ? rity he have with she in her first widowhood ? but this be no matter for the writer of that time to deliver : it touch too near the interest of prince then in be : and prince must not be touch while they live , nor when they be dead neither with uncertainty , as this can be no other : but howsoever it be , cer ? take it be , that after this agreement between king Stephen and duke Henry , they continue in mutual love and concord , as long after as they live . but what become of Maude the empress at this time ? for , that she be alive , and live many year after this agreement between king Stephen and her son Henry , all writer agree ; and to say that she consent to the agreement , without a ? ny provision make for her self , be to make she too much a woman ; a very weak vessel : and to say there may be provision make , though it be not record , be to make all writer defective in a great excess . and beside , be so stir a woman as she be , that upon a sudden she shall be so quiet , as not to deserve to have one word speak of she , in all the long time she live after , ( be no less than twelve or thirteen year ) be as strange as the rest . and if she place she con ? tentment so whole in her son , that in regard of he , she regard not her self at all ; it deserve at least the encomium of such a motherly love as be very unusual , and not always safe . whatsoever it be , i must be fain to leave it as a gordian knot , which no writer help i to untie . page 66 of his taxation , and way for raise of money . of taxation in his time , there be no mention make ; for taxation indeed , be proper draw from a body of state when it be entire , where the state all this king time be altogether in fraction . but what he want in taxation , he supply with confiscation , which by reason of the many revolting of man of all sort , can not choose but fill his coffer ; every rebellion be in nature of a purchase to he , for whatsoever become of the person , their land and good be sure to be he . and if it happen at any time , that confiscation come in but slow , he have then devise to hasten their pace , for upon light sug ? gestion ( not so much oftentimes as just suspicion ) he will call man into que ? scion , and seize upon their good , as in the case particular of Ralph bishop of sa ? lisbury ; and it may not be unpleasing to hear from what beginning this bishop grow to such a height of greatness ; which be thus ; in the time of king William Rufus , he be a poor priest , serve a cure in a village near to ca•n in norman ? die , when the king young brother Henry chance to pass that way , and to make some stay in the say village ; who be desirous to hear a mass , this Roger be curate , be the man to say it ; which he dispatch with such celerity , that the soldier ( who common love not long mass ) commend he for it , tell their lord , that there can not a fit priest be find for man of war than he . whereupon Henry appoint he to follow he , and when he come to be king , prefer he to many great place , and at last to be chancellor of England , and bishop of Salisbury . you have hear his rise , now hear his fall ; when king Stephen come to the crown , he hold this man in as great account as his predeces ? sour king Henry have do , and perhaps in great ; for be a great beggar of suit , the king will say of he , if this man will never give over ask , neither shall i ever give over give . yet this great prelate fall first through pride into envy , and then through envy into ruin . for king Stephen have give liberty to build castle , this man do so f•rre exceed all other in magnificence ( for he build the castle of Salisbury , the vie , Sherburne , Mamesbury and Newarke , to which there be no structure comparable in the kingdom ) that the lord out of envy put it into the king head , that these castle of he be build thus magni ? ficent for entertainment of ma•de the empress : which so possess the king , or he will be think to be so possess , that take this for a just cause , he seize they all into his hand , and forty thousand mark beside , which he have in more ? ney : and not co•tented with this , he take the like course also with Alexander by ? shop of Lincoln , only because he be his nephew and of his near kindred . an ? other way he have for gain of money : for in the first year of his reign , ha ? ve give liberty to hunt in his forest , be afterward at Oxford cause many to be implead for use that liberty ; a trick which perhaps he learn from hun ? ting , first to give man leave to do a thing , and then to fine they for have do it . but this be the privilege of prince , that their leave must be interpret by he that give it , and not by he that take it . law and ordinance in his time . he give licence to the city of Norwich to have coroner and bailiff , before which time , they have only a sergeant for the king to keep court ; and of ? ter this , in the 37. year of king Henry the three , they have licence to enclose the town with ditch . Affaires of the church in his time . upon the king seize into his hand , the bishop of salisburies castle , and good , complaint be make , and a synod call by the bishop of Winche ? star page 67 the pope legate , to right the bishop , where the king be cite to appear ; who send to know the cause , answer be make , that it be to answer for his imprison of bishop , and deprive they of their good , which be a Chri ? stian king he ought not to do . the king reply by his lawyer , Alveric de ver , that he have not arrest the bishop of Salisbury as a bishop , but as his servant , that be to make he account of his employment . to this the bishop answer , that he be never servant or accountant to the king : and many allegation and pro ? bation be urge to and fro , but in conclusion the synod break up , and nothing be do . the bishop dare not excommunicate the king without the pope pri ? vity ; so in the end they fall from authority to submission ; and in the king cham ? ber fell down at his foot , beseech he he will pity the church ; and not suffer dissension to be between the kingdom and the priesthood . and this be no small magnanimity in the king , that he be able to pull down the high sto ? mach of the prelate in that time . in the eight year of his reign a synod be hold in London by Henry bishop of Winchester , where it be decree , that who ? soever shall lay violent hand upon any clergy man , shall not be absolve but by the pope himself : and from this time forward , clergy man be exempt from the secular power . in the ten year of his reign , by the solicit of saint by|our ? nard , many take upon they the cross , for a supply to the holy land ; among who , some english lord also . work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . he found the abbey of Cogshall in Essex ; of furney in Lancashire ; of hur ? guiler and Feversham in Kent ; at Heigham in Kent , a house of black nun ; also a house for nun at Carew : he queen matild build the hospital of saint Katherine by the tower of London : a knight call sir William of mount fit ? chet , found the abbey of Stratford Langthorne , within four mile of London ; William of Ypre found Boxeley abbey in Kent ; Robert earl of Ferrer , found the abbey of merivall in Warwickshire ; and in the same shire , Robert earl of glow ? cester , the abbey of nun eat . also by other be found the abbey of Tiltey ; of Rievall ; of Newborough and Beeland ; of Garedon in L•ycestershire ; of Kirkstead in Yorkshire : and diverse other in other place , so that more abbey be erect in his day , then have be within the space of a hundred year before . of his wife and child . he marry , by his uncle king Henry mean , matild , daughter and heir of Eustace earl of Boleyne , a woman make for the proportion of both for ? tune : in adversity not deject ; in prosperity not elate : while her husband be at liberty , a woman ; during his durance , as it be a man ; act his part for he when he be restrain from act it himself ; not look that fortune shall fall into her lap , but industrious to procure it . by this queen , he have only one son name Eustace , a prince more than of hope , for he live to the blossom of much valour , though it come not to maturity , as be cut off at eighteen year of age , some say , by drown , and some by a strange accident . but strange relation must not always be reject , for though many of they be forge , yet some no doubt be true ; and who know but it may be of this kind , which some writer relate of the death of this prince : that be at the abbey of Bury in Norfolk , and deny some money he require to have have ; he present ? lie in a rage go forth , and set fire on the Cornefields belong to the abbey , but afterward sit down to dinner , at the first morsel of bread he put into his mouth , he fall into a fit of madness , and in that fit die ? certain , the per ? son of prince be for more observation than ordinary people ; and as they make example , so they be sometime make example . this prince Eustace be so page 68 belove of his father , that he have a purpose to have join he king with he ? self , but that the pope upon the bishop complain to he of it , divert he from it . howsoever be dead , he be bury in Feversham abbey , where his more ? there be bury a little before . other legitimate issue king Stephen have none , but by a concubine he have a son name William , who he make earl of Norfolk , which honour be confirm upon he , by a special article , in the agreement make between king Stephen and duke Henry : only a french chronicle speak of another son of he , name Gervase , make abbot of Westminster , and that he die in the year 1160. and be there bury . of his personage and condition . he be tall of stature , of great strength , and of a excellent good complexion . concern the quality of his mind , there be apparent in he a just mixture of valour and prudence ; for if he have not have both , he can never have hold out with such weak friend as he do , against such potent adversary as he have . and special it must be confess , he be of a excellent temper for a soldier , see he never kill any enemy in cold blood , as Anthony do Cicero ; nor any friend in hot blood , as Alexander do Clitus . what he will have be in peace , we be leave to judge by only a pattern , the short time between his agreement with duke he•ry and his death : which see he spend in travel to all part of the realm , and seek to sti•ch up the breach which the violence of war have make ; we may well think , that if his life have be continue , he will have give as good proof of his justice in peace , as he have do of his valour in war . for of his extraordinary good nature we have a sufficient example in one action of he , which be this : duke Henry be on a time , in some straight for money , send to his mother Maude the empress , desire she to furnish he , but she answer , that she be in as great straight her self , and therefore can not do it ; than he send to his uncle Earle Robert to furnish he , and he answer , he have little enough to serve his own turn , and therefore can not do it ; at last he send to king S•ephen , and he though a adversary , and stand in term of open ? position , yet send present and supply he with it . he be withal a great open ? pugner of superstition , which make he on a time to ride into Lincoln with his crown upon his head , only to break the people of a superstitious opinion they hold , that no king can enter into that city in such manner , but that some great disaster will fall upon he . one special virtue may be note in he , that he be not note for any special vice , whereof if there have be any in he , writer certain will not have be silent . of his death and burial . as a fish can live out of water , no more be it in the destiny of this king , to live out of trouble ; as •oone as he come to enjoy quietness , he leave to en ? joy life , no more time leave he between his agreement with duke Henry and his death , but only so much as may reasonable serve he to take his last leave of all his friend ; for it be but from January to October ; and the last friend he take leave of , be Theodoricke earl of Flanders , who he meet at Dover , and as soon as he have dismiss he , he be sudden take with the iliake passion , and with a old disease of the emerald : and die in the monastery there , the five and twentyeth of October , in the year 1154. when he have reign almost nine ? ten year , live nine and forty ; and be bury in the abbey of Feversham , which he have found . page 69 man of note in his time . of clergy man , there be Thurstine archbishop of York , and Henry bishop of Winchester the king brother , also William , another archbishop of York , who we may find in the calendar of saint , as likewise saint Bernard who live in this time , though not of this country , and if we may reckon stranger , there live at this time , Peter Lombard , master of the sentence ; Peter comester , writer of the ecclesiastical story ; and Gratian , compiler of the canon law , all three brother , and all three bastard ; also Avicen , Averroes , mesue , and Rabbi sa ? lomon be in this time famous . of military man , there be Ranulph earl of vhe ? star ; Reynold earl of Cornwall ; Robert earl of Leycester ; Hugh Bigot , earl of nor ? folk , but special Robert earl of Gloucester , the king base son , who praise , if any desire to hear sound out to the full , let he read William of Malmesbury , who write the history of those time , of purpose to be his trumpet . of the writer of our nation , there be this William of Malmesbury , Henry Huntington , Simon Du ? nelmensis , William Revellensis , and Geffrey of Monmouth , bishop of saint Asaph in Wales . also Hugo Carthusianus , a burgundian , but make bishop of Lincoln here in England . page 70 the life and reign of king Henry the second . king Stephen be dead , Henry duke of Anjou , by his fa ? ther Geoffry Plantagenet , succeed he in the kingdom of en ? gland by agreement ; who he precede by right , as be son and heir of mawde , sole daughter and heir of king Henry the first ; and be crown at Westminster , by the•bald archbishop of Canterbury , on the seventeenth of December , in the year 1155. and be now a great prince than any of his ancestor have be before : and indeed , the kingdom of England , the dukedom of Normandy , and the dukedom of Anjou in his own right ; and in the right of his wife queen Eleanor , the duchy of •uyen , and the earl ? dome of Poictou b•ing all unite in his person , make he a dominion of a large ex ? tent then any king Christian have at that time . he be bear at ment in Normandy , in the year 1132. of great joy to his father Geoffry , duke of Anjou ; a great to his mother mawde the empress ; but so great to his grandfather king Henry the first , that it seem to make amends for his son William , who unfortunate he have lose before by shipwreck . the year of his childhood be spend at home under the care of his parent : at nine year old or there about , he be bring by his uncle Robert earl of Gloucester into England , and place at Bristol , where under the tuition of one Matthew his schoolmaster , to instruct he in learning , he remain four year , after which time he be send into Scotland , to his great uncle David king of Scot , with who he remain about two year , initiate by he in the principle of state , but chief of his own estate : and be now about fifteen year of age , be by he knight , and though scarce yet ripe for arm , yet as a fruit gather before its time , be mellow under the discipline of his uncle Robert , one of the best soldier of that time . and now the duke his father not able any long to en ? dure his absence , send with great instance to have he send over to he ; for satis ? fie of who longing , earl Robert provide he of passage , and conduct he himself to the sea side , where he take his last farewell of he . be come into Anjou , his father , perhaps overjoyed with his presence , not long after die , leave he in present possession of that dukedom , be now about nineteen year of age : when short after he marry Eleanor , late the wife of Lewis king of France , but now divorce . a year or two after he come again into England , where after some velitation with king Stephen , they be at last reconcile , and page 71 his succession to the crown of England , ratify by act of parliament . not long after he go again into France , and present fall to besiege a castle which be detain from he by the french king : in the time of which siege , news be bring he of king Stephens death ; which one will have think shall have make he hasten his journey into England ; yet he resolve not to stir till he have win the cast : which resolution of his be know to the defendant , they surrender the castle ; but yet no soon , but that it be six week after before he come into England , when he be now about the age of three and twenty year . his first act after he come to the crown . he begin his reign as Solomon will have begin it , if he have be in his place : for , first he make choice of wise and discreet man to be his consel ? lour : than he banish out of the realm all stranger , and especial Fleming , with who the kingdom swarm ; as of who king Stephen have make use in his war , among who be William of ypres , late before make earl of Kent . Castles which by king Stephens allowance have be build , he cause to be demolish , ( of which there be say to be eleven hundred and fifteen ) as be rather nursery of rebellion to the subject , then of any safety to the prince . he appoint the most able man of that profession , to reform abuse of the law , which disorder of the war have bring in : he banish many lord , who a ? against their oath have assist king Stephen against he ; as think that man onc• perjure , will never be faithful : and to the end he may be the less press up ? on the people with taxation , he resume all such land belong to the crown , which have any way be alien or usurp ; as think it better to displease a few then many : and many other thing he do , which in a disjoint state be no less profitable and expedient , then requisite and necessary . his trouble during his reign . he have no competitor , nor pretender with he for the crown ; and therefore his trouble at first be not in capite , strike not at the root , as king Stephens do : but be only some certain nibbling at inferior part ; till at last he bring they himself into his own bowel . for what be the trouble in his first year with the welsh , but as a exercise rather to keep he in motion , then that it need to disquiet his rest ? for though they be mutinous for a time , while they look upon their own buckler ; their wood and mountainous passage : yet as soon as king Henry do but show his sword among they , they be soon reduce to obedi ? ence for the present , and to a great awfulness for the future . it be true , Henry earl of Essex that bear the king standard , be so assault by the welsh , that he let the standard fall to the ground , which encourage the welsh , and put the english in some fear , as suppose the king have be slay ; but this be soon frustrate to the welsh , and punish afterward in the ea•le , by condemn he to be shear a monk , and put into the abbey of read , and have his land seize into the king hand . and what be his trouble with Malcolme king of Scot , but a work of his own beginning ? for if he will have suffer he to enjoy that which be just his own , Cumberland and Huntingtonshire , by the grant of king Stephen , and Northumberland , by the gift of his mother Maude the empress ; he may have stay quiet at home , and need not at all to have stir•ed his foot ; but he can not endure there shall be such paring off from the body of his kingdom : and therefore go with a army into the north , where he win not , but take Northumberland from he , with the city of carl•ill , and the castle of Newcastle and Bamberg : and mere out of gratefulness , in remembrance of the many co•rtesies do he before , by David king of Scot ; he leave he the county of Hunting•on , but yet with condition to owe feal•y , and to do homage page 72 to he for it . and what be his trouble with his brother Geffrey , but a bird of his own hatch ? for his father Geffrey , duke of Anjou , have three son , Henry , Geffrey , and William ; and die he leave his dukedom of Anjou to his elder son Henry , but to hold no long than till he shall come to be king of England , and then to deliver it up to his second son Geffrey : and he make his lord to swear , not to suffer his body to be bury , until his son Henry have take his oath to do it ; which oath Henry afterward , in reverence to his father body , do take : but as he take it unwilling , so he willing break it , and send present to Adrian the then pope , for a dispensation of his oath : which grant , he enter Anjou with a army , and take from his brother Geffrey , be little able to make resistance , not only the dukedom of Anjou , but some other city also , which his father have absolute give he for his maintenance : yet out of brotherly kindness be content to allow he a pension of a thousand pound a year : which brotherly kindness be so unkind take by his brother Geffrey , that it break his heart ; and within a short time after die . and thus these trouble begin by Henry himself , be soon end ; but now a trouble be come on , begin by Lewis king of France , and this be like to stick long ? er by he . for king Lewis not have yet digest king Henry marriage with his divorce wife Eleanor , seek all opportunity to express his spleen , by do he displeasure ; and a fit opportunity be now offer : for there fall out a difference between Raymond earl of saint Giles , and Henry king of England , about the earldom of Tholouse , which Raymond possess , and Henry claim : in this diffe ? rinse , king Lewis take part with Raymond , as pretend it to be the just side . hereupon be great force provide on both side , and it be like to have come to a dangerous battle ; but that by mediation of friend , a peace be make ; and to make the peace the firm , a marriage be conclude between Henry , king hen ? rise elder son , scarce yet seven year of age ; and Margaret , daughter of king Lewis , not past three : who be deliver to king Henry to bring up till fit year for consummation . this be then think a strong link to hold they in friend ? ship , but it prove afterward a cause to make the great breach : and indeed when a son be once match into a family , the father must never look from thence afterward to have a good wish ; see the daughter thus match can have no add ? vancement , but by the advancement of her husband ; and he none , at least , none so w•ll , as by the ruin of his father : yet this break not out till some year of ? ter . it be now about the eighteenth year of king Henry reign , and his son Henry grow to be seventeen year of age• when it come into the king mind to have his son Henry crown king , and reign with himself in his own time ; partly out of indulgence to his son , but chief , as have find by his own experience , that oath for succession be common elude : but oath for present allegiance , as be verba de praesenti , can have no evasion : and please himself with this conceit , he acquaint his lord with his purpose , and cause his son Henry to be crown king by the hand of Roger archbishop of York ; and all the lord to swear allegiance to he : at the feast of which solemnity , king Henry to honour his son , will needs carry up the first dish to his table ; whereupon the archbishop Roger stand by , and say merry to the new king : what a honour be this to you , to have such a waiter at your table ? why ( say he ) what great matter be it for he that be but the son of a duke , to do service to i , that be the son of a king and queen ? which the old king hear , begin to repent he , now it be too late of that he have do . for indeed the honour which by God commandment , child be to do to their parent ; be by such make they their equal , in a manner abolish ; at lest it give they stomach to take more upon they then be fit . but king Henry pass it over , and mean to set the best side outward . and now king Lewis take displeasure that his daughter be not crown as well as her husband , and therefore to satisfy he in that point , king Henry send his son Henry and his wife Margaret into England• and cause they both to be page 73 crown by Walter archbishop of roan : and short after , the young king Henry and his wife go back to king Lewis her father , and by he with great joy , and variety of sport be entertain . in the time of their be there , king Lewis partly out of his old spleen to king Henry , and partly to make his son in law more absolure ; false oftentimes into conference with he , and find his hot spirit to be fit tinder for such fire , tell he , it be a shame he shall suffer himself to be make a stale ; have the title of a king , and not the authority : and that as long as he stand in such term , that which seem a honour , be indeed a disgrace . with which word of king Lewis , the young king Henry be set afloat , and from that time forward , stick not open to oppose his father : whereof his father ha ? ve intelligence , send messenger to king Lewis , desire he from the king their master , to be a mean to bring his son to more moderation . but king Lewis hear the ambassador name their master king , with a angry countenance say unto they ; what mean you by this to call he king , who have pass his king ? dome over to his son ? and with this answer send they away . to this evil , another worse be add : that queen Eleanor his wife enrage with jealousy of her hus ? band concubine , both incense her son Henry , and persuade also two other of her son , Richard and Geffrey , to join against their father ; tell they , it will be better for they that their brother shall prevail , who can not choose but allow they better maintenance , than their father do . with these per ? swasion they pass over into Normandy , and join with their brother Henry ; who embolden by their assistance , grow now more insolent than he be before ; that when messenger be send to he from his father , require he to lay down his arm , and to come love to he : he proud make answer , that his fa ? there must not look he will lay down his arm , unless himself first will lay down his authority , and resign the kingdom . and now Lewis king of France , call together the great lord of his kingdom , and with they William king of Scot , huge earl of Chester , Roger Mowbray , Hugh Pigot , and other of his son party ; they all take their oath to assist the young king Henry with all their power ; and thereupon all in one day , the french invade Normandy , Aquitaine and Britain ; the king of Scots Northumberland ; and king Lewis the city of Vernoill , which he bring to that distress , that it be agree by the inhabitant , if it be not succour within three day , than to surrender it . king Henry hear of this agreement , promise to succour they by that day . but here king Lewis use a trick , get that by fraud , which he can not do by force ; for he send to king Henry , that if he be willing to have peace with his son , he shall meet he at a place appoint , at such a time , and he doubt not to effect it . king Henry glad of such a offer , and with that gladness perhaps blind , and not suspect any deceit , promise to meet ; and come to the place at the day , which be the day he shall have succour Vernoill , he stay there all day look for king Lewis come ; who instead of come , send word to Vernoill , that king Henry be defeat ; and therefore their hope of succour be in vain : whereupon the citizen think it to be so indeed , because he come not accord to his promise , surrender the town : which king Lewis find himself unable to hold , set it on fire , and so depart . but king Henry when he perceive the fraud , follow he with his army , and take a bloody revenge of his fraud , with the slaughter of ma ? nigh of his man . at the same time also king Henry force encounter huge earl of Chester , and Robert Fulger , who have take dole in Britain , take they prisoner , and bring they to king Henry : and about the same time likewise in England , Robert earl of Leycester think to surprise Raynold earl of Cornwall , and Richard Lacy , king Henry general , at unaware , be himself by they overthrow , and the town of Leycester take ; which only the site of the place defend from be batter to the ground . Robert earl of Leycester be thus defeated• pass over into France , and be supply by king Lewis with great force than before , be together with Hugh Bigot send back into England , to draw the country to hen ? ry the son party ; who at first assault take Norwich : and then set down be ? before page 74 bury , they be in a great battle , by Richard Lacy , and other of king Henry captain , overthrow with the slaughter of ten thousand man , and as many take prisoner ; among who earl Robert himself . yet be not Roger maw ? bray and huge Bigot so daunt with this overthrow , but that together with David the king of Sco•s brother , they gather new force , and invade Northumberland and Yorkshire , when Robert Scoccee , Ralph Granula , William Vesci , and Barnard Bayliol ( of who Baynard castle in London , first take the name ) knight of those part , as ? •emble together , and fight a great battle with they , overthrow they , and take the king of Sco•s prisoner , with many other . yet be not huge Bigot daunt with this neither , but gather new force , and take Norwich ; and Robert Ferris , note ? ham : the news whereof , when king Henry the son hear , he recover new spi ? rite , and obtain new assistance from king Lewis , prepare himself afresh for war : which king Henry the father hear , return speedy into England ; and to appease saint Thomas Beckets ghost , go to visit his tomb , and there ask he forgiveness . this do , he go into Suffolk , and at Framingham castle , which belong to Hugh Bigot , stay with his army , when sudden move , by what instinct , no man know ( unless the appease of saint Thomas ghost do work it ) both huge Bigot deliver up his castle into king Henry hand , and like ? wise Roger Mawbray , Robert Ferris , and many other of that party , come voluntari ? lie in , and submit themselves to the king mercy . hereupon king Henry return to London , about which time he commit his wife queen Eleanor to prison , for her practise against he . in the mean time , king Lewis understand that nor ? mandy be but weak guard , together with his son the young king Henry , and fillip earl of Flaunders ; he besiege roan , which the king force valiant thou ? fend , till he come himself in person ; and thereupon king Lewis despair of any good to be do•e , send messenger to king Henry for a truce , and appoint a day to meet at Gysors , where he doubt not to make a reconcilement between his son and he ; king Henry agree willing , but of the meeting nothing be do : it seem it be but one of king Lewis his old trick to come fair off . after this truce make with king Lewis , king Henry hear that his son Richard have in the mean time possess himself of a great part of the province of Poicto• ; go thither with a army , where Richard at last , after some hesitation , as doubt ? ing his force , submit himself to his father , and ask his pardon ; which his fa ? there as free grant , as if he have never commit any fault ; and thereupon king Henry employ he to king Lewis and his brother Henry , to persuade they to peace : who weary now with the war , be easy draw , and so reconcilia ? cion on all part be make ; and to confirm the reconciliation between the two king , Henry and Lewis , his daughter Adela be affiance to king Henry son Richard , as earl of Aquitaine , and because the lady be but young , she be come ? mit to the care of king Henry , till she shall be fit for marriage . upon this king Henry set Robert earl of Leycester , and huge earl of Chester , give hosta ? guess and oath for their allegiance , at liberty ; and William also king of Scot , pay a certain mulct ; for which he deliver in paw the strong castle of Berwick , Roxborough , and sterling to king Henry , and be fine also to lose the county of Huntington , and never to receive any rebel into his protection . Theise thing do , the king with his son return into England , where with all joy ? fullness they be receive . it be now the year 1179. when king Lewis begin again to grow discontent with king Henry , because his daughter be not yet marry to his son Richard , as be agree : but king Henry make he promise to have they marry within a few day , give he satisfaction ; though indeed he mean nothing less , for it be think he keep she for himself , as with who he have before that time , have unlawful familiarity . the year after be memora ? ble for nothing , or for nothing so much as the death of the young king Henry , who die then ; who widow Margaret return into France , be afterward marry to Bela king of Hungary . now king Henry son Richard , no long endure to have his marriage delay , which his father often promise , but will never page 75 suffer to be perform ; false into his old fit of discontentment : wherein though he can perhaps be justify , yet he may just be excuse , for to be keep from a wife at that time of his age , for which a wife be most proper ; and especial have be affiance so long before , which can not choose but make his appetite the sharp : must needs be , if not a just cause , at least a strong provocation to make he doe as he do : howsoever , from this fit of discontentment , he fall into a relapse of rebellion , and infect with it his brother John , and a great part of his father adherent ; they all take part with Philip ( now after the decease of Lewis ) king of France , who will to make use of their assistance , before the stream of filial awfulness shall return into the natural channel , take they along with he , and besiege the city of ment , in which king Henry at that time be himself in person ; who apprehend the danger , and then resent the mischief of fall into his enemy hand , get he secret out of the city , leave it to defend it self , till he shall return with great force : but hear afterward that the town be take , he fall into so great a distraction of mind , that it make he break out into these blasphemous word ; i shall never hereafter love God any more , that have suffer a city so dear unto i , to be take from i : but he quick re ? collect himself , and repent he that he have speak the word . Indeed ment be the city in which he be bear , that to have this city take from he , be as much as to have his birthright take from he ; and to say the truth , after he have lose this city , he scarce seem to be alive ; not only because he short after die , but because the state of majesty which have all his life accompany he , after this forsake he : for now he be fain to beg peace of his enemy , who often be ? fore have beg it of he : now he be glad to yield to condition , which no force before can have wrest from he . it be memorable and worth observe , that when these two king have meeting between Turwyn and Arras , for recon ? cilement of difference ; there sudden happen a thunderbolt to light just be ? between they , with so terrible a crack , that it force they for that time to break off their conference : and afterward at another meeting , the like accident of Thun ? der happen again , which so amaze king Henry , that he have fall off his horse , if he have not be support by those about he ; which can be nothing but drop let fall of the divine anger , and manifest presage of his future disaster . and thus this great prince trouble , which begin in little one , and be conti ? nue in great one , end at last in so great a trouble , that it end his life , and leave he a example of desolation , notwithstanding all his greatness ; forsake of his friend , forsake of his wife , forsake of his child ; and ( if he be not he ? self when he blaspheme for the loss of ment ) forsake of himself ; which may be exemplar in this king , if it be not the common epilogue of all great ? ness . of his acquest of Ireland . RObert fits-stephen be the first of all Englishman , after the conquest , that en ? tread Ireland , the first day of May , in the year 1170. with 390. man : and there take Werford , in the behalf of Deruntius , son of Marcherdach , call Mac Murg , king of Leymster . in September follow , Richard earl of Chepstow , surname strong-bow , sail into Ireland with twelve hundred man , where he take water ? ford and Dublin ; and marry eeve , the daughter of Deruntius , as he be promi ? sed . from these beginning , king Henry be then at rest from all hostile arm , both at home and abroad , take into his consideration the kingdom of Ireland , as a kingdom which oftentimes afford assistance to the french ; and therefore purpose with himself by all mean to subdue it : he provide a mighty army , and in the winter season sail thither , take ship at Pembroke , and land near to Waterford : where enter into consultation what course be fit to be take in the enterprise , sudden of their own accord , the prince of the country come in , and submit themselves unto he , only r•d•rick king of connacht stand page 76 out ; who be the great , think to make himself the only king of that na ? cion : but king Henry forbear he for the present , who keep himself in his fast ? ness of bog and wood , and be not to be follow in the winter season : take his journey to Dublin , the chief city of the country ; and there call the prince and bishop of the nation together , require their consent to have he and his heir to be their king : which they affirm they can not do without the pope authority ; to who , at their first conversion to the christian religion , they have submit themselves ; the king send present to Adrian the then pope a english man , require his assent ; which upon diverse good consideration he grant : and hereupon the king build he a stately palace in the city of Dublin ; and have thus without blood possess himself of the kingdom , the spring fol ? low he return joyful into England . about four year after Rodorick also send his chancellor to king Henry , to offer his submission , with a tribute to be pay of every ten beast , one sufficient . after this , in the one and thirty year of his reign , he send his son John to be the governor there . his taxation , and way for raise of money . taxation in his time , be chief once ; when he take escuage of English ? man , towards his war in France , which amount to 12400. pound : but confiscation be many , because many rebellion , and every rebellion be as good as a i . also vacancy of bishopric and abbey , keep in his hand , sometime many at once ; no time without some . he resume also all land which have either be sell or give from the crown by his predecessor : but a principal cause that make he plentiful in money , be his parsimony ; as when he be enjoin for a penance , to build three abbey , he perform it , by chan ? ging secular priest into regular canon , only to spare cost . and it be not the least cause of alienate his son from he ; that he allow they not main ? tenance answerable to their call . and it can be nothing but parsimony while he live , which bring it to pass , that when he die , there be find in his cof ? fer , nine hundred thousand pound beside plate and jewel . law and ordinance in his time . in the begin of his reign , he refine and reform the law of the realm ; make they more tolerable and more profitable to his people then they be be ? fore . in the one and twenty year of his reign , he divide his whole kingdom into six several circuit ; appoint in every circuit three judge , who twice every year shall ride together , to hear and determine cause between man and man : as it be at this day , though alter in the number of the judge , and in the shire of Cir ? cuit . in this king day the number of Jew all England over be great : yet , wheresoever they dwell , they may not bury any of their dead● any where but in London ; which be a great inconvenience to bring dead body oftentimes from far remote place , the king give they liberty of burial in the several place where they live . it be in this king day also ordain that clergyman offen ? ding in hunt the king deer , shall be punishable by the civil magistrate , accord to the law of the land ; which order be afterward take with they for any offence whatsoever they commit . though it be not a law , yet it be a ordinance which be first bring in by this king , that the lion shall be keep in the tower of London . Affaires of the church in his tim• . this king reign be famous for the contention of a subject with the prince , and though it may be think no equal match , yet in this example we shall find it hard to judge which of they have the victory . but before we come to speak page 77 of the contention , it be fit to say something of the man , and of the quarrel . the man be Thomas Becket , bear in London , his father , one Gilbert Becket , his mo ? there a outlandish woman , of the country of Syria . his first rise be under Theobald archbishop of Canterbury , who take a like to he , ( as one say , no man know for what ) make he first archdeacon of Canterbury , and then use mean to have he be the prince tutor , after that to be chancellor of England , and after the decease of the say Theobald , be himself make archbishop of can ? terbury in his place . one memorable thing he do at his come to be archbishop , he surrender his place of be chancellor , as not think it fit to sit at the helm of the commonwealth , and of the church , both at once . but now begin the contention between the king and he : the difference be , the king will have it ordain that clergy man who be malefactor , shall be try before the secular magistrate as lie man be : this Becket oppose , say , it be against the liberty of the church , and therefore against the honour of God . many bishop stand with the king , some few with Becket the contention grow long , and with the length still hot , till at last Becket be content to assent to the ordinance with this clause , Salvo Ordine suo : the king like not the clause , as be a delude of the ordinance : he require a absolute assent , without any clause of reservation . at last , after many debating and demur , the archbi ? shop yield to this also , and subscribe the ordinance , and set his hand unto it . but go homeward , it be say , his cross-bearer and some other about he , blame ? m he for that he have do , but whether move with their word , or other ? wise upon second thought , the next day when they meet again , he open re ? pent his former deed , retract his subscription , and send to the pope for ab ? solution of his fault : which the pope not only grant , but encourage he to persist in the course he have begin . it may be think a fable , yet be relate by diverse good author , that one time during this contention , certain fellow cut off the archbishop horse tail ; after which fact , all their child be bear with tail like horse ; and that this continue long in their posterity , though now long since cease , and perhaps their family too . but king Henry find there be no prevail with Becket by fair mean , begin to deal more rough with he , and first make use of authority upon his temporalty ; and withal a censure be speak off to be intend against his person ; which Becket understand ? king , think it his best course to flee the realm , and thereupon pass under the name of dereman , he pass over sea , and there , two year by the pope , and five by the king of France , be maintain as it be of alm : in which misery , nothing vex he so much , as that king Henry send all his kindred , man and woe ? man , old and young into banishment after he . and now king Henry find that Becket stand much upon his legatine power , send messenger to the pope , de ? sire he to take that power from he , and to confer it upon his archbishop of York , but the pope answer , he will not do so , but be content the king himself shall be his legate , and send he letter to that purpose , which king Henry take in such scorn , that he throw away the letter , and send they present ? lie back to he again . in this mean time , the king of France prevail with king Henry to afford Becket a conference , hope to bring they to some agreement , where be to ? gether , king Henry allege before the king of France , that he require nothing of Becket , but his assent to a ordinance , to which in his grandfather king hen ? rise the first time , all the bishop of the realm , and the archbishop of canter ? bury that then be do give their assent ; yet this move not Becket at all , but he continue his former tenet , it be against the honour of God , and therefore de ? sire to be excuse . see now ( say King Henry ) the perverseness of this man , all that agree not with his own humour , be present against the honour of God . while these thing be thus a work , Becket have get he more friend at room , and by their mean prevail with the pope , to give he power to inter ? dict some bishop in England that have do he wrong , and the pope spare no• page 78 to threaten excommunication to king Henry himself , if he restore not Becket to his dignity . but whether awe with his threaten , or win by the king of Frances importunity , or else perhaps relent in himself , he be content at last that Becket shall return home , and enjoy his bishopric ; who be come to Canterbury , the bishop who he have indict , for crown the young king Henry , ( which he say , be his right to have do ) make humble suit unto he , to be release of the censure . which , when the archbishop will not grant , but with certain caution and exception , the bishop discontent go over to the king , complain of the hard measure that be offer they by the archbishop : whereat the king be much move , shall i never ( say he ) be at quiet for this priest ? if i have any about i that love i , they will find some way or other to rid i of this trouble . whereupon four knight stand by that hear the king make this complaint , namely Reynold fits-urse , or bereson , Hugh morvyll , William Tracy , and Richard Britton , think they shall do a accepta ? ble service to the king , go short after into England , and go to Canterbury , find the archbishop then at church , when upon the step there , they strike he upon the head with their sword and slay he the thirty day of December , in the year 1172. afterwards , with much ado , by king Henry mean they be pardon by the pope , only enjoin penance , to go on p•lgrimage to Jerusalem , as some write ; but other more probable , that the king abhor they ever after ; and that within three year they all die miserable . you have hear his persecution , and ( as some will have it call ) his martyrdom : now hear the honour that have be do he , and the visitation to his tomb . and first king Henry himself come to Canterbury , as soon as he come within sight of becket church , light off his horse , and put off his hose and shoe he go barefoot to his tomb , and for a further penance suffer himself to be beat with rod , by every monk of the cloister . a few year after , king Lewis of France come into England of purpose to visit the shrine of saint Thomas , where have pay his vow , he make oblation with many rich present . the like many prince since that time have do ; and many miracle be report to have be do at his tomb , which yet may be unbelieved without unbelief , and with faith enough . another difference in this king day , be between the two archbishop of England , about the jurisdiction of Canterbury over York , which be refer to the pope , he give judgement on Canterbury side . also in this king day there be a schism in the church of Rome , two pope up at once , of who Alexander the three be one ; which schism continue the space of almost twenty year . also in this king day , one Nicholas Breakespeare , bear at saint Alban , or as other write , at Langley in Hartfordshire , be a bondman of that abbey , and therefore not allow to be a monk there , go beyond sea , where he so profit in learning , that the pope make he first bishop of Alba , and afterward cardinal , and send legate to the Norway , where he reduce that na ? cion from paganism to Christianity , and return back to roam , be choose pope , by the name of Adrian the four , and dye be choke with a fly in his drink . in his day also , Heraclius patriarch of Jerusalem , come to king hen ? ry , desire aid for the holy land , but not so much of money as of man ; and not so much of man neither , as of a good general , as himself be ; to who king Henry answer , that though he be willing to undertake it , yet his unquiet state at home will not suffer he ; with which answer the patriarch move , say , think not great king , that pretence will excuse you before God , but take this from i , that as you forsake God cause now , so he hereafter will forsake you in your great need . but ( say the king ) if i shall be absent out of my kingdom , my own son will be ready to rise up against i in my absence ; to which the patriarch reply , no marvel , for from the devil they come , and to the de ? will they shall• and so depart . also in this king day there come into Eng ? land , thirty german , man and woman , call themselves publican , who de ? nyed matrimony , and the sacrament of baptism , and of the lord supper , with page 79 other article , who be obstinate , and not to be reclaim , the king common ? dead they shall be mark with a hot iron in the forehead , and be whip , which punishment they take patient , their captain ( call Gerard ) go before they sing , bless be you when man hate you . after they be whip , they be thrust out of door in the winter , where they die with cold and hunger , no man da•ing to relieve they . this king after his conquest of Ireland , impose the tribute of Peter penny upon that kingdom , namely , that every house in Ireland shall yearly pay a penny to saint Peter . work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . this king found the church of Bristol , which king Henry the eight after ? ward erect into a cathedral : he also found the priory of d•ver ; of Stoneley ; and of basinwerke ; and the castle of Rudlan : and begin the stone bridge over the Thames at London . he cause also the castle of Warwick to be build . Maude the empress his mother , found the abbey of Bordesly . in his time also huge Mortimer found Wigmore abbey , Richard Lucye the king chief justice lay the foundation of the coventuall church , in the honour of saint Thomas , in a place which be call Westwood , otherwise les•es , in the terri ? tory of Rochester , in the new parish of southfleete . he also build the castle of anger in Essex . Robert Harding a burgess of Bristol , to who king Henry give the barony of Barkeley ; build the monastery of faint augustines in Bristol . in the ten year of his reign , London bridge be new make of timber , by Peter of cole-church a priest . Robert de Boscue earl of Leycester , found the monastery of Gerendon , of monk ; and of Leycester , call saint mary de prate , of canon regular , and his wife Amicia , daughter of Ralph Montford , found Eaton , of nun . in the two and twentyeth year of his reign , after the foundation of saint marry overeyes church in Southwark , the stone bridge over the Thames at London , begin to be found , towards which a cardinal , and the archbi ? shop of Canterbury give a thousand mark . Aldred bishop of Worcester found a monastery at Gloucester of Benedictine monk . casualty that happen in his time . in the eleven year of this king reign , on the six and twentyeth day of ia ? nuary , be so great a earthquake in Ely , Norfolk , and Suffolk , that it over ? throw they that stand upon their foot , and make the bell to ring in the steeple . in the seventeenth year of his reign , there be see at saint osythe in Essex , a dragon of marvelous bigness , which by move , burn house , and the whole city of Canterbury be the same year almost burn . in the eighteenth year of his reign , the church of Norwich with the house thereto belong be burn , and the monk disperse . at Andover , a priest pray before the altar , be slay with thunder . likewise one clerk and his brother be burn to death with lightning . in the three and twentyeth year , a shower of blood rain in the isle of wight two hour together . in the four and twentyeth year , the city of York be burn , and on Christmas day , in the territory of Derlington , in the bishopric of Durham the earth lift up it self in the manner of a high tower , and so remain unmoveable from morning till evening , and then fall with so hor ? rible a noise that it fright the inhabitant thereabouts , and the earth swallow it up , make there a deep pit , which be see at this day : for a testimony where ? of Leyland say , he see the pit there , common call hell-kettle . also in the same year , on the ten day of April , the church of saint Andrew in Rochester be consume with fire . in the eight and twentyeth year of his reign , bairn ? well , with the priory , near unto Cambridge be burn . in the thirtyeth year , the abbey of Glastenbury be burn with the church of saint Julian . in the year 1180. of great earthquake throw down many building , among which the ca ? thedrall page 80 church of Lincoln be rend in piece the five and twenty of April : and on the twenty of October , the cathedral church of Chichester , and all the whole city be burn . this year also , near unto Orford in Suffolk , cer ? taine fisher take in their net a fish , have the shape of a man in all point , which fish be keep by Bartholomew de Glanvile in the castle of Orford six more ? neth and more ; he speak not a word ; all manner of meat he do glad eat , but most greedy raw fish , when he have press out the juice ; oftentimes he be bring to church , but never show any sign of adoration : at length , be ? king not well look to , he steal to the sea , and never be see after . in the year 1188. on the twenty of September , the town of Beverley with the church of saint John there be burn . and in this king time the bone of king Arthur , and his wife guynevour , be find in the vale of Avalon , under a hollow oak , fifteen foot under ground ; the hair of the say guynevour be then whole and of fresh colour ; but as soon as it be touch , it fall to powder , as Fabian relate . of his wife and child . he marry Eleanor daughter and heir of William duke of give , late wife of Lewis the seven , king of France , but then divorce , but for what cause divor ? ced be diverse relate ; some say king Lewis carry she with he into the holy land , where she carry her self not very holy , but lead a licentious life , and which be the worst kind of licentiousness , in carnal familiarity with a Turk ; which king Lewis though know , yet dissemble , till come home , he then waive that cause , as which he can not bring without disgrace to himself , and make use of their nearness in blood , as be cousin in the four degree , which be allow by the pope , as a cause sufficient to divorce they , though he have at that time two daughter by she . be thus divorce , duke Henry mar ? rise she , with who it be never know , but she lead a modest and sober life , a sufficient proof , that the former report be but a slander . by this queen Eleanor he have five son , William , Henry , Richard , Geoffry , and John ; and three daughter , Maude , marry to Henry duke of Saxony ; Eleanor , marry to Alphonso the eight of that name , king of Castille ; and Jane or Joan , mar ? ry to William king of Sicily . of his son , William die young . Henry bear the second year of his reign , be crown king with his father , in the eighteenth year , and die the nine and twentyeth year , and be bury at roan ; marry to Margaret , daughter of Lewis king of France , but leave no issue . ri ? chard , bear at Oxford , in the four year of his father reign , and succeed he in the kingdom . Geffrey , bear the five year of his father reign , mar ? ry Constance , daughter and heir of Conan , earl of little Britain , in the four ? teenth year , and in the two and thirty year die ; leave by his wife con ? stance , two daughter , and a Posthumus son name Arthur . John , his young ? est , call John without land , because he have no land assign he in his fa ? there|be time ; bear the twelve year of his father reign , and succeed his brother Richard in the kingdom . and this may be reckon a peculiar honour to this king , that of his five son , three of they live to be king ; and of his three daughter , two of they to be queen . concubine he have many , but two more famous than the rest ; and one of these two , more famous than the o ? there : and this be Rosamond , daughter of Walter lord Clifford ; who he keep at Woodstock , in lodging so cunning contrive that no stranger can find the way in , yet queen Eleanor do , be guide by a thread : so much be the eye of jealousy quick in find out , than the eye of care be in hide . what the queen do to Rosamond when she come in to she , be uncertain , but this be certain , that Rosamond live but a short time after , and lie bury at the nunnery of God ? st•w near to Oxford . by this Rosamond king Henry have two son , William call longsword ; who be earl of Salisbury in right of his wife Ela , daughter page 81 and heir of William earl of that country , and have by her much issue , who posterity continue a long time : and a second son name Geffrey , who be first bishop of Lincoln , and afterward archbishop of York , and after five year banishment in his brother king John time , die in the year 1213. the other famous concubine of this king Henry , be the wife of Ralph Blewet a knight ; by who he have a son name Morgan , who be provost of Beverley , and be to be elect bishop of Durham , go to roam for a dispensation , because be a bastard , he be else uncapable : but the pope refu•ing to grant it , unless he will pass as the son of Blewet , he absolute answer , he will for no cause in the world deny his father ; and choose rather to lose the dignity of the place , then of his blood , as be the son , though but the base son , of a king . of his personage and condition . he be somewhat red of face , and broad breast ; short of body , and there ? withal fat , which make he use much exercise , and little meat . he be common call Henry Shortmantell , because he be the first that bring the use of short cloak out of Anjou into England . concern endowment of mind , he be of a spirit in the high degree generous ; which make he of ? ten say , that all the world suffice not to a courageous heart . he have the re ? putation of a wise prince all the christian world over ; which make he of ? ten say , that all the world suffice not to a courageous heart . he have the re ? putation of a wise prince all the christian world over ; which make Alphonsus king of Castille , and Garsyas king of Navarre , refer a difference that be be ? between they , to his arbitrament : who so judicious•y determine the cause , that he give contentment to both party ; a hard matter than to cut cloth even by a thread . his custom be to be always in action ; for which cause , if he have no real war , he will have feign : and will transport force ei ? there into Normandy or Britain , and go with they himself , whereby he be all ? way prepare of a army : and make it a school to his soldier , and to himself a exercise . to his child he be both indulgent and hard : for out of indulgence he cause his son Henry to be crown king in his own time ; and out of hardness he cause his young son to rebel against he . he be rather superstitious , than not religious ; which he show more by his car ? riage towards Becket be dead then while he live . his incontinency be not so much that he use other woman beside his wife , but that he use the affiance wife of his own son : and it be common think , he have a meaning to be divorce from his wife queen Eleanor , and to take the say Adela to be his wife . yet general to speak of he , he be a excellent prince ; and if in some particular he be defective , it must be consider he be a man of his death and burial . he be not well at ease before , but when the king of France send he a list of those that have conspire against he , and that he find the first man in the list to be his son John , he then fall sudden into a fit of faint , which so en ? crease upon he , that within four day after he end his life : so strong a corrosive be grief of mind , when it meet with a body weaken before with sickness . he die in Normandy , in the year 1189. when he have live threescore and one year ; reign near five and thirty : and be bury at Founteverard in France . the manner of who burial be thus : he be clothe in his royal robe , his crown upon his head , white glove upon his hand , boot of gold upon his leg , gild spur at his heal , a great rich ring upon his finger , his sceptre in his hand , his sword by his side , and his face uncover and all bare . as he be carry to be bury , his son Richard in great haste run to see he , who no soon be come near the body , but sudden at his nostril he fall a bleed afresh ; which though it be in prince Richard no good sign of innocency , yet page 82 he break present into bitter tear upon the see it , be a good sign of repentance . it may not be unseasonable to speak in this place of a thing which all writer speak of , that in the family of the earl of Anjou , of who this king Henry come , there be once a princess a great enchantress , who be on a time enforce to take the bless eucharist , she sudden fly out at the church window , and be never see after : from this woman these latter earl of Anjou be descend , which perhaps make the patriarch Heraclius say , of this king Henry child , that from the devil they come , and to the devil they will . but writer perhaps have be more complete , if they have leave this story out of their write . man of note in his time . of clergy man , there be Theobald archbishop of Canterbury , huge bishop of Lincoln ; Richard bishop of Winchester ; Geffrey of Ely ; Robert of bath ; Aldred of Worcester ; all learned man , and of great integrity of life . of mili ? tarry man , there be Robert earl of Leycester ; Reynold earl of Cornwall ; Hugh Bigot , Robert Ferrys , Richard Lacy , Roger Mowbray , Ralph Fulger , Ranulph gra ? nula , William v•sei , •nd Baynard Baylioll ; man of great achievement in war , and of no less ability in peace . page 83 the life and reign of king Richard the first . of his come to the crown , and of his coronation . king Richard , the first of that name , after his father Fune ? rall , go to roan , where he settle the state of that province ; and from thence come into England , where he be crown king at Westminster , by the hand of Baldwin archbishop of Canterbury , the three day of September , in the year 1189. and herein this prince be more behold to writer then any of his predecessor : for in speak of their crown , they content themselves with tell where , and by who they be crow ? ned : but of this prince , they deliver the manner of his crown , in the full they ? plitude of all circumstance ; which perhaps be not unfit to do , for satisfaction of such as be never like to see a coronation ; and it be in this manner . first , the archbishop of Canterbury , Roan , Tryer , and Dublin , with all the other bishop , ab ? bot , and clergy , apparel in rich cope , and have the cross , holy water , and censer carry before they ; come to fetch he at the door of his privie-chamber ; and there receive he , they lead he to the church of Westminster , till they come before the high altar , with a solemn procession . in the middle of the bishop and clergy , go four baron , bear candlestick with taper ; after who come Geffrey de Lucy , bear the cap of maintenance , and John Marshall next to he , bear a massive pair of spur of gold ; then follow William martial earl of Striguill , alias Pembroke , who bear the royal sceptre , in the top whereof be set a cross of gold ; and William de Patrick earl of Salisbury go next he , bear the warder or rod , have on the top thereof a dove . then come three other earl , David , brother to the king of Scot , the earl of Huntington , John the king brother , earl of mortaigne , and Robert earl of Leycester , each of they bear a sword upright in his hand , with the scabbard right adorn with gold . the earl of mortaigne went in the midst betwixt the other two ; after they follow six earl and baron , bear a chequer table , upon the which be set the king scotchen of Armes• and then follow William mandevill earl of Albemarle , bear a crown of gold a great height before the king , who follow have the bishop of Durham on the right hand , and Reynold bishop of bath on the left ; over who a canopy be bear : and in this order he come into the church at Westminster , where before the high altar , in the presence page 84 of the clergy and the people , lay his hand upon the holy evangelist , and the relic of certain saint , he take a solemn oath that he shall observe peace , honour and reverence to almighty God , to his church , and to his minister , all the day of his life : also that he shall exercise upright justice to the people come ? mit to his charge , and that he shall abrogate and disannul all evil law and wrongful custom , if any be to be find in the precinct of his realm ; and maintain those that be good and laudable . this do , he put off all his gar ? ment from his middle upward , but only his shirt , which be open on the shoul ? d•rs , that he may be anoint . then the archbishop of Canterbury anoint he in three place ; on the head , on the shoulder , and on the right arm ; with pray ? er in such case accustom . after this , he cover his head with a linen cloth hallow , and set his cap thereon ; and then after he have put on his royal gar ? ment , and his uppermost robe , the archbishop deliver he the sword , with which he shall beat down the enemy of the church : which do , two earl put his shoe upon his foot , and have his mantle put on he , the archbishop forbid he on the behalf of almighty God , not to presume to take upon he this dignity , except he faithful mean to perform those thing which he have there swear to perform ; whereunto the king make answer , that by god grace he will p•rforme they . then the king take the crown beside the all ? tar , and deliver it to the archbishop , which he set upon the king head , delive ? ring to he the sceptre to hold in his right hand , and the rod royal in his left hand : and thus be crown , he be bring back by the bishop and baron , with the cross and candlestick , and three sword , pass forth before he unto his seat . when the bishop that sing the mass , come to the offertory , the two bishop that bring he to the church , lead he to the altar , and bring he back again . the mass end , he be bring with solemn procession into his chamber : and this be the manner of this king coronation . but at this solemn ? nity there fall out a very disastrous accident : for this prince not favour the Jew , as his father have do ; have give a strict charge , that no Jew shall be admit to be a spectator of the solemnity : yet certain Jew , as though it have be the crown of their king Herod , will needs be press in ; and be put back by officer set of purpose , it grow to a brabble , and from word to blow , so as many ie•es be hurt , and some slay : and thereupon a rumour be sudden spread abroad , that the king have command to have all the Jew de ? stroy . whereupon it be incredible what rifle there be of Jew house , and what cut of their throat : and though the king signify by public declaration , that he be high displease with that which be do , yet there be no stay the fury of the multitude till the next day ; so often it fall out , that great solemnity be wait on with great disaster ; or rather indeed , as be connatural , they can hardly be asunder . of his first act after he be crown . he begin with his mother queen Eleanor , who upon her husband this ? pleasure , have be keep in prison sixteen year ; he not only set at liberty , but set in as great authority , as if she have be leave the regent of the kingdom . the next he gratify , be his brother John ; to who he make appear , how much the bounty of a brother be better than the handnesse of a father . for he confer ? read upon he , in England , the earldom of Cornwall , Dorset , Somerset , note ? ham , Derby , and Leycester ; and by the marriage of Isabel , daughter and heir to the earl of Gloucester , he have that earldom also ; as likewise the castle of Marle ? borough , and lutgarsall , the honour of Wallingford , Tichill , and eye , to the value of 4000 mark a year : a estate so great , as be able to put a very moderate mind into the humour of aspire , of which prince shall have care . concern his affiance lady Adela , it may be think strange , that have desire she so infi ? nite when he can not have she , now that he may have she , he care not for page 85 she : but the cause be know , and in every man mouth ; that she be now but his father leave : yet he will not send she home but very rich in jewel , to make amends , if it may be , for the loss of her virginity : though this be some ? thing hard on his part , when the father have take all the pleasure , that the son shall afterward pay all the charge . but by this at lest he make a quiet way for his marriage now conclude ; and short after to be consummate in Sicily with Berengaria the daughter of Garsyas king of Navarre . and now his mind be whole ? lie set upon his long intend voyage to the holy land , for which he think not the treasure leave by his father , to be sufficient , which yet amount to nine hun ? dread thousand pound : but forecast with himself the great charge it must needs be , to carry a army so long a journey , he seek to enlarge his provision of money by all the mean he can devise . not long before , Hugh Pudsey have be advance to the bishopric of Durham ; and now for a great sum of money he sell he the earldom : and then say merry among his lord , do you not think i a cunning man , that of a old bishop can make a young earl ? from the Londoner also he drain great sum of money , and make they recompense in Franchi ? ses and liberty , which they have not before . he make also greatsale : to the the king of Scot , he sell the castle of Berwick and Roxborough , for ten thou ? sand pound : to godfryde Lucy , bishop of Winchester , the manor of Weregrave and ment : to the abbot of saint Edmundsbery , the manor of Mildhall , for one thousand mark of silver : to the bishop of Durham , the manor of Sadborough ; and when it be marvel that he will part with such thing , he answer , that in this case he will sell his city of London , if he can find a chapman . but the worst way of all be , that pretend to have lose his signet , he make a new ; and make proclamation , that whosoever will safe enjoy what under they for ? mer signet be grant , shall come to have it confirm by the new ; whereby he raise great sum of money to himself , but great of discontentment in his subject . by these , and such like mean he quick furnish himself with money : and now it remain only to consider , to who care he shall commit the government of the kingdom in his absence ; and after deliberation , he make choice for the north part , of huge bishop of Durham ; join in Commissi ? on with he , huge Baldulph , and William Brunell : and for the south part , he ap ? point William longshampe bishop of Ely , and chancellor of England , and for his great strength , cause the pope to make a legate of all England and Scotland : and for Normandy , and Aquitaine , Robert earl of Leycester ; all man eminent for prudence and uprightness , and which be most of all , for loyalty : and indeed to make a man fit for such employment , all these virtue must concur . as for his brother John , he know very well his aspire mind , and therefore will have tie he to live in Normandy , and not to come into England till his return ; but that their mother queen Eleanor intercede , and pass her word for he : and that nothing may be leave provide for , he appoint his nephew Arthur , the son of his brother Geffrey duke of Britain to be his successor , if himself shall fail . and now , undique convenere , vocat jam carbasus auras : every man be ready to take ship ? ping , and no stay now but for a wind ; only some say that king Richard before his depart , call his lord and knight unto he , and swear they to be true ; give to overy of they a blue ribbon to be know by ; from whence the first occa ? sion of the order of the garter be think to begin . of his journey into the holy land king Richard have prepare a army of thirty thousand foot , and five thousand horse , and have appoint to meet Philip king of France in si ? cilie , at the latter end of June , in the year 1190. set forward himself by land to Marseillis , and there stay till his ship shall come about ; but his navy be ? king drive by tempest to other part , and the king weary of long stay , after six week , he hire ship for himself and his company , and pass for ? ward page 86 to Messana in Sicily , where arrive also the king of France ; and not long after , his own navy . in this island the king William now late dead , have marry Jane , king Richard sister ; from who Tancred the present king withhold her dower : and therefore though he show king Richard fair con ? tenance , yet he deal secret with the messanians to use all mean to get he go ; whereupon the messanians take a small occasion , set sudden upon the english , and thrust they out of their town : with which king Richard just offend , who have his camp without the town , prepare himself to revenge the affront ; when Tancred send to he , to signify that the affront be offer without his know ? ledge , and much against his like , so pacify he , that for the present he re ? maim satisfy ; but understand afterward , that the messanians do but wait their opportunity till the spring , when king Richard shall be go : he resent their intention , stay •ot their leisure , but assault the town with fire and sword , in one day labour take it , and have make great slaughter in it , if king Richard have not be move to compassion with the messanians tear , but chief with king Tancred offer ; both to pay his sister Jane her dower , and to marry his daugh ? ter to king Richard nephew Arthur , duke of Britain , and to give a good part of the portion in hand . but king Philip be not well please with these condition , yet he break not out into open dissension , till more fuel be afterward cast upon the fire of his anger . in the spring king Philip sail with his army to Ptolemais oh ? therwise call Acon ) which the Christians have long besiege , and with they he join : while king Richard take his sister Jane , and Berengaria the young daugh ? ter of the king of Navarre with he in 190. ship , and 50. galley , put to sea for the holy land , but be by tempest cast upon the coast of Cyprus ; where than i ? landers seek to hinder his land , he set upon they with his force ; and in ? vade the island , easy subdue , and bring it under his subjection ; and the king of the cou•trey be take prisoner , and entreat king Richard not to put he in bond of iron , king Richard give he his word , and keep it , but put he in bond of silver . in this island he solemnize his marriage with Berengaria , and then leave Richard de Canvile , and Robert de Turnham , his lieutenant in Cyprus ; he pass on to Ptolemais , which city be defend by Saladine , and have be besiege now two year : when the enemy see and fear the increase of the christian force , propound condition , upon which accept , they deliver it up in August , the year 1192. at the take of this town there fall out a accident , seem a honour to king Richard for the present , but prove a disgrace , at least a great trouble and charge to he afterward . for Leopold duke of Austria have first set up his counterfeit ? lour upon the wall , which king Richard cause to be throw down , and his own to be set up ; but this be no place to stand a quarrel , it come not to the reckon till some time after . when Ptolemais be take , Saladine fear the Christians further proceed , dismantle all the best town that be near it : as Porphyria , Caesarea , Ascalon , Gaza ; but of Ioppa king Richard take a care , and place in it a colony of Christians . for Ioppa be a city of Palestine , that be build before the flood ; and have belong to it a haven of great convenience . and now the king of France , though valiant enough himself , yet think his own great act to be obscure by great of king Richard ; he begin , beside his old hate he , now to envy he . for indeed emulation when it be in virtue , make the strong knot of love and affection : but when it be in glory , it make a separation , and turn into the passion of envy and malice ; and so do it with king Philip , who pretend the air of the country do not agree with his body ; but be indeed because the air of king Richard glory do not agree with his mind ; obtain king Richard consent to return home , swear first solemn , not to molest his territory in his absence . but this fall out for the present enterprise most uns•asonably : for the departure of the king of France , though it diminish not much the strength ; ( for he leave Od• , duke of Burgundy in his place ) yet it dimini ? shed much the show of assistance : and indeed Saladine , who be at this time in page 87 term of surrender Jerusalem ; when he see the king of Franc• depart ; as know there must needs be a conclusion , where there be a beginning , doubt not but the rest will follow soon after , and thereupon st•ied his hand ; and grow more confident than he be before . at this time guy of Lu•ignan be possess of the city of tyre , and with it , of the right of the kingdom of Jerusalem : with he king Richard make a exchange , that g•y shall have the island of Cyprus which king Richard have win , and king Richard shall have the kingdom of Jerusalem , to which Guy have a right : and upon this title the king of England , be style king of Jerusalem a long time after : as likewise the posterity of the say Guy have by this exchange hold the kingdom of Cyprus to this day . now be king Richard more hot upon take Jerusalem then ever before , and have cert••nely take it , but that by ill counsel divert , because the winter draw on : and indeed by the draw back of Odo duke of Burgundy , who envy that king Richard shall have the honour of take it , he remove for that season to Askalon ; after which time , the enemy grow strong , and the Christians weak ; all opportu ? nity of take it be utter lose , and they can never come to the like again . and short after king Richard be advertise of the king of France his invade Normandy , contrary to his oath at his departure ; which force king Richard , much to his grief , to conclude a peace with Saladine , and that upon condition not very honourable for the Christians ; and himself present to retu•ne home : and so send his wife Berengaria , and his sister Jane , with a great part of his army into Sicily , and from thence into England : he pass himself with some few in his company , by the way of Thrace , and be by tempest bring into Dalma•iae ; from whence being to pass through Germany , and particular through duke leopold country of Austria : he remember the old grudge , change his apparel , and travel sometime afoot , and sometime on horseback , he use all mean po ? sible to keep himself from be know : but destiny be not to be avoid , for as soon as he come to Vienna , partly by his tongue , and partly by his expense , it be present find he be a Englishman , and withal some great man ; and by and by a rumour be spread , that it be Richard king of England : who find himself to be discover , and no mean possible to escape , he put off his disguise , put on his princely apparel , and avow himself : which duke Leopold under ? stand , send present to have he apprehend ; but king Richard refuse to yield himself to any , but to the duke himself ; the duke himself come and lead hi• to his own palace honourable enough , but yet strong guard : whereof as soon as Henry the emperor hear , he send with great instance to duke Leopold to send king Richard over to he , under pretence of safe custody , but with a pur ? pose indeed to be a sharer in his ransom . and the duke though well know his meaning , yet know withal that it be not safe for he to deny the empe ? rour , he send he over to he ; who soon after put he into a prison he have , call ? lead Trivallis , into which no man be ever know to be put that escape with life , though do perhaps to he , but in terrorem , to draw the better ransom from he . that with which king Richard be charge , beside the wrong do to Leo ? bold , in throw down his colour at Ptolemais , be the death of Conrade duke of tyre , who they pretend king Richard have murder ; wherein though king Richard make his innocency appear by the testimony of Limbeldus , who confess ? sed himself to have be the author of the marquis death ; yet the pretence serve to detain he in prison ; and in prison indeed they keep he , till his Ran ? some be agree upon and pay : which be a hundred thousand pound , four ? score thousand be pay in hand : whereof two part to the emperor , a three part to duke Leopold : and for the rest , hostage give to the number of fifty ; of who the bishop of Roan be one : though the hostage afterward be deliver with ? out pay the rest : for Henry the emperor die short after , his successor have the conscience not to take it , as know it have be unjust exact : and indeed the accident that befall both the emperor and the duke leop•ld , be evident demonstration of the injustice they have do ; for the emperor short after page 88 die ; and the duke Leopold , in a tilt for solemnity of his birthday , fall off his horse , and so break his leg , that to save his life , he be fain to have his leg cut off . and now after fifteen month imprisonment , king Richard be release , and return into England four year elder than he go out ; and thus end his journey to the holy land yet one memorable accident happen to he in the holy land , may not be omit ; that go one day a hawk about Ioppa , find himself weary , he lay he down upon the ground to sleep ; when sudden certain Turk come upon he to take he ; but he awaken with their noise , ri•eth up , get a horseback , and draw out his sword , assault the Turk , who feign ? ing to fly , draw the king into a ambush where many Turk lay ; who have cer ? tain•ly take he if they have know his person : but one of the king sir ? van• , call William de Patrellis , cry out in the saracen tongue , that he be the king ; they present lie hold upon he , and let the king escape . trouble in his dominion in his absence . king Richard at his go out of England , have so well settle the govern ? mean of the kingdom , that may well have keep it in good order during all the time of his absence ; but disorder be weed which no foresight can hinder from grow , have so many hand to water they : where occasion of distaste be no soon offer , then take ; and o•tentimes take before they be offer , as be here to be see . for king Richard have leave in chief place of authority , Will ? liam Longshampe , bishop of Ely ; a man who so carry himself , that although the thing he do , be justifiable ; yet the pride with which he do they be unsuffe ? r•ble : seldom ride abroad without five hundred , some say a thousand in his train ; not for safety , but for state : and though there be other leave in authority beside himself , yet his power be so predominant , that he make of they but ci ? pher , and rule all as he listen himself . this insolency of govern be soon distaste by many , and special by John the king brother , who count the great ? ness of his birth a equal match at least with any substitute greatness , affront the bishop in the manage of affair , in such sort , that while some adhere to the one , and some to the other ; the kingdom in the mean time be in danger to be rend asunder , till at last the bishop find himself too weak , or at least fear that he be so ; but rather indeed depose from his authority by the king letter , and the archbishop of Roan put in his place , think it best for he to fly the real•e : whereupon for his great safety , disguise himself in woman apparel , and carry ? ing a web of cloth under his arm , he seek in this manner to take ship ? ping and pass the sea but be discover and know , the woman in revenge of the abuse do to their clothes , in make they his instrument of fraud ; fall upon he , and so beat he , that it may have beat humility into he for ever of ? ter . this disgrace make he glad to get he into Normandy , his native country , where to little purpose he woo king Richard and queen Eleanor for reparation . but this be but a sport in comparison of the mischief do in Normandy by Philip king of France : for first he invade Normandy , where he take many town , and among other gysort , and draw the king brother John to combine with he , promise to assist he in win the kingdom of England , and to have his sister Adela , who king Richard have repudiate to be his wife ; with which pro ? mouse duke John have be ensnare , if his mother queen Eleanor have not this ? swade he . but in England duke John take upon he as king , persuade the people that his brother king Richard be not live ; and indeed it be easy to remove , the know he to be a prisoner , to the affirm he to be dead ; but such be the faithfulness of the archbishop of roan , and other the prince of the realm to king Richard , that they oppose duke John , and frustrate all his practi ? ses : and the bishop of Ely have tell he plain , that though king Richard be dead , yet the succession in the kingdom belong not to he , but to Arthur duke of Britain , son of Geffrey his old brother . and in these term king Richard find his state when he return from the holy land page 89 his act and trouble after his return from the holy land at his come home from the holy land , the first thing he do ; be to give his lord and people thanks for their faithfulness to he in his absence , and then for their readiness in supply he for his ransom . but as for his brother John in who ungratefulness seem to strive with ambition , which shall be the great in he ; he deprive he of all those great possession he have give he : some ado he have to make sound certain piece which he have corrupt , as the castle of Marleborough , Lancaster , and a fortress at saint Michael mount in Cornwall ; but chief the castle of Nottingham and Tichill , which stand so firm ? lie for duke John , that they be not reduce to obedience without some blood , and much expense . but h•s great trouble be with Philip king of France , in who be so ingraffed a spleen against king Richard , that he seem to be never well but when he be work he some ill . now therefore king Richard to make it appear he have not leave the holy war for nothing ( have first obtain in Parlia ? mean a subsidy towards his charge , and cause himself to be new crown at win ? chester , lest the people through his long absence may have forget they have a king ) he depart with a hundred ship into Normandy ; but it be withal , upon this occasion : sit one day at dinner , in his lit•le hall ( as it be call ) news be bring he , that king Philip have besiege Vernoull , with which he be somove , that he swear a great oath , he will not turn his face till he be revenge : whereupon he cause the wall right before he to be present beat down , that so he may pass forward without turn his face ; and thus in haste he go to Vernoull , whither he be no soon come , but the king of France make as great haste to be go , not without some loss , and more disgrace . here his brother John submit himself to he , and with great show of penitence intreat his pardon , which he ready grand ? t ; say only , i wish you may as well remember your fault , as i shall forget it . the king of France have leave Vernoull , enter Turonia , and near to Vindoci ? num pitch his tent ; thither king Richard follow he , and with his come so affright he , that leave bag and baggage , munition , tent , and treasure to a marvellous value , he get he go , and glad he be so rid of king Richard . after this a truce be agree upon for a year , which each of they long till it be expire , as have no pleasure but in trouble one another . in this time there be a trouble at home , though not to the king , yet to the kingdom : for Ro ? be hood accompany with one little John , and a hundred stout fellow more , molest all passenger upon the highway ; of who it be say , that he be of noble blood , at least make noble , no less than a earl , for some deserve sir ? vice : but have waste his estate in riotous course , very penury force he to take this course ; in which yet it may be say he be honest dishonest , for he fall ? dome hurt any man , never any woman , spare the poor , and only make prey of the rich : till the king set forth a proclamation to have he apprehend , it happen he fall sick at a certain nunnery in Yorkshire , call Birckleys ; and desi ? ring there to be let blood , be betray , and make bleed to death . such another trouble , though not to the king , yet to the kingdom , fall out by reason of the Jew : and first at the town of Linne in Norfolk , upon this occasion : a Jew be turn Christian , be persecute by those of his nation , and assault in the street ; who thereupon fly to a church hard by , be thither also follow , and the church assault ; which the people of the town see , in succour of the new christian they fall upon the Jew , of who they slay a great number , and after pillage their house . by this example the like assault be make upon the Jew at Stamford ; and after that at Lincoln ; and last at York , where infi ? nite number of Jew be massacre ; and some of they block up in the ca ? stle , cut the throat of their wife and child , and cast they over the wall upon the christian head , and then burn both the castle and themselves : neither can this sedition be stay , till the king send his chancellor , the bishop of Ely , with page 90 force of arm , to punish the offender . his last trouble be a punishment of counterfeit ? vetousnesse , for one Guydomer have find a great treasure in the king domini ? once , and •or fear of king Richard , fly to a town of the king of France for his safeguard ; be pursue by the king , but the town deny he entrance , and he thereupon go about the wall to find the fit place for assault it , one Bertram de Gurdon , or as other call he , Peter Basile , shoot at he with a cross ? bow , and hit he on the arm , of which wound he die within fo•re day after , and so end all his trouble . of his taxation , and way for raise of money . of taxation proper so call , there be never few in any king reign : but of way to draw money from the subject , never more . it be true , the first money raise for his journey , be all out of his own estate , by sell or pawn of land ; but when at his come back , he resume the land into his hand aga•ne , without pay back the money he have receive ; this if it may not have the name , yet certain it have the venom of a bitter taxation . likewise the feign to have lose his seal , and then enjoin they to have their grant confir ? m by a new ; though it go not in the number , yet it have the weight of a heavy taxation where it light . afterwards , the money raise for his ransom , be not so proper a taxation , as a contribution : or if a taxation for he , yet not by he ; which be do in his absence , by the subject themselves : and indeed no taxation be common so pinch , as those which be impose upon the subject by the subject , and such be this ; for to raise money for his ransom , ther• be impose upon every knight fee , 20. s . of all lay-men revenue , the four part ; and the four part of all the revenue of the clergy , with a ten of their good . also the chalice and treasure of all church be take to make up the sum . afterwards , this only be a plain taxation , and grant in parliament ; that of every Ploughland through England , he shall have two shilling , and of the monk Ci•teaux , all their wool of that year : and one more great than this ; and be this year impose towards his war in Normandy ; that every hide of land , as much as to say , every hundred acre of land , shall pay five shilling ; which compute without deduction , will rise to a sum that will seem in ? credible . law and ordinance in his time . his ordinance be chief for the meridian of London : for where before his time the city be govern by Portgraves , this king grant they to be go ? verne by two sheriff and a major , as now it be ; and to give the first of these magistrate the honour to be remember , the name of the sheriff be Henry Cornhill , and Richard Reyner ; and the name of the first lord major , be Henry fits-allwyn , who continue major during his life , which be four and twenty year . and now begin the city first to receive the form and state of a common ? wealth , and to be divide into fellowship and corporation , as at this day they be : and this franchise be grant in the year 1189. the first year of king Richard the first . Affaires of the church in his time . the church within his own dominion be quiet all his time , no contestati ? on with the pope , no alteration among the bishop , no difference between the clergy and the Laity , or the clergy among themselves ; they all seem to lie asleep , till they be afterward awaken , in the time of the succeed king . but abroad , in his time , there be a addition of three order of devotion ; the order of the Augustine friar , call friar mendicant , begin by William of page 91 parish ; then the order of friar minor begin by saint Francis ; and last the order of friar preacher begin by saint Dominick , though not confirm till the first year of pope Honorius . work of piety in his time . work of piety be for the most part work of plenty ; penury may in ? ward have good wish , but outward it can express but little : and in ? deed all part of the kingdom , all sort of people be draw so dry ; by the two great occasion of his journey and his ransom , and afterward by other Taxati ? once , that the rich man have enough to do to maintain themselves , without be ? king at the charge to make provision for other . all work of piety be now for the service of the holy land , and therefore it may well pass , if not for a work of devotion , at least worthy to be remember ; that William bishop of Ely buil ? dead the outer wall of the tower of London , and cause a deep ditch to be make about it , with a intention the river of Thames shall have surround it , though it can not be effect . only Hubert Walter , who at one time be archbishop of Canterbury , the pope legate , lord chancellor , lord chief justice , and the immediate governor under the king , both in wale and England , found a mo ? nastery at west Derham in Norfolk , where he be bear : begin another at Wol ? verhampton , and finish a collegiate church at Lambeth . of his Wif• and child . in his infancy he be contract to a daughter of Raymond earl of Barcelone , after that affiance to Adela , or Alice , daughter of Lewis king of France , yet marry to neither of they ; but he marry Berengaria daughter of Garsias king of Navarre , who his mother queen Eleanor bring unto he into Sicily , from whence passing into Cyprus , their marriage be there solemnise : afterward , go ? ing forward to the holy land , he carry she and his sister Jane queen of Sicily along with he , where they remain till his return home ; and then send they to pass to Sicily , and from thence into England : but that ever she come into Eng ? land , no mention be make , neither what become of she after she part from king Richard at the holy land but child certain he have none , either by his wife , or by any concubine , unless we reckon as a priest in Normandy do ; who tell king Richard , he have three daughter : and the king marvel who they shall be , see he know of none he have ; yes ( say the priest ) you have three daughter , pride , covetousness , and lechery ; which the king take merry , call to the company about he , and say ; i be tell by a priest here , that i have three daughter , and i desire you to be witness how i will have they be ? stow : my daughter pride , upon the templar and Hospitallers : my daughter covetousness , upon the monk of the Cistercian order : and my daughter lechery , upon the clergy . casualty happen in his time . in his time the town of mawl in Kent , with the nunnery , be consume with fire , and in his time the bone of Arthur the famous king of Britain be find at Glastenbury in a old sepulchre , about which stand two pillar , in which letter be write but can not be read ; upon the sepulchre be a cross of lead , whereon be write , here ly•th the noble king of Britain Arthur . also in this king day for three or four year together , there reign so great a dearth , that a quarter of wheat be sell for 18. shilling 8. penny , and then follow so great a mortality of man , that scarce the live suffice to bury the dead . page 92 of his personage and condition . he be tall of stature , and well proportion , fair and comely of face , of hair bright abourne , of long arm , and nimble in all his joint , his thigh and leg of due proportion , and answerable to the other part of his body . to speak of his moral part , his vice for the most part , be but only upon suspicion : incontinency in he much speak of , nothing prove ; but his virtue be appa ? rend , for in all his action he show himself valiant , ( from whence he have the appellation or surname of cae•r de lion ) wise , liberal , merciful , just , and which be most of all , religious ; a prince bear for the good of Christendom ; if a bar in his nativity have not hinder it . the remorse for his undutifulneesse towards his father , be live in he till he die : for at his death he remember it with bewail , and desire to be bury as near he as may be , perhaps as think ? king they shall meet the soon , that he may ask he forgiveness in another world . of his death and burial . he die of a wound with a arrow in his arm , which neglect at first , and suffer to wrankle , or as other say , ill handle by a unskilful surgeon , in four day bring he to his end but his charity deserve to have it remem ? breed , that find himself past hope of recovery , he cause the party that have wound he to be bring before he , who be ask what move he to do this fact ? answer , that king Richard have kill his father and two of his Bro ? there|be with his own hand , and therefor• will do it , if it be to do again . up ? on this insolent answer , every one look the king shall have censure he to some terrible punishment , when contrary to all their expectation in a high degree of charity , he not only free forgive he , but give a special charge he shall be set at liberty , and that no man shall dare to do he the least hurt : common ? ding beside to give he a hundred shilling for his pain . a act that well show ? ed he have be at the holy land , or rather indeed that he be go to it . he die the six day of April in the year 1199. when he have live 44. year , reign ? ed nine , and about nine month , and have his body bury at Founteverard , by his father ; his heart at roan , in remembrance of the hearty love that city have all ? way bear he ; and his bowel at Chalons , for a disgrace of their unfaithfulness ; other say at Carlile in England . of man of note in his time . in his time be famous Baldwyn archbishop of C•nterbury , who follow king Richard into the holy land , and die there ; Hubert that succeed he ; Hugh by ? shop of Lincoln ; William bishop of Ely , a man equal famous and infamous ; all ? so Baldwyn archbishop of Canterbury , a learned writer in divinity ; Daniel mor ? ley a great mathematician , John de Herham , and Richard de Herham , two notable he ? storian ; Guilielmus Stephonides a monk of Canterbury , who write much in the praise of archbishop Becket ; also one Richard Divisiensis , Nicholas Walkington , and Robert de bello foco , a excellent philosopher . of martial man , Robert earl of Leycester ; Ranulph de Fulgers ; two of the B••dolphs , Hugh and Henry ; three Willi ? be|be , martial , brun•ll and mandevill , with two Roberts , Rosse , and s•vevile . page 93 the reign of king John . king Richard be dead , the right of succession remain in Arthur , son of Geffrey plantagen•t elder brother to earl John , but John as think the title of Arthur but a criticism in state , and not for every one capacity , at least in common sense not so plain as his own , who be the son of a king , and the brother to a king , ascend into the throne as confi ? gentle as if he have no competitor : only Hubert archbishop of Canterbury go before , and make a oration in his behalf , wherein seek to do he a courtesy , he do he indeed a wrong ; for waive his right of succession , he insist whole upon their right of election ; where ? of will follow , that as they bring he in , so they may cast he out ; of which error when he be tell , he say , he do it of purpose to make king John the more careful of his government , by make he sensible upon what a unsure ground his regality stand : king John resent it , but see it to serve his turn for the present , he take it not ill , as know that his turn once serve , he can afterward be his own carver of what title he please ; and so upon ascension day in the year 1199. he be crown king at Westminster , with more solemnity than joy ; many presage by their countenance , and more in their mind , that all will not long be well . it can be deny , but that in moral circumstan ? ces earl John have the advantage of his nephew Arthur ; for he be a man of year fit to govern , Arthur but a child , not above thirteen year old ; he a native , at least always breed up in the kingdom , Arthur a foreigner , and have never be here ; he well know both to the nobility and the people , Arthur a stranger to both , as one they have never •eene ; and beside to these moral ad ? vantage , he have now add one from the politics , that he have get Posses ? sion ; ( of more force in the practical part then all the former ) and withal a grea ? ter then all these , if it be true which some write , that his brother king Richard have assign he his successor after his decease . but yet know the title at last will come to be try in a court , where the sword must be judge ; he employ ? eth all his endeavour to get this judge to be his friend , and by all mean possible to strengthen himself with arm ; and thereupon go to Chinon and Roan , he seize upon the treasure which his brother have leave in those part , and with it , get friend and soldier , the armour of arm . and indeed all he can have do himself will have do he no good , if he have not have the help of able assistant , who yet assist he no less for their own end then for he ; and these be chief his mother queen Eleanor , who know if her grandson Arthur shall be king , that than his mother Constantia will rule all ; at least during his minority , and thereby her self put from the stage of all authority ; and the archbishop page 94 Hubert , who also know that if Arthur shall come to reign , that than the Anjouyn and French shall have all the best office , and the english whole be neglect , as it be in the time of king William the conqueror . and yet a great friend than both these , for come to roan , he use mean that Walter the archbishop in the cathedral church with great pomp gird he with the ducal sword of Normandy , and crown he with a coronet of golden rose , he take his oath for faithful administration in that dukedom , and they their oath for be his loyal subject . of his trouble in contestation with his nephew Arthur . though king John have enter upon Normandy , and make that province sure unto he , yet the province of Anjou stand firm for Arthur , in observance of their love to his father their former prince : which also king John soon after in ? vade , reduce by force of arm to his obedience . and now Constantia the mother of prince Arthur , find king John too powerful a adversary , and no likelihood for her party , to be able long to stand out against he without further assistance , conceive it her best way to have recourse to the king of France , and thereupon commit her son Arthur to his tuition : who seem to receive he with the tenderness of a father , and promise to assist he with his uttermost force , in the recovery of his right both in France and England . here we may observe upon what hinge the affection of the king of France be use to turn . for in king Henry the second time , king Lewis of France be so great a friend to his son Richard , that by all mean he will help he to get the kingdom from his father ; afterwards when Richard be king , than Philip king of France , be so great a friend to John , that by all mean he will help he to get the king ? dome from his brother ; and now that John be come to be king , he be present grow so great a friend of Arthur , that by all mean he will help he to get the kingdom from his uncle ; and no doubt , if Arthur shall ever have come to be king , he will have be as ready to help any other to get the kingdom from he : by which it appear , that it be not the person of the man they either hate or love , but that they be always jealous of their grow too great ; and indeed this balance of state keep prince affection always in suspense , and never suffer the glass of their love or hate , to make a true reflection . A ? about this time William king of Scot come to London to visit king John , and there do homage to he for his kingdom of Scotland , though some say , but only for the county of Northumberland and Cumberland , but be require aid a ? against the french , he excuse himself , say , he can not do it without consent of his kingdom , and so return home . and now fillip king of France have undertake the protection of the young prince Arthur , with a mighty army enter Normandy , take many of the best town , and pursue his victory , enter the province of Anjou also , and re ? cover it from king John , which he the year before have get from prince be ? thur . upon this king John make a journey into Normandy , accuse king phi ? lip for break the truce , which former he have make with king Richard for five year ; but when he shall come to make his accusation good by arm , he fall to treaty , and obtain a new truce for fifty day : with which new truce , Baldwyn earl of Flanders , who have profess himself of that side , be not well please ; and thereupon come to king John to Roan , and enter a new league with he , they there consult how to proceed , when the fifty day shall be expire . this consultation the king of France understand ; and there ? upon both side prepare for war , but at the end of the truce , both side seem to relent , and diverse meeting be have for treaty of peace , and in conclusion , king John more desirous of peace then be for his honour , agree to these condition ; that his ni•ce Blanch , daughter of Alphonsus king of Castille by his sister Eleanor , shall marry with Lewis king fillip son , who shall have with page 95 she in dower , beside thirty thousand mark in money , all those city , except only Angiers , which the french before that time have take , which be many and very great : and his peace thus make , he return into England with great joy , but be not with like joy receive of the english lord , who count themselves dishonour , in the dishonourable condition he have make ; and Baldwyn earl of Flanders also , when he see the poor spi•its of king John , to descend to such base condition ; leave his party , and enter league with the king of France , dispo ? sed himself for the holy war . but king John have now get a vacation , and a time of ease , which agree much better with his nature then war , set his mind whole upon pleasure ; and for maintain his pleasure , upon seek after profit , which he pursue by all manner of injustice , under the name of prerogative ; and with such violence , that when his brother Geffrey archbishop of York , in the dutifulness of a coun ? sellour , advise he not to take such unlawful course , he most unworthy take from he all he have , and it be a year work for all the archbishop friend to pacify his anger . in the neck of this injustice , he commit another , he procure a divorce from his wife Avis , the daughter of Robert earl of Gloucester , only for be of kin to he in the three degree , and by advice of the king of France , marry Isabella daughter and heir of the earl of angoulesme , affiance before to Hugh le Brun earl of march ; and short after bring she with he into Eng ? land , where he and she together , be both crown at Canterbury . and here the earl and baron of the realm , be all summon to attend the king into France at Whitsuntide follow ; they all by a general consent send he word , that unless he will restore they their right and liberty , they will do he no service out of the kingdom . but what it be that make the lord more violent in press their demand at this time then before , no writer of these time do sufficient deliver : only some of they speak scatter of certain oppressi ? on|his ( beside the general grievance for exaction ) late offer to some of the lord , one to the earl of Chester , who he will have banish , only for ad ? vise he to leave his cruelty and incontinency : another , a pursuit in love to a daughter of Robert fits-water , call Maude the fair , who not consent to the king lust , a messenger be send to give her poison in a potch egg , where ? of she die : and a three , offer to William de brawse and his lady , for a rash word speak ; for when the king send to have the brawse son deliver he for a pledge , the lady answer , we shall do well indeed to commit our son to his keep , who keep so well his own nephew prince Arthur . this rash word cost the brawse his country , and his lady and their son their life , both of they be famish to death in prison . for , though these direct be but particular grievance , yet reflect they be general , what one suffer all might ; but whether any of these , or all of these together , be ingredient to make a come ? pound of violence in the lord at this time , or whatsoever be the true cause , this be plain the effect , that unless the king will restore their liberty , they will not follow he out of the kingdom . but notwithstanding this refusal of his lord , he pass over with his queen into Normandy , and from thence to pa ? ris , where the king of France receive they with all compliment of love and a ? mity . but now huge earl of march , resent the injury do he by king John ; in take away his affiance wife , join with prince Arthur , and the king of France also , for all his fair show of amity late make , join with they , as have sometime before marry his young daughter to prince Arthur , and these with their force join , invade first the Turones , and then the Anjovins : of which province queen Eleanor the king mother be leave regent , who there ? upon betake her self to Mirabell the strong town of those part , and send to her son king John , acquaint he with the danger she be in , and require his speedy succour . when in the mean time prince Arthur take the city , and in it his grandmother queen elea•or , who he use with great reverence and respect than she expect . but king John at the hear hereof , be so move , page 96 calling the french king ungrateful and perfidious for succour prince Arthur , contrary to his league , that study•ng present the art of revenge , he fall upon a stratagem , of all other the most prudent against a enemy : for a surprise in war be like to a apoplexy in the body , which strike without give warning for defence : and this stratagem at this time king John put in practice , for tra ? vell night and day with indefatigable labour , he come upon his enemy before they be aware , and set upon they unprovide , it be rather a execution than a battle ; and they who remain unslain be take prisoner , among who prince Arthur him•elfe , who commit present to the custody of Robert de Veypont in Ro ? an , live not long after whether it be that attempt to make escape , he fall down from the wall of his prison , and be drown in the river Seyne , as some say ; or whether it be , that through anguish of mind he fall sick and dye , as other say ; or whether indeed he w•re make away by king John , as the common fame go ; certain it be , that he survive his imprisonment but a very few day . but though he be go , yet his sister Eleanor , a precede competitor to king John , be still remain : her therefore , at this time also king John seize upon , and commit she in safe custody to Bristol castle , where , after she have live long , she die . of he trouble after the death of his nephew Arthur . king John be now free from his competitor , one will think he shall have end all his trouble , but like a Hydra head , they rather multiply upon he : for they who have be so ready to assist prince Arthur in his life , be now as ready to revenge his death . and first , Constance his mother come to king Philip , with open exclamation against king John , accuse he with the murder of her son , and with all the instance of tear and entreaty , solicit he to revenge it . hereupon king Philip summon king John to appear at a day , and because he appear not accord to the tenure of his homage , it be decree against he , that he have forfeit all the property of his estate in France , and thereupon king Philip with mighty force invade his territory , take man ? nigh town of principal consequence , while king John live idle at r•an , no more regard it then if it have not at all concern he ; and when some of his lord seem to marvel what he mean to suffer the french to rob he of such goodly city : you say true indeed , ( say he ) for it be but robbery , and within a few day you shall see , i will make he to restore they back with usu•y . in this slight humour he return into England , where he look not after the le ? vie of soldier , or the raise of a army , as this case require , but continue his old course for raise of money , accuse sometime one of his lord , some ? time another , as ? ? ? it w•re their fault that he have lose these town in France• and upon ? … ? make many of they pay great sum of money , which bring ? … ? into hatred at home , but into contempt abroad ; for the king of ? ? ? •n•••standing his unworthy course , proceed more violent in his invasi•ns ? … ? , get Falai• , damfr•nt , and all the good town of Normandy , but only roan , and at last , though R•an be a town strong for ? tify with wall , and more strong with the faithful heart of the inhabi•ants , yet find no hope of succour from king John , it be force for want of victu ? also to submit it self to the king of France , who example all the other city fol ? low ; and so all Normandy return to the subjection of the french , after three hundred and sixteen year that Roll• the Dane have first possess it . it be now the year 1205. and the four of king John reign , about which time , the two prop of his estate , or rather indeed , the two bridle of his intemperancy , die , his mother queen Eleanor , who virtue have oftentimes qualify the vice of her son ; and Hubert archbishop of Canterbury , who repent he at his death of nothing more , than that he have be a instrument of bring he to the crown . page 97 and now king John be a substantive of himself , have a devise in his head to make his subject as willing to give he money as he be to have it : for know ? ing the great discontentment they all have for his loss in France ; he give it out , that he will present rais• a army , for recovery of those loss , if he may have money to go about it : whereupon , never be money give with moor alacri ? ty ; and as soon as he have it , he instant go to Portesmouth , and there take ship ? ping before it be possible for his lord and other to be in readiness to accompa ? nigh he ; and sail forward some certain league into the sea , upon a sudden he return back again , and then lay the fault upon his lord , that have not fol ? low he ; and for this backwardness of they , impose afterward great fine upon they ; by which mean he get money no less by pretence of his not go ? king , than he have do before by pretence of his go . about this time die Geffrey Fits-Peter justitiar of England , who while he live keep the king in some awe , in so much , as hear he be dead , he swear by the foot of God , that now at length he be king of England ; and with great rejoice say to some lord about he : now when this man come into hell , let he salute the archbishop Hubert , who certain he shall find there . but Philip , king of France , inten ? ding to leave the english nothing on that side the sea , invade Chinon , and take it ; and in it the valiant captain Roger Lacie , which have give a period to king fillip victory , have not Guido the husband of Constantia prince Arthur mother revolt to king John ; who with his assistance once again leavy a army , be ? siege mount Auban , a castle think impregnable , and within fifteen day take it , which Charles the great can not get with his seven year siege : where so great a number of french lord be take prisoner , that king John send a ca ? talogue of their name into England , for a memorial of so great a victory . after this , he take the strong town of Angiers , and utter deface it ; for which of ? terward he be sorry , as be the town where he be bear . but now when the two king be ready to meet , and to give battle , intercession be make by friend of both side , and thereupon a peace conclude for two year : and king John return into England . king John be return , perform no less worthy act at home , than he have do in France : for first he invade the border of Scotland , and bring Alexander king of Scot to do he homage ; and then understand many of the irish to be revolt , he pass over to Dublin , and reduce they to his obedience ; and then place John bishop of Norwich governor there , he return into England ; where pass through wale , he subdu certain rebel there , and take eight and twenty child of the best family , for pledge of their future loyalty ; but not long after , hear they grow mutinous and rebel again , he be so incense , that he will not go to dinner till he have see those twenty eight child to be all hang before his face : so inconsiderate a thing be the desire of revenge , that it make no difference between innocency and guiltiness ; though indeed a thing oftentimes must be do for example , which consider in it self , will be for ? bear . and it be the year 1214. and the fourteenth of king John reign , when he go to Angiers , strong repair it ; and the province of Poictou revolt to he ; which Lewis king fillip son understanding , come upon they with a mighty army , and use much severity upon the author of the revolt , take prisoner , Rey ? nold earl of Boleigne , and William earl of Salisbury , with many other of king John captain , and defeat his whole army : whereof when king John be certify , he grow in a manner desperate , and as a man deject , make a new truce upon any condition with the king of France , and return into England ; where he find a worse business ready to entertain he : for the lord of the realm have often require their ancient right and liberty ; and find nothing but delusion , endure no long to be abuse ; but meet at saint Edmundsbery , they there confer how they may find a remedy to redress this evil ; and at la•t conclude to go to the king themselves in person , and make their demand ; page 98 whereof a charter be produce , that have be former grant in king Henry the first time : whereupon come to the king after Christmas , lie then in the new temple , and acquaint he with their demand ; he give they this fair answer , that within a few day he will give they satisfaction ; and cause the bishop of Canterbury and Ely , with William martial , earl of Gloucester , to pass their word for he , that it shall be perform . but the king mean nothing less than to do as he say , fall present a leavy of soldier ; which the lord understand , they also do the like ; and go to the bishop of Canterbury , de ? liver he a copy of their demand , and require the king answer . but the bishop show it to the king , and humble entreat he to give the lord a satisfactory answer : he swear a great oath , they may as well demand the kingdom , and that he will die before he will yield to any such demand . whereupon the lord ( know now what they be to trust to ) fall to besiege Northampton , and after that , Redford , which be yield to they ; and withal they be send to by the Londoner , to signify their readiness to join with they . at this time the king be at Windsor provide a army , but hear the Londoner be join with the lord , he think it no good way to proceed by force , but rather by fraud ; and thereupon send to the lord , that if they will come to he to Windsor , he will grant their demand . the lord come thither , but in a military manner , ( for they dare not trust his word ) the king salute they all kind , and promise to give they satisfaction in all they demand ; and so in a meadow between wind ? for and Stanes , call running-mead , he free consent to confirm their former liberty ; and be content some grave personage shall be choose to see it per ? form . but the next day , when it shall be do , he get he go to south-ham ? pton , and from thence to the I|will of Wight ; where advise with his council , what in this case be fit to be do : it be conclude he shall send to the pope , to acquaint he with this mutiny of the lord , and to require his help : while the king in the mean time live skulk up and down in corner , that no man may know where to find he ; or which be worse ( as some write ) rove about and practise piracy . and now the lord begin to suspect fraud , when short after the king messenger , who be Walter and John , bishop of Worcester and Norwich , return with the pope decree ; which be , that the king grant to the lord shall be void : with this decree , the king after three month that he have stay in the I|will of Wight , come back to Windsor , acquaint the lord ; but they accuse the messenger for false inform the pope , and the pope also for make a decree without hear both side , betake they to arm , and swear by the holy altar to be revenge for this iudification and injurious deal . the king find the lord nothing move with the pope decree , send again unto he , to acquaint he with it : who mighty incense to have his decree so slight , adjudge they all to be hold as enemy of religion ; and give power to Peter bishop of Winchester , and to the abbot of read to excommunicate they . in the mean time the king have send the bishop of Worcester , chancellor of England , and other with his seal , to hire soldier from the part beyond the sea ; who return short after , bring along with he out of Poicto• and glasconie , Savery de Malcon , Geffrey and Oliver B•t•vile , brother ; and under their conduct so great a rabble , that with these force , within half a year the king have get all the castle of the baron , to the border of Scotland . and now he divide his army , commit part of it to his brother William , earl of Salisbury , and other , to set upon London ; and with the other part he go himself into Yorkshire , where most of the lord have possession , which in most cruel manner he destroy with fire and sword . the lord be thus on all side distress , resolve upon a course , neither honourable nor safe ; yet such as necessity make seem both : they send to fillip king of France , require he to send over his son Lewis to their aid , and promise they will submit themselves to be govern by he , and take he for their sovereign . to this more ? cion of the lord , king Philip be as forward as themselves ; which king John understanding , send again to the pope , require he to use his authority to stay page 99 the king of France from come . but king Philip , though much regard the request of the pope , yet nothing so much as the acquest of England ; with all speed provide a army , and with a fleet of six hundred sayle• send over his son Lewis ; who pass into England , land at Sandwich , whither many of the lord and other resort unto he ; and give oath of allegiance , join they ? self with he . king John at this time be at Dover , but not dare to stay there for fear of the enemy , he commit the castle to Hubert Burgh ; and go himself to Canterbury , and from thence to Winchester in manner of a flight ; which prince Lewis understanding , go straight to London , and by a plausible oration make that city sure unto he : and thither come to he the king of Scot with a army of choice soldier , as also the earl , Warren , Arundel , Salisbury , with many other . and now prince Lewis pass all the country over without resistance , but not without infinite outrage commit by his soldier , which it be not in he to hinder : and then come to Norwich , he take that city easy , but Dover cost he a long siege , as be defend by the valiant and loyal captain Hubert Burgh . in this mean while king John find his enemy employ in these diffi ? cult siege ; send about and gather a rabble of all rascal people to he , and with they run over all the country , spoil and kill in most barbarous man ? ner ; and now be the kingdom make the stage of all misery of rapine and cruelty : two army in it on foot at once , each of they seek to prey upon the other , and both of they upon the country . but the king come to wall ? pool in Norfolk , where the Washes be to be pass over , he send one to search where the Ford be passable , and there himself with some few pass over , but the multitude , with all the carriage , pass without orde• , they care not where , be all drown ; with which disaster , the king through anguish of mind fall into a fever , whereof within a few day he die . and here be a end of all the trou ? bles of this king : in who it be observable , that love his case• so well as he do , he shall run voluntary into such trouble , especial at home , upon so small occasion as he do ; but it shall seem there be no great hindrance to man for accomplish their will , than their own wilfulness . of his taxation . to speak of his taxation , it may not unproper be say that it be but one continue taxation all his reign through ; yet to divide it into part : his first be the taxation of three shilling upon every Ploughland through the king ? dom• , to pay the thirty thousand mark , for his niece blanche portion ; and to mend this taxation , he seize upon all the temporalty of his brother Geffrey archbishop of York , for oppose it ; and for a continuation , he make a progress short after into all the north part , where he exact great fine of offender in his forest . very short after solicit by the pope legate , he grant a subsidy of the forty part of all his subject revenue for one year , to succour the holy land short ? lie after this , he charge his earl and baron with the loss he sustain in France ; and thereupon fine they to pay the seven part of all their good : neither spare he the church , or the commons in this imposition . before this year be end another lea•y be make at a parliament in Oxford , wherein be grant two mark and a half of every knight fee , for military aid ; neither be the clergy exempt from pay their part : and before another year be out , another imposition be lay of the thirteenth part of all movable and other good , both of the clergy and Laity . it may be reckon among his taxation , that when the monk of can ? terbury have displease he about the election of their archbishop , he seize upon all their good , and convert they to his own use : and present after this , upon the like displeasure , he depute many bishopric , abbey , and priory into the hand of layman , and confiscate all their revenue . to these may be add that he take eleven thousand mark of silver of the king of Scot for grant he peace . add to these also great sum of money exact and gather from page 100 the Jew , among who there be one that will not be ransom , till the king cause every day one of his great tooth to be pull out by the space of seven day , and then he be content to give the king ten thousand mark of silver , that no more may be pull out . add to these , that at his return out of Ireland , he summon all the prelate of the kingdom to appear before he ; of who he extort for their redemption , the sum of a hundred thousand pound star ? ling . add last to these , that at his return out of wale , he exact of every knight that attend he not in that expedition , two mark . of his law and ordinance . he be the first that appoint the form of civil government in London and other city , endow they also with their great franchise . the first that cause sterling money to be here coin ; the first that ordain the ho ? nourable ceremony in creation of Earles ; the first that settle the rate and measure for wine , bread , cloth , and such other necessary of Commerce• the first that plant english law and officer in Ireland ; the first that enlarge the royal stile with lord of Ireland , and both annex that kingdom , and fasten wale to the crown of England . Affaires of the church in his time . after the death of Hubert archbishop of Canterbury , the monk of th•• counterfeit ? vent secret in the night elect one Reginold their subprior to succeed he ; and cause he to go to roam for confirmation : but afterward doubt how the king will take it , be do without his knowledge , they crave leave of the king to choose a fit man , the king be content to allow they the election , but re ? quire himself to have the nomination , and thereupon commend unto •hem John grey bishop of Norwich , who he special favour , and accord then monk elect he . but the matter be afterward refer to the pope , which of these two election shall stand good , after many allegation of both side , the pope to show himself indifferent to both , disallow they both , and nominate a three man , one Stephen Lancthon , cardinal of saint Chrysogone , a Englishman bear , and a man of great learning . the monk admit he , but the king open ? pose it : and now , as it be , a prize begin to be play between the two sword , the spiritual and the temporal : but he that use the spiritual sword , prove so much the better fencer , that he disarm the other , and take away his temporal sword from he . it be true , in the first venue , the king give the pope as good as he bring ; for as the pope threaten the king to excommunicate he , and to interdict the kingdom ; so the king threaten the pope to nullify his authority , and to banish clergy man out of the realm . in the second venue , as the pope act as much as he have threaten ; ( for he interdict the •ingdome ) so the king perform as much as he have speak ; ( for he drive the monk ou• of their cloy ? star ) yet at last when Pand•lphus the pope legate come into England , and make appear to the king in what great d•ngers he stand ; first• of the king of France , by invasion ; and then of his own subject , by rebellion ; for both which , there be no other help but reconcilement with the pope ; he so touch he to the quick , that he make he leave his great word , and fall to ask forgiveness . so as take off the crown from his head , he lay it down at Pand•lphus fe•te , to be dispose of , as the pope shall please . and Pandulphus stick not to ••ke up his crown , and to keep it three or four day in his hand before he restore it ; and do not then neither , but upon condition that he •nd his successor sho•ld hold the kingdom of the see of room , at the annual tribute of • thousand mark . and all those three or four day , in which Pandulphus keep the crown , it may be true say , the kingdom be without a king . and upon this , no doubt it be that Peter a her••te in a prophetical rapture have give out some time be ? fore , page 101 that by asc••sion day , there shall be no king of England . which though in some sort it be true , yet in some sort it be not true , and it be in the prerogative of the king to make his own interpretation : and so it cost the poor hermit and his son their life , and they remain as a pillar of salt , to make man take heed of ludere cum sanctis ; and of play the critic in matter of state . but by this mean the kingdom be release of the interdiction , which have continue six year , three month , and fourteen day : during all which time , there be no public exercise of religion ; no church open ; no eccle ? siasticall sacrament administred• but only to they that be in danger of death , and baptism to child ; all that dye be bury like dog , in ditch and corner , but only such as have purchase or procure licence from the pope . in this king reign , saint Dominicke continue his preach ten year toge ? there , against the Albigenses . also in his time saint Francis renounce the world ; and when a priest to who he offer it , will not take his money , he cast it a ? way• and enter into a vow of perpetual poverty . also in this king time , be hold the L•teran council , under pope innocent the three , in which be esta ? blish the pope power over prince , and in matter of faith , auricular confess ? sion , and transubstantiation . of his irreligion . i need not relate a speech of he , though very unchristian , that have be a little before reconcile to the pope , and then take a overthrow in France , in great anger he cry out , that nothing have prosper with he since the time he be reconcile to God and the pope . nor another speech of he , which though speak merry , be in good earnest very irreligious , that be on a time a hunt at the open of a fat buck , he say : see how this deer have prosper , and how fat he be , and yet i dare swear he never hear mass . it be sufficient to relate one act of he , ( if it be true which some write ) that be in some distress , he •ent Thomas Hardington , and Ralph fit Nichols , knight , in embassage to Mir•• ? m•malim king of Africa and M•r•cco , with offer of his kingdom to he , upon condition he will come and aid he ; and that if he prevail , he will he ? self become a Mahometan• and renounce the christian faith . though some there be that •ay , all the•e be but false crimination charge upon he by monk that do not love he . but though we believe not these thing of he ; yet to suffer his kingdom to stand interdict so many year together , upon so small occasion as he do , be certain no good sign of religion in he . yet one act he do , wherein he show a respect to religion , by the honour he do to a religious man : for huge bishop of Lincoln lie very sick , he not only go to visit he , but be dead , be one of the three king , ( the other two be , William king of Scotland• and the king of Southwales ) that carry his hearse upon their shoulder , till they deliver it to the peer , and the peer of ? terward to the archbishop and bishop to carry it in•o the choir . work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . yet do this king leave more work of piety behind he , than all his Sub ? ject that be in his time . for he found the abbey of Bowley in the new forest in Hampshire : also a abbey of black monk in the city of Winchester , and the monastery of Farend•n , and the monastery of Hales Owen in Shropshire : he reedify •odsto• and wr•xell , and enlarge the chapel of Knarisborough . now for his subject , only Richard prior of Ber•mon•sey build a house against the wall of the say house of Ber•on•sey , call the Almary or hospital of convert and child , in honour of saint Thomas . in this king time saint mary overeye in southw••ke be begin to be build , and the stone bridge over the Thames , be page 102 by the merchant of London finish . also Hubert archbishop of Canterbury , found a monastery at west Derham in Norfolk , which upon the dissolution come to the family of the Derhams , who hold it to this day . of his law and ordinance . in this king time , five and thirty of the most substantial citizen of London , be choose out , and call the counsel of the city , and the king give the city liberty to alter their major and sheriff every year , which before continue ? ed during life . he cause the law of England to be execute in Ireland , and money to be coin there , accord to the weight of english money . of his wife and child . king John live to have three wife : his first be Alice daughter of hu ? bert earl of Morton , who leave he a widower without issue . his second be Isabella daughter and heir of Robert earl of gl•c•ster , by who no issue nei ? there , divorce from she by reason of consanguini•y in the three degree . his three wife be Isabel daughter and heir of Aymer earl of angoules•e , affiance be ? fore to Hugh le Brun , earl of march : by this wife he have two son , Henry and Richard , and three daughter , Joan , Eleanor , and Isabella : Henry succeed he in the kingdom ; Richard be earl of Cornwall , and crown king of the roman , and have issue Henry and John , that die without issue : also Edward earl of Cornwall , and other . Joan his elder daughter marry to Alexander the se ? cond king of Scot , die without issue : Eleanor the second daughter ( marry to Simon earl of Leycester ) have issue Henry , Simon , Almaricke , Guy , Richard , and Eleanor . Henry slay without issue . Simon earl of Bigorre , and ancestor to a fa ? mily of the Mountford in France . Almaricke , first a priest , after a knight . Guy earl of Angleria in Italy , and progenitor of the Mountford in Thuscany , and of the earl of the Campo bacchi in the kingdom of Naples . Richard• remain privy in England , and change his name from Mountford to Wellesborne , be ancestor of the Wellesburnes in England . Eleanor bear in England , bring up in France , marry into wale , to prince Lewin a• Griffith . Isabel his young daughter , marry to the emperor Frederick the second , have issue , Henry appoint to be king of Sicily , and Margaret wife of Albret landgrave of Thurine . she die in childbed , after she have be empress six year . he have also two natural son , Geffrey fit Roy , and Richard , that marry the daughter and heir of Fulbert de Dover , ( who build Childham castle ) have issue by she , of who some family of good account be descend . also one base daughter name Joan , marry to Lewin prince of Wales . of his personage and condition . he be of stature indifferent tall , and something fat , of a sour and angry countenance , and concern his condition , it may be say , that his nature and his fortune do not well agree : for natural h• love his e•se , yet his fortune be to be ever in action . he win more of his enemy by surprise then by bat ? tell , which show he have more of lightning in he then of thunder . he be never so true of his word as when he threaten , because he mean always as cru ? elly as he speak , not always as gracious ; and he that will have know what it be he never mean to perform , must have look upon his promise . he be neither fit for prosperity nor adversity : for prosperity make he insolent , and adversity deject ; a mean fortune will have suit best with he . he be all that he be by fit : sometime do nothing without deliberation• and sometime do all upon a sudden ; sometime very religious , and sometime scarce a christian . his insatiableness of money be not so much as that no man page 103 know what he do with it , get with much noise , but spend in silence . he be but intemperate in his best temper , but when distemper with sickness , most of all , as appear at his last , when be in a fever he will needs be eat of raw peach , and drink of sweet ale . if we look upon his work we must needs think he a worthy prince , but if upon his action , nothing less : for he work of piety be very many , as have be show before , but as for his action , he neither come to the crown by justice , nor hold it with honour , nor leave it in peace . yet have have many good part in he , and especial he ? ve his royal posterity continue to this day , we can do no less than honour his memory . casualty that happen in his time . one casualty we may count disastrous , if it have not have relation to our self : for Hugh de bone come to aid king John with threescore thou ? sand out of Britain and Flanders , by misfortune at sea be all drown , to who the king have grant Norfolk and Suffolk for the people he bring with he to in ? habit . in this king time be great thunder and lightning , and shower with hail ? stone as big as goose-egge . fish of strange shape be take in England , arm with helmet and shield , and be like unto arm knight , save that they be far great in proportion . about maidestone in Kent a certain monster be find strike with the lightning , which monster have a head like a ass , a belly like a man , and all other part far differ from any other creature . of his death and burial . when prince Lewis of France be come into England , and be receive by the lord and by the Londoner , king John with a army go into the north part , and come to wallpoole , where he be to pass over the Washes , he send one to search where the water be passable , and there himself with some few pass over , but the multitude with all his carriage and treasure pass without order , they care not where , be all drown . with the grief of which disaster , and perhaps distemper in his body before , he fall into a Fea ? for and be let blood ; but keep a ill diet , ( as indeed he never keep good ) eat green peach , and drink sweet ale , he fall into a looseness , and grow present so weak , that there be much ado to get he to Newarke• where soon after he die . though indeed it be diverse relate ; Caxton say , he be poy ? son at swi••sheads abbey by a monk of that covent ; the manner and cause this : the king be there , and hear it speak how cheap corn be , shall say , he will ere long make it dear , and make a penny loa•e be sell for a shilling . at this speech the monk take such indignation , that he go and put the poison of a toad into a cup of wine , and bring it to the king , tell he there be such a cup of wine as he have never drink in all his life , and therewithal take the assay of it himself , which make the king to drink the more bold of it ; but find himself present very ill upon it , he ask for the monk , and when it be tell he that he be fall down dead ; then ( say the king ) God have mercy upon i , i doubt as much . other say , the poison be give in a dish of pear . but the physician that dis-bowelled his body , find no sign of poison in it , and therefore not likely to be true ; but howsoever the manner of his death be uncertain , yet this be certain , that at this time and place he die , on the 19 day of October , in the year 1216. when he have reign seventeen year and six month ; live one and fifty : he be bury , his bowel at Croxton abbey , his body at Worcester under the high altar , wrap in a monk cowl , which the superstition of that time account sacred , and a defensative against all evil spirit . page 104 of the prize of thing in his time . neither be this unfit to be record in chronicle , to the end comparison may be make between the time past and the present : as in the time of king Henry the second , a quarter of Whea•e be sell for twelve penny ; a quarter of bean or oat for a groat . neither be the price of silver it self much less alter , for a ounce of silver be then value but at twenty penny ; which be now value at least at five shilling . whereof philosopher must tell the reason , for see scar ? city make thing dear , why shall not plenty make they cheap ? of man of special note in his time . in military matter there be many famous man in his time , as Robert Fits-Roger , and Richard Mount-Fitchet , with many other ; but chief two , who act make they special memorable : the one be Hubert Burgh , who king John have leave governor of Dover castle , of who it be relate , that when prince Lewis of France come to take the town , and find it difficult to be take by force ; he send to Hubert , who brother Thomas he have take prisoner a little before ; that unless• he will surrender the castle , he shall present see his brother Thomas be put to death with exquisite torment before his eye : but this threaten move not Hubert at all , who more regard his own loyalty , than his brother life : then prince Lewis send again , offer he a great sum of money ; but neither do this move , but he keep his loyalty as inexpugnable as his castle . the other be Robert fits-water , of who it be relate , that king John be with a army in France , one of his knight in a great bravery will needs make a challenge to any of the french camp , that dare encounter he in a combat , when present come forth this Robert fits-water ; and in the encounter , throw horse and man down to the ground : whereof when king John hear , by god tooth ( say he ) he be a king indeed that have such a champion ; whereupon some that stand by , say to he , he be sir , a servant of your own , it be Robert fits-water , who you have banish . whereupon his sentence of banishment be present reverse , and the king receive he , as he well deserve , into special favour . in matter of literature also there live many famous man in the king reign ; as Geffrey vine ? saufe , Simon Fraxinus , alias ash , Adam Dorensis , John de Oxford , Colman surname the wise•Richard Canonicus , William Peregrine , Alane Tewksbery , Gervasius dorober ? nensis , John Hanwill , Nigell worker , Gilbert Holland , Benet de Peterborough• William parvus a monk of Newburgh , Roger Hoveden , Hubert Walter , archbishop of Canterbury , Alexander Theologus , Gervasius Tilberiensis , Gyraldus Cambrensis , Johan ? nes Devonius , Walter Mapis , Radulphus de Diceto , Gilbert Legley , Mauricius Morganius , John de Fordeham , William Leycester , joceline Brakeland , Roger of Crowland , Hugh white , alias Candidus , who write a history entitle Historia Petroburgensis ; John de saint Omer , Adam bark , John grey a historigrapher , and bishop of Norwich ; Walter of Coventry , Radulphus Niger , and last , Simon thurvay , who for his pride in learning , but more for his blasphemy against Moses and Christ , be ? come at last so utter ignorant , that hardly he can read a letter of the book . page 105 the life and reign of king Henry the three . of his come to the crown , and of act do in his minority . king John be dead , his elder son Henry be next to succeed : who be but nine year old , though he be capa ? ble of have his right , yet he be scarce c•pable of under ? stand his right : especial there being another at that tim• , to who a great part of the kingdom have swear allege ? ance . but those lord who have be constant to the father , notwithstanding his fault , be more tender of the son , who be altogether innocent , and who gracious aspect give no small hope of a better disposition . among all which lord , there be none of eminent in worthiness , none so near he in alliance , as William martial earl of Pembroke , who have marry his aunt ; and he draw the rest of the lord to ? gether , with a solemn oration in behalf of the young prince , so confirm they , and so order the matter , that on the twenty eight day of October , in the year 1216. he be crown at Gloucester , by Peter bishop of Winchester , and joceline by ? shop of bath , in the presence of Guallo the pope legate , and many lord and by ? shop : and the say William earl of Pembroke , by a general consent , assign Pro ? tector of the realm during the king minority . in which place , the first thing he do , be to give notice of the new king coronation to all the country round about ; and proclaim pardon to all offender , that within a time limit shall come and submit themselves to he . in the mean time prince Lewis of France , who at his first hear of king John death , think himself then sure of enjoy the kingdom quiet , and that he shall need to fear no more opposi ? cion ; now that he hear of the new king crown , and that so solemn , and with so unanimous a consent , he begin to think himself in worse case than be ? fore ; and to grow jealous of the english lord that have adhere to he , what they will do in this new world . and indeed a conflict be already grow in their mind , which of the two obligation shall be the great ; either that of their oath to prince Lewis , or that of their allegiance to king Henry . they can not but think it extreme ungratfulnes to forsake prince Lewis , who they have they ? self invite to come : and they can not but think it extreme undutifulness to stand out in opposition against king Henry , their natural sovereign : and that which add no small weight to this scale , be a discovery late make by the viscount page 106 Melun a french lord at the time of his death , who confess as a matter of consci ? ence , that prince Lewis have ? ? ? , if once he get th• kingdom , utter to extir ? pate all the english nobility and to admit ? ? ? but f••nch to any place of digni ? ty . but whether any of these reason , or any other ? ? ? their motive ; certain it be , that many of they , of who• be princip••• , the earl of Ar•nd•ll , warren , Salisbury , and William , the elder son of the protector , shrink from prince Lewis , and go to king Henry , as think no obligation so great as allegiance : and many again continue constant to prince Lewis , as think no obligation so great as a oath . and now prince Lewis• to cast the dice of fortune , before his enemy , though they have gotte• they a head , shall gather to a head , and draw more for••s together ; stay •imself• a Londo• , ? … ? his Lieu•enant• with a be ? my|night of twenty thousand , to take in as many town as they can ; and many they take with small opposition : but come to Lincoln , where though they have the town it self , yet the castle stand o••• and •ad be defend by a noble lady a whole year before ; they find such resistance , that their proceed be there arrest ; for thither come present Wi••ia• the pro•ect•ur with h•s sonn•William , the bishop of Winchester , •alis•ury , and ••ester ; t•e •arles of •alisbury , Ferrer and Albemarle , William de Albinet , William de Cantilupe , Falcasius , Thomas Basset , Robert Vipon• , Bren• de Lis•e , Ge••frey Lacie , and many other baron , with all the power of the young king : who with wonderful violence assault the city ; at which time it be propound by the french , to sally forth , and give they battle ; but conceive their army to be great than indeed it be ( for the english have set double ensign to every company , which make a show of twice as many as they be ) they forbear that course , and keep they self within the town ; by which mean be coop up and straiten i• place , so as they cou•• ? ? ? make use of their force as otherwise they may ; the• be in conclusion ? … ? , and all the principal man of the english that have adhere to prince ? ? ? • be take prisoner : as namely , Sa•• Earle o•Winchester , Henry de •ohun ? ? ? of Hereford , Gilbert de Gant , late make earl of Lincoln by prince Lewis ; ? ? ? Fi•••water , Richard mount-fi••het , William mawbr•y , William Beauchamp , Willi•• Maude• , Oliver Harcourt , Roger de Cressy , William de Colvil• , William de Ro• , Robert de Rope•••y , •alph Chendui• baron ; beside four hundred knight or man at arm . only the earl of perch their general , be compass about , and will to render he ? self , swear he will never become prisoner to any english : and thereupon be run through the sight of his helmet into the brain , and instant die . this be a main blow to pr•nce L••is , and th• last of his battle in England ; and be ? cause the city be very rich in merchandise , the english in derision call it Lewis fair . but prince Lewis be not yet discourage , for he have send to king Philip his father , to send he new supply out of France ; and new supply be indeed send : but Hubert de Bu•gh , governor of d•ver , be as vigilant as he be valiant , watch their come , and in a sea-fight defeat they all , of who but few escape : and now this blow at sea be so much great than that at land ; that where that make he only doubt , this make he despair , at leas• make he mal ? leable , and fit to be wrought upon by composition ; whereupon it be at last con ? clude , that prince Lewis shall have fifteen thousand mark for the charge he have be at , and abjure his claim to any interest in the kingdom ; and withal to work his father for restitution of such province in France as appertain to this crown : and that when himself shall be king , he shall resign they in a peace ? able manner . on the other part , king Henry take his oath ; and for he the le ? get Guallo and the protector , to restore unto the baron of the realm , and other his subject , all their right and privilege ; for which the discord begin be ? between the late king and his people . after this prince Lewis be honourable atten ? dead to Dover , and depart out of England about Michaelmas , above two year after his first arrival . and now the kingdom be come to unity within it self , one king and one peo ? ple ; and for a year or two there be little to be do , only some few there be , page 107 who the corruption of the time have engender ; and who be bear in a storm , can not live in a calm : of who the principal be the earl of albeit ? marl , Robert de Vipount , Foulke de Brent , Brian de Lisle• and Hugh de Bayli•l• ; who bustle about , get possession of some castle : with what intention , all man know ; but with what hope of effect their intention , no man can imagine : for be but a handful of man to the body of the realm ; they be easy suppress ; and either bring to acknowledge their fault , or else punish for not acknowledge ? ing they . it be now the four year of king Henry reign , at which time William earl of Pembroke , protector of the realm , die , and be bury in the new temple at London : in who place come the bishop of Winchester ; and now be the king the second time crown , and have grant he by Parliament• for e•c•age , two mark of silver of every knight fee , for the affair of the king ? dome , and recovery of his transmarine dominion , which be now design : and mall•on de Savery , the poicto•in , with William longsword earl of Salisbury , send over to try the affection of that people ; who they find for the most part in ? clinable to the obedience of this crown : but the king of France be require peaceable to deliver they ; make answer , that have get they by the sword , by the sword he will hold they . but now the king be come to some year of understanding , be in a parliament hold at London , put in mind by the arch ? bishop of Canterbury , of the oath he have take for confirmation of the liberty of the kingdom , which though oppugn by some ( and sp•cially by William brewer , and Hubert de Burgh , who the king have now make his chief justiciar ) as have be a act of constraint : yet the king then again ratify , and twelve knight or other legate man of every shire , by writ be charge to examine what the law and liberty be which the kingdom enjoy under his grand ? father ; and that they shall return they by a certain day : and here the king by parliament resume into his hand such alienation as have be make by his ancestor of any crown land the next year after , another parliament be hold at Westminster , wherein be require the fifty part of all the movable , both of the clergy and Laity , for the recovery of those part in France , withhold from the crown by Lewis now king , contrary to his oath and promise make here in Eng ? land at his departure ; which , though it concern the honour and dignity of the kingdom , and the estate of most of the nobility ; yet will it not be yield to , but upon confirmation of their liberty , which in the end be obtain , in the same word and form as king John have grant they in the two charter be ? before : and twelve knight be choose in every shire , to dispart the old forest from the new , and the new to be lay open and plough , and improved• to the great come ? fort and benefit of the subject ; and two year they be accord enjoy . of his act after he come to be of age . it be now the ten year of king Henry reign , and be about nineteen year of age , he claim to take the government of the kingdom into his own hand , and no long to be under a protector ; and now will present appear the difference between a prince that be rule by good counsel , and a prince that will do all of himself , and take no advice . for the ten year he be rule by a protector , be all pass , as it be in a calm , without noise or clamour ; but as soon as he take upon he the government himself , there grow present storm and tumult ; no quietness either to the subject or himself : nothing but grievance all the long time of his reign . for at the parliament now hold at Oxford , as soon as he be crown again , he present cancel and annul the charter of the forest , as grant in his nonage ; and therefore he not bind to observe it : and then not use any long than seal which the protector have use , he make a new ; and cause a proclamation to be make , that whosoever will enjoy any benefit of grant under his seal , shall come and have they sign by his new seal ; by which course he draw much money from many : and this be page 108 the first grievance . Shortly after , he commit the keep of Barkehamstead ca ? stle to one Walleran a du•chman , which castle belong to his brother Richard earl of Cornwall : but when Earle Richard require to have the possession• as o• right he ought , it be then plot by hube•t burgh chief justice , and the king chief counsellor , to commit he to prison , which the earl understanding , o• at least suspect , fly pres•ntly to M•rleborough , where he find William earl mar ? shall his vow friend , with who he has•ens to Stamford , and there mee•es with the earl of Chester , Gloucester , Warren , Hereford , Ferrer , Warwick , and diver• oh ? the baron ; who all confederate together , and send to the king •hat unless he re ? store the castle to his brother , and •o they the liberty of forest which he have late cancel at Oxford , they will seek to recover they by the sword . here , upon king Henry to pacifi• his brother• not only render the castle to him• but give he beside all that his mother have in dower and also great possession which the earl of Britain , and th• earl of B•leigne late deceased• have in England ; but to the petition of the lord he make a dilatory answer• and this be another grievance . not long after king Henry be persuade by Hugh •e Brun , earl of march , who have marry his mother , to make a journey into France , for recovery of his right there• but the earl persuade it for end of his own ; which to have discover , have be no way to com••••e them••e must therefore •ay some counterfeit ? lour upon his work , and it be colour enough• that the action will be of great benefit to the king , if it may succeed• and the likelihood of succeed be most apparent , by reason of the great inclina•ion of the people to king Henry ; and their great averseness from king Lewis . upon these colour , king Henry underta ? king the action , raise great sum of money from the Clergy• and from the Londoner for redemption of their Liberties• and take the •hird part of all the good of the Iewes• but when he return home a year after , without have do any thing but spend his treasure and his time• and that which be mo•e worth than both these , the life of many noble man and other : this be another grievance . and now king Henry bring many p••ct••ins over with he , who have serve he in his warres• he be to reward they •ere ; which he can not do , but by displace and spoil of his officer . First therefore he call Ralph Bretton treasurer of his chamber to account , and grievous f•nes he for de ? fraud he in his office : then likewise be Hubert de Burgh chief justiciar , and his chief counsellor call to account , for such treasure as pass his office , who be further charge with crime of treason , fly to the church of Merton for sanctuary ; from whence , when the king command he to be draw out by violence , the bishop of London hear of it , command he to be return back to sanctuary , upon pain of excommunication : but the king command he to be keep from sustenance , hunger at last enforce he to render himself to the king mercy : all his good , which be very great , confiscate . also Walter bishop of Carlile be thrust out of his office of treasure , and William Rodon knight , from his place of ma•shall of the king house , and all the chief counselor , bishop , earl , and baron of the kingdom be remove , as distrusted• and only stran ? gers prefer to their room : of which course , Peter de rupibus of Poictouin , by ? shop of Winchester , and one Peter de Rivalis , the king special favourite , be say to be the author : and this be another grievance . the king be now about eight or nine and twenty year old , and a consultation be have for a fit wife for he . there be propound a sister of Alexander king of Scot , but it be not think fit the king shall marry the young sister , when Hubert de Burgh have marry the elder : he therefore take one of his own choose , and marry Elea ? nor , daughter to Raymond earl of province ; by which match he neither have por ? cion by his wife , nor strength of alliance by friend ; or if any be , it be all make vain by distance : only he have by she a number of poor kindred , who to his great cost , lie hang upon he ; yet be the marriage solemnise with as great charge as if he have be to have mountain with she : and this be another grievance . and now be the score of these grievance call upon to be pay , for page 109 the lord can no long endure so many indignity , to see themselves flight , and only stranger advance ; as Foulke de Brent• who hold the earldom of Nottingham , Oxford , Bedford , and B•ckingham , and other the like : and to see their person expose to danger , and their estate to ruin ; for which no remedy can be but only the king confirm their charter of liberty : wherein it be strange to observe upon what different ground the king and the lord go : it seem the king think , that to confirm that charter , be to make himself to be less than a king ; and the lord think , that as long as it be deny , they be no better than slaves• and as the king can endure no diminution , so the lord can endure no slavery ; but the king may keep his own with sit still , the lord can not recover their own but by motion : and see their strength must be in their number , by commotion ; hereupon they confederate together , and of this confedencie , Richard now earl Marshall , upon the death of his bro ? ther William , be chief ; who repair to the king , and bold show he his er ? rour , and require satisfaction . hereupon the king send present over for whole legion of poict•uins , and withal summon a parliament at Oxford , whither the lord refuse to come after this a parliament be call at Westminster , whither like ? wise they refuse to come , unless the king will remove the bishop of winch•ster , and the Poictouins from the court ; and more than this , they send he word , that unless he do this ; they will expel both himself and his evil counselor out of the land , and create a new king . upon this threaten , pledge be require of the nobility for secure of their allegiance , and writ a re•ent out to all who hold by knight service , to repair to the king at Gloucester by a certain day ; which the earl martial and his associate refuse , the king without the •udgement of hi• court and their p••rs , cause they to be proclaim outlaw , seize upon all their land , which he give to his Poictouins ; and direct out writ to attach their body wheresoever in the kingdom . but now of these confederate lord , the bishop of Winchester win the earl of Chester and Lincoln with a thousand mark ; and the king have so please his brother the earl of Cornwall , that he likewise leave they : whereupon they withdraw they into wale , and confederate with L••ilin prince of Wales• whither also come Hubert de Burgh , escape out of pri ? son , and join with they ; take intermutual oath , that no one without other shall make their accord . hereupon the king go himself in person into wale , where not prevail , he return to Gloucester , employ new force of stranger , but all without success . at last a friar be employ to persuade the earl martial to submit himself to the king , but all in vain ; till at length a train be lay to draw he over into Ireland , to defend his state there , be seize upon by the king ; where by treachery circumvent he lose his life . yet the king disavow the sen ? ding of any such commission into Ireland , protest he never know thereof ; and lay the fault upon his officer : a easy way for prince , never to be find in any fault . after two year affliction , a parliament be assemble at Westminster , wherein the bishop admonish the king by his father example , to be at unity with his people , and to remove from he stranger , and to govern the kingdom by native of the realm ; and by the law : otherwise they will proceed by ecclesiastical censure , both against his counselor and himself . the king see ? king no way to subsist but by temporize , consent to call home those lord out of Wales ; restore they to their place and possession ; remove all stranger from about he , and call his new officer to account . hereupon the bishop of Winchester , Peter de Rivalis , and Stephen Seagrave take sanctuary ; but afterward by mediation they obtain with great fine their liberty , dear pay for their two year greatness . after this a parliament be again call , which the king will have to be keep in the tower , whither the lord refuse to come , another place of more freedom be appoint ; in which parliament , order be take for remove all sheriff from their place , upon complaint of corruption : and here the king displace his steward , and offer to take from the bishop of Chichester then page 110 chancellor , the great seal , which he refuse to deliver , as have receive it by the common council of the kingdom ; and now pe••r de Rivali• , a•d St•phen sea ? grave , be receive again into grace : by which may appear the vici••itude of for ? tune in prince favour . after this , in the one and tw•ntieth year• of •is reign , another parliament be hold at London ; where the king require the thirteenth part of all the movable as well of the clergy as Laity ; which be direct oppo ? sed , the king promise by oath , never more to injure the nobility , so they will but relieve he at that present : after four day consultation , •he king p•omising to use only the counsel of his natural subject , and protest against the Revo ? cation late propounded• and free grant the inviolable obse•vation of their liberty , under pain of excommunication , a subsidy be grant he ; bu• so , that four knight be appoint in every shi•e to receive and deliver the same , ? ? ? to some abbey or castle , where it may be saf•ly kep• , that if the king •aile in p•rfor ? mance of his grant , it may be restore to the coun•rey from whence it be col ? lect : and now the king , to make a show of true reconciliation for his part , shall ? denly cause the earl , VVarren and ? ? ? , with John pit Geffrey to be sw•rn his counselor , yet be neither of the point either for remove of stranger , or for dispose the money observe afterward by the King• for the money he make bold to take at his pleasure ; and for stranger , they be so far from re ? move , that they be draw near to he : for now William Valentine ; uncle to the queen , be grow the most inward man with he , and nothing do but by his counsel ; also the earl of province , the young queen father , a poor prince , have a good share of the money that be collect : and Simon de Montford , a french man bear , be entertain by the king , and prefer s•cretly in marriage to Eleanor the king sister , widow of William earl of Pembroke , the great Mar ? shall , and be make earl of Leycester , by right of his mother Avice , daughter of Blanchman , earl of Leycester : which course so incense the nobility , that it put they out into a new commotion ; and Richard the king brother become one of the party who the other lord make their spokesman to the king , to aggravate his breach of promise , and to acquaint he with all the disorder of the kingdom ; with who remonstrance the king be so move , that after he have try the Londoner , and find they also to partake with the lord , he call a parliament a•London , whither the lord come arm for their own safety : where after long debate , the king take his oath to refer the matter to certain grave man of the kingdom ; Article• be draw , seal , and public set up to the view of all , with the seal of the legate , and diverse great man : but before it come to be effect , the earl of Cornwall , by the work of Simon Montford , have his edge rebate , and be bring to be unwilling to meddle in the matter any more ; which the other lord see , they also grow cold , and so for that time it rest , and no more be do in it . and now be the king turn to play his part , in use his authority , which he fail not to do to the uttermost : for upon a small-occasion he cause the gate of Gilbert now earl of Pembroke ( the three son of William the great marshal ) to be shut against he at Winchester , whereupon the earl retire into the north . also Simon norman , master of the king seal , and his great favourite , be throw out with disgrace , and his brother Geffrey a knight Templar , be put out of the counsel ; both of they for not yield to pass a grant from the king , make unto Thomas earl of Flanders , the queen uncle , of four penny upon every sack of wool . and now that load enough be lay upon those of the Laity , come a new load to be lay upon the clergy ; for the pope nothing dainty to make use of the power he have in the king , send over three hundred roman , requi•ing to have the first benefice that shall be vacant , bestow upon they : which seem so unreasonable a request , and to the clergy of England so damageable , that it make Edmund archbishop of Canterbury to give over all , and betake himself to a voluntary exile in the abbey of pontinjac in France ; yet to show his respect to the pope , give he e•ght hundred mark before his departure . and to lay more weight upon the clergy , great sum be also require of they for maintenance page 111 of the pope war against the emperor : which though the clergy oppose , and show many good reason of their opposition both to the king and the legate , yet by promise or threaten , they be win or force to yield unto it . and now come the earl of march , and once again solicit the king to make another jour ? ney into France , which be yield to by the king , and assent to in parliament , a aid present be demand towards it : but this demand be not only oppo ? sed , but all the king taxation and aide before grant , be now repeat ; and thereupon a absolute denial to grant any more . upon this , the king come to the parliament himself in person ; earnest , and indeed , humble crave their aid for this once : but all prevail not , they have make a vow to the contrary : and the king be drive to get what he can of particular man , of who partly by gift , and partly by •oane , he get so much , that he carry over with he thirty barrel of sterling money . this expedition have no better success than the former , for after a whole year stay , the king be drive to make a dishonourable truce with the king of France , and return home . at his return he put the Jew to another redemption , and the Londoner to another exaction ; and to help on his charge , his wife mother , the countess of Provence come now to visit he ; who bring her daughter Zanchia with she , a marriage be solemnise between she and Richard earl of Cornwall , who wife be late dead , and he return from the holy war . the old countess at her return , be present with many rich gift , ha ? ve beside receive a annual pension of four thousand mark out of Eng ? land , for five year past ; in consideration of a pact make , that king Henry after her decease shall have the earldom of Provence : but short after her return , she disappoint he of that , and bestow it upon her young daugh•er Beatrix , marry to Charles the french king brother ; who be after king of Naples and Sicilie• so as this countess live to see all her four daughter queen : Richard earl of Cornwall come after to be elect king of the roman . upon th•se profusion , a consultation be have for new supply , and no way think so fit as by parliament ; hereupon a parliament be again assemble at Westminster , whith•r the king come again himself in person , urge his necessity , yet nothing wou•d be grant without the assurance of reformation and due execution of the law . and here they desire to have it ordain that four of the most grave and discreet peer shall be choose as conservator of the kingdom , and swear of the king council , both to see justice administer , and the treasure issue ; and these , or two of they at least , shall ever attend about the king . also that the lord chief justiciar , and the lord chancellor , shall be choose by the general voy ? ces of the state assemble , or else be one of the number of those four . beside they propound , that there may be two justice of the bench , two baron of the exchequer , and o•e justice for the Jew , and those likewise to be choose by parliament . but while these thing be in debate , come one Martin , a new legate from the pope , with a large commission than ever any before , to exact upon the state ; but at the same time , letter come from the emperor Frederick , to entreat that the pope may have no more supply out of England ; the pope man ? date be reject , and his agent Martin disgraceful send home . this business take up so much time , that nothing else be do in this parliament ; but only a aid grant to the king for the marriage of his daughter to Alexander king of Scot , twenty shilling of every knight fee ; and that with much ado , and repetition of his former aide . the winter follow he assemble another parliament , wherein he move for a aid upon a design he have upon wale , and to pay his debt , which be ur ? ge to be so great that he can not app•are out of his chamber for the infinite clamour of such , to who he owe for his wine , wax , and other necessary of house : but they all to his face , refuse to grant he any thing : whereup ? on other violent course be take , a ancient quarrel be find out against the city of London , for which they be command to pay fifteen thousand mark , and passeleve the clerk be employ , with other , in a most peremptory commission , page 112 to inquire of all such land as have be inforest , and either to fine the occupy ? er thereof at their pleasure , or else to take it from they and sell the same to other ; wherein such rigour be use , that multitude of people be undo . but now to show the king the estate of his kingdom , and the oppression of pope , inqui ? ry be make of the revenue which the roman and Italians have in England : which be find to be annual sixty thousand mark ; be more than the yearly re ? venue of the crown : which so move the king that he cause the same to be notify , with all other exaction , to the general council now assemble at lion ; and this ( with the ill usage of his agent Martin ) so vex the pope , that he be say to have utter these word : it be time to make a end with the Em ? perour , that we may crush these petty king , for the dragon once appease or destroy , these lesser snake will soon be tread down . but upon the pope reject the consideration of these grievance of England , and despi•ing the king message ( who he say , begin to frederize ) it be absolute here ordain , un ? der great penalty , that no contribution of money shall be give to the pope by any subject of England : and the king for a time assent unto it , but be of a irresolute and waver nature , and afraid of threat , he soon give over what he undertake , so as the pope continue his former rapine ; and though he have pro ? miss never to send any more legate into England , ye• send he other minister unacustomated ? there the title of clerk , that have as great power as legate , and effect as much . and now , for the other part of the state , new occasion also of complaint be offer : Peter of Savoy earl of Richmond , come into England , bring with he certain maid to be marry to young noble man of this country , the king ward , of who Edmund earl of Lincoln have one , and Richard de Burgh another , and the same year three of the king brother by the mother , Guy de Lusignan , William de Valence , and Athelmar Clerke , be send over to be provide of estate in England : also Thomas of Savoy ( sometime earl of Flanders by right of his wife ) come with his sister Beatrix , countess of Provence the queen mother , who be again feast and gift ; for which the king be tax ? ed the next parliament in Candlemas term , and beside sharp reprehend for his breach of promise , have vow and declare by his charter never more to injure the state in that kind ; also for his violent take up of provision , of wax , silk , robe , and special of wine , contrary to the will of the seller , and many other grievance they complain of ; all which the king patient hear , in hope to obtain his desire , but yet nothing be effect , and the parliament be prorogue till midsummer follow , and the king grow more obdurate than before , it afterward break up in discontent . but the parliament not supply he , he be advise to furnish his want with sale of his plate , and jewel of the crown , be tell , that though they be sell , yet they will revert again unto he ; and have with great loss receive money for they , he ask who have buy they : answer be make , the city of London . that city ( say he ) be a inexhaustible gulf : if Octavius treasure be to be sell , they sure will buy it . and now to vex they , he appoint a fair to be keep at Westminster , for ? bid under great penalty , all exercise of merchandise within London , for fif ? ten day , and all other fair in England , and namely that of Ely : but this novelty come to nothing ; the inconvenience of the place , as it be then , and the foulness of the weather , bring more affliction than benefit to the trader . that Christmas also he require newyeares gift of the Londoner , and short after write unto they his letter imperious deprecatory to aid he with money , and thereby get of they twenty thousand pound , for which the next year after he crave pardon of they . and notwithstanding his continual take up all Provi ? zion for his house , yet he lessen his housekeep in no honourable manner . and then see he can get nothing of the state together , he call unto he , or write to every nobleman apart , declare his poverty ; and how he be bind by charter in a debt of thirty thousand pound to those of Bordeaux and his Gas ? coin , page 113 ( who otherwise will not have suffer he to depart home ) at his last be in France : but fa•ling herein of temporal lord , he address his letter to the prelate , of who he find as little relief ; by much importunity and his own presence , he get of the abbot of Ramsey a hundred pound , but the abbot of Borough have the face to deny he , though the king tell he , it be more alm to give money to he , then to a beggar that go from door to door . the ab ? not of saint Albon yet be more kind , and give he threescore mark . to such lowness do the necessity of this indigent king ( through his profusion ) bring he . the Jew ever expose to his will , feel the weight of these his want ; one Abraham , find a delinquent , redeem himself for seven hundred mark , and Aaron another Jew protest , the king have since his last be in France take from he at time thirty thousand mark of silver , beside 200. mark of gold give to the queen . but now the lord assemble again at London , and press he with his promise make unto they , that the chief justiciar , chancellor and treasurer , shall be appoint by the general council of the kingdom , but by the absence of Richard earl of Cornwall , ( which be think to be do of purpose ) they re ? turn frustrate of their desire . and now the bishopric of Winchester fall void , the king send present to the monk of the cathedral church ; to elect his Bro ? there Athelmar ; and because he will not be deny , he go thither himself in person , and there enter the chapter house as a bishop or prior , get up into the president chair , begin a sermon , and take his text , justice and peace have kiss each other ; and thereupon use these word : to i and other king who be to govern the people , belong the rigour of judgement and justice ; to you who be man of quiet and religion , peace and tranquillity ; and this day i hear you have ( for your own good ) be favourable to my request ; with many such like word : whereby the monk find the earnestness of his desire , hold it in vain to deny he , and Athelmar be elect ; but with this reservation , if the pope allow it . Shortly after follow the memorable case of sir Henry de bath , a Ju ? sticiar of the kingdom , and a special counsellor to the King• who by corrup ? cion have attain to a mighty estate , and be say , in one circuit to have get two hundred pound land per annum ; he be accuse by sir Philip d•rcy of falsehood in the king court ; and the king be so incense against he , that in the parliament at this time hold in London , proclamation be make , that whosoever have any action or complaint against Henry the bath shall come and be hear . one of his fellow Justiciars accuse he of acquit a malefactor for a bribe . the king see Henry de bath friend to be many and strong• break out into rage , pro ? test , that whosoever will kill Henry de bath shall be acquit for the deed . but afterward by intercession of the earl of Cornwall , and the bishop of London ; the king become pacify , and sir Henry be release , pay two thousand mark ; and after be restore to his former place and favour . the king keep his Christ ? mass at York , the marriage be solemnize between Alexander king of Scot , and Margaret his daughter : to the feast of which solemnity it be say the arch-bi•hop give six hundred fat ox , which be all spend at one meal : and beside , the feast cost he four thousand mark . about this time , the pope solicit king Henry to undertake the cross , and so do Alphonsus king of Castille , offer to accompany he in person , to rescue the king of France , who be now hold prisoner by the sultan . and because he run ? some collect for he in France be by tempest cast away at sea , the captive king offer to restore Normandy to the king of England , so he will come to his rescue . upon this solicitation of the pope , and the grant of a ten of the Cler ? gy and Laity for three year to come ; the king undertake the cross , rather , it seem , to get the money , then with any purpose to perform the journey : which have it be collect ( say Paris ) will have amount to six hun ? dread thousand pound , to the utter impoverish of the kingdom . and now the king by proclamation call the Londoner to Westminster , and there cause the page 114 bishop of Worcester and Chichester to declare his intention , and to exhort the peo ? ple to undertake the cross and attend he : but few be move by their perswasi ? once , only three knight of small note , who thereupon the king in open view , embrace , kiss , and call his brethren ; check the Londoner as ignoble mercenary : and there himself take his oath for perform it , and to set forth upon midsummer day next . in take his oath , he lay his right hand on his breast , accord to the manner of a priest ; and after on the book , and kiss it as a layman . about this ten ( grant by the pope , but not by the people ) a Par ? liament be call at London , where the bishop be first deal withal , ( as be a work of piety ) and they absolute refuse it ; than the temporal lord be set upon , and they answer as the bishop : which put the king into so great a rage , that he drive out all that be in his chamber , as he have be mad . than he •als to persuade they apart , send first for the bishop of Ely , and deal with he in all kind manner , recount the many favour he have do he . the by ? shop reply , dissuade he from the journey by the example of the king of France ; and to that purpose use many good reason ; which the king hear , in great passion command his servant to thrust he out of door , perceive by this what be to be expect of the rest ; and thereupon fall upon his former Vio ? lend course ; and first the city of London be compel to the contribution of a thousand mark : and the gascoyner be upon revolt , unless speedy succour be send they ; general muster be make , and commandment give , that who ? soever can dispend thirteen pound per annum , shall furnish out a horseman . this occasion another parliament , wherein it seem , the state begin wise to consider that all their opposition do not good , the king turn must be serve one way or other ; therefore they agree to relieve he rather by the usual way , then force he to those extravagant course which he take ; but yet so , as the reformation of the government , and the ratification of their law and libre ? tie , may once again be solemn confirm . and after fifteen day consul ? tation , to satisfy the king desire for his holy expedition , a ten be grant by the clergy , and scutage , three mark of every knight fee by the Laity ; and thereupon those often confirm charter be again ratify , and that in the most solemn and ceremonial manner , that state and religion can possible be ? advise . the king with all the great nobility of England , all the bishop in their reverent ornament with burn candle in their hand , assemble to hear the terrible sentence of excommunication against the infringer of the same . and at the light of those candle the king have receive one in his hand , give it to a prelate that stand by , say : it become not i , be no priest , to hold this candle , my heart shall be a great testimony ; and withal lay his hand spread upon his breast all the time the sentence be read ; which be thus Pro ? nounce , authoritate dei omnipotentis , etc which do , he cause the charter of king John his father , grant by his free consent , to be open read . in the end , have throw away their candle , which lie smoke on the ground , they cry ? ed out , so let they who incur this sentence be extinct , and have no better sa ? vour then these snuff : and the king with a loud voice say , as God help i , i will , as i be a man , a christian , a knight , a king crown and anoint , in ? violable observe all these thing : and therewithal the bell ring out , and the peo ? ple shout for joy . yet be not all so quiet by this grant , but that there be grievance still , whereof the first fall upon his brother Richard earl of Cornwall : for the king ha ? ving seven and twenty year before give he the province of G•scogne , now that he have a son of his own , he will take it from his brother , and give it to his son ; and the earl refuse to deliver his charter , it be plot to imprison he , but he escape out of Bordeaux , come over into England . the king to win the nobility of Gascogne to turn to he , promise they thirty thousand mark , which they accept , so as he bind himself• by his oath and charter to perform it . this strictness of they the king take in ill part , and thereupon send Sim•• page 115 Montford earl of Leycester , a stern man , to be their governor , who with his insolent government , so discontent they , that after three year suffering , they send the archbishop of Bordeaux , with other great man , to complain of his inn ? solency ; whereupon Montford be send for , and because the lord take part with he , the king take part with the gascoyner ; which Montford take so ill , that he upbraid the king with break his promise : to who the king in great rage reply , that no promise be to be keep with a unworthy traitor : at which word Montford rise up , protest that he lie ; and be he not protect by his royal dignity , he will make he repent those word . the king come ? mand his servant to lay hold on he , but the lord will not permit it . yet after this great affront to the king , be Montford send over again into Gascogne , though with a more limit authority , and short after the king with a fleet of three hundred ship go thither himself , and soon compose all difference in the country . but now the king of Spain pretend a title to Aquitaine , and to take he off , king Henry send to treat of a marriage between prince Edward and his sister Eleanor , which be accept by the king of Spain , the marriage be solemnize at Burgos , where the king of Spain knight the prince , and quit his claim to Aquitaine for he and his successor for ever : and king Henry invest the prince and his wife in it , and give unto he beside , Ireland , Wales , Bristol , Stamford , and Grantham ; and from hence it come that ever after this , the king elder son be immediate upon his birth prince of Wales , and earl of Chester . after this king Henry prepare to return home , and well he may , have spend in this and his former journey into those part , the sum of seven and twenty hundred thousand pound : more than all the land if they have be sell be worth ; which when the king be tell , he desire there may be no word make of it for his credit . and now be to return , he be desirous with the king of Frances leave , to pass through France ; and come to Paris with a thousand horse , where he stay eight day , be there most royal feast by the king of France ; and he as royal feast the king of France again . but it be the Londoner and the Jew that be like to pay for all . for come home about Christmas , when the lon ? doner present he with a hundred pound in money , and afterward with two hundred pound in plate : it be so slight , and so ill take , that a hole be pre ? sent find in their coat , for a escape of a prisoner , which cost they three thou ? sand mark : yet be not this enough , but he take good fleece from the Jew , and then let they out to farm to his brother Richard , for a great sum of more ? ney , and he to make what moor of they he can . yet after all this he complain of his debt , which he say be at least three hundred thousand mark , which must needs be the heavy to he , because he have diminish his own• mean , by the allowance of fifteen thousand mark per annum to his son the prince . the only hope be in the parliament , but a parliament be call , they fall present upon their old grievance , complai ? ning upon the king for breach of charter , and renew their claim , to have the chief justiciar , the chancellor and treasurer , to be choose by themselves : so nothing be do for the king at this time , and the parliament be prorogue till Michaelmas after , as little then , by reason many of the peer come not , as not be summon accord to the tenor of magna charta . and now while the king be use mean to wind himself out of debt , there happen occasi ? once to put he further in ; for now Thomas earl of Savoy , the queen brother , be at war with the city of Thuryn , must be supply with money towards it by the king of England : now the elect bishop of Toledo the king of Spain Bro ? there , come into England , and must be sumptuous feast , and have great gift present he : now Eleanor the prince wife , arrive with a multitude of Spa ? niard , and must all be entertain at the king charge , and have no small present give they at their departure : now come Rustandus from the pope , with power to collect the ten of the clergy , for the pope use and the king , and to ab ? solve page 116 he from his oath of the holy war , so he will come to destroy Manfred son to the emperor Frederick , now in possession of the kingdom of Sicily , and Apulia . and this man likewise have great gift bestow upon he , beside a rich prebend in York . but the pope by too much seek his profit , lose credit and all , for the clergy sleight he , and will give he nothing : and when he will have borrow of the earl of Cornwall five hundred mark , the earl an ? swer , he like not to lend his money to one , upon who he can not distrain . but king Henry great charge , be his purchase a kingdom for his son Edmund ; for now come the bishop of B•nonia from the pope , with a ring of investiture to prince Edmund , in the kingdom of Sicily , which he pretend to be at his dispose ; and king Henry take it in so good earnest , that after this he call his son Edmund by no other name then king of Sicily . but all this be do by the pope , but to angle away king Henry money , as indeed upon this hope , he have draw the king into the engagement of a hundred and fifty thou ? sand mark ; for to draw the king on , it be give out that the pope have dele• ? t all manfreds force , and be thereby in possession of the kingdom , when the truth be , that Manfred have defeat the pope force , and be thereby he ? self establish in the kingdom . the year 1275. the king keep his Christmas at Winchester , where new grie ? vance arise . the merchant of Gascogny , have their wine take from they by the king officer without satisfaction ; complain to their lord the prince , he to his father , and his father have be inform beforehand by his offi ? cer , that their clamour be unjust , as rely upon the prince favour ; he fall into a great rage with the prince , and break out into these word : see! now my blood and my own bowel impugn i : but afterward pacify , he give or ? there the injury shall be redress . and now the prince follower themselves come to be a grievance , who rely upon their master commit many outrage , and spoil and wrong man at their pleasure , and the prince himself be not alto ? gether free , of who it be say , that meet a young man travail by the way , he cause one of his ear to be cut off , and one of his eye to be put out : and man ? nigh such prank play by he and his follower in wale , make the welsh break out into open rebellion , which the prince will fain have suppress , but there be no money to be have towards the do it . and now the king fall to shift , he come into the chequer himself , and there lay penalty upon sheriff , that return not their money in due time ; than he fall upon measure of wine and ale , upon bushel and weight , and something he get ; but London be his best cheq•er , and every year common he have one quarrel or other to the Londoner , and they be sure to pay . and now fall out a accident , seem of great honour , but cer ? taine of no profit to the kingdom . Richard earl of Cornwall the king brother be elect king of the roman , for although Alphonsus king of Spain the great mathematician be his competitor , yet earl Richard money wrought more than his learning , and the archbishop of C•llen come over to fetch he , and crown he be at Aquisgrane . this earl of Cornwall be report able to dispend a hundred mark a day , •or ten year , beside his revenue in England . but now , as a man that pay dear for a office , look that his office shall pay he a ? gain : so earl Richard have give infinite to compass this advancement , look to help himself again by the place ; and this , and the desire he have to revenge himself upon those tha• have oppose his Election• make he take such vi ? olent course that he come soon to be dispossess , forsake , and force to return into England a poor king , than he go out a earl . act do in the c•ntention between the king and his baron . now king Henry very proud to have his young son a king as well as his brother , call a parliament , wherein he bring forth his son Edmund , clad in sicilian habit , and •els the parli•ment , that for advance this son of he to the page 117 kingdom of Sicily , he have bind himself under covenant of lose his king ? dome in the sum of a hundred and forty thousand mark , and hope they will not think much to aid he with money for so great a advancement : but the parliament stand firm to their usual condition of margna charta ; so as that may be confirm , they be content to give two and fifty thousand mark , but this give the king no satisfaction . the year after , another parliament be hol ? den at London , wherein upon the king press they again for mean to pay his debt to the pope ; the lord tell he plain , they will not yield to give he any thing for any such purpose ; and give their reason , and withal repeat their own grievance , his breach of promise , the insolency of his brother , and spe ? cial William de Valence , who have give the lie to the earl of Leycester , and no right do he in it ; and many such thing , which the king hear , and not able to deny , humble himself , and tell they how he have often by ill counsel be seduce ; but promise by his oath which he take on the tomb of saint ed ? ward , to reform all those error . but the lord not well know how to deal in this business , as be divide between a desire to satisfy the king , and a desire to be satisfy themselves ; and know withal the variableness of the king na ? ture , they get the parliament to be adjourn to saint barnaby day , and then to assemble at Oxford . in which mean time , the earl Gloucester , Leycester , Hereford , the earl martial bigod , Spenser , and other great man confederate , and provide by arm to effect their desire : and here be the foundation lay of those bloody war that ensue between king Henry and his baron . and now the king be put to his shift for money , get the abbot of Westminster to put his seal and that of his covent to a deed obligatory , as a surety for two hundred mark ; make ac ? count , that by his example , other will be draw to do the like : but his trusty servant Simon passeleve be employ to other monastery , and tell they a ? among other reason to persuade they , that the king be lord of all they have , they only answer ; they acknowledge indeed the king to be lord of all they have , but yet so , as to defend , not to destroy the same : and this be all he can get of they . the prince also in no less want than his father , be drive to mor ? gage his town of Stamford , Brahan , and many other thing , to William de va ? lence , a Poictouin , whereby appear the disorder of the time , when the prince be in want , and stranger have such plenty . and now be the parliament assemble at ox ? ford , whither the lord come attend with large train : and here they begin with the expostulation of the former liberty , require that the chief justiciar , the chancellor and treasurer may be ordain by public choice ; and that the twenty four conserva•ours of the kingdom may be confirm , twelve by the election of the lord , and twelve by the king , with whatsoever else make for their imagine security . the king see their strength , and in what manner they require these thing ; swear solemn again to the confirmation of they , and cause the prince to take the same oath . but the lord leave not here , the king brethren , the Poictouins , and other stranger must present be remove ; and this also , though with some little opposition , be at last conclude : and thereupon the king brethren and their follower be despoil of all their fortune , and •x ? ill by proscription under the king own hand , direct to the earl of Hereford and Surrey . but now sickness and mortality happen to many great one , it be impute to poison , suppose to have be prepare by those stranger proscri ? bed ; the earl of Gloucester in a sickness , sudden lose his hair , his tooth , his nail ; and his brother hardly escape death : which make many to suspect their near servant , and their cook : Walter Scoynie the earl steward , be strict examine , commit to prison , and afterward without confession , be upon pre ? sumption only execute at Winchester : Elias a convert Jew , be say to have confess , that in his house the poison be confect ; but it be when he be a Jew , and not a christian . Every man that have receive any wrong by those stran ? gers , now put up their complaint , and be hear . Guydo de ••chfort a Poictouin , to who the king have give the castle of Rochester , be banish , and all his good page 118 confiscate . William Bussey , steward to William de Valence , be commit to the tower of London , and most reproachful use . Richard grey , who the lord have make captain of Dover castle , be set to intercept whatsoever the Poictouins convey that way out of England ; and much treasure of they , and of the elect of Winche ? star be by he take , beside great sum commit to the new temple be find out , and seize for the king . and now the new chief justiciar huge bigod , brother to the earl martial , ( choose this last parliament by public voice ) procure that four knight in every shire shall inquire of the oppression of the poor , do by great man ; and cer ? tifie the same , that redress may be make . also order be take against corrupt ? ing of justice ; when yet notwithstanding this pretend care of the public , it be note by the writer and record of that time , how the lord be themselves but as •otidem tyranni , enforce the service of the king tenant that dwell near they . but to make their cause the more popular , it be rumour that the king stand upon it , that his necessity must be supply out of the estate of his people , whether they will or no : which the king hear , send forth proclamation , de ? clare how certain malicious person have false and seditious report , that he mean unlawful to charge his subject , and subvert the law and liberty of the kingdom ; and by these false suggestion , avert the heart of his people from he : and therefore desire they not to give credit to such per•urbers : for that he be ready to defend all right and custom due unto they : and that they may rest of this secure , he cause his letter to be make patent . but now Montford Gloucester , and Spenser , enforce the king to call a parliament at London , where they get the authority of the twenty four to be estate whole upon themselves , and they alone to dispose of the custody of the castle , and other business of the kingdom : and here they bound the king to lose to they their legal obedience when ? soever he infringe his charter . at this time intelligence be give to the lord , that Richard king of the rom•ns have a purpose to come into England ; and the lord suspect he will come with power to aid the king his brother , take or ? der for guard the port , with intent to hinder his land : but find his train to be but small , accompany only with his queen , two germane earl , and eight knight : upon his promise to take their propound oath , they admit he to land ; but will nether permit the king ( who come thither to mee•e he ) nor himself to enter into Dover castle . at Canterbury they bring he into the chapter house , where the earl of Gloucester stand forth in the midst , call out the earl , not by the name of king , but Richard earl of Cornwall ; who in reverent manner come ? ming forth , take his oath in these word . hear all man , that i Richard earl of Cornwall , do here swear upon the holy evangelist , that i shall be faithful and diligent to reform with you the kingdom of England , and •e a effectual coadju ? for to expel all rebel and disturber of the same ; and this oath will inviolable ob ? serve , under pain of lose all the land i have in England : so help i God . but though this earl come home but weak and poor , yet upon his return the king take heart , and seek all mean to vindicate his power : and first send messen ? gers secret to room , to be absolve from his enforce oath ; and to have the more assurance from the king of France , he make a absolute resignation of all his right to the duchy of Normandy , and the earldom of Anjou , Poictou , Tourene , and main : in regard whereof , the king of France give he three hun ? dread thousand pound ( some say crown ) o•Anjouin money ; and gran•s he to enjoy all Guyen , beyond the river Garo•ne , all the country of Xan•oigne to the river of Charente , the country of limousin and quercy , for he and his success ? so•rs , do their homage to the crown of France , as duke of aquit•i•e . and now be the king of France make arbiter of the difference between king Henry and his baron , who give sentence against the baron concern the provision at ox ? ford ; but of their side concern king John charter : by which nice distin•tion , though he do but leave the matter as he find it : ( for those provision , as the lord pretend , be ground upon that charter ) yet do his sentence draw page 119 many away from the party of the baron , among who be Henry son to the earl of Cornwall , Roger Clifford , Roger de Leisbourne , Haimo Lestrange , and many other . but the earl of Leycester , notwithstanding this revolt , recover the town and castle of Gloucester ; constrain the citizen to pay a thousand pound for their redemption ; go with a army to Worcester , possess he of the castle , thence to Shrewsbery , and so come about to the I|will of Ely , subdue the same , and grow exceed powerful . the king doubt his approach to London , fall to treat of a peace , and a peace be conclude upon these condition ; that all the castle of the king shall be deliver to the keep of the baron ; the provision of ox ? ford shall inviolable be keep ; all stranger by a certain time shall avoid the kingdom , except only such as be license to stay . the prince have fortify Windsor castle ; but Leycester come to besiege it , he treat with he for peace , which be refuse , and the castle be render to he . the king at this time , to win time , convoke another parliament at London , where ? in he win many lord to take his part ; as namely the prince Richard his brother , Henry his son , William Valence , with the rest of his brother late return , and with they the king march to Oxford , whither diverse lord of Scotland repair to he ; as John Commin , John Baylioll , lord of Galloway , Robert Bruce , and other : also many baron of the north ; Glifford , Percey , Basset , and other . from Oxford he go to Northampton , where he take prisoner , Simon Montford the young , with fourteen other principal man ; thence to Nottingham , make spoil of such possession as pertain to the baron in those part . and now the king side grow strong , which the earl of Leycester and Gloucester see , they write to the king , protest their loyalty , and how they oppose only such as be enemy to he and the kingdom , and have belie they . the king return answer , that themselves be the perturber of he and his state , and seek his and the kingdom destruction ; and therefore defy they . the prince likewise and the earl of Cornwall send letter of defiance to they . yet the baron continue to mediate a peace , and send the bishop of London and Worcester , with offer of their ? ty thousand mark to the king , for the damage do in these war , so as the statute of Oxford may be observe ; but this offer be not accept . the earl see no remedy , but it must be put to a day ; take his time to be early ready than be expect , and supply his want of strength with policy , place on the one side of a hill near Lewis , where the battle be fight , certain ensign with ? out man , in such sort , as they may seem a far off , to be squadron of succour to second those he bring to the encounter , who he cause all to wear white cross , both for their own notice , and the signification of his cause , which he will have to be think for justice . here the fortune of the day be he , the king , the prince , the earl of Cornwall , and his son Henry , the earl of Arun ? dell and Hereford , with all the scottish lord , be take prisoner ; the eale war ? ren , William de Valence , Guy de Lusignan , the king brother , with huge bigod earl martial , save themselves by flight : five thousand ( some say twenty thou ? sand ) other be slay in the battle . a year and a half be Simon Montford in pos ? session of his prisoner , carry the king about with he to countenance his acti ? once , till he have get all the strong castle in the kingdom . and now come Erinnys and set debabte between the two great earl of Leycester and Gloucester , about their dividend : Leycester be tax to do more for his own particular than the common good ; his son also presume upon his great ? ness , grow insolent : whereupon Gloucester discontent , forsake that side , and be ? take he to the prince ; who late escape out of the castle of Hereford , have get a power about he to try the fortune of another battle . the revolt of this earl be great in it self , be great by its example ; for now many other revolt likewise : and the earl of Leycester see the improvement of the Prin ? ces force , who be now with his army about Worcester , though he •aw his own disadvantage , yet imbattel in a plain near Ev•sham to encounter he , and note the manner of the approach of the prince army , say •o those about he ; these page 120 man come brave on , they learn it not of themselves , but of i ; and see himself likely to be be•et , and overlay with multitude , he advise his friend , huge Spenser , Ralph Basset , and other , to shift for themselves ; which when they refuse to do , then ( say he ) let we commend our soul to God , for our body be they : and so undertake the main weight of the battle , perish under it• and with he be slay , his son Henry , eleven baron , with many thousand of common soldier . and thus end Montford the great earl of Leycester , high honour in his life , and more high shall have be after his death , if the peo ? ple may have have their will , who talk of miracle enough to have make he a saint . and now be king Henry by this victory of his son , at liberty ; who together repair to Winchester , where a parliament be convoke , and all who adhere to the earl Montford be disinherit , and their estate confer on other , at the king pleasure ; the Londoner also have their liberty take from they . but though the death of Montford give a great wound to the party of the baron , yet it be not mortal , at least not mortal present , for there remain relic that keep it alive a good while after . Simon and Guy de Montford , son of the earl of Leycester , and other of the baron , take and defend they I|will of Ely : the castle of Killingworth hold out half a year , till their victual fail ; and then yield upon condition to have their life and good save : and many other there be , resolute and desperate person , strong knit and fasten together , though now short upon dissolve . for after the parliament at Westminster , the king with a army go against they , and be at Northampton , Simon and Guy de Montford submit themselves to he : but when the earl of Gloucester oppose the restore they to their estate , they be fain to fly the kingdom , and make their fortune in other country , as indeed they do ; the young in Italy , the elder in France , where they be Propa ? tour of two great family . their mother be banish short after the battle of Evesham , a lady of eminent note , as be the daughter and sister of a king ; and yet of more note for her patient bear of adversity , or rather for her make a benefit of adversity ; for by this mean she betake her self to the veil of piety , and die a nun at montarge in France . three year after this , the disinherit baron hold out , till at length , condi ? tion of render be propound ; but here the council be divide in opinion : Mortimer and other state in the possession of the disinherit , be against re ? storation ; allege , it be injustice to take from they the reward of their sir ? vice . Gloucester , and the twelve ordain to deal for the peace of the state , be ear ? nest for restoration ; allege , it be hard measure to grant they their life , and not their livelihood : but not prevail , in great discontentment Gloucester retire from court , send messenger to warn the king to remove stranger from his counsel ; and observe the provision at Oxford , as he promise at Evesham : otherwise that he shall not marvel if himself do what he think fit . hereupon John the war ? ren , earl of Surrey , and William de Valentia be send to the earl of Gloucester : who though they can not persuade he to submit to the king ; yet thus much they get of he under his hand and seal , that he will never bear arm against the king or his son Edward , but only defend himself , and pursue Roger Mortimer and his other enemy . and now a parliament be convoke at bury , wherein many demand be make by the king and the legate , and all for money from the clergy ; but all deny , that nothing but denial be do in this parliament . after this , the legate employ solicitous to persuade the disinherit lord which hold the I|will of Ely , to return to the faith and unity of the church , and to the peace of the king , accord to the form propound at Coventry : to which the lord make answer , that they never oppose the unity of the Church• but the •varice of churchman that be put in authority ; and that they never oppose the king , but for the good of the kingdom : and then require that the provision of ox ? ford may be observe , and pledge be give they for their security . hereupon the year after , the king prepare a mighty army , and prince Edward with bridge page 121 enter then I|will of Ely , shut they up so , that he constrain they at last to yield ; also the earl of Gloucester come to London with a army , be by the legate once again persuade to render himself to the king , and upon forfeiture of twelve thousand mark if ever he shall raise any commotion again , be reconcile . now remain Lewilin and the welsh , to be chasten for aid of Simon Montford ; but the king go against they with a army , they give he two and thirty thou ? sand pound sterling , and so make their peace . and here be a end of the first war between the king of England and their baron . the next year after the pope legate Ottobon sign with the croysado both the king son , Edward and Edmund , the earl of Gloucester , and diverse noble man induce to undertake the holy war , by the solicitation of he and the king of France : who nothwith ? stand his former calamity endure in that action , will once again adventure it : and because prince Edward want mean to furnish himself out , the king of France lend he thirty thousand mark upon a mortgage of Gascoyne . and now while this preparation be in hand , king Henry labour to establish the peace of the kingdom , and to reform the excess which the war have breed ; and the same year assemble his last parliament at Marleborough , where the statute of that title be enact . near two year it seem to have be after the under ? take the cross before prince Edward set forth ; but then take his wife Eleanor with he , though young with child , he set forward ; and in the voyage , when many of his people seem desirous to leave him• and return home , he be say to have strike his breast , and swear ; that if all his follower forsake he , he will yet enter Acon , or Ptolemais ; though but only with his horsekeeper Fowin . Shortly after Richard king of the roman die , and the year follow king Henry . of his taxation , and way for raise of money . never son be more like a father in any thing , than king Henry be like his father king John , in this point , for raise of money ; for he tread direct in all his step , if he add not something of his own . king John have great sub ? sidy grant he by parliament , for any great action he undertake , so have king Henry . king John resume the land alien from the crown , so do king Henry . king John make benefit of the vacancy of bishopric and abbey , so do king Henry . king John take great fine of many for crime not prove , but only suppose , so do king Henry . king John make benefit of a new seal , so do king Henry . king John extort great sum from the Jew , so do king Henry . and one way more he have to get money , which perhaps his father have not , and that be by beg , as he tell the abbot of borough ; it be more alm to give money to he , then to the beggar that go from door to door . Indeed taxation in this king reign may be reckon among his annual revenue , for scarce any year pass without a parliament , and seldom any parliament without a tax ; or if any sometime without , it be then cause of the great taxation some oh ? the way ; as when he take of the Londoner for have aid the baron , twenty thousand mark . of his law and ordinance . in this king reign be ratify and confirm the two great charter of mag ? na char•a , and charta de Foresta : also in his time be enact the statute call ? lead of Merton , of Oxford , and of Marleborough . also steal of cattle , which before be but pecuniary , he make capital : and the first that suffer for the same , be one of Dunstable ; who have steal twelve ox from the inhabitant of Colne , and be pursue to Redburne , be by a bailiff of saint Albon , accord to the king proclamation , condemn and behead . and it may seem strange that in these time so much blood shall be shed in the field , and none upon the page 122 scaffold ; for till the twenty six year of this king , that one William marisc , the son of Geffrey Marisc , a noble man of Ireland , be condemn for piracy and treason , be hang , behead , and quarter ; there be no example of that kind of punishment to be find in our history . particular in this king reign be make that statute , by which the ward and marriage of the heir of baron within age , be give to the king . also in this king reign the plea of the crown be plead in the tower of London . all wear in the Thames be in this king time ordain to be pluck up and destroy . also the citizen of London be allow by charter , to pass toll-free through all England , and to have free warren about London , also to have and use a common seal . also it be ordain that no sheriff of London shall continue in his office long than one year , which they do before for many . in the five and twenty year of this king be alderman first choose within the city of London , which then have the rule of the city , and of the ward of the same , and be then yearly change , as now the sheriff be . it be in this king time allow to the city of London , to present their major to the baron of the exchequer to be swear , which before be to be present to the king , wheresoever he be . in his time the clause no• obstante ( bring in first by the pope ) be take up by the king in his grant and write . also in this king time , William bishop of Salisbury , first cause that cu ? stome to be receive for a law , whereby the tenant of every lordship be bind to owe their suit to the lord court , of who they hold their tenement . Affaires of the church in his time . affair of the church for matter of doctrine , be never more quiet then in this king reign ; for now all heresy account of the time , especial the Albigenses be in a manner suppress by the arm of the king of France , not without the vote of the king of England , who forbear to make war upon he in tenderness to this service ; but for matter of manner , they be never more turbulent : for now abbey be fleece , sanctuary violate , clergyman outra ? ge , bishop themselves not spare ; and all for greediness of money , or for re ? venge . Ottobone the pope legate here in England , lie at the abbey of Oseney , there happen a difference between his servant and the scholar of Oxford ; in which contention , a brother of he be slay , and the• Legat himself fain to fly into the steeple for safeguard of his life : whereupon afterward be get from thence by the king safe conduct , he thunder out curse against the scholar , and interdict the university , so as the college grow desolate , and the student be disperse abroad into other place , for the space of half a year : till the monk of Oseney , and the regent master of Oxford be fain to go barefoot and bareheaded through London , as far as Durham house , where the legate lie ; and there upon their humble submission , and great man intercession , they be absol ? ve , and the university restore to its former estate . but of this ottobone , it may not be impertinent to relate a little further ; that go afterward out of England , he come by degree , after the death of innocent the five , to be pope of Rome he ? self , by the name of Adrian the five , and die within fifty day after his electi ? on . among affair of the church , may be reckon the ulcer of any man ? ber of the church : such a one as in this king time break out most loathsome ; for one procure five wound to be make in his body , in resemblance to the five wound in Christ body , take upon he to be Christ , and have get a woman , that take upon she to be the virgin marry ; who continue obstinate in their mad ? ness , be adjudge to be immure and shut up between two wall , to the end ( no doubt ) the contagion of their filthiness shall spread no further . in this king time , a little novelty be first bring in by pope innocent the four , who ordai ? ned that cardinal shall wear red hat : something perhaps for mystery , and something for distictnion . page 123 work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . this king cause a chest of gold to be make for lay up the relic of king Edward the confessor , in the church of Westminster . he build a church for convert Jew in London : also a hospital at Oxford , for passenger and disease person : also the new coventuall church and the chapel of our lady at Westminster , whereof he lay himself the first stone : also the hou•e of Blackfriar in Canterbury . in his time , Ela countess of Salisbury , found the abbey of lacok in Wiltshire ; Richard earl of Cornwall , found hail a monaste ? ry of cistersian monk near to Winchcomb in Glocestershire : Reginold de moun , earl of Somerset , and lord of Dunster , found the abbey of Newham in Devon ? shire : Ranulph the three earl of Chester , and lord of little Britain , build the castle of Chartley , bestone , and the abbey of Dela Cresse : sir John Mansell the king chaplain , found a house of regular canon near to Rumney in Kent : William de Albineto earl of Arundel , found the priory of Wimondham : William brunc , a citizen of London , and Rosia his wife , found the hospital of our lady without Bishopsgate in London : and Isabel countess of Arundel , found the nun ? nery of Marran near to Linne . friar minor first arrive at Dover , nine in num ? ber , whereof five remain at Canterbury , and there build the first covent of friar minor that ever be in England : the other four come to London , who en ? crease in number , have a place assign they in saint Nicholas shambles ; which John Iwyn , mercer of London , appropriate to the use of the say friar , and become himself a lay brother . also in this king time the new work of saint Paul church in London be begin . if it be piety in the Jew , who fall into a privy upon a Saturday , will not be take out that day , because it be the Jew sabbath : it be as much piety in the earl of Gloucester , that will not suffer he to be take out the next day , because it be the christian sabbath ; and when the three day he be take out dead , who piety be the great ? a strange acci ? dent upon a act of piety , be relate in this king time ; which if true , be a miracle , if not true , be yet a legend , and not unworthy to be read : that in a time of dearth , one man in a certain parish , who allow poor people to relieve themselves with take corn upon his ground , have at harvest a plentiful crop ; where other that deny they , have their corn all blast , and nothing worth . in this king time also , huge Balsamus , bishop of Ely , found saint Peter college in cam ? bridge . Hubert de Burgh earl of Kent , be bury in the church of the friar preacher in London , to which church he give his palace at Westminster , which of ? terward the archbishop of York buy , and make it his inn ; since common call York place , now white-hall . casualty happen in his time . at one time there fall no rain in England , from the first of march to the Assum ? ption of our lady ; and at another time there fall so much rain , that holland and Holdernes in Lincolnshire be overflowed and drown . in the seventeenth year of his reign , be see five sun at one time together ; after which follow so great a dearth , that people be constrain to eat horse flesh , and bark of tree : and in London twenty thousand be starve for want of food . also in his time the church of saint Mildred in Canterbury , and a great part of the city be burn . also the town of Newcastle upon Tine be burn , bridge and all . and though it may seem no fit place to tell it , yet here or no where it must be tell ; that in this king time there be send by the king of France , the first elephant that ever be see in England . page 124 of his wife and child . he marry Eleanor , the second of the five daughter of Raymond earl of Provence , who live his wife thirty seven year , his widow nineteen , die ? ed a nun at Aimesbury , and be bury in her monastery . by she , he have six son , and three daughter : of his son , the four young die young , and be bury , three of they at Westminster , and the four in the new temple by Fleetstreet . his elder son Edward , surname longshank , of his tall and slender body , succeed he in the kingdom . his second son Edmund , surname crouchback , of bow in his back , ( as some say ) but more likely of wear the sign of the cross , ( ancient call a crouch ) upon his back , which be usual wear of such as have vow voyage to Jerusalem , as he have do . he be invest titular king of Sicily and Apulia , and create earl of Lancaster ; on who person original the great contention of Lancaster and York be found . he have two wife , the first be avelin . daughter and heir of William earl of Albemarle , by who he leave no issue . the second be queen Blanch , daughter of Robert earl of Artois , ( brother of saint Lewis king of France ) widow of Henry of champagne king of Navarre : by she he have issue three son , and one daughter . his elder son Thomas , who after his father be earl of Lanca ? star , and have marry Alice , daughter and heir of Henry Lacie earl of Lin ? colne , be behead at Pomfret without issue . his second son Henry lord of Monmouth , who after his brother death be earl of Lancaster , and father of Henry the first duke of Lancaster : his three son John ; who die unmarried . his daughter marry marry to Henry lord Percy , mother of Henry the first earl of Northumberland . This Edmund die at bay in Gascoyne , in the year 1296. when he have live fifty year , who body half a year after his death be bring over into England and entomb at Westminster . of king Henry three daugh ? ter , the elder Margaret be marry to Alexander the three , king of Scotland , by who she have issue , two son , Alexander and David ; who die both before their father , without issue , and one daughter margar•t queen of Norway , wife of king erike , and mother of Margaret the heir of Scotland and Norway , that die unacustomated ? marry . the second daughter of king Henry be Beatrice , bear at Bordeaux , marry to John the first duke of Britain , and have issue by he , Arthur duke of Britain , John earl of Richmont , Peter ; and Blanch marry to fillip son of Robert earl of Artois , Eleanor a nun at Aimesbury , and marry marry to Guy earl of S. Paul• she decease in Britain , and be bury at London , in the choir of the grey friar within Newgate . the three daughter of king Henry , name Katherine , die young , and lie bury at Westminster , in the space between the chapel of king Edward and saint Benet . of his personage and condition . he be of stature but mean , yet of a well compact body , and very strong : one of his eyelid hang down , and almost cover the black of his eye : for his inward endowment , it may be say , he be wise for a man , then for a prince ; for he know better how to govern his life than his subject . he be rather pious than devout , as take more pleasure in hear mass than sermon , as he say to the king of France , he have rather see his friend once , then hear from he often . his mind seem not to stand firm upon its basis , for e ? very sudden accident put he into passion . he be neither constant in his love , nor in his hate ; for he never have so great a favourite who he cast not into this ? grace , nor so great a enemy who he receive not into favour . a example of both which quality be see in his carriage towards Hubert de Burgh , who be for a time his great favourite , yet cast out afterward in miserable disgrace , and then no man hold in great ha•red , yet receive afterward into grace again . and page 125 it be memorable to hear with what crime this Hubert be charge at his arraign ? mean ; and •pecially one : that to dissuade a great lady from marriage with the king , he have say , the king be a squint-eyed fool , and a kind of leper , de ? ceitfull , perju•ed , more fainthearted than a woman , and utter unfit for any noble lady company . for which , and other crime lay to his charge in the king bench , where the king himself be present ; he be adjudge to have his land confiscate , and to be deprive of his title of earl ; yet after all this , be restore to his estate again , and suffer to live in quiet . he be more desirous of money then of honour , for else he will never have sell his right to the two great dukedom of Normandy and Anjou to the king of France for a sum of money . yet he be more desirous of honour then of quietness , for else he will never have contend so long with his baron about their charter of liberty , which be upon the matter , but a point of honour . his most eminent virtue , and that which make he the more eminent , as be rare in prince , be his Conti ? nency ; for there be nothing read , either of any ba•e child he have , or of any concubine he keep . of his death and burial . though he have live a troublesome life , yet he die a quiet death ; for he have •etled peace in his kingdom , and in his conscience . for be at saint ed ? mundsbury , and find himself not well at ease , he make the more have to lon ? don ; where call before he his lord , and special Gilbert de Clare , earl of Gloucester ; he exhort they to be true and faithful to his son prince Edward , who be at that time far from home , and therefore have the more need of their care , which consist chief in their agreement one with another . and then , his sickness increase , he yield up his soul to God , on the sixteenth day of no ? vember , in the year 1272. when he have live threescore and five year , reign five and fifty , and be bury at Westminster , which he have new build . of man of note in his time . of martial man famous in his time there be many , but three special who ob ? scure the rest : the first be William martial earl of Pembroke , memorable for the great care he have of king Henry in his minority , and more memorable for the light ? tle care , that destiny have of his posterity ; for leave five son behind he , they all live to be earl successive , yet all dye without issue : so as the great name and numerous family of the marshal come whole to be extinct in that Genera ? cion . the second be Richard the Clare earl of Gloucester , who in a battle against Baldwyn de Gisnes , a valiant Fleming , employ by king Henry , himself alone en ? country twelve of his enemy , and have his horse slay under he , he pitch one of they by the leg out of the saddle , and leap into it himself , and conti ? nue the fight without give ground , till his army come to rescue he . a act that may seem fit to be place among the fiction of knight errant , then in a true narration . the three be Simon Montford , a man of so audacious a spirit , that he give king Henry the lie to his face , and that in presence of all his lord ; and of who it seem , the king stand in no small fear : for pass one time up ? on the Thames , and sudden take with a terrible storm of thunder and light ? ning , he command to be set ashore at the next stair , which happen to be at Durham house , where Montford then lie , who come down to meet the king , and perceive he somewhat fright with the thunder , say unto he , your maj•sty need not fear the thunder , the danger be now past : no Montford ( say the king ) i fear not the thunder so much as i do thou . of man famous for sanctity of life , there be likewise many in his time , but three more eminent than the rest , Edmund archbishop of Canterbury , Richard bishop of Chichester , and Thomas archdeacon of Hereford ; all three either canonize , or at least page 126 thought worthy to be canonize for saint . to these may be add Robert gross ? head bishop of Lincoln , who translate the testament of the twelve patriarch , out of greek into latin ; which through envy of the Jew never come to the knowledge of saint Hierome , wherein be many prophecy of our saviour Christ . of man famous for learn there be likewise many in his time ; of who , some left work behind they for testimony of their knowledge in diverse kind , as Alexander hale a friar Minor , who write many treatise in divinity ; Ralp• Coggeshall , who write the appendix to the chronicle of Ralph Niger ; Randulph earl of Chester , the three and last of that name , who compile a book of the law of England ; Henry Bracton , who write the book common call by his name , de consuetudinibus anglicanis : and beside these , Hugh Kirkestead , ri ? chard of Ely , Peter Henham , John Gyles , and Nicholas Fernham , excellent why ? sitian ; Richard surname Theologus , and Robert bacon , two notable divine ; Ste ? when Langthon , Richard fisaker , Simon Stokes , John of Kent , William Shirwood , mi ? chael Blaunpaine , John Godard , Vincent of Coventry , Albericke veer , Richard which , John base , Roger Waltham , William Seningham , and other . page 127 the life and reign of king Edward the first . surname of Winchester . of his come to the crown , as soon as king Henry be dead and bury , the great lord of the land cause his elder son prince Edward to be proclaim king : and assemble at the new temple in London , they there take order for the quiet govern of the kingdom , till he shall come home . for at this time he be absent in the holy land ; and have be there a ? above a year when his father die . but we can bring he home without tell what he do , and what he suffer in all that time , and in his return ; for at his first come thither , he rescue the great city of Acon , from be •urrendred to the sultan ; after which , out of envy to his valour , one Anzazim a desperate Saracen , who have often be employ to he from their general , be one time , upon pre ? tense of some secret message , admit alone into his chamber , with a poison knife give he three wound in the body , two in the arm , and one near the arm ? pit , which be think to be mortal , and have perhaps be mortal , if out of unspeakable love , the lady Eleanor his wife have not suck out the poison of his wound with her mouth , and thereby effect a cure , which otherwise have be incurable : and it be no wonder , that love shall do wonder , which be it self a wonder . and now be disappoint of aide that be promise to be send he , and leave garrison in fit place for defence of the country , he with his wife Eleanor take his journey homeward , and first pass by Sicily , be there most kindly receive by Charles king of that island , where he first hear of his father death ; which he take more heavy far , than he have take the death of his young son Henry , whereof he have hear a little before ; at which when king Charles marvele , he answer , that other son may be have , but •no ? the father can never be have . from hence he pass through Italy , where much honour be do he both by the pope and other prince ; and then descend into Burgoigne , where by the earl of chalbon , a stout man at arm , he be challenge at a turneament , with a pretence to solemnize his presence , but with a purpose indeed to disgrace his person ; and though prince Edward in many respect may page 128 just have refuse it , yet the nobleness of his mind will not suffer he to pass by any occasion of show his valour and in this ? … ? as he make it appear , that •ame have be no ? … ? the report it ma•e of hi• . and here a great part of his english nobility meet ? ? ? ; from whence he pass in ? to France , where the king Philip his •eare cou•• ( as be sister son ) en ? tertaines he with great solemnity : and grace his solemnity with so much cour ? tesie , that it win prince Edward vol•ntarily to do he homage for the Territo ? rise he hold in France ; and this voluntarines in prince Edward , win the king of France again to grant quiet unto he , all the land in France that belong to he ; and so these two great king by reciprocal courtesy effect that , which thei• prede ? cessour by force can never effect . from she ? ? ? , pass through A•uitaine , and have there take homage of his subject , and set all thing in order , he set sail and arrive in England , above a year after the death of his father : a long time for plot of mischief , and a strong temptation to plotter of mischief ; if all the cause of quietness have not concur : but such be the worthiness of prince Edward person , and such the undoubtedness of his title , that as there can be no competitor , so there will be no Oppugner• and indeed the divine pro ? vidence have show a special care over he from his childhood ! whereof one or two example will not be unfit to be relate . one be this , that be yet but young , and play one time at chess with a friend , in the midst of his game , without any apparent occasion , he remove himself from the place where he sit , when sudden there fall from the roof of the house a great stone , which if he have stay in the place but never so little have beat out his brain . another ex ? ample of the divine providence over he , ( though it happen afterward ) be this : have prepare a great fleet of ship for a journey into Flanders , and be ? king at Winchelsey , where the ship be to meet ; it happen that ride about the harbour , his horse fright with the noise of a windmill , which the wind drive violent about , skramble up and leap over the mud•wall of the town , so as neither the king nor the horse be to be see , but every one judge the king can not choose but be throw and kill ; yet such be the divine Provi ? dence over he , that the horse light upon his foot , and the king keep the saddle return safe . and under the wing of this divine providence , he have now pass all the danger of his tedious journey ; and be safe come to London , be on the fifteen day of August in the year 1274. crown at Westminster , to ? gether with his wife queen Eleanor , by Robert Kilwarby archbishop of canter ? bury : where five hundred great horse be let loose , for any that can take they ; and yet the outward solemnity be not more great , than the inward joy be univer ? shall , every man rejoice , not only at a change , which of it self be please , but at a change so much for the better , as this be like to be . of his act do after he be crown . the act of this king after he be crown , may not unfit be divide into five part : his act with his temporal lord ; his act with his clergy ; then with wale ; then his act with Scotland ; and last with France . and first , concern his lord , he give they good contentment in the begin of his reign , by enlarge their liberty , and grant they easy law , for which purpose he call a parliament , wherein be make the statute call of westmin ? star the first , so as he have no difference with they , till towards the end of his reign , as shall be show hereafter . in the next place , concern his act with his Cler ? gy , he begin with they betimes ; for have live to be of good age , three or four and thirty year old , in his father reign , he observe in that time , that their power be too predominant , and therefore think fit to clip their wing ; at least to keep they from far grow : which he do by these mean : first , in the six year of his reign , he deprive many chief monastery of their li ? berty , and take from the abbot and covent of Westminster , the return of page 129 writ grant they by the charter of his father , king Henry the three . the next year after he get to be enact the statute of mortmain , to hinder the increase of their temporal possession . in the second statute of Westminster , he defalk the jurisdiction of ecclesiastical judge ; and grow more upon they , he re ? quire the moiety of all their good , as well temporal as spiritual , for one year . then call he a parliament of his noble at Salisbury , without admission of any churchman in it : and it be worth the note , that Marchian his trea ? sure , acquaint he that in church and religious house , there be much treasure to be have , if it may be take ; he make no scruple of it , but cause it to be take and bring into his exchequer . but find his prelate not well con ? tent with it , to please they again , he bid they ask something of he , where ? in they shall see how much he favour they . and they ask of he to re ? peal the statute of mortmain , that have be make so much to their hindrance ; he answer , that this be a statute make by the whole body of the realm , and therefore be not in his power , who be but one member of that body , to undo that which all the member together have do ; and perhaps whatsoever they shall have ask else , he will have have a answer to redeem his offer . and thus much concern his clergy . in the next place be the welsh , who have themselves begin with the king : for their prince Leolyn be summon to attend at his coronation , refuse to come ; and afterward at more leisure , be require to come and do his homage , he stand upon term of safe conduct , pretend doubt to be use , as his father Gryf ? fin have be ; who upon hard usage in the tower , seek to make escape , fall from the wall and break his neck . but indeed it be always a custom with this nation , at every change of prince in England , to try conclusion , hope at one time or other to have a day of it , and to change their yoke of bondage into livre ? berty ; for which they be never better provide than now ; especial ( which be the great matter in war ) have a valiant prince to be their leader . but there happen a accident which take off their edge at this time : for the lady Eleanor , a daughter of the late earl Simon Montford , who prince Leolyn ex ? treame love , be pass out of France into Wales , be by the way upon the sea take by english ship , and bring to king Edward , and for the love of she , prince Leolyn be content to submit himself to any condition : which beside subjection of his state , be to pay fifty thousand pound sterling , and a thousand pound per annum during his life ; and upon these condition the marriage with his belove lady be grant he , and be solemnize here in England , whereat the king and queen be themselves present . three year Leolyn continue loyal , and within bound of obedience , in which time David , one of his brother , stay ? king here in England , and find by the king to be of a stir spirit , be much ho ? nour by he ; knight , and match to a rich widow , daughter of the earl of Derby , and have give he by the king beside , the castle of Denbigh , with a thousand pound per annum : though ( as it be afterward find ) he live here but in the nature of a spy : for when prince Leolyns lady be afterward dead , and that he ( contrary to his condition former make ) break out into rebellion , then go his brother David to he , notwithstanding all these favour of the king : and they together enter the english border : surprise the castle of Flynt and rut ? land , with the person of the lord Clifford , send justiciar into those part : and in a great battle overthrow the earl of Northumberland and Surrey , with the slaugh ? ter of sir William Lyndsey , sir Richard Tanny , and many other . king Edward add ? vertise of this revolt and overthrow , be then at the vyze in Wiltshire , pre ? pares a army to repress it ; but before his set forth , go private to his mo ? the queen Eleanor , lie at the nunnery of Aimesbury , with who while he confer , there be one bring into the chamber , who feign himself ( be ? king blind ) to have receive his sight at the tomb of king Henry the three : a• ? soon as the king see the man , he remember he have see he before , and know he to be a most notorious lie villain , and wish his mother in no case to be ? leave page 130 he : but his mother , who much rejoice to hear of this miracle , for the glory of her husband , find her son unwilling that his father shall be a saint , grow sudden into such a rage against he , that she command he to avoid her chamber : which the king obey ; and go forth , meet with a clergy man , to who he tell the story of this impostor , and merry say ; he know the justice of his father to be such , that he will rather pull out the eye ( be whole ) of such a wicked wretch , then restore they to their sight . in this mean time the archbishop of Canterbury have go of himself to prince Leolin , and have labour ? read to bring he and his brother David to a resubmission , but can effect nothing ; for beside other reason that sway prince Leolin , the conceit of a prophesy of Merlin , that he shall short be crown with the diadem of Brutus , so over ? weigh he , that he have no care for peace , and short after no head : for after the earl of Pembroke have take bear castle , which be the seat of prince Leolin , he be himself slay in battle ; and his head cut off by a common soldier , be send to king Edw. who cause the same to be crown with ivy , and to be set upon the tower of London ; and this be the end of Leolin , the last of the welsh prince , betray ( as some write ) by the man of buelth . not long after his brother David also be take in wale , and judge in England to a ignominious death : first , draw at a horse tail about the city of Shrewsbury , then behead , the trunk of his body divide , his heart and bowel burn , his head send to accompany his brother on the tower of London , his four quarter to four city , Bristol , North••pton , York , and Winchester : a manifold execution , and the first show in that kind to this kingdom , in the per ? son of the son of a prince , or any other noble man that we read of in our history . it be perhaps something which some here observe , that at the seal of this con ? quest , king Edward lose his elder son Alphonsus , of the age of twelve year , ( a prince of great hope ) and have only leave to succeed he , his son Edward late bear at Carnarvan , and the first of the english , entitle prince of Wales , but no prince worthy of either wale or England . and thus come wale to be unite to the crown of England , in the eleven year of this king Edward reign ; who thereupon establish the government thereof , accord to the law of England , as may be see by the statute of Rutland , in the twelve year of his reign . the work of Wales be settle , king Edward pass over into France , upon notice of the death of Philip the hardy , to renew and confirm such condition as his state in those part require , with the new king Philip the four , entitle the fair ; to who he do homage for Aquitaine , have before quit his claim to Normandy for ever . after three year and a half be away in France , he return into England ; and now in the next place come the business with Scotland , and will hold he wo•ke at time as long as he live , and his son after he . Alexan ? there the three , king of Scot , as he be run his horse , fall horse and man to the ground , and break his neck , and die immediately• by reason whereof ( he lea ? ving no issue , but only a daughter of his daughter Margaret , who die also soon after ) there fell out present great contention about succession . ten competitor pretend title , namely , Erick king of Norway , Florence earl of Holland , Robert Bruce earl of Anandale , John de Baylioll lord of Galloway , John de Hastings lord of Abergeveny , John Cummin lord of Badenaw , Patrick de Dunbarre earl of march , John de Vescie , Nicholas de Sul•s , William de Rosse ; all or most of they de•cending from David earl of Huntington , young brother to William king of Scot , and great uncle to the late king Alexander . this title king Edward take upon he to decide , pretend a right of superiority from his ancestor over that kingdom and prove it by authority of old chronicle , as Marianus Scotus , William of malm ? bury , Roger de Hoveden , Henry of Huntington , Ralph de Luceto , and other ; which though the scottish lord who sway the interregnum oppose , yet be they con ? strain for avoid of further inconvenience , to make he arbiter thereof , and the ten competitor bind to stand to his award . two be especial find , between who the •ight lie , John de Baylioll lord of Galloway , and Robert br•ce ; the one descend from a elder daughter , the other from a son of a young page 131 daughter of Alan , who have marry the elder daughter of this David brother to king William . the controversy hold long , twelve of either kingdom learn in the law , be elect to debate the same at Berwick ; all the best civilian in the university of France be solicit to give their opinion ; all which bring forth rather doubt than resolution : whereupon king Edward the better to sway this business by his presence , take a journey northward ; where be come as far as Lincolnshire , he lose his belove wife queen Eleanor : and thereupon go back to see her funeral perform at Westminster : that do , he return present ? lie to his scottish business . and now six year be pass since the death of king Alexander , and yet nothing conclude in this controversy ; whereupon king Edward deal private with Bruce , ( who have the weak title , but the more friend ) and promise he , if he will swear fealty and homage to the crown of England , he will invest he in that of Scotland . but Bruce answer , he be not so d•sirous to rule , as thereby to infringe the liberty of his country . whereupon with the like offer he set upon Baylioll , who have better right , but less love of the people , and more greedy of a kingdom than honour , accept the condition ; and there ? upon be crown king at Scone , have fealty do he by all the chief nobility , except Bruce : come to Newcastle upon Tyne , where king Edward then lie ; and there , with many of his noble , swear fealty , and do homage to he , as his sovereign lord . which act do to secure he , overthrow he : for be little belove before , hereby he become less : such as stand for Bruce , and other of the nobility ( tender of the preservation of their country liberty ) take stomach a ? against he ; and not only for this , but short after for his injustice in the case of the earl of Fife , one of the six governor in the time on the interregnum , who have be slay by the family of Alberneth ; the brother of which earl prose ? cute law before king Baylioll , in his high court of parliament , and have no right do he ( king Baylioll give judgement of the side of the alberneth ) he ap ? peal to the court of the king of England : whereupon king Baylioll be summo ? ned , appear , sit with king Edward in his parliament till his cause be to be hear , and then be cite by a officer to arise , and to stand in the place appoint for plea ? ding ; than he crave to answer by a procurator , but be deny , and thereupon de ? scend to the ordinary place , and defend his cause himself : which indignity ( as he take it ) so incense he , that he return home with a breastfull charge with indignation ; meditate revenge , renew the ancient league with France , confirm it with marriage of his son Edward , to a daughter of Charles brother to king Phi ? lip , glad in regard of late offence take against the king of England , to embrace the same ; which do , Baylioll defy king Edward , renounce his allegiance , as unlawful do , be not in his power , without consent of the state , to do any such act hereupon break out that mortal dissension between the two nation , which consume more christian blood , and continue long than ever quarrel we read off do , between any two people in the world . for he that begin it , can not end it , but it last almost three hundred year , and be never thorough abo ? lish , till the late bless union wrought by he in who wisdom and virtue , right and power concur all to make it firm . and now the fatal chair in which the king of Scotland use to be inaugurate , seem to recover its secret operation , accord to ancient prophesy : that whither soever that chair shall be remove , the kingdom shall be remove with it ; and this chair king ed ? ward cause to be bring out of Scotland to Westminster , and to be place there among the monument , where it still continue . but now king Baylioll be summon to appear at Newcastle , and refuse to come ; king Edward enter Scotland with a army , consist of four thousand horse , and thirty thousand foot , beside five hundred horse , and one thousand foot of the bishop of Durham . by|our ? wick be first win , with the slaughter of fifteen thousand Scot ; ( our writer say more ) and after that , the castle of Dunbarre , Roxborough , Edinbough , sterli•g , and saint John town ; and now king Balioll sue for peace , submit himself , take again his oath of fealty to king Edward , as his sovereign lord : which do , page 132 a parliament for Scotland be hold at Berwicke , where the nobility likewise do ho ? mage to he , confirm the same by their charter , under their hand and seal : only William Douglas refuse ; content rather to endure the misery of a prison , then yield to the subjection of the king of England . but king Baylioll , notwith ? stand his submission , be send prisoner into England after his four year reign in Scotland ; and king Edward return home , leave John Warren earl of Sussex and Surrey , warden of all Scotland ; Hugh Cressingham treasurer , and Ormesloy chief justice , with commission to take in his name , the homage and fealty of all such as hold land of that crown . but this continue not long , for king ed ? ward be absent in France , the Scot fall upon the officer he have leave ; slay sir Hugh Cressingham with six thousand english , recover many castle , and regain the town of Berwick , and all by the animation and conduct of one William Walleys , a poor private gentleman , ( though noble descend ) who see his country without a head , and thereby without a heart ( all the great man , either in captivity or subjection• assemble certain of as poor and desperate estate as himself , and lead they to attempt upon whatsoever advantage they can find to annoy the english , and have therein good success , it so increase both his courage and company , that he afterward come to be the general guardian of the whole king ? dome ; and be in possibility to have absolute redeem his country from the subjection of the english , if the speedy come of king Edward have not preven ? t he . for now king Edward , to bring his work near together , remove his exchequer and court of justice to York , where they continue above six year ; and thither he call a parliament , require all his subject that hold of he by knight service , to be ready at Roxborough by a peremptory day : where there assem ? ble three thousand man at arm on bard horse , and four thousand other be ? med man on horse without bard , with a army of foot answerable , consist most of welsh and irish , beside five hundred man at arm out of Gascoyne ; and with this power he make his second expedition into Scotland : the earl of here ? ford and Norfolk , with the earl of Lincoln , lead his vanguard at the famous bat ? tell of Fonkirke , where the shout of the Scot be so great , that king Edward horse fright withal , cast he off , and break two of his rib ; which notwithstan ? ding he get up again , go on , and get the victory ; wherein be report to be slay two hundred knight , and forty thousand foot of the Scot : but William Walleys with some few , escape to make more work . and here again that kingdom may seem as if quite overthrow . most of the estate of the earl and baron of Scotland ( with their title ) that have stand out , be bestow on the english ; and a parliament be call at saint Andrew , where all the great man of that kingdom , except only Walleys , once again swear fealty to the king of England . it seem swear of fealty be with the Scot but a ceremony without substance , as good as nothing : for this be now the three time they swear fealty to king Edward ; yet all do not serve to make they loyal : for not long after , come the news of a new king make and crown in Scotland : Robert Bruce earl of Carrick , son to that Bruce who be competitor with Baylioll , escape out of England , become head to the confuse body of that kingdom : and perceive John Cummyn ( who have a title himself ) to go about to bewray his intention to king Edward ; he find he at dunfraye , set upon he , and murder he in the church . whereof as soon as king Edward hear , he send Aymer the valance , earl of Pembroke , and the lord Clifford and Percy , with a strong power to revenge the death of Cummyn , and to relieve his warden of Scotland ; who upon Bruces revolt , be all retire to Berwicke , while himself prepare a army to follow : wherein to be the more noble attend , he cause proclamation to be make , that whosoever ought by their paternal succession , or otherwise have mean of their own for service , shall repair to Westminster , at the feast of Pentecost , to receive the order of knighthood , and a military ornament out of the king wardrobe . hereupon three hundred young gentleman , all the son of Earles , baron , and knight , assemble at the day appoint , and receive purple , silk , sindon , scarf , wrought with page 133 gold or silver , accord to every man estate . for which train ( because the king house be too little , by reason a part of it have be late burn ) room be make , and the appletree cut down at the new temple for their tent , where they attire themselves , and keep their vigil . the prince ( who the king then likewise knight , and give he the duchy of Aquitaine , keep his vigil with his train at Westminster , and the next day gird these three hundred knight , with the military belt , in such manner as he himself have receive it . which do , the king before they all make a vow , that alive or dead , he will revenge the death of Cummyn upon Bruce , and the perjure Scot : adjure his son and all the noble about he , upon their fealty , that if he die in this journey , they shall carry his corpse with they about Scotland , and not suffer it to be inter , till they have vanquish the usurper , and absolute bring the country to subjection . the prince and all the noble promise upon their faith , to employ their uttermost power to perform his vow : and herewithal he set forth with a potent army , present after Whitsuntide , and make his last expedition into Scotland , in the four and thirty year of his reign . the earl of Pembroke , with that power send before , and aid of the scottish par ? ty , have before the king arrive in Scotland , defeat in a battle near saint John town , the whole army of the new king , and narrow miss the take of his person , but he escape in disguise , and shelter himself in obscure place , be reserve for great battle , his brother Nigell , Bruce , and short after , Thomas and Alexander a priest , be take and execute after the manner of traitor at Berwicke . and now king Edward have do for fight , all be now for Exe ? cution , and indeed his desire of revenge make he inexorable , and vow to spare none of what degree soever . the earl of Atholl , ( though of royal blood , and ally unto he ) be send to London , where all his preferment be , to have a high ? ere pair of gallow than the rest . the wife of Robert Bruce , take by the lord Rosse , be send prisoner to London , and his daughter to a monastery in Lindsey . the countess of Boughan , who have be aid at Bruces coronation , be put into a wooden cage , and hang out upon the wall of Berwicke for people to gaze on . but though Bruces party be thus deject , and himself at this time appear not , but shift privy from place to place , in a distress manner , ( attend only with two noble gentleman , who neee forsake he in his misfortune , the earl of Lenox and Gilbert hay ) yet give he not over , but gather new force , with which he sudden assail the earl of Pembroke at unaware , give he a great defeat , and within three day after chase the earl of Gloucester into the ca ? stle of air , where he besiege he , till by the king force he be drive again to his former retire . whereupon king Edward , who have spend his winter at car ? lile , in July follow with a fresh army enter Scotland himself , but fall into a Dysentery or bloody-flix , at borough upon the sand he end his life : and thus end king Edward trouble with Scotland , but not England trouble , which be more to come , then yet be past . but though this business of Scotland never leave king Edward till his die day , yet it have be upon he but as a ague , sometime put he into violent heat , and sometime leave he in a quiet temper , with such a vicissitude , that when he have quietness with Scotland , he have trouble with France , whereof the time be now to speak . it be well know , that Philip king of France , father of the present king , and Edward king of England be near cousin , the son of two sister ; and it have be show before at king Edward return from the holy land , and pass through France , what extraordinary kindness and mutual courtesy pass between they , that one will have think neither they no• they shall ever have fall out : and perhaps never shall , if they have be private man , and not prince . for private man may easy continue friend , as have none to con ? sider but themselves ; but prince hardly , as have beside themselves , their Sub ? ject to consider . and though they be the subject oftentimes that make the quar ? rell , yet they be the prince that must maintain it . and beside , between Prin ? ces page 134 there can never be but jealousy , and where jealousy be , every trifle make a quarrel . and this be the case of these two king , certain of the king of Eng ? land subject , have upon the coast of Normandy do spoil to some subject of the king of France : and this difference of the subject make a difference between the king , while each of they stand in defence of his own , fall out themselves ; and for a beginning the king of France summon king Edward , as owe homage to that crown , to appear and answer it in his court . and king Edward , though voluntary before he have do it in a way of courtesy , yet be now impetious command , he refuse it : upon which refusal , all his territory in France be condemn to be forfeit , and a army be present send to seize upon the same , lead by Charles de Valois , and Arnold the needle , constable of France . Bordeaux ; with diverse other peec•s of importance , be take from he . and now king Edward well know what danger it be to have so powerful a adversary ; endeavour first to strengthen himself with friend abroad , seek to match his son ed ? ward with a daughter of Guy earl of Flanders : marry one of his daughter to the d•ke of Barr• , who pretend title to champagne ; another to John duke of bra•ant ; send fifteen thousand pound sterling to Adolph de Nassaw the empe ? rour , for recovery of certain land which he claim in France ; and with all these and many other con•ining prince , he set upon the king of France , and then send over his brother Edmund earl of Lancaster , the earl of Lincoln and rich ? mond , with eight and twenty banner , seven hundred man at arm , and a navy of three hundred and sixty sail . in the mean time the king of France , have have intelligence of the intend alliance between king Edward , and guy earl of Flanders , send for the say earl ( as if know nothing thereof ) to come with his wi•e and daughter to make merry with he at Paris : where instead of feast he , he make he prisoner , and take from he his daughter , in regard he seek ( be his vassal ) to match she with his capital enemy . the earl excuse it the best he can , and by much mediation be release himself , but not his daugh ? ter ; whereupon the earl , presume upon aid from king Edward , take arm , and defy the king of France ; who thereupon come with a army of sixty thou ? sand against he : which cause king Edward , with all speed possible to relieve this distress earl ; and so leave the government of the kingdom in his absence , to the bishop of London , the earl of Warwick , and the lord Reynold , grey , and Clifford ; with five hundred sail , and eighteen thousand man at arm , he pass ? se over into France , but find the country distract into many popular facti ? once , and the king of France daily get upon they , ( have already win Lisle , Douai , courtray , Burges and dam ) and the emperor Adolph fail to send he aid as he have promise , he fall into great perplexity : and have stay the whole winter at Gaunt , where by reason of many outrage commit by his soldier , he be so affront by the Gauntois , that his own person be not without some danger ; he thereupon in the spring of the year , conclude a truce with the king of France for two year , take his sister Margaret to wife , and affiance the daughter of the same king to his son prince Edward , and so return into Eng ? land : and these be all the trouble king Edward have with France . but now must something be speak of trouble with his lord at home , where ? of this be the beginning : in a parliament at Salisbury , the five and twenty year of his reign , the king require certain of his lord to go to the war in Gascoyne ; which need a present supply by reason of the death of his brother Edmund : but the lord make all their excuse , every man for himself : where ? upon the king in great rage threaten , they shall either go , or he will give their land to other that shall . upon this Humphrey Bohun earl of Hereford , high constable , and Roger bigod earl of Norfolk , martial of England , make their declaration , that if the king go in per•on they will attend he ; otherwise not . which answer offend the king more , and be urge again , the earl Marshall protest he will willing go thither with the king , and march before he in the vanguard , as by right of inheritance he ought to do ; but the king page 135 tell he plain , he shall go with any other , though he we•• not himself in Person• i be not so bind ( say the earl ) neither will i take t••t journey with ? out you . the king swear by God , sir earl , you shall either go or h•••• and i swear by the same oath ( say the earl ) i will neither go no• hang• and so without leave depart . Shortly after the two earl assemble many noble man , and other their friend , to the number of thirty bannere•s , so as they be fifteen hundred man at arm , well appoint , and stand upon their Gu••d• the king like a prudent prince , who know his time , prosecu•es they not as then , b•• let the matter pass , in regard that his business call he present into Flanders ; when be ready to take ship , the archbishop , bishop , earl , baron , and the commons send he a roll of the grievance of his subject , concern his tax , subsidy , and other imposition , with his seek to force their service by unlawful course : to which the king send answer , that he can not a•t•r a ? ny thing without the advice of his council , who be not now about he , and therefore require they , see they will not attend he in his journey , ( which they absolute refuse to do , though he go in person , unless he have go in ? to France or Scotland ) that they will yet do nothing in his absence , prejudi•i ? all to the peace of the kingdom ; and that at his return , he will set all thing in good order to their contentment . but have take his journey , and be hold there with long delay , to his exceed great expense , he be force to send oh ? ver for more supply of treasure ; and thereupon give order for a parliament to be hold at York by the prince , and ( because of his minority , for he be then but sixteen year of age ) by such as have the manage of the kingdom in his absence : and to the end he will not be disappoint of aid , he condescend to all such be ? ticle as be demand , concern the great charter : promise from thence ? forth never to charge his subject otherwise then by their consent in parliament , and to pardon all such as have deny to attend he in this journey . after this , in the 27. year of his reign , a parliament be call at Westminster , wherein the pro ? miss confirmation of the two charter , and the allowance of what disafforesta ? cion have heretofore be make , be earnest urge , and in the end with much ado grant ; and that with omission of the clause , Salva jure Coronae nostr• : which the king labour to have insert , but the people by no mean will a ? gree , and the perambulation of the forest of England be then commit to three bishop , three earl , and three baron . but some year after , in the two and thirty year of his reign , king Edward begin to show his resentment of the stubborn behaviour of his noble towards he in time past ; and so terrify Ro ? she bigod , earl martial , that to recover his favour the earl make he his Heire• in possession ; ( though he have a brother of his own live ) reserve only to he ? self a thousand pound per annum , during his life . of other likewise he go• great sum for the same offence ; the earl of Hereford escape his fine by death . but the archbishop of Canterbury , ( who he accuse to have disturb his peace in his absence ) he send over to pope Clement the five , ( who succeed Bonifac• ) that he may be crush with a double power . this pope be native of Bordeaux , and •o the more regardful of the king desire ; and the King• the more confident of his favour ; which to entertain and increase , king Edward send he a whole furnish of all vessel for his chamber of clean gold : which great gift so wro•ght with the pope , that he untie the king from the covenant make with his subject concern their charter , confirm unto they by his last three act of Parli• ? mean , and absolve he from his oath : a safe time for prince , when they may ¦ tie themselves in any obligation to their subject , and afterward for a bribe to the pope be untie again . his taxation , and way for raise of money . if taxation may suffer degree of comparison , it may not unfi•ly be say of these three last king , that king John be in the positive ; his son Henry the three page 136 in the comparative : and this king Edward in the superlative . for not only he far exc•eded th• two former , but he have leave a spell to all that come after , for ever come near he : but then under the name of taxation , we must include the way he take for raise of profit . but first in the way of parliament . in the first year of his reign , be grant he a ten of the clergy for two year , beside a fifteen of they and the temporalty . in his five year , a twenty of their good towards the welsh war . in his seven , the old money be call in , and new coin , in regard it have be much def•ced by the Jew ; for which 297. be at one time execute in London : and this bring in profit of no small va ? lieu . in his eleven year , he have a thirty of the temporalty , and a twenty of the clergy , for his war in wale . in the thirteenth , escuage , forty shilling of every knight fee . in his fourteen year , he have a thousand mark of cer ? taine merchant fine for false weight . in his nineteenth , the eleven part of all movable of the clergy , and short after a ten for six year . in his twen ? ti , William marchyan then lord treasurer of England , perceive great riches to be in church and religious house , put it so into the king head , that they be all bring into the king treasury . in the eight year of his reign , he send ou• his write quo Warrant• , to examine by what title man hold their land ; which bring he in much money , till John earl of Warren , be call to show his title , draw out a old rusty sword , and then say , he hold his land by that , and by that will hold it to death ; which though it make the king desist from his project , yet he obtain at that time a fifteen part of the clergy . in his seventeenth year he fine all his judge for corruption : sir Ralph Higham chief justice of the high ? ere bench , in seven thousand mark : sir John Loveton justice of the low bench , in three thousand mark : sir William Brompton , in six thousand mark : sir S•l• ? mon Rochester , in four thousand mark : sir Richard Boyland , in four thousand : sir Walter Hopton , in two thousand : sir William Saham , in three thousand : Robert lith ? bury master of the roll , in one thousand : Roger Leycester , in one thousand : he••y bray escheator , and judge for the Jew , in one thousand : but sir Adam Stratt•• chief baron of the exchequer , in four and thirty thousand : and Thomas Wayland ( find the great delinquent , and of the great substance ) have all his good , and whole estate confiscate to the king ; and himself banish out of the king ? dome . in his eighteenth year he banish the Jew ; of who there be at that time above fifteen thousand in the kingdom , who have but all their good confiscate• leave they only mean to bear their charge in go away . in his four and twenty year , he command a new subsidy to be levy up ? on all sarpler of wool go out of England : as likewise with Fels and Hides . in his five and twenty year , he call a parliament at saint Edmundsbery , where be grant the eight part of the good of good town , and of other people the twelve . as for the clergy , they desire to be excuse , and refuse to contribute , in regard of their many late payment ; as in the two and twenty year of his reign , they pay the mo•ty of their good : and in his three and twenty year , he sei•ed into his hand , all priory alien and their good : beside he have a loan of the clergy , which amount to a hundred thousand pound : but notwithstan ? ding upon this refusal of the clergy , the king put all clergy man out of his protection , whereby they be to have no justice in any of his court ; ( a strain of state beyond any of his predecessor ) which so amaze they , that in the end , the archbishop of York , with the bishop of Durham , Ely , Salisbury , and Lincoln , yield to lay down in their church , the five part of all their good towards the maintenance of the king war ; whereby they appease his wrath , and wer• receive into grace . but the archbishop of Canterbury , by who animation the rest stand out , have all his good seize on , and all the monastery within his Dio ? cese , take into the king hand , and warden appoint to minister only niece ? sary to the monk , conve•ting the rest to the king use : at length by much suit , and abbot and priest , give the four part of their good , redeem themselves , and the king favour . in the six and twenty year of his reign , at a Parli ? ament page 137 hold at York , be grant he the nine penny of the good of the tem ? poralty : the ten penny of the clergy of the diocese of Canterbury , and of York the five : and in this year also he raise the imposition upon every sack of wool , from a noble to forty shilling . in his two and thirty year he send out a new write of inquisition , call trail-baston , for intruder on other man land ; who to oppress the right owner , will make over their land to great man ; for Batte ? rer hire to beat man , for breaker of peace , for ravisher , incendiaries , Murthe ? rer , fighter , false assisour , and other such malefactor : which inquisition be so strict execute , and such fine take , that it bring in exceed much treasure to the king . as likewise do another commission at the same time , send forth to examine the behaviour of officer , and minister of justice ; wherein many be find delinquent , and pay dear for it . at this time also he call his lord to account for their stubbornness some year before , in deny to attend he into Flanders ; which bring he in profit answerable to their greatness that be call ? lead . after all this , in his four and thirty year , there be grant he the thirti ? eth penny of both clergy and Laity , and the twenty of all merchant towards his journey into Scotland . and this may be sufficient to show his taxation to have be in the superlative degree . and yet beside these , he have no small be ? nefit by silver mine , which in his time be find in Devonshire . of his law and ordinance . in the first year of his rain be make the statute call of Westminster the first . in his twelve year be make the statute of Acton Burnell . in the four ? teenth year of his reign be mad the statute call Additamenta glocestriae . he ordain such man to be sheriff in every county , as be of the same con ? tie where they be to be sheriff . he ordain that Jew shall wear a Cogni ? sance upon their upper garment whereby to be know , and restrain their ex ? cessive take of usury . in his time be also enact the statute of mortmain . in his twelve year , in the quindenes of saint Michael , the justice itinerant be ? gin to go their general circuit . in his time new plece of money be coy ? ned , and half penny of silver come to be in use , which be before off base i ? tall . in his time , three man for rescue a prisoner , arrest by a officer , have their right hand cut off by the wrist . in his time all Jew be banish out of the realm . this king by proclamation prohibit the burn of sea-coal in London and the suburb , for avoid the noisome smoke . in his eleven year the baker of London be first draw upon hurdle , by Henry Waleys major ; and corn be then first sell by weight . in this king time the title of baron which have before be promiscuous to man of estate , be first confine to such only as by the king be call to have voice in parliament . Affaires of the church in his time . in his time , at a synod hold at read by the archbishop of C•nterbury , it be ordain accord to the constitution of the general council , that no ecclesiastical person shall have more than one benefice , to which belong the cure of soul : and that every person promote to any ecclesiastical live , shall take the order of priesthood within one year after . in his time live and die pope Boniface the 8. of who his predecessor have prophesy : ascend ut vulpe , Regnabis ut leo , morieris ut canis . work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . this king found the abbey of the vale royal in Cheshire , of the Cisteaux order . in his time John Baylioll king of Scot , build Baylioll college in Oxford : also in his time , Walter Marton lord chancellor of England , and after page 138 bishop of Rochester , found Marton college in Oxford , who be drown pass ? sing over the water at Rochester , be at that time no bridge there , as now there be . in his time be finish the new work of the church of Westminster , which have b•ene threescore and six year in building . in his time be lay the foundation of the Blackfriar beside Ludgate , and of Baynard castle : also in his time , his second wife queen Margaret begin to build the choir of the gray-frier in London . in his time be begin to be make the great conduit in London , stand against the church call acre in cheap . in his time Henry Walleys , major of Lon ? don , cause the ton upon Cornhill , to be a prison for nightwalker : and also build a house call the stock , for a market of fish and flesh , in the midst of the city . in this king time , Edmund earl of Leycester , the king brother , found the Minory , a nunnery without Aldgate . this king build the castle of flint in wale , and the castle of Beaumaris in the I|will of Anglesey , and the castle of car ? narvan by Snowdon . also in this king time , John Peckham archbishop of can ? terbury , found a college of canon at Wingham in Kent . casualty happen in his time . in the second year of this king reign , there happen the great rot of sheep in England that ever be know , which continue five and twenty year ; and come ( as be think ) by one infect sheep of incredible greatness , bring out of Spain by a french merchant into Northumberland . in the fifteen year of this king reign , wheat be sell for ten groat a quarter ; where the next year after there be so great a dearth , that it be sell for eighteen penny the bushel . in the seventeenth year of his reign , there fall so much rain , that wheat be raise from three penny the bushel , to sixteen penny ; and so encrea ? sed yearly , till at last it be sell for twenty shilling the quarter . and this year the city of Carlile , and the abbey with all the house belong to the friar mi ? nor , be consume with fire . in his one and twenty year , a great part of the town of Cambridge , with the church of our lady , be also burn . in the seven and twenty year of his reign , his palace at Westminster , and the monastery adjoin , be consume with fire . the monastery of Gloucester also be burn to the ground . in this year also , a act of common counsel , by consent of the king , be make concern victual ; a fat cock to be sell for three half penny , two pullet for three half penny , a fat capon for two penny half penny , a goose four penny , a mallard three half penny , a partridge three half penny , a pheasant four penny , a heron six penny , a plover one penny , a swan three shilling , • crane twelve penny , two-woodcock three half penny , a fat lamb from Christ ? mass to Shrovetide , sixteen penny ; and all the year after for four penny . of his wife and child . he have two wife , his first be Eleanor , daughter to Ferdinand the three king of Spain ; and be marry to he at b•res in Spain : who have live with he six and thirty year , in a journey with he towards Scotland , at Herdeby in Lin ? colneshire she die ; in who memory , and as monument of her virtue , and his of ? fection , king Edward cause cross with her statue to be erect in all chief pla ? ces , where her corpse in carry to Westminster , rest : as at Stamford , Dunstable , saint Albon , Waltham , Cheapside ; and last , at the place call Charing cross : she be bury in Westminster , at the foot of king Henry the three , under a fair marble tomb , adorn with her portraiture of copper guilt . by this wife , king Edward have four son and nine daughter ; his elder son , John ; his second , Henry ; his three , Alphonsus ; die all young in their father time : his four son , ed ? ward , call of Carnarva• , because bear there , succeed he in the kingdom . of his daughter , the old name Eleanor , be first marry by proxy to Alphonsus , king of Arragon ; but he die before the marriage solemni•ed , she be afterward page 139 marry at Bristol , to Henry earl of Barry in France ; by who she have issue , son and daughter . Joan the second daughter of king Edward and queen Eleanor , bear at Acon in the holy land , be marry to Gylbert Clare call the red earl of Gloucester and Hereford ; by who she have issue , son and daughter . she survive her husband , and be remarry to the lord Ralph Monthermere , father to Margaret the mother of Thomas Montacute , earl of Salisbury ; from who the now viscount montacu•e be descend . Margaret the three daughter of king Edward and queen Eleanor , be marry to John duke of Brabant . Berenger and Alice , their four and five daughter , die young and unmarried . Mary their six daughter , at ten year of her age , be make a nun in the monastery of A•mesbury in Wiltshire , at the instance of queen Eleanor her grandmother , who live there . Elizabeth their seven daughter , be first marry to John earl of Holland , Zealand , and lord of Freezeland ; he die within two year , she be afterward marry to hum ? phrey Bohun earl of Hereford and Essex , lord of breknok , and high constable of England ; by who she have issue , son and daughter . Beatrice and Blanch , their eight and nine daughter , die young and unmarried . king Edward second wife be Margaret , elder daughter of Philip king of France , call the hardy , and sister to Philip call the fair ; at eighteen year old she be marry to king Edward , be above threescore ; yet at the unequal year she have issue by he , two son and a daughter : their old son be bear at a little village in Yorkshire call Brotherton , and be thereof call Thomas of Brotherton : he be create earl of Norfolk , and earl martial of England , after Roger bigod , who die without issue . their second son Edmund , be bear at Woodstock in ox ? fordshire , and of the place be so call : he be create earl of Kent , and marry Margaret daughter of John , and sister of sole heir of Thomas lord wake of lie ? dell in the county of Northampton ; by who he have issue two son and one daughter : his son Edmund and John , die without issue ; his daughter Joan , for her beauty call the fair maid of Kent , be marry first to William Montacute earl of Salisbury , and from he divorce ; be remarry to sir Thomas holland , in her right earl of Kent , and by she , father of Thomas and John Holland , duke of Surrey , and earl of Huntington : and last , she be the wife of Edward of wood ? stock , the black prince of wale ; and by he mother of king Richard the second . this earl Edmund be behead at Winchester , in the four year of king Edward his nephew . Eleanor , the daughter of king Edward by his second wife Margaret , die in her childhood . of his personage and condition . he be tall of stature , high than ordinary man by head and shoulder , and thereof call longshank ; of a swarthy complexion , strong of body , but lean ; of a comely favour ; his eye in his anger , sparkle like fire ; the hair of his head black and curl . concern his condition , as he be in war peace ? full ; so in peace he be warlike , delight special in that kind of hunt , which be to kill stag or other wild beast with spear . in continency of life , he be equal to his father ; in act of valour , far beyond he . he have in he the two wisdom , not often find in any , single ; both together , seldom or never : a ability of judgement in himself , and a readiness to hear the judgement of o ? there|be . he seem to be a great observer of opportunity ( a great point of wisdom in any , in prince great ) and that he can bear a injury long , without seek to revenge it ; as appear by his carriage towards the earl Roger bigod , who when he see his time , he call to account for a affront he have offer he di•ers year before . he be not easy provoke into passion , but once in passion , not easi ? lie appease , as be see by his deal with the Scot ; towards who he show at first patience , and at last severity . if he be censure for his many taxation , he may be justify by his well bestow they ; for never prince lay out his money to more honour of himself , or good of his kingdom . his great unfortunateness page 140 be in his great blessing ; for of four son which he have by his wife queen Eleanor , three of they die in his own life time , who be worthy to have outlive he ; and the four outlive he , who be worthy never to have be bear . of his death and burial . in his last expedition into Scotland , be at Carlile , he fall sick ; and lie in his deathbed , he send for his son Edward : to who , beside many admonition to piety ; he command three thing special : that he shall carry his bone about with he through Scotland till he have subdue it : that he shall send his heart into the holy land , with sevenscore knight to that war , and the two and thirty thou ? sand pound he have provide for that purpose ; and that he shall never recall Gaveston from banishment : and soon after of a dysentery or bloody-flix , he die at borough upon the sand , the seven of July , in the year 1307. when he have reign four and thirty year and seven month , live threescore and eight year : be ? king dead , his corpse be bring to Waltham abbey , and there keep the space of six ? ten week , and after , on Simon and Jude day bury at Westminster . man of note in his time . of martial man there be many , these special : John earl of Warren , who oppose the king inquisition by quo warranto : and Roger bigod , who give the king a affront to his face . of learned man also many , special these ; John Breton bishop of Hereford , who compile a book of the law of England , call l• Breton : Thomas spot a chronographer : John Eversden a writer of annal , and of this king reign : Gregory Cairugent a monk of Gloucester , and a writer also of annal . John Peckham a franciscan friar , make archbishop of Canterbury , who write many excellent work : John read a historiographer : Thomas Bungey a friar Minor , a excellent mathematician : Roger bacon a franciscan friar , a excellent philosopher and mathematician : Robert Kilwarby archbishop of Canterbury , and after make a cardinal : also Ralph Baldock bishop of London , who write a chronicle of England in the latin tongue : but above they all , though of another country , Thomas A ? quinas , bear of a noble family , who work be too famous to be speak of ; who go to the council hold at lion by pope Gregory the ten , die by the way . page 141 the life and reign of king Edward the second . of his act before , and at his coronation . EDward of Carnarvan , elder son of king Edward the first , succeed he in the kingdom ; and never do prince come to a crown with more applause of nobility and people ; and there be good cause for it : for he have be train up in all good course for piety and learning ; he have see the government of his father , from who example he can not but have learn many good lesson ; he have be initiate in the way of state , have be leave Gover ? nou_r_ of the realm , and preside in parliament in his fa ? there|be absence ; and he be now three and twenty year old , a fit age for bear the weight of a sceptre ; and yet for all these advantage , there want not fear of he in the mind of many , who can not but remember what prank he have play not long before ; how he have break the bishop of Chesters Parke , and in most disorderly manner have kill his deer , for which both himself have be commit to prison , and his friend pierce Gaveston banish the realm : and if he do such thing be but prince , what may not be fear of he come to be king ? for seldom do advancement in honour alter man to the better ; to the worse often , and common then , when it be join with a authority that set they above controlment . neither yet be their fear more out of what they have see , then out of what they see ; for where he shall have endeavour to accomplish the charge his father have give he in his deathbed , he seem to intend nothing less : nothing more than whole to break it ; for he present call home pierce Gaveston from banishment ; and the two and thirty thousand pound , which his father have special appoint for the holy war ; either all or the most of it he be•towed upon Gaveston : and for carry his father bone with he about Scotland ; it have be well if he have suffer they quiet to be lay at rest in England ; for after the corpse have be keep above ground , sixteen week in the abbey of Waltham , and that the bishop of Chester , Walter Langton , the then lord treasurer , and executor of his father will , be busy in prepa ? ring for his funeral ; he send the constable of the tower to arrest he , and he ? prison he at Wallingford , seize upon all his good , and give they to Gaveston ; and all for old grudge . and ( that which seem a high strain of incongruity ) page 142 before he have see perform his father funeral , which be not till the 27. of October follow ; he enter into treaty of his own nuptial , forego over to Boleigne , on the two and twenty of January , he marry Isabella , the daughter of Philip the fair , king of France : which marriage be honour with the pre ? sense of four king , the king of France himself , the king of nav•rre his son , the king of the roman , and the king of Sicily : and three queen beside the bride , mary queen of France , Margaret the dowager queen of England , and the queen of Navarre : and yet do gavest•n exceed they all in bravery . this be observe by the lord of England : and thereupon when his queen and he come afterward to be crown , they go unto he , signify what a heinous transgression of his father will it be to call home G•veston ; and see the charge be no less give to they then to he , if he do not perform it they will ; and therefore unless he will remove Gaveston from the court and kingdom , they will hinder his coronation from proceed : which strike such a damp to prince Edward spirit , to think what a disgrace it will be to he ; if so many of his great friend be present , Charles of Valois , the king of Frances brother , the duke of Britain and Brabant , the count of Luxenburg , who be afterward Em ? peror , the duke of Savoy , the two duchess of Brabant and Artois , with many other prince and great lady , if now his coronation shall be call in question , that he solemn swear he will do what they desire in the next parliament , so they will be quiet now ; and thereupon , on the 24. day of February , in the year 1307. his queen and he be both crown at Westminster , by the hand of Henry bishop of Winchester , by commission from Robert archbishop of Canterbury , be then in exile , and out of the kingdom : at which solemnity there be so great a press of people , that sir John Blackwell knight be crowd to death . and now in the very act of his coronation , there be give another provocation to the lord against Gaveston : for the king have appoint he to carry the crown of saint Edward before he , ( the great honour can be do to a subject ) which add ? dead to the other honour the king have do he , ( for he have make he earl of Cornwall , lord of man , and lord Chamberlaine ) so incense the lord , that they enter into consultation , how to suppress this violence of the king affection ? on ; which short after they put in execution . portion in money king Edward have none with his wife : but the king of France give he the duchy of Guyenne , which he have seize upon before , as confiscate to he : and thereupon king ed ? ward do he homage for that duchy , and for the county of Ponthieu . of his difference with his lord about Gaveston . we shall have here no Quinquennium Neronis , no such five year , as Nero afford in the begin of his reign ; but this king at his first en ? trance will show what he be , and what he will continue to be as long as he live ; for though he take some great and grave man to be of his council , yet ( as ap ? pear afterward ) he do it rather to the end they shall be pliant to he , then that he have any meaning to apply himself to they ; for let they say what they will , Gaveston must be the oracle ; all the king action be but Gavestons he ? pression : and now Gaveston present after the coronation , to let the world be a witness of his worthiness , and that the king have not bestow his favour up ? on he without cause ; cause to be publish a turneament at Wallingford : whither come all the great lord of the kingdom , as Thomas earl of Lancaster , Humphrey earl of Hereford , Aymer earl of Pembroke , and John earl of Warren , with many other , all valiant man at arm ; yet none have the honour of the day like to give ? ston . and thus far he do well , if he can have stay here , if have get true glory , he have not fall into vainglory : for the lord envy he not so much for his advancement in honour , as they hate he for his insolency in manner : for in a scornful pride he will be cast scoff upon they all , call ? ling Thomas earl of Lancaster the stage player , the earl of Lincoln burst ? belly ; page 143 •imer the valance earl of Pembroke , Joseph the Jew ; and guy earl of war ? wick , the black dog of arderne ; which scoff together with his other inso ? lency , draw such a party upon he , that in the next parliament , the whole assem ? bly obtain of the king to draw article of their grievance : of which the chief be , that the great charter of magna charta shall be observed• that all stran ? gers shall be banish the court and kingdom ; that the business of the state shall be treat of by the counsel of the clergy and the noble ; and that the king shall not begin any war , nor go out of the kingdom without consent of parliament . which article , though seem harsh to the king , yet for avoy ? ding of further inconvenience , he yield unto they ; and special to the bani•h ? mean of his minion Gaveston , as hope that will excuse he for all the rest ; and Robert of Winchelsey , archbishop of Canterbury , late call home from exile , pronounce excommunication against all such as shall oppose the article . hereupon Gaveston be send away into Ireland , where he live awhile , not as a banish man , but as lieutenant rather of the country , and indeed not unworthy ; for in the time of his be there , he be say to have make a journey into the moun ? taines of Dublin , and to have break and subdue the rebel there ; build new ca ? stle in the kern country , repair the castle of Kevyn , and pass up to Munster , and Thoumond : perform every where much service with great valour and wor ? thinesse , that if he have stay there but a while long , he may perhaps by his desort in Ireland , have redeem his defect in England : but the king impatient of his absence , and ask advice what mean may be use to recall he ; it be tell he , that if he can but match he with the earl of gloucester sister , a man of such greatness , and so great belove of the people , for his sake certain ? lie no man will grudge at his come home . hereupon the king send for Gaveston , and make up the match between they , and marry they be at bar ? kamstead ; but this do no good . for Gaveston still work upon the king in such manner , that he scarce leave he mean to sustain himself , and as little to main ? take the queen ; nothing be do but as Gaveston will have it ; put the lord into a new discontentment ; who thereupon go again to the king , and tell he plain , that unless he will put Gaveston out of the court and kingdom , they will rise up in arm against he as a perjure king . This put the king into a great strait : loath he be to leave Gaveston , and fearful he be to provoke the lord ; in the end , his fear prevail over his love , he be content he shall be banish , and in such sort banish , that if ever he return , or be find in the kingdom , he shall be hold , and proceed against as a enemy of the state . so once again be Gaveston send pack out of the kingdom , and go into France , but find no safe harbour there : for the king of France hear of it , give strait charge , if he be find in his dominion to apprehend he : than he pass ? se into Flanders , but be there no sa•er then in France : after wave about , and find no place to rest in safety , he return secret into England , rely upon the king love , and the duke of gloucester favour . the king receive he as a angel send from heaven , and to be out of the lord eye , go a journey to York , take Gaveston along with he , and there think to be in quiet ; but the lord hear of it follow he thither , choose for their general , Thomas earl of Lancaster , a man possess of five earldom , Lancaster , Leycester , Ferrer , Lin ? colne , and Salisbury , beside the liberty of Pickering , and the honour of Coker ? more , and other land in wale ; and there be not a man of the whole nobility that be not of the party , but only Gilbert earl of Gloucester , the king sister son ; these lord send to the king , either to deliver Gaveston into their hand , or at least to send he peremptory out of the kingdom . but the king lead by ill counsel , and little regard the lord message , take Gaveston with he to Newcastle upon Tine , thence to Tynmouth , where the queen then lie , who ( though great with child , and entreat the king with tear to stay with she ) yet such be his desire to see Gaveston put into some place of security , that hear of the lord approach , he take a ship , and pass with Gaveston to Scarborough , and page 144 leave he there in a strong castle , not easy to be win , he go himself into Warwickshire ; perhaps that the lord may see he have not Gaveston with he . but the lord hear where Gaveston be , assault the castle with such violence , that Gaveston see no mean to escape , be content to render himself ; request only , that he may but once be allow to see the king face ; and the king hea ? ring he be take , desire as much : to which the earl of Pembroke consent ; and take Gaveston into his custody , promise upon forteiture of all he have , to have he forthcoming : but desire to be with his wife that night , who lie not far off , at Dedington h• deliver he to his servant to carry to Wallingford ; from who , as they pass by Warwick , the earl of that place hear of it , take he forcible from his keeper , and bring he to his own castle . where after long deliberation , whether it be wisdom to suffer Gaveston to speak with the king or no ; it be at last conclude to take of• his head ; which at a place there ? by , call Blacklow , be present put in execution . his corpse be carry to Oxford , and keep there two year , till the king cause it to be bring to long ? ley , and there build a monastery of purpose , where his soul shall be pray for . This Gaveston be the son of a gentleman of France , who have do good sir ? vice for king Edward the first , in France ; and for his sake this son of he be take and bring up with the prince : a man of excellent part of body , and of no less endowment of mind ; valiant and witty ; to which if we may add for ? tuous , he have be complete ; though the lord ( whether they have hear so , or whether they say it to wean the king from he ) tell the king that his father be a traitor to the king of France , and for the same be execute ; and that his mother be burn for a witch ; and that this Gaveston be banish out of France for consent to his mother witchcraft ; and that he have now bewitch the king himself . but why shall the lord be so violent against Gaveston ? may not the king place his affection where he please ? may he not make his own choice of what companion he like ? no doubt he may ; and fit he shall : but yet in this case , the lord have great cause to do as they do ; both in regard of the king , of themselves , and of the commonwealth . it be true , if the valour of Gaveston can as well have make the king valiant , as his riot make he riotous ; there may some good have come of their extraordinary conjunction : but see virtue be but personal , vice only be communicative ; it now make the king not only more vicious than otherwise he will have be , but vicious , where otherwise he will not have be ; and therefore great cause in regard of the king , to remove Gaveston from his company ; and no less in regard of the lord themselves ; for Gavestons advance be their debase ; his greatness with the king make they but cipher : but in regard of the commonwealth , most cause of all ; for while the king be altogether rule by Gaveston , and Gaveston he ? self be altogether irregular ; the commonwealth can have but little hope of justice , but be sure to suffer as long as Gaveston be suffer . and this may be sufficient to justify the lord , that it be not interpret to be rebellion , which be indeed but providence . of he trouble with Scotland . and now we have see two of the charge of his father will break by the king , and punish in he ; the two and thirty thousand pound appoint for the holy war , bestow upon Gaveston , and the king for it punish he ? self with want ; Gaveston call home from banishment , and the king for it pu ? nish with the loss of his subject love . it remain to see how well he perform the three charge of his father will , for subdue of Scotland . it be now the six year after the death of his father king Edward , and Robert Bruce now get to be king of Scotland , have stay all this while to see how this new king Edward will prove : and when he find by the course he hold , that he be like to page 145 prove a good easy enemy ; he thereupon take heart , and begin to stir , and in a very short time have bring almost all Scotland under his obedience ; and find no opposition he enter the english border , take and burn town ; that now king Edward , unless he will sit still , and suffer Bruce to come and pull his crown from his head , he can not choose but do something to stop his proceed . here ? upon he prepare a army , but like himself , fit for a court then for a camp : many man , and great bravery ; but readie• to take spoil , than to make spoil : and accord they speed ; for go to raise the siege at str•veling , defend for king Edward , by the valiant knight Philip Mowbray ; the king army consist ? ing of a hundred thousand , be defeat and overthrow by the Scot army , con ? sisting of scarce thirty thousand : so true be that say of a ancient soldier ; there be more hope of a army where the general be a lion , though the soldier be but sheep ; then of a army where the general be a sheep , though the Souldi ? ers be lion . but indeed the Scot , beside valour , use policy : for have in their own army none but foot , no horse at all , they have make trench in the ground three foot deep , cover they with twig and hurdle , where the english horseman be to pass , who flounder in those trench , be kill no less by their own fellow then by the enemy . in this battle , call of Ban ? nock borough , be slay the lord Mawle , the lord Clifford , the lord Tiptoft , the lord William Marshall , sir Giles , doctor Argenton , and seven hundred knight and squire , special Gylbert earl of Gloucester , who have show much valour that day ; and who the Scot will willing have keep for ransom ; if they have know he ; but he have forget to put on his coat of arm , whereby to be know . the slaughter of common soldier be certain great , though per ? hap not so great as Hector Boetius speak of , who say they be fifty thousand . there be take prisoner , Humphrey de Bohun earl of Hereford , John Seagrave , John Claveringham , William Latimer , and sir Roger Northbrooke , bearer of the king shield ; the king himself with the bishop , the earl of Hartford and Pem ? break , and Hugh Spenser , save themselves by flight ; Humphrey de Bohun earl of Hereford , be afterward release in exchange for Bruces wife , who have be long keep a prisoner in England . after this , many english fall away to the Scot , and all the north part from Carlile to York , come under their subjection ; and the english grow so fainthearted , and into such contempt , that three Scot dare venture upon a hundred english , when a hundred English dare scarce encounter with three Scot . and what can be think the cause of this great disaster to this king , but the want of his father blessing for not perform the charge he give he die , which be common accompany with the want of a high blessing , without which a vacat be set upon the labour of man , that make they all frustrate ? but Bruce , not satisfy with his acquest in England , send his brother Edward into Ireland also ; who so far prevail , that many irish come in unto he , and in the end crown he king of a great part of that island , and so continue the space of three year ; till the primate of Armagh , and the lord Brinningham , Ju ? sticiar of Ireland , gather force together oppose he , and in a battle take he prisoner , at dundalk cut off his head , with the slaughter of many thousand of the Scot beside . with which the Scot be so incense , that they invade a ? gain the english border , forage as far as York ; whereupon a parliament be assemble at London , wherein a aid be grant of arm man to go against they ; London set forth two hundred , Canterbury forty , saint Albon ten , and so proportionable for all city and borough , whereby a great army be levy ; which come to York , through mutiny , emulation , and other impediment , be soon dissolve , and return back without effect any thing . not long after the town of Berwicke be betray to the Scot , through the treason of Peter Spalding the governor , and other Englishmen ; who the king of Scot to make they a example , cause to be hang for be traitor to their country . king Edward hear of the surrender of Berwicke , raise a army , and beleaguer it ; but the Scot to divert his force , enter upon England by other way , and be page 146 like to have surprise the person of the queen , lie then near •orke . the siege of B•rwicke be notwithstanding eager continue , and the king in great possibili ? ty to have regain the town , have not the earl of Lancaster with his foll•wers withdraw himself upon discontent , hear the king say he will give the keep thereof to Hugh spen••r the young , who be now grow a special favou ? rite of the king , and theref•r• not to be en•ured by the earl . in the mean ? ? ? the Scot win the castle of ? … ? , and mid•ord ; so as they possess the great part of all North•mberland , burn all before they , ? ? ? they come to •••pon , which town they spoyled• and carry there three day , they receive • thousand mark to save the town from burn , as they have do the town of Nor•hallerton , bor•ugh-bridg• and other . in their return back , they ? ? ? Knaresborough , and Shipton in c••ven ; and all other afore they , carry into •• ? land a marvellous number of cattle , beside prisoner , man and women• The••••• ? shire man thus grievous endamage , gather together to the number of ten thou ? sand : and at the town of Mitton , ten mile from York , encounter the Sco•• where they lose three thousand of their man , and be defeated• which b•ttell , be ? cause of the many spiritual man that be in it , be call the white battle . whereof when the king heard• he leave the siege of Be•wicke , to follow the Scot , but they return another way . the year follow , king Edward once again with a great army enter Scotland ; but the Scot have destroy all afore , the king oppress with famine be force to re•urne• who the Scot follow , and in a place of the forest of Blackmore , se• upon he that he hardly escape ; where be take John earl of Britain , and the lord of Sil•ac• , the french king Em ? bassadour , and many other . after this , king Edward find the Scot either too strong , or too wily for he , make a truce with they for two year , some say for thirteen . and this be the success of this unfortunate king in his war with Scotland . of his tr••bles at home . but his trouble abroad be not so grievous as those at home ; or rather , they be those at home that make his trouble abroad so grievous ; for though the lord have make a end of Gaveston , and cut off his head , think they have make a end of their need to bear arm , and have cut off the head of all their discontent ; yet as if Gaveston have be a phoenix , as it be out of his ash an ? other phoenix rise present up , and put the lord to as much trouble as ever Gaveston do . for now the young Spenser upon a sudden grow as great a favourite of the king as ever Gaveston be : and indeed in all point just such another , equal to he in goodliness of personage , in favour of the king , and in abuse the lord , for though they be the lord themselves that bring he at first in to be the king chamberlain , the rather ( as be think ) because he be one who the king do not love : yet be once in the place , he so win upon the king by dili ? gentle service , and by comply with the king humour ; that he bring the king at last to comply with his humour , and nothing must be do but as Spenser will have it . it seem it be the king nature , that he can not be without a bosom friend ; one or other to be a alter idem : and to seek to remove such a one from he , be to seek to remove he from he selfe• as impossible a thing as to alter na ? ture ; yet the lord be more sensible of their own grievance , to be insult on by a favourite , then of the king grievance to be affront by his subject , be more intentive to work their own end then the king : and therefore to remove spen ? ser and his father from the king , which they know be a work not to be do but by strong hand ; they continue their arm , and conf•der•ting together , they send to the king , peremptory require the confirmation and execution of the article former grant ; threaten withal , that unless he present perform the same , they will constrain he to it by force of arm : and thereupon assemble strong force about Dunstable , where the king •hen lie . the great prelate of the king ? dome , page 147 with the earl of Gloucester , labour to appease they , and with two cardinal send late by the pope to reform these disorder : they repair to saint alb•ns , and desire conference with the lord , who receive they very peaceable ; but the let ? ter which the pope have write to they , they refuse to receive , say , they be man of the sword , and care not for read of letter ; that there be many w•rthy and learned man in the kingdom , who counsel they will use , and not stranger , who know not the cause of their commotion : so the cardinal with this answer return to London . but the prelate of england•o labour the business , that the lord be content to yield up to the king such horse , treasure , and jewel , as they have take of Pierce Gaveston at Newcastle , so as the king will grant their petition ; and thereupon John Sandall treasurer of the kingdom , and Ingelard warle keeper of the wardrobe , be send to saint Albon to receive those thing at their hand . Shortly after a parliament be call at London , wherein the king complain of the great contempt be have of he by the baron , their rise in arm , their ta ? king and murder pierce Gaveston , and such other affront . whereunto with one accord they answer , that they have not offend therein , but rather merit his love and favour ; have take arm , not for any contempt of his royal person , but to destroy the public enemy of the kingdom , which otherwise will never have be do . which stout resolution of they , the queen with the prelate and the earl of Gloucester see , they seek by all mean to qualify their heat ; and at length so prevail with they , that they humble themselves to the king , and crave pardon for that they have do , which they obtain ; and the king receive they into grace , as his loyal subject : grant they their Articles• and particular pardon by his charter , for their indemnity concern the death of Gaveston : and for the great show of true reconcilement , guy de Beauchamp earl of Warwick , be make of the king counsel , though short after he end his life , not without suspicion of poison ; as be a man much envy by such as possess the king . the king keep his Christmas at Clipston , and his easter at Clarendon : and they seem to be all good friend , but this reconcilement of the king with his baron , be but as the cover of fire with ash , every little wind that blow , make it break out into flame afresh ; and the time be so unsettle as it be , it be impossible but such wind will continual be blow . it be such a wind blow , when the great earl of Lancaster have his wife ( a lady who have live with he always in good fame ) take out of his house at Canford in Dorsetshire• by one Richard saint Martin• a deform lame dwarf , who challenge she to be his wife , and that he have lie with she before the earl marry her• and this wind be make to blow the strong , by the lady own confession ; for upon examination , she voluntary aver , it be all true : and thereupon the o•gly fellow in she right claim the two earldom of Lincoln and S•lisbury , which he dare not have done• if he have not be back with great abettor : and it be not without aspersion upon the king himself . it be another such wind blow , when at the feast of Pentecost , at dinner in the open hall at Westminster ; a woman fantastical disguise , enter on horseback , and ride about the table , deliver the king a letter , wherein be signify the great neg ? lect he show of such as have do he and his father noble service , tax he for advance man of unworthy part , and such other complaint ; which letter read , and the woman depart , put the king into a great rage ; they who guard the door be sharp reprehend for suffer she to enter in such manner , answer ? red , it be the fashion of the king house in time of festival , to keep out none that come as this woman do , to make sport . Search be make for the woman , she be find and examine who set she on ; she confess a knight give her money to do it ; the knight be find , and upon examination , bold answer , he do it for the king honour , and to no other end ; and thereupon escape without further trouble . it be such another wind blow , when a knight be take pass by Pom ? fret , with letter seal with the king seal , direct to the king of Scot , about murder the earl of Lancaster ; which messenger be execute , his head set upon page 148 the top of the castle , and the letter reserve to witness the intend plot . which whether it be feign , or true , the report thereof reflect upon the king , and make many to take the earl part . it be such another wind blow , when a fana ? tick fellow , one John P••dras , a Tanners son of Exeter , give forth , that himself be the tr•e Edward , elder son of the late king Edward the first , and by a false nurse be change in his cradle , and that the now king Edward be a carter son , and lay in his place : but this wind be soon blow over , when at his death , be ? king draw and hang , he confess he have a familiar spirit in his house in the like ? ness of a cat , that assure he he shall be king of England , and that he have sir ? ve the say spirit three year before to bring his purpose about . but most of all , it be such a wind blow , when a baron name William brew , have waste his estate , offer to sell unto diverse man , a part of his inheritance call Powis . Humphrey ? ? ? earl of Hereford , obtain leave of the king to buy it , and bargain for it . the two Ro ? she M•rtimers , uncle and nephew , great man likewise in those part , not understan ? ding , it seem , any thing of the former bargain , contract also for the same land with the say sir William brew . Hugh Spenser the young , hear of this sale , and the land adjoin to part of he , obtain a more special leave of the king , be now his chamberlain , and buy it out of their hand . the earl of her• ? ford complain hereof to the earl of Lancaster : who thereupon at Sherbourne en ? ter into a new confederation with diverse baron there assemble , take their oath intermutual , to live and die together in maintain the right of the king ? dome ; and to procure the banishment of the two Spens•r• , father and son , who they now hold to be the great seducer of the king , and oppressors of the state , dispose of all thing in court at their pleasure , and suffer nothing to be obtain but by their mean : and under this pretence they take arm , and come be ? med to saint Albon , they send to the king , be then at London , the bishop of London , Salisbury , Hereford , and Chichester , ( who be there assemble to consul• for peace ) require he as he tender the qu•et of the realm , to rid his court of those traitor , the spenser , condemn in many article of high treason by the communality of th• land ; and withal to grant his letter patent of pardon and indemnity both to they and all such as take part with they . the king return answer , that Hugh Spenser the father be now beyond the sea , employ in his business , and his son be guard the cinque-port accord to his office ; and that it be against law of custom they shall be banish without be hear : and withal swear , he will never violate the oath make at his coronation , by grant letter of pardon to such notorious offender , who contemn his per ? son , disturb the kingdom , and violate the royal majesty . which answer so exasperate the lord , that present they approach to London , and lodge in the suburb , till they have leave of the king to enter into the city , where they perem ? ptory urge their demand : to which at length by mediation of the queen , and the chief prelate , the king be wrought to condescend , •nd by his edict , publish in Westminster hall , by the earl of Hereford , the spenser be banish the king ? dome . Hugh the father hear it , keep beyond the sea , but the son secret hide himself in England , expect the turn of a better season . and indeed short after , the archbishop of Canterbury in a council hold at London , pronoun ? ce the banishment of the spenser to have be erroneous ; and thereupon the e ? dict be revoke , and the spenser be call home , and se• in as great authority as they be before . but the lord have thus obtain their desire , with the king letter of indemnity return home , but yet not with such security as to give over the provision for their own defence . not long after there fall ou• a unexpected accident , that sudden wrought the lord confusion . the queen make her progress towards Canterbury , intend to lodge in the castle of leede , belong to the lord Badlesmer , ( who have be long the king steward , but now take part with the lord ) and send her martial to make ready for she and her train ; they who keep the castle tell he plain , that neither the queen , nor any else shall enter there without letter from their lord . the queen her self go to page 149 the castle , and receive the like answer ; whereupon she be drive to take such lodging otherwhere as can be provide . of which indignity she complain to the king ; who take it so to heart , that present with a power of arm man out of London , he lay siege to the castle , take it , hang the keeper Thomas C••epepper , send the wife and child of the lord Badlesmer to the tower , and seize upon all his good and treasure . and have this power about he , and warm with success and the instigation of the queen , sudden direct his course to Chi•hester , where he keep his Christmas , and there provide for a army against the ba ? ron : whereof many ( see the king power increase ) lef• their associate , and yield themselves to his mercy : among who be the two Roger mor•i••rs , man of great might and mean ; the lord Hugh aude , the lord M••rice Barkely , and other : who notwithstanding , contrary to their expectation , be send to di ? vers prison . the earl of Lancaster and Hereford see this sudden change , with ? draw themselves and their company from about Gloucester , towards the north-part : who the king follow with his army ; wherein be the earl of ath•ll and Angus ; and at Burton upon Trent , where they have make a head , discomfit their force , and put they to flight . in the mean time the earl of Lancaster have send into Lanca ? shire a knight of he , name Robert Holland , ( one who he have bring up of nought ) to raise more force among his tenant ; but he hear of this flight of his lord , go with his force to take the king part ; which so dismay the earl , that he begin now to think of sue to the king for grace ; but be in the way , at a town call boroughbridge , be there set upon by sir Simon Warde sheriff of York , and sir Andrew Harkeley constable of Carlile , who utter de ? feat his force : in which fight be slay the earl of Hereford , ( who fight va ? liant upon a bridge , be by a varlet skulk under the bridge , thrust with a spear into the fundament ) sir Roger Benefield , sir William Sulland and other ; there be take the earl of Lancaster , sir Roger Clifford , sir John M•wbray , sir Roger tucket , sir William fits-williams , with diverse other , and be lead to York . this field be fight the fifteen day of march , in the year 1320. it be not long •f ? ter that sir Hugh Daniell , sir Bartholomew de Baddelsmer be take . three day after the earl of Lancaster be bring to Pomfret , where the king sit himself in judgement with Edmund earl of Kent his brother , the earl of pem•••ke , the earl Warren , Hugh Spencer , late create earl of Winchester , and other ; sentence of death be give against he , to be draw , hang , and behead as a traitor . the two first punishment be pardon , in regard he be of royal blood : only be ? head he be the same day without the town of Pomfret , before his own ca ? stle . to speak of the miracle say to be do by he after his death , may be fit for a legend , but not for a chronicle , and therefore i omit they . by the like judgement be condemn , the lord Roger Clifford• the lord Warren Lisle , the lord William Tuchet , Thomas maudit , Henry Bradburne , willi•m fits-williams , Willi ? a lord Cheyney , Thomas lord M•wbray , joceline lord Danill , all which be exe ? cut at York . Shortly after , the lord Henry teye be take , draw , hang , and quarter•d at London ; the lord Aldenham at Windsor ; the lord Baddlesmere and Ash ? burton at Canterbury : at Cardiffe in Wales , sir William Fleming ; at Bristol , Si•Henry Womington ; and sir Henry Montford banneret ; at Gloucester , the lord Clifford• and sir William Elminbridge , principal man in principal place , to spread the more •e• ? rour over the kingdom : all their estate and inheritance be confiscate , and ••ny new man advance by the same . and this be the first blood of nobility that ever be shed in this manner in England since William the conqueror . but not long after , the king in a calm humour , begin to have a sense o• the earl of lancaster execution , which he discover upon this occasion : some •bou• he make earnest suit for a pardon to one of the earl follower ; and pre•••ng the king hard to it , he fall into a great p•ssion , excl•iming •g•inst they as unjus• and wicked counselor , who will urge he to save the life of a notorious V•• ? let , and will not speak one word for his near kinsman , the earl of Lancaste• : who ( say he have ) he live , may have be use•ull to i , and the whole king ? dome ; page 150 but this fellow the long he live , the more mischief he will do , and therefore by the soul of God , he shall die the death he have deserve . sir Andrew Harkeley , who be the man that take the earl of Lancaster prisoner , be advan ? ce for his service to the earldom of Carlile , enjoy his honour but a while ; for the next year after , either thrust out into discontent by the spenser , envy his high preferment , or combine with the Scot , upon hope of a great match , ( as he be accuse ) he be degrade of all his honour ; draw , hang , and quarter at lond•n for treason . but now the king of France summon king Edward to come and do his homage for Gascoyne ; and he not come , all his territory in France be adjudge to be forfeit , and many place of importance be sei•ed on by the french . hereupon a parliament be call , and it be by common consent of all a ? agree , that the king shall not go in person himself , in regard of the distraction of the time , but shall send some special man to excuse his appearance ; where ? upon Edmund earl of Kent the king brother be send , but to little effect . than it be think fit the queen shall go , and indeed the queen go ; but what be the cause of her go , there be among writer great variance : some say she be send by the king to accommodate this business , which she negotiate so well , as that all quarrel be end , upon condition the king shall give to his son Edward , the duchy of Aquitaine , with the earldom of Ponthieu , and send he over to do his homage for they ; which after many consultations• the king be wrought to yield unto ; and the prince be send with the bishop of Exeter and o ? there|be to the court of France accord : but other say• she go out of discon ? tent , to complain to her brother the king of France , for wrong offer she by the spenser , who have so alienate the king mind from she , that he will scarce come where she be , nor allow her fit maintenance for her call . but whatso ? ever be the cause of her going• there appear no cause of her stay , but that she have get into her company , Roger Mortimer lord of wigm•re , a gallant young Gentleman• who she special favour , late escape out of the tower of Lon ? don , by give his keeper ( as be say ) a sleep drink . and withal , the bishop of Exeter perceive some plot to be in hand , and their close consultation make without he , withdraw himself secret , and discover to the king what he ob ? serve in their course . whereupon the king send present for the Qu• and prince , and solicit the king of France to hasten their return ; which when he see be negle ? ct and delay , he cause they open to be proclaim enemy to the king ? dome , banish they and all their adherent out of the land : and withal cause all the port to be strong keep ; and send three admiral to attend in several coast to hinder their land . it be not without suspicion , that as the king for love of the spenser , have his mind alienate from love the queen ; so the queen for love of M•rtimer , have her mind alienate from love the king , and therefore have he with she , c•red not how long she stay . however it be , when the queen hear of the king proclamation , she know there be no return for she into England without some good assistance : whereupon solicit her brother the king of France , he aid she with man and money ( say some : but other , that he refuse to aid she , as be wrought under hand by the spenser against she ; she leave the french court , and go into Heynault , to the earl of that country , who upon a contract between her son prince Edward and Philippa the Earles daugh ? ter••ided she with a competent army , under the conduct of his brothe•iohn : and with they and she belove Mortimer , she take ship and land at Orwell , a port near unto Harwich in Suffolk : where present come to she the earl mar ? shall , Henry earl of Leycester , and Henry earl of Lancaster with the wry neck , call ? lead t•rtc•ll , with many other lord and bishop . the king at this time be at London , and hear of the queen land with such force , and chief how all the realm run flock to she , be •uddenly strike into a great amazement ; and though he have his great counselor the spenser about he , yet now he find what little good th•ir counsel can do he : and indeed in this case , what shall he , or what can he do ? to stay in London be apparent danger , for he plain see the page 151 lond•ners to be more incline to take the queen part than he ; and to go from London to any other place be as unsafe , all place be possess eithe• with certain enemy or uncertain Friends• at last the isle of Lundy be think of , a place plen ? tifull of provision• abound with cony , fish and foul , and the island of hard access , as have but one place in it where it can be enter , and that so narrow , that a few may easy keep out many ; upon this place he resolves• and take with he the earl of Gloucester , the spenser , and Robert •ald•cke , with some fe• other , he •akes ship , but by contrary wind be drive back , and rain through tempest to land in wale , and there in the abbey of Neth in ? ? ? keep himself close . in the mean time the queen be come to Oxford where ad•m bishop of Hereford preach take for his text , caput meum dol•• , and thereupon infer , that the kingdom be now deadly sick of its head , it be fit to remove that head , and put a sound in the place . at this time also , th•l••d•ners to show their love to the queen , seize upon Walter staplet•n the good bishop of Exeter and lord treasurer of England , leave governo•r the•• by the king , and with great despite behead he , as also diverse other , only because they favour the king . in the mean time , the queen go from Oxford to Gloucester , and from thence to Bristol , where Hugh Sp•ncer the father be , a man of fou•escore and ten year old , who be there take , and without examination or judgement , in most cruel manner execute , have his heart pull out of his bo ? die be yet alive , and his body leave hang upon the gallow . after this the queen stay at H•reford the space of a moneth• and then divide her army , she send one part of it , under the conduct of Henry earl of Lancaster , and rice a Powell a clerk , •o find out the king : and this rice be a welsh•an , and know ? ing th• country well , bring the earl to the monastery of N•th• where the king be , who they there take together with Spenser the son , Rober• Bald•cke , and Simon of Reading . the king be by the bishop of Hereford commit to the custo ? die of the earl of Leycester : where all that winter he be use no worse than be fit for a captive king . but Edmund earl of Arundel , John Daniel , and Th•m•• michelden , at the instance of Mortimer , be all three behead . present after be Hugh Spenser the young , who be now earl of Gloucester , draw , hang and quar•e•ed , his head send up to be set upon London bridge , and his four quarter bestow in several city . the like be do with Simon of Reading , but Robert Baldock be commit to Newgate , against who , when no just cause of death can be find , there be use so much cruelty in his imprisonment , that he short ? lie after die . present after Christmas a parliament be call , wherein it be agree to depose the king , and set up his son ; which he hear refuse it , unless his father will free resign ; whereupon be appoint three bishop , two earl , two abbot , four baron , and of every city a burgess , to go to the king ; ( in cu ? stody then at Kenelworth ) the bishop be , John of S•ratford bishop of Winche ? star , Adam Torleton bishop of Hereford , and Henry bishop of Lincoln . but they by ? shop of Winchester and Lincoln , get to the king before the rest come , persuade the king to resign his crown to his elder son ; cra•tily promise he he shall have as good maintenance afterward , as ever he have when he be king . and contrary threaten he , that if he do it not , the people will exclude both he and his son too , and m•ke a king of another race . by these promi ? ses and threaten , the meek king be draw to yield to the bishop mo••on ; but when afterward the bishop of Hereford , and the other commissioner come , and be sit in a place appoint to take his resignation , the king come forth among they in mourn robe , upon a sudden fall down in a swound• in who the earl of Leycester , and the bishop of Winchester , have much ado• to reco ? ver life ; but than the bishop of Hereford rise up , deliver the cause of their come , as the other bishop before have do . to which •he king answer , that as he much grieve his people shall be so harden against he as utter to reject he ; so it be some comfort unto he , that they will yet receive his son page 152 to be their sovereign . after this , Thomas blunt knight , steward of the king house , break the staff of his office ; and William Tr•ssell speaker of the Parli• ? mean , in name of the whole kingdom , pronounce a form of renounce all allegiance to Edward of Carnarvan . here Caxton write , that from the time of this king depose , which be in December , to the time of his son crown , which be not till Candlemas follow , all plea of the king bench be stay , and all prisoner , arrest by sheriff , command to be set at liberty ; which seem to have little probability , see his son Edward present upon his de ? pose be receive for king : but howsoever so great a dowry be then assign to queen Isabel , that scarce a three part of the revenue of the crown be le•t for the new king and his wife : and to the late king be allow a hundred mark • month for his maintenance ; with which he live with his cousin the earl of Leycester , in good plenty and contentment for a time ; only this grieve h•m most of all ( he say ) that the queen his wife will never be get to come to see he : for he swear most devout that from the time he first see her face , he can never like of any other woman . by which it may appear , that neither Gaveston no• the spenser have so debauch he , as to make he false to his bed , or to be disloy ? all to his queen . but the queen be harden against he , and conceive he have too great liberty under the earl of Leycester , by advice of her pestilent coun ? sellour , Adam Torleton bishop of Hereford , appoint Thomas go•rney , and Io•• Matrevers knight , to take he from the earl into their own custody , and to carry he whither they think good ; who thereupon take he from kenelw•rth , and carry he first to Corfe castle , and from thence to Bristol , where they shut he in the castle ; till upon knowledge of a plot lay to get he out , and send he beyond sea , they take he in the night and carry he to B•rkeley castle , where by the way they abuse he most inhumane , as sir Thomas de la moor a knight of Glocestershire in his life relate : for to the end he shall not be know , they shave his head and beard , and that in most beastly manner ; for they take he from his horse and set he upon a hillock , and then take puddle water out of a ditch thereby , they go to wash he , his barber tell he that cold water must serve for this time : whereat the miserable king look stern upon he , say , that whether they will or no , he will have warm water to wash he : and therewithal to make good his word , he present shed forth a shower of tear . never be king turn ou• of a kingdom in such a manner ; many king ? dome have be lose by the chance of war , but this kingdom be lose before any dice be cast ; no blow strike , no battle fight ; do forcible , and yet without force ; violent , and yet with consent ; both party agree , yet nei ? there please ; for the king be not please to leave his kingdom , and the queen be not please to leave he his life ; it be not safe to leave he a part , by which he may afterward recover the whole ; and therefore this be the mark now aim at , have take away his kingdom open , how they may take away his life secret ; be the author of it , and not be see in it ; but this must be the content of a chapter hereafter . of his taxation . by this king it appear , there be something else beside the grievance of taxa ? tion , that alienates the mind of english subject from their king ; for never be few taxation than in this king time , yet never be the subject mind more alienate from their king , than they be from he . before his coronati ? on , in a parliament holde• at Westminster , ••ere be grant he a fifteen of the clergy , and a twenty of the temporalty . in his five year in a parliament at l••don , be grant he a fifteen of the temporalty . in his fifteen year be grant the six pen•y of temporal man good , through England , Ireland , and wale , towards his Warre• with Scotland . and more than these we read not of : but then at the defeat of the earl of Lancaster , there be confiscation that sup ? ply page 153 the place of taxation , by which ( as one say ) he become the rich king that have be since the conquest . of his law and ordinance . he ordain that the money of his father , though count base by the peo ? ple , shall be currant . in the eight year of his reign , by reason of a dear•h which raise the price of all victual , it be ordain by parliament , that a ox fat with grass , shall be sell for fifteen shilling ; fat with corn , for twen ? ty ; the best cow for twelve shilling ; a fat hog of two year old , three sh•l ? ling four penny ; a fat sheep shear , fourteen penny , with the fleece , twenty penny ; a fat goose for two penny halfpenny ; a fat capon two penny ; a fat hen a penny ; four pigeon a penny ; whosoever sell for more , shall forfeit their ware to the king . but after these rate impose , all kind of victual grow so scarce , that provision can hardly be make for the king house ; where ? upon short after , the order be revoke , and market folk permit to make the best of their ware . in this king time a ordinance be make against knight templar , accuse of heresy and other crime , and they be all apprehend , and commit to diverse prison . the like be do by all the king of Chri ? stendome , at one instant , be condemn in a general counsel at Vienna . in the 14. year of his reign , on the 15. of October , the clerk of the exchequer go towards York with the book call domus dei , and other record and pro ? vision that jade one and twenty cart , but within half a year they be bring back again . Affaires of the church in his time . in the 17. year of his reign the bishop of Hereford be arrested• accuse of high treason , for aid the king enemy in their late rebellion ; but he refu•ed to an ? swer , ( be a consecrate bishop ) without leave of the archbishop of canter ? bury , who Suffragan he be , ( and who he say be his direct judge , next the pope ) or without the consent of his fellow bishop : who than all arise , and hum ? bly crave the king clemency in his behalf ; but find the king implacable , they take he away from the bar , and deliver he to the custody o• the archbishop of Canterbury : short after , he be again take and convent as before , which the clergy understanding , the archbishop , Canterbury , York , and Dublin , with ten other bishop , all with their cross erect , go to the place of judgement , and again take he away with they ; charge all man , upon pain of excommunication , to forbear to lay violent hand upon he ; with which audacious act , the king be so much displease , that he present come ? mand inquiry to be make ex Officio Iudicis , concern those objection against the bishop ; wherein he be find guilty , though absent , and have all his good and possession seize into the king hand . in this king time the crowchet fry ? er come first into England . in his time , pope John the two and twenty , first institute the feast of corpus christi ; begin before by Urban the four . work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . this king found oriall college , and saint marry hall in Oxford : he buil ? dead • church of friar at his manor of Langley , where the soul of Gaveston , shall b• pray for . in this king twenty year , Richard rthe sheriff of London b••lded the parish church of Garlickhithe in London . Ralph Baldock bishop of London give two thousand mark to the build of the new work of the chapel , on the south side of Paul church : and leave much more by his Testa ? mean . page 154 casualty . in the eight year of this king reign , be so great a dear•h , that horse and dog be eat , and thief in prison pluck in piece those that be new ? lie bring in among they , and eat they half alive ; which continue three year , bring in the end such a pestilence , that the live scarce suffice to bury the dead . in the four year of his reign , the church of Middleton in Dorset ? shire , with all the monument , be consume with lightning , the monk be at matin . in this king time , dig the foundation of a work about Pauls , be find more than a hundred head of ox and cow , which confirm the oh ? pinion , that of old time it have be the temple of Jupiter , and that there be the sacrifice of beast . of his wife and child . he marry Isabel daughter of Philip the fair , king of France , she be but twelve year of age ; who live his wife twenty year , his widow thirty , and die at threescore and three year old , at rising near London , be bury in the midst of the grey friar choir in London . by she he have issue two son and two daughter : his old son name Edward of Windsor , because bear there , succeed he in the kingdom . his second son name John of Eltham , be ? cause bear there , be at twelve year old create earl of Cornwall : he die in Scotland , in the flower of his youth , unmarried . his elder daughter Joan , be ? king a child , be marry in the four year of king Edward her brother , to D• ? with prince of Scotland , son to king Robert Bruce , at seven year old , who come ? ming afterward into England to visit her brother , die here , and be bury at the grey friar in London . his second daughter Eleanor , be marry to Reginold the second earl of gelder , with a portion of fifteen thousand pound , and have issue by he two son , who be earl successive . of his personage and condition . he be fair of body , and of great strength , but give much to drink , which make he oftentimes bewray his own secret ; for his other condition , his great fault be , that he love but one , for if his love have be divide , it can not have be so violent . he be extreme in nothing but in love ; and though love moderate , be the best of affection , yet the extremity of it be the worst of pas ? zion . he be rather unfortunate than unhappy ; see unfortunateness be in the event , unhappiness in the cause ; and if his fortune have be to love good man , his own goodness will have make he happy . two virtue be eminent in he above all his predecessor , continence , and abstinence : so continent that he leave no base issue behind he ; so abstinent , that he take no base course for rai ? sing of money . they who despise he be alive , so much honour he be ? king dead , that they can have find in their heart to make he a saint . of his death and burial . many way be attempt to take away his life : first , they vex he in his diet , allow he nothing he can well endure to eat , but this succeed not . than they lodge he in a chamber over carrion and dead carcase , enough to have poison he ; and indeed he tell a workman at his window , he never en ? dure so great a misery in all his life , but neither do this succeed : then they at ? tempt it by poison , but whether by the strength of his constitution , or by the divine providence , neither do this succeed . at last the pestilent Achit•phel , the bishop of Hereford , devise a letter to his keeper , blame they for give he page 155 too much liberty , and for not do the service which be expect from they : and in the end of his letter write this line , edwardum octidere ••lite timere bonum est : crafty contrive it in this doubtful sense , that both the keeper may find sufficient warrant , and himself may find sufficient excuse . the keeper guess at his meaning , take it in the worst sense , and accord put it in execu•ion ; they take he in his bed , and cast heavy bolster upon he , and press they hard down , stifle he ; and not content with that , they heat a iron red hot , and through a pipe thrust it up into his fondament , that no mark of violence may be see ; but though none be see , yet some be hear ; for when the fact be in do , he be hear to roar and cry all the castle over . Gourney and ma ? trever , his murderer , look for reward , have the reward of murderer : for the queen and bishop Torleton disavow the command , threaten to question they for the king death : whereupon they flee beyond sea ; and Gourney after three year be take in France , and send into England , be in the way upon the sea behead ? ed. Matrevers fly into Germany , have the grace to repent , but live ever after mi ? serable . thus die this king in the year 1327. more than half a year after his depose ; when he have reign almost 19 year , live 43. his body be c•rry ? ed to Gloucester , and there without any funeral pomp bury in the monastery of saint Peter , by the Benedictine friar . of man of note in his time . in this king time , of martial man be many , who act have be speak of in the late king life . of learned man , also many , as John Duns the great logician , call doctor Subtilis , bear in Northumberland , at emildune a village three mile distant from al•wi•ke ; though both the Scot and the irish challenge he for thei•s . Robert Walsingham a Carmelite friar , who write diverse treatise . Robert Baston bear in nottinghamshire , a Carmelite friar of Scarborough , who king Edward take with he into Scotland , to write some remembrance of his victory ; but be take by the Scot be constrain by Robert Bruce to write remembrance of his overthrow . William Rishanger , a monk of saint Alban , a historiographer ; Ralph Baldock bishop of London , who write a history inti ? tule Historia Anglica ; John Walsingham , a Carmelite friar , who write diverse trea ? tise ; Nicholas de Lyra a Jew by birth , who write many excellent treatise in di ? vinity ; William Ockam a friar Minor , who write diverse treatise , and namely a ? against John Duns , and also against pope John the 23. in favour of the emperor Lewis of Bavaria ; Thomas Haselwood , a canon of leede in Kent , who write a Chro ? nicle , call chronicon compendiarium ; Robert perscrutator , bear in Yorkshire , a black friar and a philosopher , or rather a magician ; and last , though not least worthy to be remember , John Mandevile , the great traveler , a doctor of physic , and a knight . page 156 the life and reign of king Edward the three . of his come to the crown , and act do in his minority . EDward of Windsor , elder son of king Edward the second , by order of parliament , upon his father resignation , be pro ? claim king of England , on the five and twenty day of ia ? nuary , in the year 1327. and because he have not yet receive the order of knighthood , he be by Henry earl of Lancaster gi•t solemn with the sword ; and on the first day of February fol ? low , be crown at Westminster by Walter Reginolds arch ? bishop of Canterbury : and thereupon a general pardon be proclaim , which have since be use as a custom with all the succeed king : that at their first come to the crown , a general pardon be always grant . and because the king be under age , scarce fifteen year old ( though Froyssard say he be then eighteen ) there be twelve appoint governor of he and the kingdome• namely the archbishop of Canterbury and York , the bishop of Winchester , here ? ford , and Worcester ; Thomas of Brotherton , earl martial , Edmund earl of Kent , the king uncle ; John Earle warren , Thomas lord wake , Henry lord Percy , Oli ? for lord Ingham , and John lord Rosse : but though these be appoint and bear the name , yet the queen and Roger Mortimer take all the authority to themselves . the first action that be undertake , be a expedition against the Scot ; for Ro ? bert Bruce , though now old and sickly , and ( as be say ) leprous : yet consider the youth of the new king , and the distraction of the kingdom , think it now a •it time to do some good upon England : and enter the english border with a army , send defiance to king Edward : whereupon a army be raise , and the hey ? na•lders ( who the queen have bring over ) be join with the english ; but a variance fall out between the two nation , make the action not successful . for the king army encounter the Scot at Stanhope park in weridall in the by ? shopricke of Durham , though three time as many as the Scot , as be thirty thou ? sand ; yet through this variance , but more through treason of some great man , suffer they all to escape their hand , and the Scot return home in safety , the english with dishonour : and after this , the english see the heynaulder can do they no good , send they away to their own country . in king Edward second year , his marriage with Philippa of Heynault be solemnise , ( a dispensation be first get , because of their nearness in blood ) and a parliament be hold at page 157 Northampton , where the king make three earl : John of Eltham his brother , earl of Cornwall ; Roger Mortimer , earl of march , and Iames butler of Ireland , earl of Ormond : and in this parliament a dishonourable peace be conclude with the Scot , and confirm by a match between David Bruce prince of Scotland , be but se ? when year old , and Joan sister to king Edward , not so old ; at which time , by the secret work of queen Isabella , Roger Mortimer and sir Iames Douglas ; the king surrender by his charter , all his title of sovereignty to the kingdom of Scotland , restore diverse deed and instrument of their former homage and fe ? alty , with the famous evidence call ragmans roll , and many ancient jewel and monument , among which be the black cross of Scotland ; and beside , any english man be prohibit to hold land in Scotland , unless he be a dweller there . in consideration whereof king Bruce be to pay thirty thousand mark , and to renounce his claim to the county of Cumberland and Northumberland , and any other place possess by he in England . this be no good beginning , and yet worse follow after . for another parliament be hold at Winchester , Edmund earl of Kent , the king uncle , be there accuse , and condemn upon his con ? fession , for intend to restore his brother , the late king Edward ; a intention only without any fact ; yet condemn he be , and bring to the scaffold , but general , so belove of the people , that he stand on the scaffold from one a clock till five , before any executioner can be find that will do they of ? fice , till at last a silly wretch of the Marshalsey be get to cut off his head . but the author of his death escape not long themselves , for in the three year of the king reign , another parliament be hold at Nottingham , wherein the queen have all her great jointure take from she , and be put to her pension of a thousand pound a year , and her self confine to a castle , where she remain the rest of her day , no few than thirty year , a time long enough to find that her be the daughter of a king , the sister of a king , the wife of a king , and the mother of a king , be glorious title , but all not worth the liberty of a mean estate ; and as for Mortimer , ( lie then in the castle of Nottingham ) and late create earl of the march of wale ) he be seize on in this manner ; the king take with he William Montacute , Robert Holland , and other , go secret one night by torch ? light , through a privy way under ground , till they come to the queen chamber , where leave the king without , they enter , and find the queen with Mortimer , ready to go to bed : then lay hand on he , they lead he forth , after who the queen follow , cry , bel fit , •el fit , ayes pity du gentle Mortimer ; good son good son , take pity upon the gentle Mortimer , suspect that her son have be among they : this course be take to apprehend he for avoid of tumult , he have no few than ninescore knight and gentleman , beside other mean sir ? vaunt continual about he . but thus seize on , he be commit present to the tower , accuse of diverse great crime , whereof these be chief ; that he have pro ? cure the late king death ; that he have be the author of the Scot safe escape at Stanhope park , corrupt with the gift of thirty thousand pound ; that he have procure the late marriage and peace with Scotland , so dishonourable to the king and kingdom ; that he have be too familiar with the queen , as by who she be think to be with child : of which article he be find guilty , and condemn ; and thereupon be draw and hang on the common gallow at the elm , now call Tyburn , where his body remain two day as a opprobrious spectacle for all beholder . after these business in England , there come a new business upon he from the king in France : for about this time Philippe le Bell , king of France , the queen brother die without issue , the right of succession to the crown be devolve up ? on the heir to Charles a former king , wherein be competitor Philip duke de Valois , and Edward king of England ; Edward be the near in blood , bu• draw his pedigree by a female : Philippe , the further off , but descend by all male ; and because the law salique exclude female , be conceive as well to exclude all descendant by female , therefore be Philips title prefer before king Edward , page 158 and Philip be receive and crown king of France : to which preferment of he , Robert d' Arthois a peer of great power , give no small furtherance . and now as soon as Philip be invest in the crown , he summon king Edward to come and do his homage for the duchy of Guyenne , and his other land in France , hold of that crown , accord to the custom ; which though it be some prejudice to king Edward claim afterward , yet in regard his kingdom of England be scarce well settle , and himself but young , he be content to do ; and thereupon the six of June , in the year 1329. king Edward in a crimson velvet gown imbroi ? dere with leopard , with his crown on his head , his sword by his side , and golden spur on his heal ; present himself in the body of the cathedral church of Amiens before king Philip , sit in his chair of estate , in a Velve• gown of a violet colour embroider with flower the lys of gold , his crown on his head , and his sceptre in his hand , with all his prince and peer about he . the viscount Melun chamberlain of France , first command king Edward to pu• off his crown , his sword , and his spur , and to kneel down , which he do , on a crimson velvet cushion before king Philip ; and then the viscount put both his hand together between the hand of the king of France , pronounce the word of the homage , which be these : you become liegeman to my ma ? star here present , as duke of Aquitaine and peer of France , and you promise to bear faith and loyalty unto he ; say yea : and king Edward say yea , and kiss the king of France in the mouth , as lord of the fee . the like homage also he do for the earldom of Ponthieu . but this act of submission leave a rancour in king Edward heart , which afterward break so out , that it have be good for France ? ? ? have never be exact . this do , king Edward return home , and there find a new business with scot ? land , upon this occasion . Edward Baylioll , son to John Baylioll ( sometime king of Scotland ) two and thirty year after his father deposition , begin now to show himself , attempt the recovery of that crown ; and come out of fra•ce , where he have all that while remain ; and get aid underhand in engla•d , with they he sudden assail those who have the government of Scotland , during the nonage of the young king David , ( be at that time with the king of fra•ce ) and in a battle overcome they , with the slaughter of many noble man , and thou ? sand of the common people ; and thereupon be immediate crown king of Scotland at Scone . but notwithstanding this great defeat , king Baylioll be for ? ce to retire he into England to get more aid of king Edward : who now show himself in the action , join with Baylioll against his brother in law , king David ; go in person with a strong army to recover Berwicke , which after three month siege , be valiant defend by the lord Seton , be take in ; and the army of the Scot which come to the rescue thereof , at hallidowne-hill , utter defeat : where be slay seven earl , ninety knight and banneret , four hundred esquire , and about two and thirty thousand common soldier , as our writer report ; as they , but fourteen thousand : and with this effusion of blood be Baylioll return to his miserable kingdom , and to hold good correspondence with the king of England hereafter , do he homage for his realm of Scotland , and the land adjacent . but though he have a kingdom , yet he have not quietness , for many of the scots ai ? dead by the french , make war upon he diverse year after ; during all which time , king David with his wife remain in France . if any man marvel why king ed ? ward will aid Bailioll against king David , who have marry his sister ; he may consider that alliance , how near soever , weigh but light in the scale of state . about this time the I|will of man be conquer by William Montacute , earl of S•lisbury ; for which service king Edward give he the title of king of man page 159 of his act after he come of age . and now Robert of Arthois banish out of France , come into England , who king Edward make earl of Richmond , and of his counsel . This Robert per ? swade king Edward to make war upon France , to which crown ( he say ) he have more right than he that hold it ; with who persuasion , king Edward be at last resolve to undertake the enterprise : and to furnish himself of noble chief ? taine , he at one time in a parliament at Westminster , the eight year of his reign , create six earl , Henry of Lancaster he make earl D•rby , William Montacute he make earl of Salisbury , Hugh Audeley earl of Gloucester , William Clinton earl of Huntington , and Robert Clifford or Ufford earl of Suffolk ; also twenty knight , of who Thomas de la moor , who write the life of the king father , be one : withal he enter league of amity with many prince abroad , with the duke and e•rles of gelder , iulyer , Cleves , Heynault , and Brabant , and with the archbishop of counterfeit ? len , and Valeran his brother : as on the other side , the king of France get to take his part the bishop of liege , John king of Bohemia , earl of Luxemburg , Henry count palatine , Aubert bishop of Mets , otho duke of Austria , be earl of Geneva , with many other prince and captain out of Germany , Spain , and other country . king Edward thus resolve in himself , and furnish with friend abroad , go over into Flanders with his queen and child , make his residence at Antwerp , where by persuasion of the Fleming he take upon he the stile , title , and arm of the king of France ; for by this they account themselves disoblige of the bond of twenty hundred thousand crown , which they have enter into , never to bear arm against the king of France ; and hereupon the league be establish be ? between they and king Edward . and now king Edward for a beginning to put his claim in execution , set upon Cambray , and enter France by the way of Verman ? dois and Thierach ; on the other side king Philip seize on the duchy of Guienne , and send thither the conte d' eu , constable of France , with the earl of Foix and be ? migniack . at last both army come so near together , that a fight be appoint the Friday after ; but upon better consideration , the english think it no discretion to give battle to a army so much great than their own , if they can avoid it ; and the french think it as little discretion for they to hazard the person of their prince within his own kingdom ; and perhaps be not a little move with the warning give they by Robert king of Sicily , a great astronomer , that he foresee by the star , some great misfortune to threaten the french , if they shall that day fight with the engli•h , king Edward be present : and thus both army have their several reason to decline the battle , they part without do any thing ; only a accident happen scarce worth remember , yet must be remember . a hare start out before the head of the french army , cause a great shout to be make ; whereupon , they who see not the hare , but only hear the shout , suppo ? sing it to be the onset to the battle , dispose themselves to fight , and fourteen gentleman for encouragement sake , as the custom be , be knight ; call of ? terward in merriment , knight of the hare . but now king Edward must a little look home , and therefore leave the queen in Brabant , he pass himself into England about Candlemas , have be in Bra ? bant about a year ; and land at the tower about midnight , and find •t un ? guard , be so much displease , that he present send for the major of •ondon , command he to bring before he the chancellor and treasurer , with sir John saint Paul , Michael watch , Philp Thorpe , Henry Stratford , clergy man , ( who it seem be officer for his receipt ) and John sconer justice of the bench ; all which , except the chancellor , be apprehend and commit to prison ; as be afterward in like manner diverse officer of justice , and accomptant , upon inquiry make of their unjust proceed . during the king abode in England , William Montacute earl of Salisbury , and Robert Ufford earl of Suffolk , le•t in Flanders to oppose the french , have perform diverse great e•ploits , be a• last page 160 in a encounter about lis•e , so overlay by multitude , as they be both take , and send prisoner to Paris . beside , about this time two accident happen that be think will be great rub in king Edward proceed ; one , that his wife father , William earl of hayn•ult , die , and leave his son to succeed , this son leave his brother king Edward , and fall to take part with the king of France : the other , that the duke of Normandy , think himself as strong as ever William Du•• of Normandy be that conquer England , he see no reason but he may con ? quer it as well as that William ; and thereupon make preparation by sea and land to attempt the enterprise : but these be but vapour that never come to be wind , at least bring no storm : for John earl of Haynault have quick enough of the king of France , and be soon after reconcile to his brother king Edward ; and the duke of Normandy go no further than preparation : for indeed king edw••d prosecute his course against France with such heat , that all the neighbour prince see a fire kindle so near their own border , be glad to look •o themselves at home . but now to impeach the king of England return into Fra•ce• king Philip have provide a mighty navy in the haven of sluice , consist of tw• hundred sail of ship ( beside many galley ) and two thousand arm man in th• port ready to encounter he upon his land : whereof king Edward be adve•ti ? sed , prepare the like number of ship , and set out to sea upon midsummer eve ; be m• the morrow after with a navy likewise from the north part , conduct by sir •• ? bert Morley ; and encounter his enemy who lie to intercept he with such force and courage , and such advantage of wind and sun , that he utter defeat their whole navy , take and sink all their ship , slay thirty thousand man , and land with as great glory , as such a victory ( the great that ever before be get by the E• ? glish at sea ) can yield , though king Edward himself be there wound with a arrow in the thigh . most of the french , rather than to endure the arrow of the english , or be take , desperate leap into the sea ; whereupon the french king jester , set on to give he notice of this overthrow , ( which be so ill news , no•• else will willing impart unto he ) say , and oftentimes repeat it in the king hear ; cowardly english man , dastardly english man , fainthearted Englis• men• the king at length ask he why• for that ( say he ) they dare not leap out of their ship into the sea , as our brave french man do . by which speech the king apprehend a notion of this overthrow : which the french attribute to Nichol•••• ? chet , one of their chief commander , who have arm his ship with man of base condition ( content with small pay ) and refuse gentleman and sufficient soldier , in regard they require great wage : and indeed it often happen that the avarice of commander be the occasion of great defeat . by this victory king Edward gain a free entrance into Flanders , and present ? lie went and besiege Tournay with a army of five and fifty thousand , but be so valiant encounter by the duke of Burgundy and the earl of armigniack , that they rout his army , and slay four thousand upon the place ; which so enrage king Edward , that two day after he send a challenge to king Philip to meet he in • single combat , or with a hundred against as many , before the wall of Tourn•• . king Philip answer , that his challenge be make to Philip de Valois , withou• mention of king , he take it not to be to he , who be true king of France• but he wish he to remember the homage he have do he at Amiens , and the wrong he do to the christian world• by his troublesome course to hinder he from his voyage intend to the holy land beside this answer in write he send to he by word of mouth ; that by his challenge he hazard nothing of his own , but expose only the dominion of another , which be against all rea ? son : but if he will set his kingdom of England , though much mean , agai••• his of France , he will then accept the challenge , and meet he in the field ? ? ? single combat . but this king Edward will not hearken to for as he be valiant to make the challenge , so he be circumspect to look to the condition . but here upon he continue his siege of T••rnay ; to the relief whereof king Philip send all the force he can possible make by himself o• his friend ; and after the siege page 161 have continue three month , partly by mediation of Robert king of Sicily , but chief by the lady Jane of Valois , sister to king Philip , and mother of king ed ? ward wife ( who have vow her self a nun ; but to do this good office , tra ? vell from one to another ) a truce be conclude for a year , and both their be ? mie be dissolve . after this , king Edward return into England , be advertise how the Scot after many other place gain , have besiege the castle of strivel ; for relief where ? of , the king make all the haste he can ; and yet before he can come , it be by force of battery , compel to render it self upon condition . then king Edward be at Berwicke , pass to Newcastle upon Tyne , where he stay a month wait for his provision that be to come by sea ; but that be drive into other part by tempest , he make a truce with the Scot for three or four month , and then return home . in the time of this truce ; the Scot send to king David , to come and govern the kingdom in his own person ; who thereupon take his leave of the king of France , with who he have remain seven year , he with his wife Joan , king Edward sister , return into Scotland ; where after he have be most honourable receive by the prince of Or•nay , and the other lord and baron of the kingdom , as soon as the truce be end , with a strong army enter nor ? thumberland , pass on to Newcastle upon Tyne , where he plant his camp . of this castle , John Nevile be leave governor by king Edward , who send out certain company , take the earl Murray prisoner , and with the slaughter of di ? vers of his man , and rich booty , return back to his castle ; which so incen ? sed king David , that he assault the castle as a man enrage , but find it too strong for his take , he then pass into the province of Durham , where he use all kind of cruelty , first upon the country , and then upon the city , kill man , woman and child , clergy , and other ; burn and destroy house and church , and utter deface it . from thence he pass on to the castle of sa ? lisbury , which castle belong to William Mountacute earl of Salisbury in right of his wife ; but himself be then prisoner in France , only his countess , and one William Mountacute a cousin of he , be in the castle . This William perceive the scottish horse to be so overcharge with pillage , that they be scarce able to go ; issue out of the castle with forty horse , set upon they , kill two hundred , and take six score , who he bring with their rich pillage , into the castle . king dam ? with soon after with his whole army arrive , but hear of king Edward come ? ming ( who certify of these thing , make all the haste he can ) he retire he ? self from thence ; and king Edward find he go before he come , yet will needs go in and visit the countess : of who , as soon as he see she , he be so enamour , that he lay more battery to her chastity , than king David have do to her castle ; but find it inexpugnable , after a day and a night he leave it , and fol ? low after the Scot , with who for three day together he have many skirmish , till at last a truce be conclude for two year ; and among other condition , William earl of Salisbury , prisoner with the king of France , be set at liberty in exchange for the earl Murray , prisoner with the king of England . about this time another difference fall out between the king of France and England . John earl of Montford lay claim to the duchy of Britain , but in the quarrel be take prisoner by the king of France : he lady send to king Edward for succour ; which king Edward grant upon condition that a marriage be make between his daughter marry and the earl of montfords son ; which be agree on , he send over to her aid , first , Walter de Manny a valiant knight , and afterward Robert d' Arthois : but while his army be prepare , king Edward be inform by Edward Baylioll , the pretend king of Scotland , and governor of Berwicke , that the Scot have not keep the condition of the truce ; whereupon king Edward draw a great army to Berwicke , with a purpose to do great matter , but nothing be do , for a new truce be again conclude for two year . by this time Robert d' Arthois have make ready his army , and take with he the countess of Montford , the earl of Pembroke , Salisbury , and Suffolk , and many other baron ; page 162 after great tempest and encounter at sea land safe at last near to Vannes , which be hold by the french , and lay ••ege to the city , with the assistance of Walter de Manny , who come unto he , after many assault , at last he take it , to the great joy of the countess of Montford , though she hold it not long ; for certain resolute french knight assault it soon after , and recover it from the english . in which action many lord be slay or wound , and particular Robert the ar•hois himself ; who pass over into England , for the better cure of his wound , soon after die , and be bury in Paul church in L•ndon . and now king Edward himself with a strong army pass over into Britain , and plant his camp before the city of Vannes , where be like to have be a cruel battle ; but in the instant , there come from pope cl•ment the six , two cardinal , the by ? shop of Preneste and Thusculum ; who upon certain condition conclude a peace ; among other condition , this be one ; that the city of Vannes shall be delive ? read to •ing Philip , and thereupon John earl of Montford shall be set at liberty , but yet with this charge , not to go into Britain : which promise notwithstanding , he keep not , but go present and besiege a tow•e in Britain , though he be force to retire , and die short after . but the truce crack •hus , as it be , by Montford , be afterward absolute break by king Edward though he charge the breach of it upon king Philip , and king Philip upon he . but howsoever break it be ; and Henry of Lancaster earl of Derby , with diverse other earl and baron , be send into France , who win many town in Gascoyne• and in the county of Perigort and tholo•se , and then go to winter at Bordeaux . and afterward , in May follow , pursue his victory , he win many mor• town ; and among other , the great town of Reoll . after this again , he take Montpesat , maurore , villefranche , and many other town ; and at last the great city of ango•lesme , and then come to winter again at Bordeaux . of his act together with the prince . king Philip inform of so many great loss , assemble a mighty army , no less than a hundred thousand man , with which he recover Miremont , and villefranche , and then proceed to besiege angoulesme , who the earl of Derby have not force sufficient to encounter , king Edward ( leave for warden of England in his absence , the lord Percy and Nevil ) go himself in person with a army ( as Froyssard say ) of fourscore thousand man at arm , and ten thou ? sand archer , beside those out of wale and Ireland ; take with he his son , the prince of Wales , and duke of Guyenne , be then but of the age of fifteen year . it may be think preposterous in king Edward , to put his son to be a soldier before he be come to be a man ; but it seem he have a longing to try his son valour in the bud , and perhaps be loath to omit any thing that may give any countenance to this battle , in which the two kingdom be lay as it be at stake ; but howsoever , take he along with he , and almost all the lord of his kingdom , he take ship , and land at Normandy , where at the first set his foot on ground , he take such a fall , that the blood gush out at his nose ; which the baron take for a ill sign , but the king take it for a good : say , it be a sign that the land desire to have he : and in deed he present take the town of harsteur , Moulbourg , Carenton , and saint lo , and afterward the city of ca•n it self ; and from thence pass to the county of eureux , saccage and pillage it , as also the city of gisor , Vernon , Meulan , and boulebourse to the city of Poyssy . king Philip all this while stay about Paris , as look for king Edward to give he battle there ; and for that purpose have plant his camp near to saint she ? man ; but king Edward deceive he : for go from Poyssy , he pass into picar ? die and Ponthie• , where he take and burn many town and castle : and then pass the river of ? ? ? , though not without danger : for king Philip have send thy ? there Gundemar de Fay with a thousand horse , and six thousand foot , to stop his pass ? sage : king Edward notwithstanding resolve to pass , or perish , and plunge fore ? m••• page 163 into the river ; cry out , they who love i , will follow i at which voice , ? ? ? man strive who shall be foremost , and so the shore be present gain by the english . Gun•emar astonish with this bold adventure , astonish his peo ? ••• with his fearful countenance : so that the english encounter the french all in ? ? ? , put they to flight . king Philip enrage with this dishonour , resolve to ? ? ? it ; and present provoke king Edward to a battle . king Edward have ? ? ? ••camped in a village call Cressy , his army consist of thirty thousand ? ? ? •hich he divide into three battalion : the first be lead by the young prince ? … ? , with who be join the earl of Warwick , Geffrey of Harecourt , ? ? ? Holla•d , ric•ard Stafford , John chandoes , Robert Nevile , and many other ? ? ? and gentleman , to the number of eight hundred man at arm , two thou ? ? … ? , and a thousand Welsh . in the second be the earl of Northam ? •••••nd of ? ? ? , the lord rise , Basset , and other , to the number of eight hun ? ? … ? Armes , and twelve hundred archer . in the three the king be he ? ••••• h•ving about he seven hundred man at arm , and three thousand archer . ? ? ? battle thus order , mount on a white hobby , he ride from rank to rank ? ? ? ••em ; encourage every man that day to have regard to his right and ho ? ? … ? the french king army be far great , consist of above sixty thou ? ? … ? well arm ; whereof the chief be Charles duke of Alanson ? … ? John of Luxembourg king of Bohemia , Charles de Blois the king ? … ? duke of Lorraine , the earl of Flanders , Nevers , Sancerre ; of ba ? ? … ? and gentleman , about three thousand . the vanguard he commit to his •rother the count de Alanson , the rear to the earl of Savoy , the main bat ? tell •e lead• himself ; his heat out of confidence of victory be so great , that ? … ? permit time for a little counsel what be fit to be do . the old king ? … ? advise that the army shall take some repast , and that the infantry c•••isting of ge•oueses ( which be above fifteen thousand crossbow , and ? ? ? men• shall make the first front , and the cavalry to follow ; which be he ? agree on . but the count of Alanson , contrary to this order , take it ill that then ? ? ? be in the first rank , and in fury cause they to change place ; which ? … ? discontentment , that it irritate they more against the leader , then then ? ? ? ; beside there fall at the instant , such a shower of rain , as dissolve their ? ? ? , and make their bow of little use ; and at the break up of the shower , then ? … ? full in the face of the french ( dazzle their sight ) and on the back of they ? ? ? , as if all make for they . king Edward who have get to a windmill , behold ? ? ? a sentinel , the countenance of the enemy , and discover the disturbance ? ? ? by the change of place ; instant send to charge that part , without give ? … ? to reaccommodate themselves ; whereupon the discontent gen••ese ? ? ? which the co•nt de Alanson perceive , he come on with the horse , and ? … ? •age cry out , on , on , let we make way upon the belly of these genouese , ? … ? but hinder we : and instant prick on with a full career through the midst ? … ? , follow by the earl of Lorraine and Savoy , and never stay till he come ? ? ? the english battle , where the prince be ; the fight grow hot and doubtful , ? … ? as the commander about the prince send to king Edward to come up with his power to aid he . the king ask the messenger whether his son be ? … ? hurt : who answer , no ; but that he be like to be overlaid : well then ( ? ? ? •he king ) return , and tell they who send you , that so long as my son be a ? ? … ? they send no more to i what ever happen ; for i will that the honour of this ? … ? he . and so be leave to try for themselves , they wrought it out with they ? ? ? • the rather by reason the french king have his horse slay under he , and ? ? ? danger to be tread to death , have he not be recover by the lord Beau ? ? … ? •••s to the great discouragement of his people , withdraw out of the field : ? ? ? no••ce be once take by the english , the day be soon after they , and ? … ? victory they ever have yet against the french , and so bloody , as there be ? … ? make of any one prisoner take in the battle , but all •laine outright ; •nely •ome few troop that hold together , save themselves by retire to place page 164 near adjoin . the french king himself with • small company , get to bray in the night , and approach the wall , and the gu•rd ask he who go there ? he answer , the fortune of Fr••c• . by •i• voice •e be know , and thereupon receive into the town , with the tear and lamenta•ions of his people . the number of the slay be certify to be thirty thousand : the chief whereof , be Charles the al•ns•n , John duke of ? ? ? , •alph earl of Lorraine , L•wis earl of fl•••ers , i•ques da•lphin de ? ? ? , so••e to i•b•rt , ( who after give dolphin to the crown of France ) the Earl•• of S••c•rre , H•r•court , and many other earl , baron , and gentleman , to the number of fiftee•• hundred . this memorable victory happen upon the S•turday after Bart••l•••• day , in the year 1346. the next day , early in the morning , be Sunday , he s•n• out 300. Lance , and 2000 Archers• to discover what be becom• of t•• ? ? ? who find great troop come from Abbe••l• , saint ? … ? , a•d B••u ? voye , ( ignorant of what have happen ? ? ? by the archbishop of R••• , and the prior of France : who they likewise defeat , and slay s•ven thou ? sand . but this be not all th• victory that fall to king Edward that year , there be another of no less importance get in engl••d , by the queen and hi• peopl• at home against the Scot ; who be set on by the french , to divert the wa••• there• enter upon this kingdom wit••hreesco•e thousand man , ( as our writer report ) assure himself of success , in regard ( as he suppose ) • the ma••e stre•gth there ? of be now go into France ; but •e find it otherwise• for the lord of the north , as Gylbert de Umfrevile , the Earl• of Ang••• , Henry Perc• , Ralph Nevile , William d•y•co••t , with the archbishop of York , the bishop of Dur•am , and o ? there|be of the clergy , gather so great force , and so well order they , by the animation of the queen , ( who be there in person ) as fight a great battle at Nevil cross in the bishopric of Durha• , they utter defea•ed this great be ? my|night , take David their king prisoner , with the earl of Fif• , ment , Murry , Sutherland , the lord Dowglas , the archbishop of saint Andrew , and other ; and put to the sword fifteen thousand sc•ts . this victory also fall upon a Satur ? day , six week after that of Cressy . he that take king David prisoner , wa• one John C•pl•nd , a esquire of Northumberland , who king Edward reward with five hundred pound land a year , and make he a banner•t . and as if all concur to make this year triumphant , the aide send to the countess of Montford in Britain , lead by Thomas Dagworth a valiant knight , overthrow and take prisoner , Charles de Blois , pretender to that duchy , and with he mounsi ? •ur la Vall , the lord Rochfort , Bea••anoyre , loi•c•ue ; with many other baron , knight , and esquire : where be slay the lord de la Vall , father to he that be take , viscount Rohan , mounsieur de Chastea• Bryan , de •alestroit , de quin ? tin , de dyrev•ll , beside many other knight and esquire , to the number of se ? when hundred . and now king Edward without meddle with the great city of Amiens and Abbevile , march on direct , and sit down before Callice , a town of more importance for England , and the gate to all the rest : wherein John d• Vienne marshal of France , and the lord de Andregh•n , ( a great man in his time ) command . all that winter king Edward lie without any molestation by the french king , who be busy at home in his own state about raise of money ; where ? with supply at last , he raise a army and approach Callice , but find no way open to come to relieve it . the king of England be both master of they ha ? when , and possess all other way that be passable ; and the Fleming his friend have besiege air ; to oppose who , John duke of Normandy be send for out of Guyenne : who depart leaf Henry of Lancaster earl of Derby , master of the field , and •e have a army consist of twelve hundred man at arm , two thousand archer , and three thousand other foot , take in most of the town of Xaintoigne , and Poict•• , and in the end besiege and sack P•ityer• , and then re ? turn to b•rdea•x , with more •illage than his people can well bear : thus the page 165 ? ? ? prosper every ••here , and the french suffer . during this siege of calli•e , ( •n ? ? ? some t•in•• king Edw••• first use gun ) the Fleming• send to king ? ? ? to make a marriage between his daughter Isabella and their lord then ? … ? ; to which the king consent , but the duke of br•••nt get ? … ? of ? ? ? , •o make the match for a daughter of his• the Fleming press ? ? ? lord with t•e match of England ; but he absolute refuse•h it , saying• h• ? ? ? never marry a daughter of he , that have kill his father , though he will ? … ? ••lf• his kingdom . this answer so incense the flemi•gs , that they ? … ? lord in prison , till with long durance he at last consent ; and there ? … ? E•ward and his queen , with their daughter is•••ll , come over to ? … ? there the young earl be aff•an•ed to she ; but return after••rds ? … ? as •e find opportunity , he go to king Philip , and •eft ? … ? ; and marry afterward a daughter of they ? … ? this whi•••he siege of Callice be continue ; and king Philip ? … ? come to relieve it ; solicit king Edward to appoint some• place ? … ? will mee•e he . but king Edward return answer , that if he ? … ? own way to come thither to he , there he shall find he , but ? … ? be will not pa••• have lie there so long to his great l••our and ? … ? b•ing now so near the point of gain the place• Two••a•••nals ? … ? the pope , to mediate a peace , but can effect nothing , so as they ? … ? w•s force to break up his army and retire to Paris , leave c•llice ? … ? the besieger : which when the town understand , they send to de ? ? … ? grant , and therein receive this final answer , that •ixe of the chief burgess shall be send to the king , bareheaded , barefooted , in their shirt , ? … ? their neckes• the key of the town and castle in their hand , ? … ? th•••elves to the king will ; the rest he be content to take to mercy . ? … ? condition , and much difficulty who shall be those six : but ? ? ? up , and out of love to his country offer himself to be one , the six ? … ? make •p ; for now by his example every one strive to be of they ? ? ? who present themselves before the king , he command they instant ? … ? to death . great supplication be make by his lord for their life , but ? … ? will not be draw to alter his sentence , till the queen , great with ? … ? on her knee , and with tear obtain pardon for they ; which do , ? … ? they to be clothe , and beside a good repast , give to every one of they ? ? ? Nobles a p•ece . but though the king in this sentence show severity , ? … ? act before he have show mercy ; for when victual begin to fail in ? … ? , and all unuseful person , as old man , woman , and child , be put ? … ? Gates ; he force they not back again as he may have do , there ? •• ? ? ? soon to consume their store ; but suffer they to pass through his Ar•y• ? ? ? they to eat , and two penny a piece to all of they . and thus be that strong ? ? ? of Callice get , the three day of August , in the year 1347. after eleven ? … ? siege , and continue afterward in possession of the english two hundred ? … ? . all the inhabitant be turn out , but only one priest , and two ? … ? to inform of the order of the town : and a colony of English , a ? mo•gst which seven and thirty good family out of London be send to inhabit it• ? … ? and queen enter the town triumphant , and make their abode there , ? ? ? queen be bring a bed of her daughter Margaret . the king make ? ? ? of the town ayme•y of Pavia a Lombard , who he have bring up from ? … ? , and then with his queen return into England ; at which time then ? ? ? elector send to signifie• that they have choose he king of the roman , but ? … ? refuse to accept it , as be a honour out of his way , and scarce come ? ? … ? his state at home . •fter this tr•••s be make by mediation , from one time to another , for they ? … ? •wo year , in which time , Geffrey de charmy captain of saint Omer , ? … ? Aymery of P•via , who king Edward have leave governor of Callice , to ? … ? for twenty thousand crown : which king Edward hear of , send to page 166 a•mery , and charge he with this perfidiousness ; whe•••pon ay•••y come to the king , and humble desire pardon , promise to h•ndl• they ? ? ? so as shall be •o the king advantage , and thereupon i• sen• back to Callice . the king , the •ight before the time of agreement• arrive with three •und•ed man at ? ? ? , and ? ? ? hundred archer : ? ? ? de charmy ? … ? likewise then ? ? ? ••ght from saint Omers with his force , and send a hundred m•n before with the crown to ? ? ? : the man be let in at a postern Gate• the crown receive , •nd assure to be all weight : which do , the gate of the town be open , and out march the king before day , to encounter ? ? ? de charmy ; who perceive himself betray , defend •imselfe• the best he can , and put king Edward to a hard bicker , who for that •e will not b• ? … ? person , put hi•self• and the prince under the colour of the lord ? … ? bea•en ••wne on •is knee by ? … ? •hom he fight hand to hand ) and ye• recove••d , and ? … ? pri ? soon . charmy be likewise take , and all his Fo•••• defeat . ki•g •dward the night after ( which be the first of the new-yeare ) feast with the prisoner , and give •ibo•••nt in honour of his valou• , ? … ? chaplet of pearl , which himself wear on his head , ( for a newyear gift ) forgive he his ransom , and set he at liberty . but the english not long after , in the like practice , have better success , and get the castle of guysnes , ( a piece of great importance ne•r•callice , ) for a sum of money , give to one beaconr•y a french ••n . of which c•s•le , when the french king demand restitution in regard of the Truc• , king Edwar• return answer , that for thing buy and sell between their people , there be no ex ? ception , and so hold it . about this time fillip king of France die , leave his son John to succeed he ; in the begin of who reign , Humber• p•ince of D••lphin , die with ? out issue , make he his heir , and ther•upon Charles king Ioh•• son , be crea ? t the first dolphin of France : from whence it grow to be a custom , that the king of France his heir shall always be call dolphin of France . about this time also the duke of Lancaster be to perfo•me a combat , upon a challenge , with a prince of B•h•mia , but when they be enter the list , and have take their oath , king John interpose , and make they friend . and now when after man ? nigh mean of mediation , no peace can be conclude between the two king ; the prince of Wales be now grow a man , be appoint by parliament , to go into Gascoyne with a thousand man at arm , two thousand archer , and a great number of Welshman ; and in June follow he set forth with three hundred sail , attend with the earl of Warwick• , Suffolk , Salisbury , and Oxford , the lord chand•s , the lord Iames A•deley , sir •obert Knolles , sir Francis hall , with many other . about Michaelma• following• the king himself pass over to Callice , with another army , take with he two of his son , li•n•ll of Antwerp , now earl of Ulster i• right of his wife , and John of Gant , earl of Richmond . there meet he at Callice of mercenary out of Germany , Flanders and Brabant , a thousand man at arm , so that his army consist of three thousand man at arm , and two thousand archer on horseback , beside archer on foot . the city of London send three hundred man at arm , and five hundred archer , all in one livre ? very , at their own charge ; but all this great army effect nothing at that time , by reason the king of France will not be draw to any encounter , and have so disfurnish the country of all provision , that the king of England be force to return . king Edward solicit by the king of Navarre to aid he against the king of France , send over the du•e of Lancaster with four thousand man at arm , who win many Townes• and the prince enter G•yenne , pass oh ? ver langn•d•c to Tholouse , Narbonne , Burges , without any encounter , sack , spoil and destroy where he go , and load with booty return to Bordeaux . the french king thus assault on all •ides , gather all the power he possible can , and first make against his e•emies in n•••••dy , recover many of his lose town , and be likely to have there prevaile• , but that he be draw of force to oppose page 167 ? ? ? fresh invader , the prince of Wales , who be come up into tourayne , against ? ? ? he bring his whole army , consist of above threescore thousand : where ? •••• the prince , who force be not likely to be able to encounter he ( being ? ? ? for one ) be advise to retire again to Bordeaux . but the french king , to pre ? ve•• this course , follow ; and within two league of Poitiers , have he at a ? ? ? advantage : at which instant , two cardinal come from the pope to mediate • pe•ce . but the french king suppose he have his enemy now in his mercy , will accept of no other condition , but that the prince shall deliver he four Hosta ? ge• , •nd •s vanquish , render himself and his army to his discretion . the prince wa• content to restore unto he what he have gain upon he , but without pr•ju ? •••• of his honour , wherein he say he stand accountable to his father , and to his c•u•tr•y . but the french king will abate nothing of his demand , as make hims•lf• sure of victory ; and thereupon be instant ready to set upon the Princ• : ? ? ? see himself reduce to this straight , take what advantage he can of th• ? ? ? , and provident get the benefit of vine , shrub , and bush , on that part ? … ? like to be assail , to impester and entangle the french horse , which he see ? ? ? •ome furious upon he . the success answer his expectation , for they ? ? ? of his enemy upon their first assault be so wrap and encumber ? ? ? •he vine , that his archer gall and annoy they at their pleasure . for ? ? ? fre••h king , to give the honour of the day to his cavalry , employ they only without his infantry ; so as they be disorder and put to rout , his whol• army come utter to be defeat . in this battle be take prisoner , king John himself , with his yo•ngest son Philip , by Dennis de Morbecque a knight of Ar•h•is ; Jaques de Bourbon , Conte de Ponthieu ; the archbishop of Sens ; John de Arth•is ; Conte de en ; Charles de Arthois ; his brother count de Longueville ; John de ? ? ? , count de Tankarvile ; the count of Vendosme , Va•demont , estampe , Salbourg , ? ? ? and la Roche ; also John de ceintre , account ( as Froissard say ) the ? ? ? •night of France , with many other lord , beside two thousand knight and gen•lemen ; in so much , as the conqueror hold it not safe to retain so many , le•••ny of they go . the french , who can give best account of their own loss , ••por• there die in the battle , a thousand seven hundred gentleman , among which be fifty two banneret : the most eminent , Peter de Bourbon , the duke of Ath••s constable of France , Iehan de Clermont marshal ; Geffrey de charmy , high Chamberlain• ; the bishop of Chalons , the lord of Landas , of Pons , and of cham ? ••y . there escape from this battle , three of the french king son , ( for he bring they all thither ) Charles prince dolphin ; louy after duke of Anjou ; and John duke of B••ry• all great actor in the time follow . the special great man of the english i• th•• fight , be the earl of Warwick , Suffolk , Salisbury , Oxford , Stafford ; the Lord••Cobham , Spenser , Barkeley , Basset : of gascoyne , le capital de Beuff ; the lord , Pumyer , Chaumont , and other . the lord Iames Andeley win honour both by his valour , and his bounty ; for have vow to be foremost in this fight , he pe•formed his word , and seal it with many wound : for which the prince ha ? ve reward he with the gift of five hundred mark fee-simple in England , he p•esently give it to four of his esquire ; whereupon the prince demand when ? there he accept not his gift ? he answer , that these man have deserve the same as well •s himself , and have more need of it ; with which reply the prince be so well please , that he give he five hundred mark more in the same kind . a rare example , where desert in the subject , and reward in the prince , strive which shall be the great . and now , though king John have the misfortune to fall into the hand of his enemy , yet he have the happiness to fall into the hand of a noble enemy ; for prince Edw. use he with such respect and observance , that he can not find much d••ference between his captivity and liberty . after the battle , which be fight the •in•••enth day of September , in the year 1357. prince Edward lead king John and the captive lord to Burde•ux , where he retain they till the spring follow ; but ? ? ? present news of his victory to his father : who thereupon cause a ge ? nerall page 168 thanksgiving all England over eight day together : and in May follow ; king John rather come over with the prince , then bring over by he , be lodge at the Savo• ; a palace belong to Henry duke of Lancaster , and the fair at that time about London . and king Edward , as though he think it honour enough to have one king his prisoner at once , at the suit of his sister queen I•ane , he set her husband David king of Scot at liberty , after he have be prison ? ner in England eleven year , but not without pay a ransom , which be a hun-thousand mark , to be pay in ten year . after this , by mediation of cardinal send by the pope , a truce for two year be conclude between the two kingdom of France and England , and in the time of this truce , article of peace between the two king be propounded• king Edward require the duchy of Norm•••• and G•yenn• , the county of Poicto• , T•uraine , main , and Anjo•• with all their •ppur•e•ances as large as king Richard the first hold they , and many other province beside , and to hold they all with ? out homage or any other service ; to which article , king John ( weary of impri ? sonment ) assent and seal , but then ? ? ? •nd council of France utter reject it : whereupon king Edward in great disple•sure resolve to make a end of this work with the sword , and to take possession of the kingdom of France ; and lea ? ve his young son Thomas gove••our of his kingdom at home , with a fleet of •leven hundred sail , and take all the great lord of the realm with he , he pass over to Callice , divide his army into three battle , whereof one he come ? mit to the prince of Wales , another to the duke of Lancaster , and the •hird he lead himselfe• and first march through ? ? ? where he take in many town , he plant his si•ge afterward before ? ? ? ; but have spend there six or seven week without effect any thing , he •asseth thence , and take in the city of Sens and Nevers ; the duchy of , B•rgoyne redeem it self from spoil with pay two hun ? dread thousand flo•ens of gold : than he march up to •aris , and plant his camp within two small league of the Tow•• , where •e honour 400. esquire and gentleman with the order of knighthood : but when sir Walter de Manny have make a bravado before the gate of the city , and the king see that the dolphin will by no provocation be draw out to battle ; he raise his siege , and re ? turn into bri•aine to refresh his army ; from thence he march towards char•res with a purpose to besiege that city , and though great offer be make he by the french , and commissioner from the pope solicit he with all earnestness to ac ? cept they , yet neither they , nor the duke of lancaster persuasion can prevail with he , till a terrible •torme of hail with thunder and lightning fall upon his army , which so terrify he , be a warning as it be from heaven , that he pre ? sent vow to make peace with the french king upon any reasonable condition , as short after he do at a treaty of Britigny near to Chartres , upon these article : that the fief of thouar and Belleville , the duchy of Guyenne , comprise Gascoyne , Poictou , San•ogne , limo•sin , Perigort , quercie , Rhodes , angoulesme , and rochel , toge ? there with the county of guysnes and Callice , and some other place , with the ho ? mage of the lord within those territory shall be to the king of England , who beside be to have three million of crown of gold• whereof six hundred thousand in hand , four hundred thousand the yea•e follow , and the rest in two year after : and for this the king of England , and his son the prince of Wales , for they and their successor for ever , shall renounce all their right pretend to the c•owne of France ; the duchy of Normandy , the country of Touraine , an ? jou , main , the homage and sovereignty of Britain , and the earldom of Flan ? dear ; and within three week king John to be render at Callice at the charge of the king of England , except the expense of his house . for assurance of which ac ? cord , shall be give into his hand five and twenty of the great duke and lord of France for hostage . the Scot not to be aid by the french king , nor the Fleming by the english . this accord and final peace sign by both king , be ratify by their two elder son , Edward and Charles , and swear unto by the nobility of both kingdom . the hostage be deliver to king Edward , who page 169 bring they into England ; and thereupon king John be honourable conduct to Callice , after he have remain prisoner in England near about five year : but be come to Callice , he be detain there above three month , till the money which he be to pay in hand , can be provide ; and for provide the rest he be put to hard shift ; be fain to give the Jew leave to dwell in France for twenty year , pay twelve florin a man at the entry , and six every year after . at this time the prince by dispensation marry the countess of Kent , daughter to Edmund , brother to Edward the second , and his father invest he with the duchy of A ? quitaine , he be now prince of Wales , duke of Aquitaine , duke of Cornwall , and earl of Chester and Kent : and not long after , with the princess his wife , he pass over into France , and keep his court at Bordeaux . this be now the year 1362. and the fifty year of king Edward age , wherein for a jubilee , he show himself extraordinary gracious to his peopl• , free pardon many offence , relese prisoner , revoke exile ; with many oh ? the expression of his love and bounty . the year follow be famous for three king come into England : John king of France , Peter king of Cyprus , and D•vid king of Scot . the king of Cyprus come to solicit king Edward to join with other prince in the holy war , but receive only royal entertain ? mean and excuse . the king of Scot come for business and visitation , but why the king of France come , be not so certain , whether it be about take order for his hostage , or to satisfy king Edward for breach of some article , or else for love to the countess of Salisbury ; or perhaps out of a desire to let England see his majesty , be at liberty , which have be darken before by the cloud of captivity ; but whatsoever the cause of his come be , the cause of his stay ( at least , of long stay than he mean ) be a mortal sickness , whereof ( have lie all the winter at the Savoy ) in march or April follow , he die ; and his bo ? dy convey over into France , be bury at saint Donis with his ancestor . the prince of Wales be now grow famous all the christian world over , and the man to who all wrong prince seem to appeal , and to fly for succour : for which end there come at this time to his court , Iames king of majorque , and hap ? pen to come at a time when the princess lie in ; and thereupon he and Richard king of Navarre be take to be godfather to his son Richard . for the like assistance also , there come at the same time to he , Peter king of Castille , drive out of his kingdom by the french , in favour to Peter king of Aragon : and prince Edward , partly out of charity , to succour a distress prince , and partly out of po ? licy , to keep his soldier in exercise ; undertake the enterprise , and be so pros ? perous in it , that with one battle , ( have but thirty thousand against a hundred thousand ) he put king Peter in possession of his kingdom , though he be ill reward for his labour : for the ungrateful king will not so much as pay his soldier . a unfortunate journey for the prince , for though he come back with victory , yet he bring back with he such a indisposition of body , that he be never thorough well after : not perhaps by poison , nor give he by his brother the duke of Lancaster , though both be suspect ; but there be cause of di ? stemper he enough beside , the country , the season , the action it self ; and it may be more marvel that his soldier come home so well , then that he come so ill ; but howsoever , be now return , there be present to his indisposition of body , add discontentment of mind : for not have mean to pay his soldier , which force he to wink at that which he can not choose but see , and see , grieve at , how they prey upon the country , and thereupon how the country murmur against he : and now to stop this murmur , his chancellor , the by ? shop of Rhodes , devise a new imposition , of leavy a frank for every chimney , and this to continue for five year , to pay the prince debt : but this imposition make the murmur the more ; for though some part of his dominion , as the poict••ins , xaingtonoi , and lymo•sins in a sort consent to it , yet the count of be ? migni•ck , the count of Comminges , the viscount of Carmayn , and many other so much distaste it , that they complain thereof to the king of France , as to their page 170 supreme lord ; who upon examination find their complaint to be just , he there ? upon , by advice of his council , summons prince Edward to appear in person , to answer the complaint : whereunto prince Edw. make answer , that if he must needs appear , he will bring threescore thousand man in arm to appear with he ; and have certain bring his army that summer against Paris , if he have not fall ? len into symptom of a dropsy , which ( Walsingham say ) be wrought by en ? chantment . but upon this answer of the prince , king Charles send defiance to king Edward ; who thereupon prepare arm both by sea and land to oppose he . the french enter upon the territori•s of the prince , and defeat diverse of his troop ; in revenge whereof , John chandos the prince lieutenant , assault Terrieres in the province of Tholouse , and take it . the count of perigourd a• ? fault Royanville , in quer•y , and put all the english to the sword ; in revenge where ? of , Iames Audeley sene•chall of Poicton , assault the city of Brosse , and take it . in the mean time Robert knoll , by some call Robin , and by other , arnould , or Reynold Knoll , have draw Perducas de Albert to the party of the english ; and there ? upon wen• and encamp before the fort of darc•ell in quercy , which John Chan ? do understanding , go also and join with he in the siege ; but find they can do no good there , they remove , and besiege the city of dam : and when they can do no good there neither , they march forward , take the fort of Froyus , rochevaudour , and villefranche ; and that do , return to the prince at angoulesme . at the same time , the earl of Cambridge , and Pembroke , have spend nine week at the siege of Bordeille , at last take it ; but other captain of the english do yet more , for they scale Belleperche in the province of Bourbon , where the mother of the duke of Bourbon , and of the queen of France be , and take her prisoner . about this time , Philippa queen of England , king Edward wife die , and be bury at Westminster ; but this hinder not the proceed of the english in France ; the earl of Pembroke enter Anjou , where he take many town : the duke of Lancaster do the like about Callice , and march forward , plant his camp before Harfleur , with a purpose to burn the king of France his navy , but be watch by the count saint Poll , be force to forbear that design ; and so pass other way , and spoil all the place where he pass , he return to Callice . winter now be draw on , and John chandos , desire to recover the abbey of saint Silvin in Poictou , which not long before have be betray to the french ; be in the enterprise discover , and be assault by great force , be slay in the place , to the great grief of the prince of Wales , and of the english lord : but die without issue , his estate , which amount to four hundred thousand Franks , come to the prince . at this time , the duke of Anjou and Berry , with two great army enter upon the territory of the prince of wale ; whereof the prince advertise , assemble force to oppose they : but when the news be bring he of the take of limouge , he be so much trouble at it , by reason of the bishop of that place be his gossip , and one in who he special have affiance ; that he resolve to recover it at any price , and not to spare a man that have any hand in the render it up : and thereupon take it by force , he command to sack and pillage it , and will not be stay by the cry of the people , cast themselves down at his foot ; till pass through the town , he perceive three french cap ? taine , who themselves alone have withstand the assault of his victorious army , and move with the consideration of their valour , he then abate his anger ; and for their sake , grant mercy to all the inhabitant . so much be virtue even in a enemy , respect by generous mind . in the mean time , David king of Scots di ? ed without issue ; and Robert Stuart his nephew succeed he in the kingdom , and be crown at Scone . at this time Robert knoll with a great army be send into France , where make many attempt , with valour enough , but with little success ; he be come home , though with no gain , yet with no loss : till by|our ? trand de Gueschlyn assault he , slay the most part of his man ; and so this great army on a sudden come to nothing . it seem knoll his action be the less success ? full , page 171 by reason some young lord that wen• with he , sco•ning to •e ? ? ? his command , as be but a new man , and rise fro• a low estate ; be refractory to hi• direction : and indeed what can a general do , if he have not as well reputation of person , as of place ? and now the prince of Wales , his elder son Edward die ? ? ? Bu•de••• , then ? ? ? with his wife , and his other son Richard , come over into England , at whi•• time the vallant knight Walter de M••ny die at lond•n , and be bury in the monastery of the Chartreux which he have build ; leave one only daughter ; marry to John earl of Pembroke . this earl of Pembroke be soon after send go•ernour into aquita•ne , but set upon by the way by Spaniards in favour of the fr••ch ; be by they take prisoner , and carry with other into Spain•• who be ? king chain together , as the manner be ; one Evans a welsh Fugitive• who give •••selfe out for the right heir of wale ; cam• unto he foolish play upon he with scornful language , as though to insult over another man misery , can s••le for a co•diall to mitigate his own . and now upon the take of this earl , the prince dominion in France be either take away , or •all away fast than they •ere get ; Gueschly• enter Poictou , and take Montm•rillon , Chauvigny , Luss•• , and mo•t•onti•r : straight after follow the country of Aulnys , of Xaintoigne , and the rest of Poic•ou ; then saint Maxen• , needle , auln•y ; then Benaon , marant , surg•rs , ? ? ? ; and at last they come to thouar , where the most part of the lord of Poi ? c•o• , that hold with the prince , be assemble ; at which time king Edward with the pr••ce , the duke of Lancaster , and all the great lord of England , set forward to their succour , but be drive back• by tempest , never come to give they assi ? stance , so as thouar yield upon composition . yet do this preparation of the king stand he in nine thousand mark ; that it may be true say , it cost he more now to lose town , than it have cost he before to win they so great odds there be between the spring and fall of fortune . after this , the duke of Lancaster be send over with another great army , who pass up into many part of the country , but king Charles resolve to hazard no battle ; say , they be but cloud , and will soon pass away ; yet so watch he , that what with light skirmish , and what with skarcity of victual , his force be so diminish , that of thirty thou ? sand which go out of Callice , there scarce retunred six thousand home : which make king Edward say of this king Charles , that he do he more mischief sit still , than his predecessor have do with all their stir . and now by this time all Poictou be lose , and all Aquitaine also , but only Bordeaux and Bayon : when the archbishop of roan and other , be send from pope Gregory the eleven , to medi ? eat a peace between the two king ; but each of they stand upon high term of condition , nothing can be effect but truce upon truce , for two or three year together . in which time Edward prince of Wales die , and with he we may say , the fortune of England ; be a prince so full of virtue , that he leave no place for any vice ; and if he have live in the heroic time , may well have be numb•ed among the nine worthy . his body be bury at Canterbury , where his monument stand . king Edward in his seven and forty year call a parliament at W•stminster , which last but eight day ; and to which be sum ? moan by write , of clergy man only four bishop , and five abbot . of king Edward act after the death of the prince . in the time of the prince sickness , king Edw•rd call a parliament at westmin ? star ; in which , when demand be make for supply of the king , demand be present make for redress of grievance for the subject . it be require that the duke of Lancaster , the lord latyme than lord Chamberlaine , dame Alice pierce the king concubine , and one sir Richard Sturry may be remove from court . and this be so vehement urge by their speaker , sir Peter la Moore , that the king , rather than not to be supply , give way unto it ; and thereupon all these person be present put from court : but the prince soon after die , they page 172 be all recall to court again , and restore to their former place . about this time ex•mplary justice be do upon sir John Minsterworth knight , who be draw , hang , and quarter at Tyburn , for treason , by he commit ? t , in defraud soldier of their wage . Thi• be now the f•ftieth year of king edw••ds reign , and he for another in ? bilee , gra••s another general pardon to his subjects• only William Wic•ham bishop of Winchester be except , be late , by procurement of the duke of Lancaster , fall into the king displeasure• and forbidd•• to come to the parliament . this parliament be call the good parliament•••ough it wrought ill effect ; for sir . Peter de la mare , at the suit of Alice pierce , be commit to perpetual imprison ? mean at Not•ingham , though within two year after , by importunate suit of friend ; he regain his liberty . This Alice Pierce presume upon the king favour , grow so insolent , that she intermeddle with court of justice , and other office , where •he herself will fit , to countenance her cause . and now the duke of Lancast•• be come to have the regency , and to manage all the affair of the kingdom ; but king Edward to prevent the mischief , when by disorder the succession may grow in the kingdom , provident settle the same in parliament upon Richard of Bordeaux ; •reating he first earl of Chester and Cornwall , and then prince of Wales , and cause all the lord of the realm to tal•e a oath , to accept he for their king , as his lawful heir , when himself shall be dead . in this mean time a trea ? ty be have about a marriage between this prince Richard , and m•ry a daughter of Charles king of France : and a offer be make to king Edward , to leave he four ? ten hundred town , and three thousand fortress in Aq•itaine , upon condition he will render Callice and all that he hold in Picardy ; but before any thing can be conclude , king Edward die . of his taxation . in the eight year of his reign , in a parliament hold at London , there be grant he a fifteen of the temporalty , a twenty of the city and borough , and a ten of the clergy . in his ten year , in a parliament at north ? ampton , be grant a ten penny of city and borough , a fifteen of other , and a ten of the clergy . also all such treasure as be commit to church through England for the holy war , be take out for the king use , towards his war with France . the next year after , all the good of three order of monk , lom•ards , cluniake , and Cistercians ; be likewise seize into the king hand : and the like subsidy as before grant at Nottingham . in his twelve year ( and as some write , in absence of the king ) in a parliament at Northampton , be grant by the Laity , one half of their wool , but of the clergy the whole . the next year after a fifteen be likewise pay in wool by the commonalty . in his four ? teenth year , in a parliament at London , be grant he for Custom• of every sack of wool forty shilling , for every three hundred wool fell forty shil• for every last of leather forty shilling ; and of other merchandise accord to the rate : the same to endure from that easter to the Whitsuntide twelve month after . beside , there be grant of citizen and burgess , a nine part of good ; of foreign merchant and other , a fifteen ; of husbandman , the nine sheaf , the nine fleece , the nine lamb for two year ; also another ten of the clergy : and for his present supply , he have loan of diverse person ; and the city of London lend tw•nty thousand mark . for the grant of which mighty subsidy , the king ( be ? side his pardon to diverse kind of offender ) remit all amerciament for trans ? gression in his forest , relief and scurage , to the first time of his go into Flan ? dear , beside all aide for the marriage of his son and daughter during his reign ; pardon and remit all ancient debt and •rr•rages , both of his fer ? mors and other , till the ten year of his reign ; and likewise confirm the great charter of Magna Chartae : in his eighteenth year , in a parliament at London , a ten be grant by the clergy , and a fifteen by the Laity• beside a come ? mission page 173 be send into every shire to inquire of man ability , and all of five pound to ten of lie fee , be appoint to find a archer on horseback ; of twenty five , a demi-lance ; and so ratable above . there have former be make a certain coin of gold call the Floren , of base alloy , for the king benefit , towards his war in France , but this be now call in• and noble of fine metal coin , to the great contentment of the people . in his nine and twenty year , he have by parliament grant unto he fifty shilling upon every sack of wool , for six year next ensue ; by which imposition , it be think , the king may dispend a thous••d mark sterling a day , the vent of wool be so great in that time . but that which exceed all his taxation , be the ransom he have in his four and thirty year , of the king of France , three million of crown of gold . in his twelve year , he have take from the prior alien , their house , land , and tene ? ment , for the maintenance of his french war , which he keep twenty year in his ? ? ? and then restore they again . in his six and thirty year be great twen ? ty six shilling eight penny , for transportation of every sack of wool for three yeare• . in the five and forty year of his reign , in a parliament at Westminster , the •lergy grant he fifty thousand pound to be pay the same year , and the lai•y as much ; which be lev•ed by set a certain rate of five pound fifteen shilling upon every parish , which be find in the 37• shire to be eight thou ? sand and six hundred ; and so come in the whole to fifty thousand one hundred eighty one pound and eight penny : but the 181. livre . be abate to the shire of Suf ? folk• and Devonshire , in regard of their poverty . in his eight and forty year , in a parliament , be grant he a ten of the clergy , and a fifteen of the Laity . in his fifti•h year , a subsidy of a new nature be demand by the young prince Richard , who ( be bu• eleven year of age ) the duke of Lancaster have bring into the parliament of purpose to make the demand ; to have two ten to be pay in one year , or twelve penny in the pound of all merchandise sell , for one year ; and one pound of silver for every knight fee , and of every firehouse , one penny : but instead of this subsidy , after much altercation , there be grant another of as new a nature as this ; that every person , man and woman , within the kingdom , above the age of fourteen year , shall pay four penny , ( those who live of alm only except ) the clergy to pay twelve penny of every parson benefice , and of all other religious person four penny ; a mighty aid , and such as be ne ? ver grant to any king of England before . of his law and ordinance . he institute the order of the garter , upon what cause be not certain ; the common opinion be , that a garter of his own queen , or ( as some say ) of the lady Joan countess of Salisbury , slip off in a dance , king Edward stoop and take it up ; whereat some of his lord that be present , smile , as at a amorous action ; he serious say , it shall not be long ere sovereign honour shall be do to that garter ; whereupon he afterward add the french Morto , honi soit qui maly pense ; therein check his lord sinister suspicion . some con ? jecture that he institute the order of the garter , for that in a battle wherein he be victorious , he have give the word garter , for the word or sign : and some again be of opinion , that the institution of this order be more ancient , and be ? gun by king Richard the first , but that this king Edward adorn it , and bring it into splendour . the number of the knight of this order be twenty six , where ? of the king himself be always one , and precedent ; and their feast yearly cele ? brate at Windsor on saint George day , the tutelar saint of that order . the law of the order be many , whereof there be a book of purpose . in the five and their ? ti year of his reign , he be earnest petition by a parliament then hol ? en , that the great charter of liberty , and the charter of forest may be due observe ; and that the great officer of the kingdom shall ( as in former time ) be elect by parliament : to which petition , though the king at first stand stiff page 174 upon his own election and prerogative ; yet at last ( in regard to have his present turn serve , ( as himself after confess ) he yield , that such officer shall re ? ceive a oath in parliament , to do justice to all man in their office : and there ? upon a statute be make and confirm with the king seal , both for that and many other grant of he to his Subjects• which notwithstanding be for the most part short after revoke . this king also cause all plea , ? ? ? be before in fren•h , to be make in english , that the subject may understand the course of the law . also in his time a act be pass for purveyor , that nothing shall be take up but for ready money , upon strict punishment . in the next parli•ment hold the seven and their ? ti year of his reign , certain s•mp•uary law be ordain , both for ap ? parel and diet ; appoint every degree of man , the stuff and habit they shall wear , prohibit the wea•ing of gold and silver , silk and rich fur to all , bu• eminent person . the lab••rer and husbandman ? ? ? •ppointed but one ? ? ? day• and what meat he shall ? ? ? . also in his time , at the instance of the Lo••oners• a act be make that no common whore shall wea•e any hood , except stripe with diverse colour ; nor fur , but garment reverse the wrong side outward . this king also be the first that create Dukes• of who Henry of B•llingbr•oke , ? ? ? of Lancaster , create duke of Lancaster , in the seven and twenty year of his Raigne• be the first . but afterward he erect Cornwall also into a duchy , and confer it upon the prince : after which time , the king elder son use always to be prince of Wales , duke of Cornwall , and earl of Chester . this king alter money , and abate they in weight , and yet make they to pass accord to the former value . before his time , there be no other piece but noble and half noble , with the small piece of silver , call starling ; but ••w groat of four penny , and half groat of two penny , equivalent to the sterling money , be coin ; which in ? haunsed the prize of thing , that rise or f•ll , accord to the plenty or scarcity of coin ; which make servant and labourer to r•ise their wage accord . whereupon a statute be make in the parliament now hold at Westminster , to re ? duce the same to the former rate . also a act be make in this king time , that all wear , mill , and other stoppage of river , hinder the passage of boat , lighter , and other vessel , shall be remove ; which though it be most come ? modious to the kingdom , yet it take little effect , by reason of bribe and cor ? rupt lord and great man , who regard more their own private , than the public benefit . in a parliament hold the ten year of his reign , it be en ? act that no wool grow within the realm shall be transport , but that it shall be make in cloth in England . peterpence be forbid by the king , to be pay any more to roam . the c•stome of wash poor man foot on Maun ? dy-Thursday , think to have be first bring in by this king . Affaires of the church in his time . king Edward upon some displeasure have imprison diverse clergy man ; whereupon John Stratford archbishop of Canterbury write he a letter , charge he with violation of the right of the church , and with the breach of magna charta ; and after much good counsel give he , threaten , that if he amend not these disorder , he must and will exercise his ecclesiastical authority , and proceed to excommunication of his officer , though not of himself , queen , or child . the king answer , and send his letter to the bishop of London ; charge the archbishop to be the c••se of all this disturbance , have be the man that first set he upon the war with France ; assure he he shall want no money , and now have be the hindrance , that money give he by Parlia ? mean , be not due levy : and after many remonstrance to such purpose , con ? clude , that if he desist not from his re••llions obstinacy , he will use his tem ? porall authority , and proceed ? … ? as against a rebel . but this difference between they be not long after , upon the archbishop submission , reconcile . page 175 and indeed the great account which this king make of clergy man , may appear by his employ almost none but clergy man in all his office of account•Simon •••gham archbishop of Canterbury , be chancellor of England ; William Wickam archdeacon of Lincoln , keeper of the privy seal ; David willer parson of summer ? •••• , master of the roll ; ten benefice priest , civilian , master of the Chan ? cery ; William mulse deane of saint Martins le grand , chief chamberlain of they ? ? ? , receiver and keeper of the king treasure and jewels•will•am a•••y archdeacon of Northampton , chancellor of the Exchequer•William Di•ht•• ? ? ? of saint mar•ins , clerk of the privy Seale•Richard Chesterfield p•eb•nd ? … ? Stephens• treasurer of the king house ; Henry Snatc• parson of ? … ? of the king wardrobe ; John N•w•ham parson of fen•y-sta••on , one of they ? ? ? of the exch•quer ; John •ouseby parson of ? ? ? , surveyor and ? ? ? of the king work ; Thomas Brittingham parson of Asby , treasurer ? … ? king , for the part of Guisnes , and the march of Callice , John Troy a priest , ? ? ? of Ireland . ? ? ? the seventeenth year of his reign , in a parliament hold at West•inster , ? ? ? be make of the great inconvenience that come by the pope collation of benefice in England , confer they upon stranger who understand not then ? ? ? ; and therefore not fit to be pastors over a flock they can not feed : and hereupon sir John Shoreditch be send to pope Clement the six , to require he to fo••eare such collation , and to signify his consent therein : but this message be ? … ? welcome to the pope , that the messenger come back , unheard , at least unacustomated ? answered• and the king take his silence for consent• or perhaps not much ca ? ring whether he consent or no ; proceed to a prohibition of all such Colla ? tion within his realm , on pain of imprisonment , or death , to whosoever shall in time to come , present or admit any such person , who by the pope be so prefer to the prejudice of the king prerogative . Theise be disturbance in matter of discipline ; but towards the end of his reign , there fall a disturbance in matter of doctrine , for a certain divine , name John Wickliff , inveigh in his ? ? ? and other act in the school , against the abuse of churchman , monk , and other religious order ; and have by his doctrine win many disciple unto he , ( who after be call Lollards ) profess poverty , go barefoot , and poor clad in ru••et ; among other his doctrine , he teach that neither king ••r other secular lord , can give any thing •n perpetuity unto churchman ; and th•• temporal lord , if they need , may lawful take the good of religious person to relieve they in their necessity , by the example of William Rufus , and other . this man , the duke of Lancaster , and sir Henry Percy martial , much fa ? vour and cherish , extol he for his learning and integrity of life ; which make he so far to presume , that daily in one church or other , he publish his opi ? nion ; whereupon at length he be cite to answer before the archbishop , the bishop of London and other in •auls . at the day appoint , the duke of Lanca ? star and the lord Marshall go to conduct he ; when they be come to our la ? die chapel , the duke and baron with the bishop sit down , John Wick ? life be by the lord Marshall will to sit down , in regard ( he say ) the man have much to answer , and need a convenient seat . the bishop of London tell he ; it be against all law and reason , that he who be there •ited before he ? ? ? shall sit . hereupon contumelious word arise between the lord m•••hall and the bi••op ; the duke take the marshal part , and sharp repre ? hend the bishop ; the bishop return the like to the duke ; who in a gre•• rage ? ? ? he will pull down the pride of he , and of all the bishop of E•gland• and whisper in his ear , tell he he have rather pull he out of the church by ? … ? of the head , than to suffer such indignity ; which word , the londo•ers overhear , swear with a loud voice , they will rather lose their life the•• suffer ••eir bishop to be thus injurious use . their fu•y be the more against the duke , for that the day before in the parliament ( whereof he be precedent ) it be ? ? ? in the king name , that from thenceforth •h•re shall be no more a page 176 major of London , but a captain appoint for the government of the city , and that the lord martial of England shall arrest offender within the liberty , as in other place . the morrow after the citizen assemble to consult of this business , it happen the lord fitswater , and Guid• Bryan , come into the city ; which the people see , furious run upon they , and be like to beat they down for come at that time . the lord fitswater protest , he come to no other end , but to offer his service to the city , be by inheritance their standard bearer , and be to take injury offer to they , as to himself ; and therefore will they to look to their defence . whereupon they pres•ntly take arm , assail the marshal inn , bre•ke open the ga•es , bring fo•th a prisoner in his give , and set he at liberty , but find ? ? ? the lord ? … ? with th• duke , be that day to dine with one John de ? ? ? . T••n this furious multitude run to assail the sav•y ; which a knight of the duk•••••ing , ha•tes to the plac• where his lord dine , and acquain•• he with this ? ? ? in the c••y . the duke up ? on hear it , leap from the table so hasty , that he hurt bot• his shin on the fowrme ; and with sir Henry •ercy alone take boat , and go to , Kennington near lambe•h , where the princess with the young prince lie : to who he complain of this riot , and the violence offer he . in the me•ne time the multitude come ? ming to the Savoy , a priest inquisitive to know the business , be answer , they go to take the duke , and the lord martial , and compel they to deliver sir Peter de la Mar• , unjust keep in prison . the priest reply , th•t sir Peter be a traitor to the king , and worthy to be h•nged . at which word they all cry out , this be Percy , this be the traitor of England , his speech betray he , though his app•rell be disguise , and present they r•n upon he , and wound he to death . the bishop of London hear of this outrage , leave his dinner , haste to the sav•y , admonish they of the holy time be lend ; assure they all shall be fair end for the good of the city with who persuasion they be some ? what pacify ; but yet they take the duke arm , and hang •hem up reverse , in sign of treason , in all the principal stree•s of the city . Upo• the princess ad ? vice , the chief citizen send to the sick• king , to excuse this tumult ; say , it be not in their power to suppress it , the commonalty be in commotion , upon a information that their liberty shall be take from they by parliament . the king tell they , it never be in his thought to infringe their liberty , but he rather desire to enlarge they . but this affr•nt of the citizen will not down with the duke , till he have pull down som• of the principal of they ; for he cause the major and alderman to •e displace , and other put in their room : a revenge he have better be without , for he never have the love of the city after : and to want their love be a kind of banishment . Wickliff himself , censure by the bishop to abjure his opinion , choose rather to leave his country than his doctrine , and go over into Bohemia , be there much honour while he live , and have be more since he die ; at least , a great part of his doctrine continue in veneration a ? among that people to this day . work of piety do by he , or by other in his time . his work of piety be great and many , as the found of east Minster , a abbey ( of the Cistea•• order ) near the tower . a abbey for nun at D•rtford in Kent . the king hall in Cambridge for poor scholar . a hospital for the poor at Callice . he confer upon the university of Oxford , where he have himself be train up , under the learned Walter Burley , the chief rule of the city , subordinate the major and citizen to the chancellor of the university . he build saint Stephens Chappel at Westminster , with the endowment of 300. pound per annum . he augment the chapel at Windsor , and make provision there for churchman , and four and twenty poor knight . Theise be his public work ; but beside these , his private building be , the castle of Windsor , which he re-edify and enlarge , the castle at Quinborough , fortification at page 177 ? ? ? and other place . his queen Philippa found Queens college in Oxford : ? … ? countess of Pembroke , the college call Pembroke hall in Cambridge . in this king t•me sir John Poultney major of London , build the college in London call ? ••d ? ? ? L•wrence poult••y , and little alhollo•es , a parish church in Thames street , ••d also the Carmelite friar church in C•ventry . Henry earl of Lancaster and ? ? ? , •ounded the new hospital by the castle of Leycester , wherein a hundred ? ? ? impotent people be provide for with all thing necessary . William Elsing Merc•• of London , make a new hospital of a old house of nun by cripple ? g••• , and place canon regular there , he become the first prior thereof . Walter ? ? ? bishop of Exeter , found Exeter college , and hart hall in Oxford . William b••eman bishop of Norwich , build Trinity hall in Cambridge . Simon ? ? ? archbishop of Canterbury , found Canterbury college in Oxford . William ? ? ? treasurer of England , found the monastery of Edendon ; the religious brethren whereof be call B•nhommes . sir Walter de Manny , bear in Cambray , purchase a piece of ground call hospital Croft , contain thir•eene acre , with ? ou• the bar of west Smithfield , and cause the same to be enclose , where he build a chapel , and after found the same to be a house of charterhouse monk . Humphrey Bohun earl of Hereford and Essex , re-edify the Augustine friar church in London , and be bury in the choir there• in the two and thirty year of this king reign , John Stody major of London , give unto the vintner of London all the quadrant where the vintner hall now stand , with the te ? nement round abou• , from the lane to this day call Studis lane• where be foum ? dead thir•eene house for thirteen poor people , which be there keep of charity . also in this king time sir John Cobham found the college of Cobham in Kent . I•hn L•vekin four time major of London , build at Kingston upon Thames , where he be bear , a chapel call Magdalen , to the which he join a hospital , wherein be a master , two priest , and certain poor man : and for that the parish church of saint Michael by crooked-lane , where he dwell , be a very homely thing , and the ground thereabouts a filthy plot , by reason of the burcher in east ? cheap , who make the same their lay-stall ; he on the same ground build the fair new parish church of saint Michael now stand , and be bury there in the middle of the choir , under a fair tomb of stone . he also found a college to the same church , near thereunto adjoin . John Barnes major of London , give a chest with three lock , and a thousand mark to be lend to young man , upon sec•rity , so that it pass not one hundred mark ; and for the occupy thereof , if he be learned , to say at his pleasure , de profundis , for the soul of John Barnes ; if he be not learned , to say pater noster : but howsoever the more ? ney be lend , the chest at this day stand in the chamber of London , without more ? ney or p••dges . Thomas of Woodstock , the young son of king Edward , Foun ? dead a college at Playsi• in Essex , where in his life he have provid•d a sumptuous tomb , where he be first lay , but translate afterward to Westminster . casualty happen in his time . in the the two and twenty year of his reign , a contagious pestilence arise in the east and south part of the world , and spread it self over all christian ? dome ; and come at last into England , it so waste the people , that scarce the ten person of all sort be leave alive . there die in London ( some say in n•r ? which ) between the first of January , and the first of July , 57374. person . in Yar ? mouth , in o•e year , 7052. man and woman : before which time , the parsonage there be worth 700. mark a year , and afterward be •carce worth forty pound a year . this plague begin in London about alhollan•ide , in the year 1348. and continue till the year 1357. •here it be observe , that those who be bear after the begin of this mortality , have but twenty eight tooth , where before •hey have two and thirty . in the twelve year of his reign , a sudden ••undation of water , at Newcastle upon Tyne , bear down a pi•ce of the town page 178 w•ll , and six perch in length , near to a place call walkenew ; where a hun ? dread and twenty man and woman be drown . in the five and thi••ieth year of his reign , another pestilence h•pp•ned in England , which be call the se ? cond pestilence , in which die Henry duke of La•caster , also regin•ld lord C••ha•• , and Walter fits-warren , two famous man ; and five bishop , of W•rcester , of lon ? don , of Ely , of Lincoln , and of chich•ster . in this king time , a frost last from the midst of September , to the month of April . in the four year of his reign , a solemn just or tournament be hold at London in Ch••pside , be•wixt the great cross and the great conduit , ? ? ? s•per-la••• which last three day ; where the queen Philippa , with many lady , fall from a stage , set up for they to behold the just ; and though they be not hurt at all , yet the king threa••ed to p• ? nish the carpenter for their negligence , till the que•ne in•••ated pardon for they upon her knee : as indeed she be always ready to do all good office of mercy to all people . in the eleven year of his reign be so great plenty , that a quar ? ter of wheat be sell at London for two shilling , a fat ox for a noble , a fat sheep for six penny , and six pigeon for a penny , a fa• goose for two penny , and a pig for a penny , and other thing after that rate . of his wife and child . he marry Philippa , the daughter of William earl of Haynault at York ; a match make up in haste by queen Isabella his mother , for her own end , although a better can never have be make upon deliberation for king Edward end : for though her parentage be not great , and her portion less• ; yet she make amends for both , in virtue ; for never king have a better wife . by her king Edward have seven son and five daughter : his old son Edward prince of Wales , and come ? mon call the black prince , ( but why so call uncertain for to say , of his dreadful act , as spe•de say , have little probability ) be bear at Woodstock , in the three year of his father reign ; he marry Joan , the daughter of Edmund earl of Kent , brother by the father side to king Edward the second . she have be twice marry before ; first to the valiant earl of Salisbury , from who she be divorce : next to the lord Thomas holland ; after who decease , this prince passionate love she , marry she : by she he have issue two son , Edward the elder , bear at angoulesme , who die at seven yea•es of age ; and Richard bear at Bordeaux , who after his father , be prince of Wales , and after his grandfather king of England . this prince have also natural issue , sir John sound , and Ro ? she Clarendon knight ; the latter be attaint in the Raign• of king Henry the four , be think to have •eene ancestor to the house of smith in Essex . he di ? ed at Canterbury , in the six and forty year of his age ; and of his Fathe•• reign , the nine and forty , and be bury at Christ church there . his second son William be bear at Hatfield , in Hertfordshire , who decease in his childhood , and be bury at York . his three son Lionel be bear at Antwerp , in the twelve year of his father reign ; he marry first Elizabeth , the daughter and heir of William Burgh , earl of Ulster in Ireland ; in who•e right he be first create earl of Ulster : and because he have with she the honour of Clare , in the county of To• ? mond ; he be in a parliament , create duke of Clarence , as it be of the coun ? trey about the town and honour of Clare ; from which duchy , the name of Clarentieux ( be the title of the king of arm , for the south part of England ) be derive . this duke have issue by her one only daughter , name Philippa after ? ward wife of Edmund Mortimer , earl of march ; mother of earl Roger , father of Anne countess of Cambridge , the mother of Richard duke of York , father of king Edward the four . the second marriage of this duke be at Milan in Lombardy , with the lady Vi•lanta , daughter of G•leac•• the second duke thereof ; but through intemperance he live not long •fter . king Edward four son na ? m John , be bear at ga••t , in the fourteen year of his father reign ; he have three wife , the first be •l•nch , daughter and coheir , and in the end the sole page 179 heir of Henry duke of Lancaster , son of Edmund , surname Crouch back ; by who he have issue , Henry of Bullingbrooke earl of Derby , after duke of Hereford , and last king of England , name Henry the four , who first place the crown in the house of Lancaster . by she also John of Gaunt have two daughter , Philip wife of John the first , king of Portugal ; and Elizabeth marry first to John hol ? land , earl of Huntington , and after he , to sir John Cornwall , baron of Fanhope . John of gaunt second wife be Constance , the elder daughter of Peter king of ca ? stile and Leon , in who right , for the time he entitle himself king of both those realm : by she he have issue one only daughter name Katherine , marry to hen ? ry the three , son of king John , in possession before , and in her right after king of both the say realm . John of gaunt three wife be Katherine , the widow of sir Hugh Swinford , a knight of Lincolnshire , elder daughter and coheir of Payn roet , a Gascoyne , call g••en king of arm for that country ; his young daughter be marry to sir Geffrey chawcer , our laureate poet . by she he have issue bear before matrimony , and make legitimate afterward by parliament , in the twen ? ti year of king Richard the second ; John earl of Somerset , Thomas duke of Exeter , Henry bishop of Winchester , and cardinal , and Joan ( who be first marri ? ed to Robert Ferrer baron of wemme , and Ou•sley , in the county of Salop and Warwick ) and second , to Ralph Nevil , the first earl of Westmoreland . she and all her brethren be surname Beaufort , of a castle which the duke have in France , where they be all bear ; and in regard thereof , bear the portcullis of a castle for the cognisance of their family . this duke in the thirteenth year of his ne ? phew king Richard be create duke of Aquitaine , but in his sixteenth year he be call home , and this title recalled ; and the three year after , in the sixti of his age , he die at Ely house in Holborn , and lie honourable entomb in the choir of saint Paul . king Edward five son Edmund , surname of Langley , be first in the year 1362. create earl of Cambridge , and afterward in the year 1386. make duke of York ; he marry Isabella , daughter and coheir to Peter , king of Castille and Leon : he son Richard Plantagenet duke of York , take to wife Anne Mortimer , heir of the foresay Lionel , elder brother to Edmund of Langley . king Edward six son William , surname of Windsor , where he be bear , die young , and be bury at Westminster . king Edward young son Thomas , surname of Woodstock , where he be bear , be first earl of Buckingham , and after make duke of Gloucester by his nephew king Richard the second . he be a man of va ? lour and wisdom , but the king surmise he to be a too severe observer of he do ; consult with Thomas Mowbray , duke of Norfolk , how to make he away : who Mowbray unaware surprise , convey secret to Callice , where he be strangle the twenty year of king Richard reign . he have issue one son , Humphrey earl of Buckingham , who die at Chester of the pestilence , in the year 1400. and two daughter , Anne marry first to Edmund earl of Stafford , by who she have Humphrey duke of Buckingham ; second to William Bourchier earl of ewe , by who she have Henry earl of Essex , and Joan marry to Gylbert lord Tal ? bot , and h•d issue by he a daughter , who die young . of king Edward daugh ? ter , the old name Isabella , be marry at Windsor to ingelram of guysnes , lord of co•cy , earl of soyson , and after archduke of Austria ; create also by king Edward , earl of Bedford : by who she be mother of two daughter ; mary marry to Henry duke of bar , and Philip marry to Robert de Vere earl of Oxford , duke of Ireland , and marquess of Dublyn . This Robert in the height of his fortune forsake his lady Philip , and marry one Lancerona a joiner da•gh ? ter ( as be say ) which come with king Richard the second wife ou• of Bohemia ; and be for abuse the king ear , drive out of the land by the lord , he die at London in extreme poverty in the year 1392. Isabella his wife mother , be bu ? ried in the church of friar minorite near Aldgate in London . king Edward see ? cond daughter Joan be marry by proxy to Alphonsus , king of Castille and Leon• but pass into Spain , die by the way ; and king Alphonsus meet she , instead of consummate his espousal , to solemnise her funeral . his three daughter blanch page 180 die young . his four name mary , be marry to John Montford duke of Britain . his young name Margaret , bear in Callice , be the first wife of John de Hastings , earl of Pembroke , but die without issue . of his personage and condition . he be of stature indifferent tall , of sparkle eye , of a comely and manly countenance , in his late time something bald ; and concern his condition , no man be more gentle , where there be submission ; where opposition , no man more stern . he be a prince no less of his passion , then of his people ; for he be never so love , as to be fond ; nor ever so angry , as to be inexorable : but this must be understand of the time while he be a man , for in his old age , when he come to be a child again , he be prince of neither . he be no less fortunate than valiant ; and his fortunateness be the great by a kind of antiperistatis , as come between two unfortunate prince ; successor to one , and predecessor to anon ? there . he be of so warlike a disposition , that his very sport be warlike ; for no delight be so frequent with he as joust and tournament . to show his de ? votion , one example may be sufficient , for when neither cardinal nor counsel ? lour can move he to make peace with France , a tempest from heaven do it ; to which may be add , that he never win great battle , of which he win many , but he present give the glory of it to God by public thanksgiving . he outlive the best wife , and the best son that ever king have ; and to say the truth , he outlive the best of himself , for his late year be not answerable to his former . of his death and burial . king Edward beside his be old , and wear with the labour of war , have other cause that hasten his end : he grief for the loss of so worthy a son , dead but ten month before ; his grief for the loss of all benefit of his conquest in France , of all which he have little now leave , but only Callice : and open ? press thus in body and mind , he be draw his last breath , when his concu ? bane Alice pierce pack away what she can catch , even to the ring of his fin ? gers , leave he ; and by her example , other of his attendant , sea•sing on what they can come by , shift away ; and all his counselor and other forsake he , when he most need they , leave his chamber quite empty ; which a poor priest in the house see , he approach to the king bedside , and find he yet brea ? thing , call upon he to remember his saviour , and to ask mercy for his offence , which none about he before will do : but now move by the voice of this priest , he show all sign of contrition , and at his last breath express the name of Jesus . thus die this victorious king at his manor at sheen , ( now Richmond ) the one and twenty day of June , in the year 1377. in the sixty four year of his age , have reign fifty year , four month , and odd day . his body be convey from sheen by his four son and other lord , and solemn inter within Westminster church , where he have his monument , and whereit be say , the sword he use in battle , be yet to be see , be eight pound in weight , and seven foot in length . of man of note in his time . martial man be never more plentiful than in this king reign : whet••r it be that the star have a influence to produce such man at one time more than another : or whether it be that regis ad exempl•• , the king example make his subject like himself : or last , that his continual exercise of arm put they as it be into a mould of fortitude . the first of this kind , be worthy Edward the black prince , and so worthy the first , that long erit • primo cuique secundus erit . next he be Henry earl of Lancaster , the prince right hand , in all his great at ? •••evements : page 181 then William the valiant earl of Salisbury , than John eure , ancestor to ? ? ? lord eures that now live ; then follow the lord John chandos , sir Iames Aude ? •• , sir Walter de Manny , sir Robert knoll , than sir John Hawkewood bear in Essex ; who ••ough not much honour at home , have be a tailor , yet in foreign part , and ••ecially in Italy so famous , that his statue be erect in public , for a monument ? ? ? testify his valour to posterity . and here must not be forget , Robert venile•night , a Norfolk man ; who when the Scot and english be ready to give battle , • certain stout champion of great stature , common call Tournboll , come ? ? ? of the Scot army , and challenge any english man to meet he in a single combat ; this Robert venile accept the challenge , and march towards the champion , and meet by the way a certain black mastiff dog which way ? •ed on the champion , he sudden with his sword cut he off at the loin , and afterward do moor to the champion himself , cut his head from off his shoul ? dear . and as there be this great plenty of martial man , so there be no less plenty of learned man ; John Baconthorpe bear in Norfolk , a Carmelite friar , who write diverse excellent treatise in divinity ; Nicholas Trivet bear also in Norfolk : a black friar , who write two history , and a book of annal : Richard Stradley , bear in the march of wale , a monk and a divine , who write diverse excellent treatise of the scripture : William Herbert a Welshman , and a friar Minor , who write many good treatise in divinity : Tho. Walleis a Dominican friar , and a writer of many excellent book : John Eversden a monk of Bury in Suffolk , a historiographer : Walter Burley a doctor of divinity , bring up in Martin college in Oxford , who write diverse excellent treatise in natural and moral philosophy , which remain in estimati ? on to this day ; and who for the great fame of his learning , have the honour to be one of the instructor of Edward the black prince : Roger of Chester , a monk of that city , and a historiographer : John Burgh a monk , who write a history , and also diverse homily : Richard Aungervill bishop of Durham , and lord chancel ? lour of England , bear in Suffolk : Walter Heminford , a historiographer : Richard Chichester a monk of Westminster , who write a excellent chronicle from the year 449. to the year 1348. Richard Rolle , alias Hampole , who write many excellent treatise in divinity : Robert Holcot a black friar , bear in Northampton , a lear ? ned Schooleman , and write many book in argument of divinity : Thomas Brad ? wardin , bear near Chichester in Sussex , archbishop of Canterbury , and who write against the pelagians , and for his depth of learning , have the title of doctor Pro ? fundu• : Richard fit Ralph , archbishop of Armagh in Ireland , a learned writer : William grysant , name Anglicus , a notable physician , who son come to be pope , and be call Urbane the five : John Killingworth a excellent philosopher , Astro ? nomer , and physician : Ranulph Higden a monk of Chester , a historiographer : bar ? tholomew Glanvile , descend of those glanvile that be sometime earl of Suf ? folk : Simon Islip archbishop of Canterbury , and founder of Canterbury college in Oxford , who write many treatise : Matthew Westmonasteriensis , who write the book call flores historiarum : William fleet a hermit , who write sundry trea ? tise , exhort England to repentance : Henry Knighton , who write a history inti ? tule de gestis anglorum : and last two other , worthy perhaps to have be pla ? ce first ; John mandevill the great traveler , a doctor of physic , and a knight , who die at liege , in the year 1372. and sir Geffrey chawcer , the Homer of our na ? cion ; and who find as sweet a muse in the grove of Woodstock , as the ancient do upon the bank of Helicon . page [ unnumbered ] page 1 the reign of king Richard the second . Richard , call of Bordeaux , because bear there , the only son of Edward the black prince , be by his grandfather in his life-time declare to be his heir and lawful successor ; and accord after his death be crown king of England , at west ? minster , the sixteenth day of July , in the yerre 1377. by Simon Su•bury archbishop of Canterbury : and for the more solemnity of his coronation , he then m•de nine knight , and create four earl : Thomas of Woodstock , king Edward the three young son , be create earl of Buckingham and Northampton ; Thomas Mowbray , young brother of John L. Mowbray , earl of Nottingham ; Gifford angoulesme a Gascoigne , be make earl of Huntington ; and Henry Percy son of Henry L. Percy , be create earl of Northumberland . at the time of the coronation , the duke of L•ncaster , by the name of John king of Castille and Leon , and duke of Lancaster , put in his claim as earl of Leicester , to have the place of earl martial of England ; as duke of Lan ? caster , to carry the sword call Curtana ; as earl of Lincoln , to be carver that day ; all which to be execute by himself , or by his sufficient deputy ; which , with the fee thereunto belong , be confirm unto he . as likewise , diverse other make their claim : Robert de veer , e•rle of Oxford , to have the office of chamber ? lie , and to power out water for the king to w•sh : John Wiltshire citizen of Lon ? don , by reason of a moiety of the manor of Heydon , hold in sergeanty , claim to hold a towel for the king to wipe with when he go to meat : Thomas Beau ? champ earl of Warwick , to bear the three sword before the king ; and also to exercise the office of pantler : sir John Argentine , by reason of his manor of with ? mondtey in the county of Hartford , to serve the king at his cup : William L. fur ? nivall , for his manor of Fernham , to support the king right arm when he hold the royal sceptre : anne late wife of John de Hastings earl of Pem•rooke , •or hi• manor of Ashele in Norfolk , to have the office of naperer ; which she be admit to do by her deputy sir Thomas blunt : Richard earl of Arundel , for his manor of B. in Kent , be admit to be chief butler : the lord major of London , to attend in his own person , as chief cup-waiter : sir John Dimmock , for his manor of Scrivelbie ; and sir Baldwin Frevile , for his castle of Tamworth , in the county of Warwick , contend for the office of be the king champion ; but adjudge to Dimmock : William de Latimer , and John the son and heir of John Mowbray of Axholm , joint petition to have the office of almoner ; but adjudge to Lati ? mer : Richard lion , as tenant of the manor of L. hold by the service of make wafer for the king at his coronation , be thereunto admit : the baron of the cinque-port be admit to bear the king canopy , upon four staff of silver , over the king head ; and also to sit at meat in the hall , at the high table on the king right hand : John Fitz-Iohn , by reason of his manor of saint in Norfolk , be admit to be chief larde•er : Richard herring , for the manor of C. in the county of Surry , claim to be usher of the king chamber ; but because that claim do no way concern the coronation , he be leave to pursue his right some other time . page 2 the coronation it self be perform with great solemnity : after a sermon , the king take his oath ; and then the archbishop bless the king ; which do , he tear •ff his garment , and stripp he into his shirt ; than he anoint his hand• , head , breast , shoulder , and the joint of his arm , with the s•cred oil ; and after certain prayer , he then cl•dd• he , first with the coat of S. •dward , and after with his mantle : after which , the archbishop deliver he the sword , say , accipe Gladium ; with which two earl gird he : than he give he bracelet , saying•accipe Armillas : after this , he put upon he a upper vesture call a pall , saying•accipe Pallium : in the mean time , while the archbishop bless the crown , he to who office it pertain , put spur on his heal ; after the crown be bless , the archbishop set it on his head , say , coronet te Deu• : than he deliver he a ring , say , accipe an••lum : immediate herewith come the lord fur•ivall , by virtue of his office , offer he a red glove ; which the arch B. bless , and put it on his hand , give he the sceptre , say , accipe scep•rum : and after that , in his other hand , deliver he a rod , on the top whereof stand a dove , say , accipe Virgam Virtuti• ; and then bless the king , say , benedicat te De•• : which do , the king kiss the bishop and abbot , by who he be afterward lead to his seat : and so end the solemnity . the tender year of the king , be but eleven year of age , require a pro ? tector : but be perhaps think dangerous to commit that authority to only one , who may rather seek to get it for himself , than to keep it for another , it be think fit to commit it to many ; and thereupon John duke of Lancaster , ed ? m••d earl of Cambridge , the king uncle ; with some other lord and bishop , be join in commission to manage the state ; and Guishard de angoulesme ap ¦ point to be his schoolmaster . and now the king minority make foreign prince conceive , that this will be a time of advantage for any that have quar ? rell to England : which the french and scots take present hold of ; for , the french come now , and burn the town of rye ; and soon after , enter the isle of wight , burn diverse town there ; and though they be repel from the castle by the valiant sir Hugh Tyrrell captain thereof , yet they constrain the man of the isle to give they a thousand mark , to spare the residue of their house and good : and depart thence , they set on land where they see advantage , burn sundry town near to the shore ; as Portsmouth , dertmo•th , and Plymouth : and then sail towards Dover , they burn Hastings , assault Winchelsey ; but be valiant defend by the abbot of battle , be force to retire : after this , they land not far from the abbey of Lewis , at a place call Rottington ; where the prior of Lewis , with sir Thomas cheyny , and sir John f•llesly , encounter they , be over ? throw , and take prisoner . and no less than the french , be the Scot also now busy ; for come one morning by stealth , they win the castle of Barwick ; but short after , upon knowledge thereof have , they be drive out again by the earl of Northumberland and Nottingham ; and all the Scot• they find in it , ex ? cept Alexander Ramsey their captain , put to the sword . about Michaelmas , a par ? liament be hold at Westminster , wherein Alice Pierc• , the late king concubine , be banish the realm , and all her good confiscate ; and two ten of the clergy , and two fifteenth of the temporalty be grant ; but so , as that two citizen of London , William Walworth , and John Philpot , shall receive and keep it , to see it bestow for defence of the realm . in this time , sir Hugh Calverley , deputy of Calais , burn six and twenty french ship in the haven of Boulogne : and at the same time a great navy be set out , under the guide of the earl of Bucki•gham , the duke of Britain , the lord L•timer , sir Robert knoll and other , with a purpose to inter ? cept the spanish fleet ; but through tempest be twice drive back : when in the mean time , one mercer a scottish pirate , come to Sc•rborough , take there diverse ship , and commit many outrage : and no order be take to repel he , a citizen of L••do• n•med John Philpot , at his own charge set forth a fleet , and in his own person encounter they , take the say mercer , and all his ship : and re ? turn home , in stead of be reward for his service , he be call in question page 3 for presume to raise a navy , without advice of the king council : but he give •uch reason for that he have do , that not only he come off then wi•h credit , but live in reputation for it to this day . Indeed reason of state , though they may see ? cret be censure , yet they must not open be control , for this be to bring authority into contempt , and in stead of error to bring in confusion ; but yet when wrong be offer that be public , every particular person seem to have a interest in take revenge ; and though it may be no manner not to stay the state leisure , yet it can be no offence to do their work for they . many action pass at this time with the french and scots , some prosperous , and some adverse : the Scot burn Roxborough ; this be adverse : but the earl of Northumberland enter Scotland with ten thousand man , spoil the land of the earl of march , the chief incendiary , this be prosperous : but when the northern man will needs make a road into Scotland , and be encounter by the Scot , and put to flight , this be adverse . anon after midsummer , the duke of Lancaster , with the earl of buck ? ham , Warwick , Stafford , and other of the nobility , with a strong power to•ke the sea , and land in Britain , besiege the town of S• . Malo , but find strong opposition , be force to raise his siege , and return home : this be adverse . and now again , the Scot by night enter secret into the castle of Berwick , and slay sir Robert Baynton , that be constable there : this also be adverse : but when the earl of Northumberland , be advertise ther•of , come with a power , assau•ted the castle , and after two daye• defence recover it again ; this be prosperous . Will ? liam Montacute e•rle of Salisbury , the king lieutenant in Calais , forage the country round about , and furnish Calais with booty of french cattle : sir Hugh Calverley and sir Thomas Percy make Admiralls• put to Sea• and take diverse ship lade with merchandise , and one sh•p of war : sir John H••leston , captain of Chierbourg in France , issue forth , assault a fortress of the french , which be the storehouse of their provision , and with much valour take it : these be prosper ? ous : but when sir John Clerke , lie in ga•rison in a castle in Britain , where la• many eng••sh ship in the haven , •ad •he•e ship let upon by the french , where though he show incredible valo•r in the action , yet the ship be take , and he ? self slay : this be adverse . also in the three year of this king reign , sir John Arundel , sir Hugh Calverley , sir Thomas Percy , sir William Elmham , sir Thomas ba ? nister , and many other knight , go to sea , with a purpose to pass over into Bri ? taine ; but be so beat back w•th tempest , that diverse of their ship be •ast away ; and sir John Arundel , sir Thomas Banister , sir Nicolas Trumping•on , sir tho ? mass dale , and above a thousand other be all drown ; only sir Thomas Percy , sir Hugh Calverley , sir William Elmham , and certain other escape . it may not be imper•inent to note here the sumptuousness of those time ; for this sir John Arundel be then say in his furniture to have two and fifty new suit of apparel of cloth of gold and tissue , all lose at sea this year also , there be find inconvenience in have many governor of the king and kingdom , it be by parliament decree , th•t the lord Thomas Beauchampe , earl of Warwick• shall himself alone hold the place of protector . about this time sir John Annesley knight accuse Thomas Katrington esquire , for betray the fortress of saint Saviour to the french : which Katrington denying• at the suit of annesly a solemn combat be per ? mit to be between they ; at which combat the king and all the great lord be present : the esquire Katrington be a man of a mighty statu•e , the knight Annesley a little man• yet through the justness of his cause , after a long fight , the knight prevail , and Katrington , the day after the combat die . in the begin ? ning of the four year of this king , Thomas of Woodstock earl of Buckingham , the king uncle , with diverse earl and lord , and a army of seven or eight thou ? sand , be send into France , to aid the duke of Britain ; but the king of France at that time die , the duke of Britain grow to have peace with the new king ; where ? upon the earl of Buckingham come home again , without do much , but make of knight , and forage the country . in this time the french and spanish gall ? lies do much mischief on the coast of England : they burn Rye , h•sti•gs , a•d page 4 Portsmouth ; and at last , ent•ing the river of Thames , they come up to Gravesend , where they burn most part of the town , and take many prisoner and booty return into France . at this time also , there fall out a accident of great distur ? bance to the realm ; for the commons rise in diverse part , begin at Dep•ford in Kent : and the cause of their rise grow ( as be think ) through the rude be ? behaviour of a collector of the poll-money , who come into the house of one John Tyler , and demand pollmony of his wife for a daughter of she , and she say ? king that her daughter be not of that age to pay , the rude fellow say , he will pre ? sent see whether that be so , or no , and thereupon forcible turn up her clo•thes ; whereat the mother make a outcry , her husband be at work hard by , and hear the noise , come in with his lathing-staff in his hand , with which he give the collector such a blow on the head , that his brain fly out , and he pre ? sent dye . upon this , at the complaint of Tyler among his neighbour , and withal , a factious clergyman , one John ••ll , take occasion hereat to rip up the ground of this misgovernment , and tell the people , that this difference of man estate , where some be potentate , and some be bondman , be against Christian liberty , take for his theme , when Adam delved and eve span , who be then • gentleman ? he so incense they , that the commons in diverse part draw together ; and whether beginning in Kent , or otherwise in Essex , they draw at last into their fa ? ction the commons of S•ssex , Hartfordshire , Cambridgshire , Suffolk , Norfolk , and other shire ; and arrest all such as pass , make they swear to be true to king Richard , and to the commons , and never to receive any king that shall be call John ; which they do for the envy they bear to John duke of Lancaster . thus their num ? ber still increase , that by that time they be come as far as black-heath , they be esteem to be a hundred thousand . the first thing they do when they come to London , be to send for one Richard Lyon , a grave citizen , who have be tylers master , and his head they strike off , and carry it upon a pole , in triumph before they : the next day they go to the Savoy , the duke of la•casters house , which they set on fire , burn all his rich furniture , break in piece all his pla•e and jewel , and throw they into the Thames , say , they be man of justice , and will not like robber enrich themselves with any man good : and when one of their fellow be espy to thrust a fair silver piece into his bosom , they take he , and cast both he and the piece into the fire : two and thirty of they be get into the duke wine-cellar , where they stay drink so long , till the rafte•s of the house , on fire , fall upon they , and so cover they , that not able to get out , they be hear cry seven day after , and then perish . from the Savoy they go to the temple , where they burn the lawyer lodging , with their book and write , and all they can lay hand on : also the house of saint John by smith ? field they set on fire , so that it burn for the space of seven day together . after this they come to the tower , where the king be then lodge ; and though he have at that time six hundred arm man , and as many archer about he , yet he dare not but suffer they to enter ; where they abuse the king mother , offer to kiss she , in such rude manner , that she fall into a swoon : and find in the place Simon Thybold archbishop of Canterbury and lord chancellor ; and sir Robert hale also lord treasurer ; they lead they to the Towerhill , and there in most cruel manner strike off their head• , as also of diverse other : neither spare they sacred place ; for break into the church of the Augustine friar , they draw forth thirteen Fleming , and behead they in the open street ; as also seventeen other , out of other Churche• . yet after all these outrage , the king proclaim pardon to all such as will lay down arm , and go quiet home ; which the essex-man do , but the kentishman continue still , with their captain what tyl•r : to who when the king send sir John Newton to understand what his meaning be ; what Tyler , off ? fend because he come on horseback , tell he , it become he to light from his horse in his presence ; a•d therewith draw out his dagger to strike he : the king perceive his knight to be in danger , bid he alight from his horse : but when this will not pacify he , the major of London , William Walworth , by the king ap ? appointment page 5 road to he and arrest he , and give he such a blow on the head , that he astonish he ; and then other of the king servant draw their sword , and thrust he through in diverse part of his body , so as he die there in the place . when the commons see this , they cry out , our captain be slay , let we revenge it . here the king , though very young , not above fifteen year of age , yet have the courage to ride unto they , tell they , that now their leader be dead , he will be their leader himself ; and if they will follow he into the field , they shall have whatsoever they desire . in the mean time , the lord major Walworth have go into the city , and raise a thousand arm man , and meet sir Robert knoll by chance , get he to be their leader ; who come into the field where the re ? bell be , so daunt they , that throw down their weapon , they cry for mercy : that it be a wonderful thing to see how sudden fear overtake presump ? cion ; for scarce their word of insolency be out of their mouth , when they fall to word of most servile submission : and as strange a alteration in those about the king , to see how sudden boldness surprise fear ; for scarce they leave tremble at the sight of the rebel , when sudden upon sight of this aid their finger itch ? ed to be set •pon they , but that the king will not suffer it , because some a ? among they be there by compulsion , and to set upon they thus mingle , may as well be the death of the innocent , as of the guilty . but to pacify they the more , the king cause his charter of manumission to be send unto they ; which yet stay they not from commit outrage at S• . Alban , and cancel the ancient Char ? ter of the abbot and monk there . beside , the sedition be more general , then that the appease it in one place can be final ; for at the same time there be ga ? red together in Suffolk to the number of fifty thousand , by the set on of one John wraw a lewd priest : and these fall to destroy the house of lawyer speci ? all ; and sir John Cavendish lord chief justice of England , they behead , and set his head upon the pillory in saint Edmundsbury . the like commotion of the commons be at the same time also in Cambridgeshire , in the isle of Ely , and in Norfolk , under the guide of one John littester a dyer : and to countenance their proceed the more , they have a purpose to have bring William Vfford earl of Suffolk into their fellowship ; but he , advertise of their intention , sudden rise from supp•r , and get he away : but many other lord and knight they compel to be swear to they , and to ride with they ; as the lord scale , the lord Morley , sir John Brewi• , sir Stephen hale , and sir Robert Salle , who not endure their insolence , have his brain dash out by a country clown that be his bondman : the rest terrify by this example , be glad to carry themselves submissive to their chieftain John light ? •ester , who name himself king of the commons , and count it a preferment for any to serve he at his table , in take the assay of his meat and drink , with kneel humble before he , as he sit at meat . and now these fellow , upon a c•nsultation , send two choyceman , namely , the lord Morle• and sir John Brewi• , with three of their chief commons , to the king , for their charter of manumission and enfranchise : who be on their way , at Itchingham not far from new market , they meet with Henry Spenser bishop of Norwich ; and he examine they if there be any of the rebel in their company , and hear that thr•e of the chief be there present , he present cause their head to be strike off ; and then pursue on to ? ward Northwalsham in Norfolk , where the commons stay for answer from the king ; by that time he come thither , where he have at first but eight lance , and a small number of archer in his company , his number be so increase , that it come to be a complete army , with which he set upon the rebel , discomfit they , and take John littester and their other chieftain , who he cause all to be execute ; and by this mean the country be quiet . after this , the major of london•ate in judgement upon offender ; where many be find culpable , and lose their head ; among other , Jack straw , John Kirkeby , Alane Tredder , and John sterl•ng , who glory that he be the man have slay the archbishop . also sir Robert Tresilian chief justice , be appoint to sit in judgement against the offender ; before who above fifteen hundred be find guilty , and in sundry place put to page 6 death : among other , John ball priest , their incendiary ; of who it be not imper ? tinent to relate a letter he write to the rebel-rabble of Essex ; by which we may see how fit a orator he be for such a auditory , and what strength of persuasion there be in nonsense : John sheep saint Mary priest of York , and now of Colchester , greet well John nameless , and John the miller , and John carter ; and bid they that they beware of guile in borough , and stand together in god name : and bid Piers ploughman go to his work , and chastise well Hob the robber , and take with you John Trewman and all his fellow , and no more . John the miller you ground small , small , small ; the king son of heaven shall pay for all . beware or you be woe : know your friend from your foe : have enough , and say ho ; and do well and better : flee sin , and seek peace , and hold you therein : and so bid John Trewman and all his fellow . neither be it impertinent to declare the confession of Jack straw at his execution : when we be assemble ( say he ) upon Blackheath , and have send to the king to c•me to we , our purpose be to have slay all knight and gentleman that shall be a ? about he : and as for the king , we will have keep he among we , to the end the people may more bold have repair to we ; and when we have get pow ? ere enough , we will have slay all nobleman , and special the knight of the Rhodes ; and last we will have kill the king , and all man of possession , with bishop , monk , parson of church ; only friar mendicant we will have spare , for administration of the sacrament : then we will have devise law accord to which the people shall have live ; for we will have create king , as what tiler in Kent , and other in other country : and the same evening that Wat Tyler be kill , we be determine to set fire in four corner of the city , and to have divide the spoil among we : and this be our purpose , as God may help i now at my last end . ] for his service do in this seditious bu ? sinesse , the king knight the major William Walworth , and give he a hundred pound a year in fee ; also he knight five alderman his brethren , gird they abou• the waste with the girdle of knighthood , which be the manner of Gradu ? at in those day : and to do the city it self honour , he grant there shall be a dagger add to the arm of the city ; for till this time the city bear only the cross without the dagger . and now all part be quiet , the king by proclamation revoke and make void his former charter of enfranchise the bondman of the realm ; and that they shall stand in the same condition they be before . in the time of this sedition , the duke of Lancaster have be send into Scotland , to keep the Scot quiet ; who so carry the matter , that before the Scot hear of the sedition , a truce be conclu ? dead for two or three year . but the duke come back to Berwick , be deny by the captain sir Matthew Redman , to enter the town , because of a common ? dement give he by the earl of Northumberland , L. warden of the march , not to suffer any person to enter the same ; which the king indeed have appoint to be do , forget the duke of Lancaster that be then in Scotland : but howsoever , this breed such a spleen in the duke against the earl , that at his come home , he lay many thing to the earl charge , and the earl as stout answer his objecti ? on|his : and so far it proceed , that both of they come to the parliament which be then beginning , with great number of arm man , and themselves in armour , to the great terror of the people : but the king , wise take the matter into his own hand , make they friend . at which time , the lady Anne , sister to the Em ? perour Wincesl•us , and affiance wife to the king , be come to Calais ; whereupon the parliament be prorogue : the lady be bring to London , join in marriage to the king , and crown queen at Westminster by the archbishop of Canterbury , with great solemnity . after the marriage , the parliament begin again ; in which William Vfford earl of Suffolk be choose by the knight of the shire to deliver in behalf of the commonwealth certain matter concern the same , the very day and hour in which he shall have do the business , as he go up the page 7 stair towards the upper house , he sudden fall down and die , have be merry and well before , to all man judgement . about this time the lord Scroop be depose from the chancellorship , for refuse to seal some grant which the king have make : and the king receive the great seal at his hand , keep it a cer ? take time , and seal with it such grant and write as he please ; till at length it be deliver to Robert Braybrooke bishop of London , who be make lord Chan ? cellour . Henry Spenser bishop of Norwich , have late with the king leave raise a army , and be go into France , in behalf of pope Vrban , against the antipope Clement ; and enter first into fla•ders , he take and sack many town ; at last besiege ypres ; till by a army of French ( great than be think can have be raise in France ) he be force to raise his siege : and then pass diverse place , he come to gr••eling ; from whence he write to king Richard , that if ever he mean to try bat ? tell with the french , now be the time . the king be at that time at dayntrie in North•mptonshire ; and be at supper when the word be bring he , he in ? stant rose from the table , get to horseback , and ride in post with such speed that he come to saint Alban about midnight ; where make no stay , but while he borrow ? ed the abbot gelding , he haste forth till he come to Westminster , as though he have mean never to rest till he have give battle to the Frenchman : but after he have take council of his pillow , his mind be alter , and h• think it better to he ? ploy some other , than to go himself : so the duke of Lancaster be think the fit man ; but he protract the time so long in make preparation , th•t before he can be go , the bishop be come away : and this indeed be the condition of many , to spend so much time in prepare , that they utter lose all opportunity of act ; like to man that be put on their clothes so long , till it be time to put they off again . Shortly after , a truce be conclude between fra•ce and Eng ? land , to endure till the feast of saint Michael , which shall be in the year 1384. of act do after he come of age . the Scot in this mean time have make Roades into England , and take and burn diverse town upon the border : whereupon the duke of Lancaster , with his brother the earl of Buckingham , be send with a mighty army to repress they ; but have enter Scotland , and not able to draw the Scot to a battle , they only burn certain town , and then return . about this time a irish friar , of the order of the Carmelite , charge the duke of Lancaster with heinous crimes• as that he intend to destroy the king , and u ? s•rpe the crown ; show the time , the place , and other circumstance of the whole plot . but the duke call to his answer , so clear himself , a• lest give such colour of clear , that the accuser be commit to the custody of John Holland the king halfbrother , till a day appoint for further trial : the ni•ht before which day , the say lord Holland and sir Henry Greene be say to have come to this friar , and put a cord about his neck , tie the other end about his privy man ? bers ; and after hang he up from the ground , lay a stone upon his belly , with the weight whereof his very backbone burst asunder ; thereby put he to a most torment death : a act not more inhumane than unadvised ; for though it take away the accuser , yet it make the accusation more suspicious . at this time , though a truce have be make with the Scot , yet they will not be quiet , but enter and win the castle of Barwick , whereof the earl of nor ? thumberland be captain , but have commit the keep of it to another ; for which be blame , he go against they with a army , but take a easy course , for with the sum of two thousand mark he buy they out , and have the castle surrend•ed into his hand again . the king upon some new displeasure , be now incense against the duke of Lancaster , have a purpose to have he arrest , and be ? reign of certain point of treason , before sir Robert Tresilian chief justice , page 8 though he ought to be try by his peer : but the duke have intimation hereof• get he to his castle of Pomfret , and stand upon his guard ; till the king mother , ( notwithstanding her indisposition of body , by reason of her corpulency ) ride to and fro betwixt they , pacify the king , and make they friend . in the nine year of king Richard reign , the fencing send the admiral of France into Scotland , with a thousand man of arm , beside crossbow and o ? there|be , to aid the Scot against the english ; with which aid the Scot encourage , enter the english border : whereof king Richard advertise , himself with a mighty army enter Scotland ; and come to Edingborough , and find all the people fled• he set fire on the house , burn the church of S. Giles , only holy-rood-house be spare at the duke of lancaster suit , in remembrance of friendship he have former receive in that house . the Scot by no mean can be draw to any battle ; bu• to divert the king army , they enter Cumberland , and besiege Carlile , whereby the valour of sir Lewis Clifford and sir Thomas Musgrave they be repel ; and hear of the king army come towards they , and fear to be enclose , they draw back into Scotland , and the king return into England . but in this mean while , the english of Calais take many prize of french ship at sea , and many Boo ? tie also by land ; at one time four thousand sheep , and three hundred head of great cattle . this year the king call a parliament at Westminster , where he create two duke , one marquess , and five earl : Edmund of Langly earl of Cambridge , the king uncle , be create duke of York : Thomas of Woodstock earl of buck ? ingham , his other uncle , duke of Gloucester : Robert veer earl of Oxford , be make marquess of Dublin : Henry of Bullingbrooke son of John of Gaunt , be create earl of Derby : Edward Plantagenet son to the duke of York , be make earl of Rutland : Michael de la pool chancellor of England , be create earl of Suffolk : and Thomas Mowbray earl of Nottingham , be make earl martial . also by a• ? thority of this parliament , Roger Mortimer earl of march , son and heir of ed ? mund Mortimer , and of the lady Philip elder daughter and heir to Lionel duke of Clarence three son to king Edward the three , be establish heir apparent to the crown of the realm , and short after so proclaim : but go into Ireland to his lordship of Ulser , be there by the wild irish slay . This Roger earl of march have issue , Edmund , Roger , Anne , Alice , and Eleanor ; which Eleanor be make a nun : the two son dye without issue : Anne his elder daughter , be marry to Richard earl of Cambridge , son to Edmund of Langley ; which Richard have issue by the say Anne , a son call Richard , that be after duke of York , and father to king Edward the four ; also a daughter name Isabel , marry to the lord Bourchier . also this year Henry of Bullingbrooke earl of Derby , marry the daughter and heir of Humphrey Bohun earl of Hereford ; in who right he be after make duke of Hereford . this year also king Richard hold his Christmas at Eltham , leo king of Armenia come thither to he ; who in fear to have his kingdom conquer by the Turk , be come into Christendom to seek for aid : but his chief errand into England be , to have procure a peace between the two king of England and Fran•e ; but their spleen be so great against one another , that it be not in the physic of hi• power to cure they . at this time , the duke of Lancaster , take with he his wife the lady const•nce , and a daughter he have by she name Katherine , and two other daughter which he have by his former wife , fail into Spain : he be attend in his journey with the lord Lucy , the lord Talbot , the lord Basset , Willoughby , Fitzwater , poy•ings , Br•• ? ston , and many other lord and knight , to the number of fifteen hundred man of arm ; whereof a thousand at the least be knight and esquire . the king at his take leave give he a crown of gold , and command he shall be call king of Spain : and the queen likewise give another crown of gold to the dutche••e . he land first at breast , and free that castle from the french : from thence he sai ? lead , and arrive at the groin in Spain , where he remain a month ; and then go to Compostella , where he stay a while : in which time , his constable sir John page 9 holl••d win diverse town . at Monson , the king of Portugal , and the duke of L••caster meet ; where a marriage be conclude between the say king of Portugal and the lady Philip daughter to the Duke• which marriage short after be con ? summate , and the lady send into Portugal honorable accompany . the duke continue at Co•postella all the winter : at march the king of Portugal and he en ? ••ed the confine of Castille , where they take many town ; and pass over the river of Dure , enter into the country de Campo : but the Spaniard not will to come to a battle , but mean to weary they out with delay ; the English not use •o such hot air , fall daily into many disease : which the duke see , accor ? dead •o a truce . there die in this action , the lord Fi•zwater , sir Richard burley••night of the garter , the lord Poynings , and sir Henry Percy cousin-german to the e••le of Northumberland , also the lord Talbot ; and in all , twelve great lord four ? score •nights , two hundred esquire , and of the mean sort above five hundred . when the army be break up , the duke of Lancaster , and the dutche•se his wife go into Portugal ; and after some stay there , they sail to Bayon , in the mar ? che of Gascoigne , where he rest a long time after : in which mean while , there be offer make for a marriage to be have , between the duke of Berry , uncle to the fr••ch king , and the lady Ka•herine , daughter to the duke of Lancaster : which the king of Spain understand , he begin to doubt , lest if that marriage go for ? ward , it may turn to his disadvantage ; and thereupon by earnest suit , at length conc•uded a peace with the duke of Lancaster , on this wise , that his elder son he•ry shall marry the the lady Katherine , the duke of lancaster daughter , and be entitle prince of austurg•s ; and in consideration of this marriage , and that all claim shall cease , which the duke in right of his wife may challenge or pre ? tend• it be agree , that the say duke shall receive yearly the sum of ten thous•nd mark , during the life of he and his duchess ; and to have in hand the sum of two hundred thousand noble . at this time , the french have a purpose to invade England , with no less a hope then to make a conquest : and to that end , they prepare a mighty navy ; so as in the month of September , there be number about Sluis , dam , and Bla•kerk• , 1•87 ship , beside those which be rig in Britain by the constable , who have cause a enclosure of a field to be make of timber , that when they be land in E•gland , they may therewith enclose their field , and so lodge at more surety : but it so fortune , that the lord William Beauchampe captain of Calais , take two of their ship , whereof one be lade with a piece of the say enclosure ; and after that , •nother ship , lade with gun , gunpowder , and other instrument of war ; and after that again , two ship more , lade with parcel of the say enclosure , which king •ichard cause to be rear and set up about Winchelsey town : at last the fore ? say army come into Flanders , and arrive at Sluis ; where , after some stay , they be so distress for victual , that in the end of November , they be glad to be go , and return into France . at this time , in a parliament , Robert veer earl of Oxford and Marques of Dublin , be create duke of Ireland ; and Michael de la pool , a merchant son , have late be ? fore be create E. of Suffolk , and make chancellor of England . and now begin king Richard to enter , i may say , upon the confine of his destiny : his grace of undeserving man , and disgrace of man deserve , if they be not the cause , they be at least the occasion of his own disgrace , and destruction in the end . he be now come to be of full age to do all himself ; which be indeed to be of full age to undo himself : for the fault of his young year may have the excuse to be but error ; but the fault of the age he be now at , be peremp•ory against he , and admit no defence . and to hasten the pace of his destiny the fast , the ill counsel which before be but whisper in his ear , be now scarce forbear to be give he aloud : it be tell he , that he be under tuition no long , and there ? fore not to be control , as in former time he have be ; that to be cross of his will by his subject , be to be their subject ; it be no sovereignty , if it be not absolute . at the instigation of which counsel , the king in a parliament now assemble , fall page 10 to expostulate with his lord , ask they what year they think he to be ? ? ? who answer , that he be somewhat more than one and twenty ; well , then ( sa•• he ) i be out of wardship , and therefore look to enjoy my kingdom as free , ? ? ? your self at the like year enjoy your patrimony . but his flatter Favori•• shall have remember , that though the king may not be control , where he ca• command ; yet he may be oppose , where he can but demand ; as now indeed he wa• for when he come to demand a subsidy towards his war , he be answer , that he need no subsidy from his subject , if he will but call in the debt which th• chancellor owe he : and if he be so tender of he , that he can not find i• his heart to do it himself , they will do that work for he : and thereupo• charge he with such crime , that all his good be confiscate , and himself add ? judge to dye , if the king so please : though some write , his sentence be only to pay a fine of twenty thousand mark , and a thousand pound year beside . Upo• this provocation , the opposite side seek present revenge : it be devise , that the duke of Gloucester as principal , and other lord that cross the king course , shall be invite to a supper in London , and there be murder . in the execu•• ? on of which plot , the former lord major , sir Nicolas brember , have a special hand• but the present major rich•rd Exton , move to it by the king , will by no mean•• consent ; and thereupon the plot proceed not . but for all these harsh strain , and many such other that pass this parliament , a subsidy be at length grant to the king , of half a ten , and half a fifteen ; but with condition , that ? ? ? shall not be issue but by order from the lord , and the earl of Arund•ll be ap ? point to receive it . but before this time , both house have direct agree , that unless the chancellor be remove , they will meddle no further in the P•• ? liament . the king advertise hereof , send to the commons , that they shall se•• unto Eltham ( where he then lie ) forty of their house , to declare their mind ? ? ? he : but upon conference of both house , it be agree , that the duke of Glo•• ? st•r , and Thomas Arundel bishop of Ely , shall in the name of the parliament go unto he : who come to the king , declare , that by a old statute , the king once a year may lawful summon his court of parliament , for reformation of all corruption and enormity within the realm : and further declare , that by a old ordinance also it be enact , that if the king shall absent himself 40 day not be sick , the house may lawful break up , and return home . at this the king be say to say , well , we perceive our people go about to rise against we , and therefore we think we can do better than to ask aid of our cousin the king of France , and rather submit we to he then to our own subject . to which the Lord• answer , they wonder at this opinion of his majesty , see the french king be the ancient enemy of the kingdom ; and he may remember what mischief be bring upon the realm in king John time , by such a course . by these and the like persuasion , the king be induce to come to the parliament : and soon after , John Fortham bishop of Durham be discharge of his office of lord treasurer ; and in his place be appoint•d Ioh• Gilber• bishop of Hereford , a friar of the order of preacher : also Michael de la p••le earl of Suffolk , be discharge of his office of chancellor ; and Thomas Aru•dell bishop of Ely , by consent of parliament , place in his room . also by order of parliament , thirteen lord be choose to have oversight , under the king , of the w•ole government of the realm : of which thirteen , there be three of the new-officer name ; as the bishop of Ely lord chancellor , the bishop of Hereford lord treasurer , and Nicolas abbot of w•l ? tham lord keeper of the privy seal : the other ten be , William archbishop of C••terbury , Alexander archbishop of York , Edmund of L•ngley duke of York , Thoma• duke of Gloucester , William bishop of Winchester , Thomas bishop of Exeter , rich•rd earl of Arundel , Richard lord scr••pe , and John lord Devereux . but this parti ? cipation of the government be find inconvenient , hold not long . also in this parliament , it be grant , that Robert de veer , late create duke of Ireland , shall have and receive to his own use 30000. mark , which the Frenchman be to give for the heir of •he lord Charles de bl•ys : but it be grant upon •his page 11 condition• that before the next easter he shall pass over into Ireland , to recover such land as the king have there give he : so desirous the lord and commons be to have he remove from the king presence . but though the king give way to this torrent of the parliament for the present , yet as soon as the parliament be dissolve , he dissolve also all that have be do , either against the lord Chan ? cellour , or against the duke of Ireland , or against Alexander Nevil archbishop of York ; and receive they into more favour than ever he have do before . in his ten year , about the beginning of march , Richard earl of Arundel appoint admiral , and Thomas Mowbray earl of Nottingham , the earl of Devon ? shire , and the bishop of Norwich , go to sea , with a warlike power of man and •rmes , to watch for the fleet of Flanders , that be ready to come from rochel with wine ; and meet with they , they set upon they : and take of they , to the number of a hundred vessel , all fraught with wine ; so as wine grow so plentiful , that it be sell for thirteen shilling four penny the ton ; and the best and choy ? sest for twenty shilling . beside this , they land in Flanders , where they relieve and fortify breast , and demolish two fort which the enemy have build against it . but this happy service of the earl of Arundel ; the duke of Ireland , the earl of Suffolk , sir Simon Burley , and sir Richard Sturrey , who continue still about the king , seem rather to envy , than to commend ; insomuch that when the earl of Nottingham , that have ever be the king play fellow , and of equal age to he , come to the court , he be neither receive by the duke of Ireland with any good well ? come , nor by the king with any good countenance : and therefore indeed , not by the king with any good countenance , because not by the duke of Ireland with any good welcome . about this time ; the duke of Ireland seek to be divorce from his lawful wife , daughter to the lady Isabel , one of king Edward the three daughter ; and take to wife one Lancerona a vintner daughter of Bohemia , one of the queen maid : at which indignity , the duke of Gloucester , that be uncle to the lady thus forsake , take great displeasure ; which the duke of Ireland understand , study how by some mean he may dispatch the duke of Gloucester out of the way . Easter be now past , the time appoint for the duke of Ireland go over into Ireland ; when the king , with a show to bring he to the water side , go with he into wale , and in his company , Michael de la pool earl of Suffolk , Robert Tresilian L. Chie• justice , and diverse other ; who there consult how they may di•patch the duke of glow ? cester , the earl of Arundel , Warwick , D•rby , Nottingham , with diverse other of that faction : but when the king have remain in those part a good while , he re ? turn , and bring back the duke of Ireland with he ; and so his voyage into irel••d be clean forget . about the same time , Robert Tresilian chief justice come to Coventry , where he indict two thousand person . the king and the queen come to Groby ; and thither come by his commandment the justice of the re••me , Robert Belknap lord chief justice of the common plea , John Holt , r•ger Fulthorpe , and William Borough , knight : to who it be propound , to an•wer to these question follow : first , whether the new statute and commission make in the last parliament , be against the king prerogative , or no ? to which they all answer , it be . second , how they ought to be punish , that procure the say statute and commission to be make ? they answer with one assent , that they deserve death , except the king will pardon they . third , how they ought to be punish who move the king to consent to the make of the say statute and commission ? they answer , they ought to lose their life , unless the king will pardon they . four , how they ought to be punish , that com•elled the king to the ma ? king of that statute ? they answer , they ought to suffer as traitor . five , whether the king may cause the parliament to proceed upon article by he limit , before they proceed to any other ? they answer , that in this the king •hould over-rule ; and if any presume to do contrary , he be to be punish as a traitor . page 12 sixthly , whether the king may not at his pleasure dis•olve the parliament , and command the lord and commons to depart ? they all answer , he may . seven , whether the lord and commons may , without the king will , impeach officer and justice upon their offence , in parliament , or no ? it be answer , they may not ; and he that attempt contrary , be to suffer as a trai ? tour ? eight , how he be to be punish , who move in the parliament , that the statute wherein Edward the second be indict in parliament , may be send for ; by i• ? spection of which statute , that present statute be de•ised ? it be answer , that as well he that move it , as he that bring they ? ? ? into the house , be to be punish as traitor ? nine , whether the judgement give in parliament against Michael de la Po•le be erroneous and revocable ? they answer , it be erroneous and revocable• and that if the judgement be now to be give , the justice will not give the same . in witness of the premise , the justice aforesaid , to these present have set their seal ; in the presence of Alexander archbishop of York , rob••t archbishop of Dublin , John bishop of Durham , Thomas bishop of Chester , John bishop of ••ng•r , Robert duke of Ireland , Michael earl of Suffolk , John Ripon clerk , and John Blake . at this time the Londoner incur much obloquy ; for , have before be pardon by the king of some crime••aid to their charge , they be now ready to comply with the king in his desire ; and thereupon be impanel , they indict some lord of many crime inform against they . but not only the justice a ? foresay , but all other justice and sheriff of the realm be call at this time to Nottingham : the chief cause be , to understand what power of man they can assure the king of , to serve he against the lord : and further , that where he mean• short to call a parliament , they shall so use the matter , that no knight or burr ? guess shall be choose , but such as the king and his council shall name . to which the sheriff make answer , that it lie not in their power to assemble any force against the lord , who be so well belove : and as for choose knight and burgess , the commons will undoubted look to enjoy their ancient liberty , and can not be hin•ered . but yet the king and the duke of Ireland send into all part of the realm , to raise man in this quarrel against the lord : whereof the duke of Gloucester be advertise , he come secret to conference with the earl of Arundel , Warwick , and Derby ; who upon consultation , determine to talk with the king , with their force about they : and the king , on the other part , take add ? vice how he may apprehend they apart ; and thereupon , send the earl of nor ? thumberland and other to the castle of Rygate , to take the earl of Arundel , who lie there at that time : but howsoever it fortune , they fa••ed of their purpose . after this , he send other to apprehend he : but he be warn by a messenger from the duke of Gloucester , convey himself away by night ; and by morning be come to haringey-parke , where he find the duke of Gloucester and the earl of Warwick , with a great power of man about they . the king hear of this as ? sembly at hari•gey-parke , call his council , to hear their opinion what be fit to be do : some be of opinion , that the king shall assemble his friend , and join they with the Londoner , give they battle ; the chief of this mind be the archbishop of York : other think best , the king shall seek to appease the lord with fair promise , till a fit opportunity to suppress they . but the king not yet resolve what course to take , cause only order to be take , that no citizen of Lond•n shall sell to the duke of Gloucester , the earl of Arundel , or to any other of the lord , any armour or furniture of war , under a great pain . but for all this , the lord proceed in their course , and send the archbishop of Canterbury , the lord John Lovel , the lord Cobham , and the lord John Devereux , require to have deliver to they such as be about the king , that be traitor and seducer page 13 both of he and the realm : and further to declare , that their assemble be for the honour and wealth both of he and the kingdom . the duke of Ireland , the earl of Suffolk , and two or three other about the king , per•wad•d he to offer call ? l•• to the king of France , to have his assistance against the lord . withal , the king seat to the major of London , require to know how many able man the city can make ? to which the major answer , that he think it can make fifty thou ? sand man at a hour warning . well then ( say the king ) go and prove what will be do . but when the major go about it , he be answer , they will never fight against the king friend , and defender of the realm . at the same time , the earl of Northumberland say to the king : sir , there be no doubt but these lord have always be , and still be your true and faithful subject , though now distemper by certain person about you , that seek to oppress they : therefore my advice be , that you send to they , to come before your presence in some public place ; and i very believe , they will show such reason of their do , that you will hold they excuse . the archbishop of Canterbury , and the bishop of Ely lord chancellor , and other of the bishop there present , approve all of the earl advice : where ? upon the king send the archb•shop of Canterbury , and the bishop of Ely to the lord , require they to come to he to Westminster , on Sunday then next follow : which , upon oath give by the archbishop and the chancellor , that no fraud nor evil practice shall be use against they , they be content to do . but when the lord be ready to come at the day appoint , they hear of a ambush lay to entrap they at the mew , and thereupon stay , so as they come not at the time appoint : whereupon , the king ask why they come not accord to their promise ? it be answer , because he keep not his promise , there be a ambush of a thousand arm man lay to surp•ize they at the mew . the king hear this be astonish , and swear he know of no such thing , and come ? mand present the place shall be search , but it be true ; a ambush be lay , but not at the mew , but in a place a•out Westminster , where sir Thomas tryvet and sir Nicholas Brember have assemble they . this one action may have make the king sensible of his favorite abuse his authority ; but that where affection make the construction , all thing be take in a good sense ; or be it perhaps they have a warrant dormant , to prosecute the king end without the king knowledge ? yet the lord after this , receive a safe conduct from the king , come to Westminster ; of who come when the king hear , he apparel himself in his royall-robe , and with his sceptre in his hand , come into the great hall ; before who , the lord upon their knee present themselves , the king bid they welcome , and take each of they by the hand ; then the lord Chancellor make a speech , wherein he blame they for raise of arm , and require to know the cause ; they answer , they have do it for the good of the king and kingdom , and to take away the tra•tors about the king . upon this the king himself speak , ask he whether they think to compel he by strong hand ? have not i ( say he ) sufficie ? t man to beat you down ? true in this behalf i make no more account of you then of the base scullion in my kitchen ; yet after these great word , he lift up the duke of Gloucester , who all this while be kneel , and command the rest also to rise , and then lead they courteous to his chamber , where they sit and drink together : and final it be conclude they shall all meet again , as well these lord , as those they accu ? sed , at the next parliament ; which the king promise to call speedy , and each par ? ty to receive there accord to justice , and in the mean time all party to be in the king protection . but when the favourite lord hear this , they tell the king plain ? lie , they neither dare nor will put themselves to the hazard of such a meeting , and therefore the duke of Ireland and the rest of that faction leave the court to be out of the way : but the king not endure their abs•nce , app•l•ted Thomas Mollineux constable of •he castle of Chester , to raise a army , and to safe-conduct the duke of Ireland to he ; but ••ey be come as far as radcoat-bridge , be encoun•red by the earl of Derby ; and the duke of Ireland , not d•ring to join battle with he , flee ; and be to pass a river , cast away his gauntlet and sword ( to be the more page 14 nimble ) and give his horse the spur , leap into the river , and so escape ; that when these thing be afterward find , it be very think he have be drown , till news come he be get into holland , where be no very welcome guest , he go from thence into the bishopric of Vtricht , and after two or three year scamble about in manner of a fugitive , at Louvain in Brabant he end his life . a man of ma ? ny good part , and worthy enough of his prince favour , if with that favour he have not grow proud , and in that pride , injurious and insult over other not less deserve then himself . he be valiant enough against any man but the earl of D•rby , and of he indeed both the genius of the duke of Ireland , and of king Richard himself seem to stand in fear , for neither of they dare meet he in the field , though encourage to it by those about they . about this time the duke of Suffolk doubt some plot lay to surprise he , flee over to C•llis in disguise , shave his beard , and counterfeit himself a Paul ? terer , to sell certain foul which he have get ; but be come to Calais , be by the lord William Beauchampe , deputy of the town , send back into England , who the king notwithstanding permit to go at large , to make it be think he be more afraid than hurt , more suspicious than he need by this time the lord h•d get matter enough against the king , at least to justify their arm , and thereup ? on with a army of forty thousand man , they come to London , where after some de ? bate , they be receive ; and then the duke of Gloucester , the earl of Derby and Nottingham go to the king in the tower ; to who , after humble salutation , they show the letter which he have write to the duke of Ireland , to levy an be ? my|night for their destruction : likewise the letter which the french king have write to he , contain a safe conduct for he to come into France , there to do act to his own dishonour and the kingdom . this do , upon the king promise that he will come the next day to westmin ? star to treat further of these matter , the lord depart , only the earl of not ? tingham and Derby , at the king instance , stay all night ; but before the king go to bed , his mind be clean alter for keep his promise to meet the lord the next day at Westminster : which the lord understand , they send peremptory to he , that if he come not accord to his promise , they will choose another king , that shall hearken to the faithful counsel of his lord . This touch the king so to the quick , that the next morning he go and meet the lord ; who there decla ? read to he , how much it concern the good of the kingdom , that those traitor so often speak of , shall be remove from the court : to which , the king , though much against his will , yet at last condescend . and thereupon present Alexan ? there Nevil archbishop of York , and Thomas rushoke bishop of Chichester , and confess ? sour to the king , be expel the court ; who not willing to come to after-reckon ? ing , flee no man know whither . they expel also John Fourdham bishop of Dur ? ham , lord treasurer ; the lord zouch of Haringworth , the lord Burvell , the lord Beaumont , Albery de veer , Baldwin de Bereford , Richard Adderbury , John worth , tho ? mass Clifford , and John Lovel , knight : but constrain to put in surety to appear at the next parliament . also certain lady be expel the court ; as the lady Poynings , the lady moul , and other ; bound to appear at the next parliament . there be also arrest , and commit to several prison , sir Simon Burley , Will ? liam Elmham , John Beauchamp steward of the king house , sir John Salisbery , sir Thomas Trivet , sir Iames berney , sir Nicolas Dagworth , and sir Nicolas brember , knight . also Richard Clifford , John Lincoln , Richard Mitford , the king chaplain ; Nicolas Sclake deane of the king chapel , and John Blake a lawyer . Shortly after , the parliament begin , ( call afterward , the parliament that wrought wonder : ) on the first day whereof , be arrest as they sit in their place , all the justice ( but only sir William Skipwith : ) as sir Roger Fulthorpe , sir Robert belknappe , sir John carry , sir John Holt , sir William brook , and John Alac•on the king sergeant at law ; and be all send to the tower , for do contrary to a agreement make the last parliament . also in the begin of this parliament , Robert veer duke of irel•nd , Alexander Nevil archbishop of York , Michael de la page 15 pool earl of Suffolk , and sir Robert Tresilian lord chief justice of England , be open call to answer Thomas of Woodstock duke of Gloucester , Richard earl of Arundel , Henry earl of Derby , and Thomas earl of Nottingham , upon certain be ? ticle of high treason : and because none of they appear , it be ordain by whole consent of parliament , they shall be banish for ever , and all their land• and good •eized into the king hand ( their entail land only except . ) short ? lie after , the lord chief justice Robert Tresilian , be find in a apothecary house in Westminster ; where be take , he be bring to the duke of Gloucester , who cause he the same day to be have to the tower , and from thence draw to tie ? burn , and there hang . on the morrow after , sir Nicolas Brember be bring to his answer ; who be find guilty , be behead with a axe which he ? self have cause to be make for behead of other . after this , sir John Salisbery , and sir Iames berney , lusty young man , be draw and hang ; as also John Be••champ L. steward of the king house , John Blake esquire : and last , sir Simon Burley , son to the great sir John Burley knight of the garter , be behead on tower-hill ; who death the king take more heavy and more heinous than all the rest . also all the justice be condemn to dye ; but by the queen inter ? session , they be only banish the realm , and all their land and good con ? fiscate , only a small portion of money be assign they for their sustentation . final , in this parliament , a oath be require and obtain of the king , that he shall stand unto , and abide such rule and order as the lord shall take : and this oath be require also of all the inhabitant of the realm . in the late end of the king eleven year , the earl of Arundel be send to sea , with a great navy of ship and man of war ; with who go the earl of not ? tingham and Devonshire , sir Thhmas Percy , the lord Clifford , the lord Camoi• , sir William Elmham , and diverse other knight , to aid the duke of Britain against the king of France : but before they come , the duke of Britain be reconcile to the king of France ; and so need not their aid , all this great fleet return with do nothing . and it be indeed a year of do nothing , unless we reckon some petty inroad of the Scot : and that sir Thomas tryvet die with a fall off his horse : and that sir John holland , the king brother by the mother , be make earl of Huntington : and that there be contention in Oxford , between the northern and the southern scholar ; which be pacify by the duke of Gloucester . in his twelve year , commissioner be appoint to meet at Balingham , be ? betwixt Calli• and Boulogne , to treat of a peace between the realm of England , France , and Scotland : and after long debate , a truce be at last conclude , to begin at midsummer next , and to last three year . but now the king , to show his plenary authority of be at full age , remove the archbishop of York from be ? king lord chancellor , and put in his place William Wickham bishop of Winchester : also he remove the bishop of Hereford from be treasurer , and put another in his place : the earl of Arundel likewise , unto who the government of the par ? liament be commit , and the admiralty of the sea ; be remove , and the earl of Huntington put in his room . about this time , the lord John Hastings earl of Pembroke , as he be practise to learn to just , be strike about the privy part , by a knight call sir John saint John ; of which hurt he soon after die . in who family , it be memorable , that for many generation together , no son ever see his father , ( the father be always dead , before the son be bear . ) the original of this family be from Hastings the Dane , who in the reign of king Alured , long before the conquest , about the year 890. come with Rollo j•to England . but howsoever , in this John Hastings end the then honourable title of the Hastings ; for this man die without issue , his inheritance be disperse to diverse person : the honour of Pembroke come to Francis at court , by the king gift : the barony of Hastings and Welford come to Reynold grey of Ruthin : the barony of Aburg•veny be grant to William Bea• ? •hamp of Bedford . about this time , John duke of Lancaster be create duke of Aquitaine , recei ¦ ving page 16 at the king hand the rod and the cap , as investiture of that duchy . also the duke of York son and heir be create earl of Richmond . in his thirteenth year , a royal joust be proclaim to be hold within smith ? field in London , to begin on Sunday next after the feast of saint Michael : which be publish , not only in England , but in Scotland , in Almaigne , in Flanders , in Bra ? bant , and in France ; many stranger come hither ; among other , Valeran earl of S. Poll , that have marry king Richard sister ; and William the young earl of Oster ? vaunt , son to Albert de bav•ere earl of Hollond and Heynoult . at the day •ppointed there issue forth of the tower , about three a clock in the afternoon , sixty Cour ? ser apparel for the joust ; and upon every one a esquire of honour , ride a soft pace : after they , come forth four and thirty lady of honour , ( Froyssard say , threescore ) mount on palfrey , and every lady lead a knight with a chain of gold : these knight be on the king part , have their armour and apparel garnish with white heart , and crown of gold abo•• their neck ; and so they come ride through the street of London , unto Smithfield : the joust last diverse day ; all which time the king and queen lie at the bishop palace by Paul church , and keep open house for all comer . in his fifteen year , the duke of Lancaster go into France , have in his train a thousand horse ; and meet the king of France at A•iens , to treat of a peace between the two kingdom : but after long debate , a truce only be conclude for a year . about this time also , the king require the Londoner to lend he a thous•nd pound : which they refuse •o do ; and not only so , but they abuse a italian merchant , for offer to lend it . This move the king to some indignation : to which be add the complaint of a riot commit by the citizen , against the servant of the bishop of Sali•bury L. treasurer ; for that , where one of the bishop servant , name Walter roman , have take a horse-loaf out a baker basket , as he pass in the street , and run with it into his lord house ; the citizen thereupon assault the house , and will not be quiet , till the major and alderman be fain to come , and with much ado appease they . upon complaint hereof , ur ? ge against the citizen , by the bishop of Salisbury L. treasurer , and Thomas A ? rundell archbishop of York L. chancellor , the major and alderman , and diverse other substantial citizen be arrest : the major be commit to the castle of Windsor , and the other to other castle ; the liberty of the city be seize into the king hand , and the authority of the major utter cease ; the king appoint a warden to govern the city , first sir Edmund Derligrug , and afterward sir bald ? win Radington ; till at length , by special suit of the duke of Gloucester , the king be content to come to London , to so great joy of the citizen , that they receive he with four hundred on horseback , clad all in one livery , and present the king and queen with many rich gift : yet all give not satisfaction , to have their liberty restore , till they afterward pay ten thousand pound . this it be to pro ? voke a lion : it may be fortune enough to we , if by any mean we can but keep he quiet ; for if once we provoke he to lay his paw upon we , it will be hard get from he , and not be tear in piece . in his sixteenth year , the duke of lanc•ster and Gloucester be once again send into France , to treat of a peace : but when they can not agree with the french-commissioner upon article propo•nded , there be only a truce conclude for four year ; though perhaps a further agreement have then be make , but that the king of France fall new again into his old fit of frenzy , which call away the french commissioner from further treaty . in his eighteenth year , a proclamation be set forth , that all irish man shall avoid this realm , and return home : the occasion be , because so many irish be come over , that irela•d in a manner be leave unpeople : in so much , that where king Edward the three have receive from thence yearly the sum of thirty thou ? sand pound , the king now lay forth as much to repel rebel . whereupon at mi ? chaelmas king Richard go himself into Ireland , attend with the duke of Gloucester , page 17 the earl of march , Nottingham , and Rutland , the lord Thomas Percy L. steward , and diverse other of the english nobility ; to who come in the great o•eale king of Meth , Bryan of Thomond king of Thomond , Arthur macmur king of leymster , and C•nhur king of Cheveney and Darpe : and there king Richard stay all that winter , and after Christmas call a parliament ; at which time also , the duke of York lord warden of England , in the king name call a parliament at Westminster : to the which be send forth of Ireland the duke of Gloucester , that he may declare to the commons the king great occasion for supply of money : who word so far prevail , that a whole ten be grant by the clergy , and a fifteen by the Laytie . in his twenty year be the famous interview between the two king of England and France : there be set up for king Richard a rich pavilion , a little be ? yond guysnes , within the english pale ; and another the like for the french king , on this side Arde : the distance betwixt the two tent be beset on either side with knight arm with thei• sword in their hand , four hundred french on one side , and four hundred english on the other : the two king before their meeting , take a solemn oath , for assurance of their faithful and true meaning , to observe the sa ? cred law of amity one towards another , in this interview . after the two king be come together , it be accord , that in the same place where they meet , there shall be build at both their cost , a chapel , for a perpetual memory , which shall be call , the chapel of our lady of peace . on Simon and Jude day , the king talk together of article concern the peace ; and have conclu ? dead they , they receive either of they a oath , upon the holy evangelist , to ob ? serve and keep they . this do , the french king bring his daughter Isabel , and deliver she to king Richard , who short after at Calais marry she , and upon the 17. of January follow , she be crown queen at Westminster . a match of great honour , but of little conveniency , and less profit ; for the lady be but eight year of age , there can be no hope of issue a long time , which be king Richard great want ; and as little supply of his want otherwise , her portion perhaps scarce pay the charge of his journey to fetch she , which cost he three hundred thousand mark . the duke of Lancaster , in the thirteenth year of king Richard reign , have be create duke of Aquitaine : but when the gascoigner will not receive he , show reason why that dukedom ought not to be separate from the crown of England , his grant be revoke , and so it remain still in demesne of the crown . at this time , in a parliament , the duke of Lancaster cause to be legitimate , the issue he have by Katherine Swinford , before he marry she ; of who , Thomas Beaufort be create earl of Somerset . this year also , the king receiviug the money back , which have be lend to the duke of Britain , upon breast , deliver up the town unto he ; and thereupon , the english soldier that be there in garrison , be all discharge and send home ; who , at a feast which the king keep at Westminster , come in company together into the hall ; as soon as the king have dine , and be enter into his chamber , the duke of Gloucester ask he , if he do mark those man that stand in such troop in the hall : yes marry ( say the king ) who be they ? they be ( say the duke ) those soldier , who by your render up of breast have be send home , and now must either starve or steal ; and therewithal , very unadvised in word , tax the king with unadvisedness of his deed : to who the king in great anger reply , why uncle , do you think i either a merchant , or a fool , to sell my land ? by saint John Baptist , no : but can i refuse to render the town , when tender be make of the money lend upon it ? indeed nothing can more discover the duke of gloucester , either weakness , if he know not that breast be but only a mortgage ; or injustice , if know it , he will have have the king , though the money be ten ? dread , to have keep it still : but such be the course of many , to take part with the Po ? liticks against the ethic ; work their end by do unjust , when do just aught to be their chief end . howeve it be , the multiply of word about page 18 this matter , kindle in the king such a displeasure against the duke , that it can never afterward be quench , but by his blood . and first he complain to his oh ? there two uncle , the duke of L•ncaster and York , of his undutiful behaviour to ? ward he ; who tell the king , their brother perhaps may let fall some unad ? vised word , but they know his heart to be true and faithful . yet doubt how far the king may press upon they to answer for their brother faithfulness , they re ? tire from court : which give the d•kes enemy time to incense the king far against he . it happen , that the duke of Gloucester have with he one day at his house , the abbot of S. Alban , that be his godfather , and the prior of Westmin ? star : and after dinner fall in talk with they , among other communication the duke require the prior to tell truth , whether he have any vision the night be ? fore ? to which the prior be loath , at first , to make a direct answer ; but at last , be earnest request , as well by the abbot as the duke , he confess that he have a vision indeed , which be , that the realm of England shall be destroy through the misgovernance of king Richard . by the virgin mary ( say the abbot ) i have the very same vision . whereupon the duke present disclose to they all the secret of his mind , and by their device contrive a assembly of diverse great lord of the realm , to meet at arundell-castle that day Fortnight• at which time he appoint to be there himself , with the earl of D•rby , Arundel , marsh•ll , and W•rwick ; also the archbishop of Canterbury , the abbot of S. Alban , the prior of Westminster , with diverse other : and accord all these meet at Arundel castle , at the day appoint : where receive first the sacrament , by the hand of the archbishop of Canterbury , to be assistant each to other , in all such matter as they shall determine ; they resolve to seize upon king Richard , and upon the duke of Lancaster and York , and commit they to prison ; and all the other lord of the king council , they determine shall be draw and hang . but the earl martial , that be deputy of Calli• , and have marry the earl of arundel daughter , discover all their counsel to the king ; who thereupon , by a plot devise by his council , take his brother the earl of Huntington with he , and rise from supper , ride that night to the duke of gloucester house at Plashey in Essex . when the king come thither , the duke be abed ; but inform of it , cast his cloak about his shoulder , and come down , bid the king grace , with all reverence , welcome . the king courteous request he to go and make he ready , for that he must needs ride with he a little way , to confer of some business . the duke present make he ready and come down ; and as soon as the king and his company be go a little way from the house , and the duke with he , the earl Marshall arrest the duke , as he have be appoint to do by the king ; who immediate be send to Calais , where , after some time , he be dispatch of his life , either strangle , or else smo ? red with pillow , as some write . at the very same time be the earl of A ? rundell apprehend , by the earl of Rutland and Kent : the earl of Warwick also , when the king have invite he to dinner , and show he very good countenance , be take and arrest in the place : as likewise at the same time be apprehen ? dead , and commit to the tower , the lord John Cobham , and sir John Ch•yny . Shortly after , the king procure they to be indict at Nottingham , suborn such as shall appeal they in parliament ; namely , Edward earl of Rutland , Thom•• Mowbray earl martial , Thom•s holland earl of Kent , John Holland earl of Hun ? tington , Thomas Beaufort earl of Somerset , John Montacute earl of Salisbury , tho ? mass L. Spenser , and the lord William Scroop L. Chamberlaine : and in the mean time , the king send for a power of Cheshi•• man , to keep watch and ward about his person . on the 17. of September , a parliament begin at Westminster ; wherein the king complain as well of many thing do by the lord in his minority , as also of the hard deal which they have use towards the queen , who be three hour at one time on her knee , before the earl of Arundel , for one of her esquire , name John Calverley , who nevertheless have his head smite from his shoulder ; and all the answer she can get , be this : madam , pray for your self and your husband , page 19 and let this suit alone . those that set forth the king grievance in this parliament , be John Bushie , William Bagot , and Thomas green . the cause of a•sembling the parliament be show , that the king have call it for reformation of diverse trans ? gression against the peace of his land , by the duke of Gloucester , the earl of A ? rundell , Warwick , and other . then sir John Bushie , speaker of the parliament , make request on behalf of the commonalty , that they may be punish accord to their deserve ; and special the archbishop of Canterbury• who then •ate next the king , who he accuse of high treason . when the archbishop begin to a ? swer , sir John Bushie beseech the king that he may not be admit to answer , lest by his great wit and cunning he may lead man away to believe he . and here sir John Bushie in all his talk do not attribute to the king title of honour due and •ccustomed , but such as be fit for the majesty of God then for any earthly prince . and when the archbishop be constrain to keep silence , sir John Bushie proceed ; require on the behalf of the commons , that the charter of pardon , grant to the duke of Gloucester , and the earl of Arundel and Warwick , shall be revoke . the king for his part protest that they be draw from he by come ? pulsion , and therefore beseech they to deliver their opinion , what they think thereof : whereupon , the bishop first give their sentence , that the say pardon be revocable , and may be call in ; but pretend a scrupulosity , as if they may not with safe conscience be present where judgement of blood shall pass , they appoint a layman to be their prolocutor for that turn . the temporal lord likewise give their sentence , that the pardon be revocable : only the judge and lawyer be not of this opinion . but howsoever , the archbishop of C•nterbury be hereupon condemn to perpetual exile , and appoint to avoid the realm within six week . also the earl of Arundel be by the duke of La•caster who sit that day as high steward , condemn of treason , and on the tower ? hill behead . there go to see the execution , diverse lord ; among who be the earl of Nottingham , that have marry his daughter , and the earl of Kent , that be his daughter son : to who , at the place of his execution he say , true it will have beseem you rather to be absent , then here at this business ; but the time will come ere long , that as many shall marvel at your mis ? fortune , as they do now at i . after his death , a fame go , that his head be grow to his body again : whereupon , the ten day after his burial , his body , by the king appointment be take up , and then find to be a fable . after this , the lord Thomas Beauchamp earl of Warwick be bring forth , and charge with the like treason ; but by the intercession of the duke of Lancaster and other lord , after confession of his fault , be only confine into the isle of man likewise the lord Cobha• , and sir John cheyny be only banish , or ( as Fabian say ) condemn to perpetual prison . the parliament after this be hold at Shewsbery ; where , for the love the king bear to the gentleman and commons of the shi•e of Chester , he cause it to be ordain , that from thenceforth it shall be call and know by the name of the principality of Chester ; and herewith entitle himself prince of Ch• ? star . at this parliament also , call the great parliament , he create five duke , and • duchess ; one marquess , and four earl . the earl of Derby be create duke of Hereford ; the earl of Nottingham , duke of Norfolk ; the earl of R•tland• d•ke of A•bemarle ; the earl of Kent , duke of Surrey ; the earl of ? ? ? , duke of Exeter ; and the lady Margaret martial countess of Norfolk , be create duchess of Norfolk : the earl of Somerset be create Marquesse Dorse• ; the lord Spenser be make earl of Gloucester ; the lord Nevil , earl of west•erl••d ; the lord scr••pe , earl of Wiltshire ; and the lord Thomas Percy L. steward of the king• house , be make earl of Worcester : and for the better maintenance of their es••te• , he divide among they a great part of those land that belong to the duke of Gloucester , the earl of Aru•dell and Warwick . also in this parliament , the judge give their opinion , that when article be propound by the king to be handle in parliament , if other article be handle before those be first determine , that it be treason in they that do it . and in this parliament , the king bring it so • ? bout , page 20 that he obtain the whole power of the parliament to be confer upon cer•taine person , namely , John duke of Lancaster , Edmund duke of York , Edm••• duke of A•merle , Thomas duke of Surrey , John duke of Exeter , John marque••e Dorset , Roger earl of march , John earl of Salisbury , and diverse other ; or to any seven or eight of they : and these , by virtue of this grant , proceed to conclude upon many thing , which concern general the knowledge of the whole Parlia ? mean , to the great prejudice of the state , and a dangerous example in time to come . a general pardon be also grant for all offence , to all the king subject , but only to fifty , who name he will not express , but reserve they to his own know ? ledge , that when any of the nobility offend he , he may at his pleasure name he to be one of the number except , and so keep they still within his danger . and for the more strengthen the act of this parliament , the king purchase the pope bull , contain grievous censure and curse to they that shall break they . and now the head of the opposite faction have lose their head , and all thing as well settle as can be desire , the king be secure , as think himself safe ; and he have indeed be safe , if time and fortune be not actor in revenge , as well as man ; or rather , if a superior power do not interpose , who way be as secret as himself be invisible . it now fall out , ( though w•iters differ what it be fell out ) for some write , that thom•s Mowbray accuse the duke of Hereford ; other , that Henry duke of Herefo•d accuse Thomas mowbr•y duke of Norfolk , for speak word sound high to the king dishonour : to which the duke of Norfolk be call to answer , charge the duke of Hereford before the king , that he lie false . whereupon a combat be agree upon between they : the king labour to make they friend ; but not prevail , he give way to proceed in combat , and the place to be at Coventry : where at the day and hour appoint , the duke of Hereford , mount on a white Cou•se• , b•rded with green •nd blow velvet , embroider sumptuous with swan and Antelops of goldsmith work , approach the list ; of who the mar ? shall , be the duke of Surry , demand who he be ? he answer , i be Henry of L••caster , duke of Hereford , that be come hither to do my endeavour against Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk , as a traitor , untrue to God , the king , his realm , and i : then incontinent he swear upon the holy evangelist , that his quarrel be true and just , and thereupon require to enter the list , where in • chair of green velvet he sit down and repose himself . then come the duke of n•rf•lke , his horse bard with crimson velvet , embroider rich with lion of silver , and mulberry tree ; and when he have take his oath before the constable the duke of A•merle , that his quarrel be just , he enter the list , and sit he down in his chair of crimson velvet , curtain about with white and red damask . then the martial view their spear , to see that they be of equal leng•h ; and then the herald proclaim , on the king behalf , they shall mount on horse ? b•ck , and address themselves to the combat . but when they be set forward , and have their spear in their rest , the king cast down his warder , and the herald cry , stay , stay . then the king cause their spear to be •aken from they , and deliberate with his council , what be •it to be do in so weighty a cause . after two long hour , it be at last conclude , that Henry duke of Hereford shall with ? in fif••en day depart out of the realm , and not return before ten year be expire , upon pain of death ; and that Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk , shall likewise avoid the realm , and never to return into England , upon the like pain . it be observable , that this censure be pass against the duke of Norfolk , the very same day twelvemonth , in which he have take order to put the duke of Gloucester to death at Calli• , whereof he be then governor . when these judgement be once read , the king call before he both the duke , and make they swear , that the one shall never come in place where the other be . after this , the duke of N•rf•olke go into Alm•i•• , and from thence to Venice , where after some time he die with sorrow . the duke of Hereford , at the take his leave of the king , have four year of his banishment release ; •nd then go to Calais , and from thence to page 21 •aris , where , of the french king he be so kind receive , that by his favour he have obtain in marriage the only daughter of the duke of Berry , uncle to the french king , if king Richard by messenger have not hinder he . it be a custom in those day , to punish the delinquency of great man by banishment out of the realm ; a custom not more grievous to the subject , then dangerous to the prince ; for by this course , they have mean to work so close in their mine of revenge , that the fabric of a kingdom be in danger to be blow up , before their work can be perceive . a example whereof be never more plain see then at this time , in the archbishop of Canterbury , and the duke of Hereford : for they in their banishment meet often together , and aggravate the grievance of king Richard government , fall at last to consult by what mean he may best be remove , see there be no hope he can ever be reclaim . in the time of their consultation about it , John duke of Lancaster , father to the duke of Hereford , die , at Ely house in Holborn : and as if fortune herself mean to do their work for they , solicitation come from many part of England , to move the duke of Hereford to come now and take the government upon he , wherein they will be ready to assist he . the duke heat before by the archbishop insti ? gation , and now set on fire by this solicitation , give fortune no leisure to alter her mind , by delay the time , but without further deliberation prepare to be go : and take with he the archbishop , the lord Cobham , sir Thomas Erpington , and sir thom•s Ramston knight ; John Norbury , Robert Warerton , and Francis coynt e ? squire , and about some threescore other person , as many as he can ready get ; in three ship which the duke of Britain lend he , he put to sea ; where hover about the coast a while , to mark the countenance of the shore , he land at last , about the begin of July , at ravenspurre in Yorkshire : which no soon be know , but there repair to he , the lord , Willoughby , Rosse : Darcie , and beau ? mont ; and short after , at Doncaster , the earl of Northumberland , and his son sir He•ry Percy , with the earl of Westmoreland , and great number of the gentry and common sort ; of who , though some have invite he to come to take the go ? vermin of the realm upon he , yet he forbear to pretend that for any cause of his come , but make a solemn protestation , that he come only to take possession of the inheritance descend upon he from his father , which king Richard most unjust , and contrary to his promise , have seize into his hand : for this be a Rea ? son have no objection : the other he reserve , till his power shall not need to re ? guard objection . and indeed , no snowball ever gather greatness so fast by rol ? ling , as his force , increase by march forward ; for by that time he come to Berk ? lie , he have get a mighty army ; and within three day after , all the king castle in those part be surrender to he . the duke of York , leave governor of the kingdom , use his best mean to raise force to resist he , but find few willing to bear arm against he : whereupon , and perhaps hear withal that the duke come be but only to take possession of his inheritance , he think good to go to berkly to he , to have there some communication about it . at Berk ? lie , at that time , be arrest the bishop of Norwich , sir William Elmham , and sir Walter Burli• knight ; Laurence draw , and John Golofer esquire . from berk the two duke go forward towards Bristol ; where in the castle be the lord Will ? liam Scroop earl of Wiltshire and treasurer of England , sir Henry green , and sir Henry Bushye ; who be take , and bring forth bind before the duke of Lan ? caster , and the day after arraign before the constable and marshal , find guilty of treason for misgovern the king and the realm , and present have their head smite off . sir John Russell also be take there ; but he feign himself to be our of his wit , escape for that time . all this while king Richard be in Ireland , where he perform act in repress the rebel there , not unworthy of he ; and have with he among other of the great lord , the duke of lancaster son Henry , he there for his towardliness in service , knight him• by which it appear that he have no great fear of •he father , when he grace the son ; and indeed he need not have fear he i• his own page 22 absence out of England have not give he advantage . six week be now passe• after the duke arrival in England ; in all which time king Richard have no notice• it , by reason the wind be contrary to come •orth of England : but as soon as ? ? ? hear it , and in what hostile manner he proceed , he then determine to return instant into England ; and have do it , but that the duke of Aumerle his princip•• counsellor ( whether out of a good meaning , but ground upon error , or ou• of a ill meaning , but shadow with colour ) by all mean persuade he to stay so long till thing fit for his journey may be make ready . it be king Richard ill luck to hearken to this counsel : but yet he present send the earl of Salisbury in ? to England , to provide he a army out of wale and Ch•shire , against his own come ? ming , which he promise faithful shall be within six day at the most . the earl land at co•way in wale , and have soon get to the number of forty thou ? sand man : but the six day pass , and no news of the king : which make the soldier suspect that he be dead , and thereupon be ready to disband ; but at the earl of salisburies persuasion , they be content to stay for some day long ; and when the king come not in that time neither , they then will stay no long , but depart and go home . at length , about eighteen day after that the king have send away the earl of Salisbury , he take ship , together with the duke of A•merle , Exeter , and Surrey , and diver• other of the nobility ; with the bishop of London , Lincoln , and Carlile ; and land at barklow in wale . he have about he some Ch•shire man , and be at first in not great doubt of prevail : but when he hear that all the castle from the border of Scotland unto Bristol , be deli ? vex to the duke of Lancaster , and that then grate part of the nobility and come ? mons take part with he , and special that his principal counselor have lose their head at Brist•• ; then , solvuntur frigore membra , he fall so utter to despair , that call his army together , he license every man to be go , and to shift for he ? self . the soldier beseech he to be of good cheer , swear they will stand with he to the death : but this encourage he not at all ; so as the next night he steal from his army , and with the duke of Exeter and Surry , the bishop of car ? lile , sir Stephen Scroop , and some half a score other , he get he to the castle of co••ay , where he find the earl of Salisbury , determine there to stay , till he may see the world at some better stay . here the earl of Worcester steward of the king house , break his white staff , and without delay go to the duke of Lanca ? star ; who understand that k . Richard be return out of Ireland , he leave the duke of York at Bristol , and come back with his power to berkly , and from thence the next day come to Gloucester , then to Rosse , after to Hereford , where come to he the bishop of Hereford and sir Edmund Mortimer : on the Sunday follow he go to ly•ster , and there the lord Charleton come to he : from thence he go to Ludlow , and the next day to Shrewsbery , and thither come to he sir Robert leigh•nd sir John Leigh , and many other , be send from Chester , to offer their service ; thither also come to he the lord scale , and the lord •ardolphe , forth of Ireland : from Shrewsbery he go to Chester , and from thence send for his son and heir , and likewise for the duke of gloucester son and heir ( who king Richard have leave in cu ? stody in Ireland ) with all speed to come into England ; but the duke of gloucester son through misfortune perish at sea , or as some write , die of the plague ; then for ? row whereof cause , short after , his mother death . after this , the duke send the earl of Northumberland to the king ; who upon safe-conduct come to he , de ? clare , that if it may please his grace to undertake , that there shall be a Parlia ? mean assemble , in which justice may be have , and herewith pardon the duke of Lancaster of all thing wherein he have offend , the duke will be ready to come to he on his knee , and as a humble subject obey he in all dutiful service . yet upon this conference with the earl , some say , the king require only , that he ? self and eight more , who he will name , may have honourable allowance , with the assurance of a private quiet life , and that then he will resign his crown ; and that upon the earl oath that this shall be perform , the king agree to go• with the earl to meet the duke : but after four mile ride , co•ming to the place page 23 where they have lay a ambush , the king be enclose , and constrain to go with •he earl to Rutland , where they dine , and from thence to flint , to bed . The ? ? ? have very few of his friend about he , but only the earl of Salisbury , the •ishop of Carlile , the lord Scroop , sir Nicolas Ferehye , and Iames D'Arthois a Gas ? •••gne , who still wear a white heart , the cognisance of his master king Richard , and neither for promise nor threat will be draw to leave it off . the king be in the castle of flint , and duke Henry with his army approa ? ch near the town , the archbishop of Canterbury , with the duke of Aumerle a•d the earl of Worcester , go before to the king ; who the king spy from the wall where he stand , go down to meet , and find they do their due re ? verence to he on their knee , he take they up , and take the archbishop aside , n•ked with he a good while ; and as it be report , the archbishop will he to be of good comfort , for he shall be assure not to have any hurt as touch his person . after this , the duke of Lancaster come to the castle himself , alarmed ; and be within the first gate , he there stay , till the king , accompany with the bish•p of Carlile , and earl of Salisbury , and sir Stephen Scroop , who bear the sword before he , come forth , and sit down in a place prepare for he . as soon as the• duke see he , he come towards he , bow his knee ; and come forward , do so the second time , and the three , till the king take he by the hand , and lift he up , say , dear cousin , you be welcome . the duke humble thank he , s••d• my sovereign lord and king , the cause of my come at this present , be ( your honour save ) to have restitution of my person , my land and heritage : whereto the king answer : deer cousin , i be ready to accomplish your will , so that you may enjoy all that be you without exception . after this , come forth of the castle , the king call for wine ; and after they have drink , they mou••ed on horseback , and ride to Chester , the next day to Nantwych , then to new ? c•stle , from thence to Stafford , and then to Lichfield , and there rest Sunday : after that , they ride forward , and lodge first at Coventry , then at Dayntree , then at N•r•h•mpton , next day at Dunstable , then at saint Alban , and so come to London : in all which journey they suffer not the king to change his apparel , but make he ri•e still in one suit of raiment , and that but a simple one , though he in his time be •x••eding sumptuous in apparel , have one coat which be value at thirty thousand mark : and in this •ort he be bring the next way to Westminster , and from thence the next day have to the tower , and commit to safe custody . after this , a parliament be call by the duke of Lancaster , but in the name of • . Richard ; in which many heinous point of misgovernment be lay to his charge , and be ingross up in three and thirty article , the chief whereof be these : that he have wasteful spend the treasure of the realm . that without law or justice , he have cause the duke of Gloucester , and the earl of Arundel to be put to death . that he have borrow great sum of money , and give his letter patent to repay thesame , and yet not one penny ever pay . that he have say , the law of the realm be in his head , and in his breast : by reason of which fantastical opinion , he destroy nobleman , and impoverish the commons . that he change knight and burgess of the parliament at his pleasure . that most tyrannous he say , that the life and good of all his subject be in his hand and at his disposition . that whereas diverse lord be by the court of parliament appoint to treat of mat ? ters concern the state of the kingdom ; they be busy about the same commission , •e w••t about to appeach they of high treason . that by force and threat , he enforce the judge of the realm , at Shrewsbery , to con ? descend to his way , for the destruction of diverse of the lord . that he cause his father own brother , the duke of Gloucester , without law to be at ? tach and send to Calais , and there without reason secret murder . that notwithstanding the earl of Arundel at his arraignment plead his charter of pardon , yet he can not be hear , but be shameful and sudden put to death . page 24 that he •ssembl•d certain La•cashire and C••shire man , to m•ke war upon his Lord• and suffer they to rob and spoil , without prohibition . that though he have make proclamation that the lord be not attach for any cri•• of treason , yet afte•ward in the parliament he lay treason to their charge . that notwit•standing his pardon grant to th•m , he enforce diverse of the lord par ? tak•rs to be again intolerable fine , to their utter undo . that without the •ssent of the peer , he carry the jewel and plate of this Kingdom• into Ireland . upon these , and some other article , he be by parliament adjudge to be de ? pose from all kingly honour , and princely government . and thereupon , the king be advise by his own servant , rather voluntary to resign the crown , then by compulsion to be force to it ; on the Monday before the nine and ••entieth day of September , in the year 1399. he make a sol•mne resignation , bef•re diver• lord and other , send to he for that purpose : and a ins••ume•t of hi• R•signa ? cion be make , he will needs read it before they all himself , and then subscri ? bed it ; and withal , make it his suit , that t•• duke of Lanc•ster may be his Suc ? cessor , and king after he ; and for a sign of his desire hereof , he take his Signe• ring of gold from his finger , and put it upon the duke of lancaster ; that never man who have use a kingdom with such violence , give it over with such patience , or rather such willingness , that he seem rather to affect it , then that he be any way force to it . this resignation of king Richard be show to the parliament , both house give their assent ; and than c•mmissioners be appoint to pronounce open the sentence of his depose , which be do by the bishop of Assaph , and all allegiance renounce to he . and now it be easy to be observe , what a wonderful concurrene of fortune , in behalf of the duke of Lancaster , and against king Ri•hard , happen together , whereof if any one have be miss , he have never be turn •ut of his throne in such manner as he be : for first , if it have not happen that king Richard have be in Ireland at the time when the duke begin his attempt , it have •or be possi ? sible for he to compass• his design as he do : and then , if king Richard be in Ireland , he have not by misfortune of weather be keep six week from hear of the duke arrival , he have not give he so large a time for raise of force , and •o more easy may have resist he : or after king Richard hear of the duke be ? rival , if he have follow the earl of Salisbury , and not stay so many day long than he promise , he have find a army ready to receive •im , sufficient at least to have give a stop to the duke proceed : or when at last he come over , and find his army to fail he , if withal his own courage have not fail he , but that he have manful put it to the hazard of a battle , as his soldier themselves will have have he to do , he can not choose but have make a better end of his business then now he do . but when all be do , there be no ward •he blow of fortune ; or to say better , no resist the decree of heaven : but see that decree be a Abyssus to we , and may perhaps but be conditional ; we shall manifest be traitor to our self , if we use not our uttermost endeavour to divert it : that it may true be say , king Richard lose his crown , more by his own treason , then by the trea ? son of any other . of his taxation . in his second year , in a parliament hold at Gloucester : be grant to be pay by the merchant , upon every sack of wool a mark , for this present year ; and for every pound worth of ware , bring from beyond sea , and sell here , six penny of the buyer . in his three year , in a parliament of Westminster , a subsidy be grant to be levy of the great man of the realm , to the end the commons may be spare : the duke of Lancaster and Britain pay 20 mark ; every earl 6 marn ; bishop and abbot with miter , as much : every monk , three shilling four penny : also every justice , sheriff , knight , esquire , parson and vicar , be charge after a certain page 25 rate ; but no commons of the laiety . also this year , in another parliament , be grant a ten by the clergy , and a fifteen by the Laytie ; but with this con ? dition , that from thenceforth , which be in march , 1380. till the feast of saint mi ? chael , which shall be in the year 1381. there shall be no more parliament : but yet be not observe . in his four year , in a parliament at Northampton , a new kind of subsidy be grant ; of every priest secular or regular , six shilling eight penny ; and as much of every nun ; and of every man or woman , marry or not marry , be sixteen year of age , ( beggar only except ) four penny . in his five year , a subsidy be grant by the merchant , of certain cu ? stome of their wool which they buy and sell , call a Maletot , to endure for four year . in his seven year be grant he one moiety of a fifteen by the Laytie ; and short after , a moiety of a ten by the clergy . in his nine year , half of a ten , and half of a fifteen by the Laytie . in his eleven year , there be grant he a ten of the clergy , and a fifteen of the Laytie . in hi• twelve year , at a parliament , be grant of every sack of wool , forty shilling ; whereof , ten shilling to be apply present to the king use ; the other thirty to remain in the hand of treasurer , towards the charge of war , if any shall happen . also there be a subsidy grant , of six penny in the pound ; whereof• four penny to the use last mention ; the other two penny to be at the king pleasure . in his fifteen year , at a parliament , be grant a ten of the clergy , and a fifteen of the Laytie , towards the charge of Ioh• duke of La•caster , send into France . in his eighteenth year , a ten be grant by the clergy , and a fifteen by the Laytie , towards his own journey into Ireland . in his twenty year , the clergy grant he a ten , to be pay that year . in his one and twenty year , upon pretence of have aid the duke of Gloucester , and the earl of Arundel and Warwick against he , he cause blank charter to be make , which he compel both citizen and gentleman in the country to seal , whereby he may charge they afterward to pay whatsoever he require . in his two and twenty year , a fifteen and a half be grant ; and for the custom of wool , fifty shilling upon every sack , of Englishman bear , and three pound of stranger . of law and ordinance in his time . in his second year , in a parliament at Gloucester , it be enact , that merchant-stranger may buy and sell in gross , or by retail , within this realm . in his three year , in a parliament at Westminster , it be ordain , that the Privi ? ledge and immunity of the abbey of Westminster shall remain inviolate ; but with this proviso , against those that take sanctuary with pu•pose to defraud their creditor , that their land and good shall be liable to their debt . in his six year , a parliament be hold , in which the major of London , upon suggestion that the fishmonger use great deceit in utter of their fish , obtain to have it enact , that from thenceforth , none of that company , nor of the vintner , grocer , butcher , or other that sell any provision of victual , shall be admit major of the city : but in the parliament next follow , be restore to their livre ? berty again , save that they may not keep court among themselves , but that all transgression of their custom shall be try at the major court . in his eleven year , king Richard create John Beauchamp of Holt , baron of Kedermister , by his letter patent ; the first that be so make ; for before this time , baron be always make by call they to parliament by the king write . Affaires of the church in his time . in the second year of this king reign , there come messenger from the new-elected pope Vrban , to require the king aid against such cardinal as he name schism•ticks , that have elect another pope , who they name clem•nt : which page 26 cardinal send messenger likewi•e to crave his aid for they , but through perswa ? sion of the archbishop of Canterbury , urban request be grant , and clement re ? ject . in his four year , John Wickliff set forth his opinion touch the sacra ? mean of the altar , deny the doctrine of transubstantiation , in such sort , as the church of Rome do then teach . in his six year , Henry Spencer bishop of No•wi•h receive bull from pope vrb•n , to grant all privilege of the crusado to all such as will come over and assist he against the anti-pope Clement ; which be the ? bate in parliament , it be after much opposition , agree that it shall go for ? ward ; and thereupon , the bishop not only gather much money from such as will contribute to the expedition , but draw many great captain to go they ? self in person ; as namely , sir Hugh Calverley , sir William Farington , the lord Henry beau•••t , sir William Elmham , sir tho•as tryvet , and diverse other . the money raise by contribution , come to 25000 Franks , and the army to 3000 horse , and 15000 foot ; with which force , the bishop pass over into Flan ? dear , win the town of gravel , Dunkirk , and Newport ; but at last encoun ? tread by a mighty army of the french , he be put to the worse , and return into England . in the twelve year of this king reign , a act be make that none shall pass the sea to purchase promotion or provision ( as they term they ) in any church or church . also in this year Thomas late earl of Lancaster , by rea ? son of miracle report to be do by he , be canonize for a saint . at this time also , the wickliff mervelous increase , preach against pilgrimage and image , who great opposer be the bishop of Norwich . in his thirteenth year , Procla ? mansion be make , that all benefice man abide in the court of Rome , shall return into England by a certain day , under pain of forfeit their benefice ; and all other not benefice , under a certain pain likewise . also about this time a statute be make , that no ecclesiastical person shall possess manor , house , land , revenue , or rent whatsoever at the hand of the feoffee , without the king li ? cence , and the chief lord . in his eighteenth year , the wickliff be persecute , and excommunication pronounce against they by the archbishop of Canterbury . in this schism of the two pope , the french clergy write in behalf of Clement their pope , and send it into England ; the clergy of England on the contrary , write in behalf of pope Vrban , and so nothing be agree . work of piety in his time . in the 20th year of this king reign , William B•teman bishop of Norwich buil ? dead Trinity hall in Cambridge . in the three year of his reign , John Philpot major of Lo•don , give to the city certain tenement , for the which the chamberlain pay ? eth yearly to thirteen poor people , to every of they seven penny the week for ever ; and as any of those thirteen person die , the major appoint one to succeed , and the recorder another . in the one and twenty year of his reign , king ri ? chard cause the great hall at Westminster to be repair , both the wall , window , and roof . in his time , Si••• archbishop of Canterbury , slay by the rebel upon tower hill , build the west-gate of Canterbury , and from thence to the north-gate , common call the long wall . Thomas fits-ala• or Arundel , be bishop of Ely , build the great Gatehouse of Ely house in Holborn ; and be after bishop of can ? terbury , he build a fair spire steeple at the west-end of his church there , call to this day , Arundel steeple , and bestow a tuneable ring of five bell upon the same . of casualty happen in his time . in his three year , so great a mortality afflict the north part of England , that the country become almost desolate . in his sixth year , on the 24 day of May , there happen so great a earthquake , or ( as some write ) a watershake , that it make ship in the haven to beat one against the other . in July , in the year 1389. while the king be at sheen ; there swarm in his court such multitude of fly and page 27 gnat , skirmish with one another ; that in the end they be sweep away with broom by heap , and bushel be fill with they . in his twelve year , in march , first there be terrible wind ; afterward follow a great mortality , and after that a great dearth ; that a bushel• of wheat be sell for thirteen penny , which be then think a great price ; for the year before it be sell for six penny , and wool be sell for two shilling a stone . in his fourteenth year , on Christmas day , a dolphin be take at London-bridge , be ten foot long , and a monstrous grow fish . Ind his eighteenth year , a exhalation , in likeness of fire appear in the night in many place of England ; which when a man go alone , go as he go , and stay as he stay ; sometime like a wheel , sometime like a barrel , sometime like a timberlogge ; but when many go together , it appear to be far off . also in a parliament time , there be a certain image of wax make by Necro ? mancie ( as be say ) which at a hour appoint , utter these word : the head shall be cut off ; the head shall be lift up aloft ; the foot shall be lift up a ? above the head : and then speak no more . This happen in the parliament , call the marvellous parliament , not long before the parliament that wrought wonder . in his one and thirty year , a river not far from Bedford , sudden cease his course , so as the channel remain dry by the space of three mile ; which be judge to signify , the revolt of the subject from their natural prince . in his two and twenty year , almost through all England , old bay-tree wither , and afterward grow green again ; which be suppose to import some strange event . about the year 1380. then make of gun be find by a she ? ma•e , which may well be reckon among casualty , see it be find by casu ? alty ; for this germane have beat brimstone in a mortar to powder , and cover it with a stone ; it happen , that as he strike fire , a spark chance to fall into the powder ; which cause such a flame out of the mortar , that it raise the stone a great heighth ; which after he perceive , he make a pipe of iron , and temper the pow ? der with some other ingredient , and so finish that deadly engine . the first that use it , be the venetian against the inhabitant of Geneva . of his wife . king Richard in his time have two wife ; the first be Anne daughter to the emperor Charles the four , and sister to the emperor Wenceslaus ; who live his wife ten year , and die without issue at sheen in Surry , in the year 1392 ; who death king Richard take so heavy , that he cause the building of that palace to be throw down and deface , as though to revenge himself upon the place , can ease his mind , and mitigate his sorrow . his second wife be Isabel daughter to Charles the six king of France ; she be marry to he at eight year of age , and therefore never cohabited . after king Richard death she be send home , and marry afterward to Charles son and heir to the duke of Orleans . of his personage and condition . he be the goodly personage of all the king that have be since the conquest ; tall of stature , of strait and strong limb , fair and amiable of countenance ; and such a one as may well be the son of a most beautiful mother . concern his condition , there be more to be blame in his education , than in his nature ; for there appear in he many good inclination , which will have grow to be ability , if they have not be pervert by corrupt flatterer in his youth . he be of a credulous disposition , apt to believe , and therefore easy to be abuse . his great transgression be , that he go with his friend ultra aras , where he shall have go but we { que } ad aras . his great imbecility , that he can not distinguish between a flat ? terer and a friend . he seem to have in he both a french nature and a english ; Vio ? lend at the first apprehension , calm upon deliberation ; he never show himself more worthy of the government , than when he be depose as unworthy to govern ; page 28 for it appear , that his regality be not so dear unto he , as a private quiet lif•• which if he may have enjoy , he will never have complain that fortune have do he wrong . of his death and burial . king Richard , short after his resignation , be convey to the castle of Leeds in Kent , and from thence to Pomfret ; where the common fame be , that he be serve with costly meat , like a king , but not suffer once to touch it , and so die of force famine . but Thomas Walsingham refer it altogether to a voluntary pi ? ning of himself , through grief of his misfortune . but one writer , well acquaint with king Richard do , say , that king Henry sit one day at his table , say sigh , have i no faithful friend that will deliver i of he who will be my death• this speech be special note by one sir peer of ex•on ; who present , with eight person in his company , go to Pomfret , command the esquire that take the assay before king Richard , to do so no more , say , let he eat now , for he shall not eat long . king Richard sit down to dinner , be serve without assay ; whereat marvel , he demand of his esquire , why he do not his duty ? sir ( say he ) i be otherwise command by sir Piers of Ex•on , who be new come from king Henry . when king Richard hear that word , he take the carve knife in his hand , and strike the squire on the head , say , the devil take Henry of Lancaster and thou together : and with that word , sir Piers enter the chamber , with eight arm man , every of they have a bill in his hand . king Richard per ? ceive this , put the table from he , and step to the foremost man , wring the bill out of his hand , and slay four of those that thus come to assail he ; but in conclusion , be fell with a stroke of a pole-axe , which sir Piers give he upon the head , with which blow he fall down dead• though it be scarce credible , that • man upon his bare word , and without show any warrant , shall be admit to do such a fact . sir Piers have thus slay he , weep bitter : a poor amends for so heinous a trespass . king Richard thus dead , his body be embalm , and cover with lead , all save the face , and then bring to London , where it lie at Paul three day together , that all man may behold it , to see he be dead : the corpse be after have to Langley in Buckinghamshire , and there bury in the church of the friar preacher : but afterward , by k . Henry the five , it be remove to west ? minster , and there honorable entomb , with queen Anne his wife ; and that beau ? tifull picture of a king , sit crown in a chair of state , at the upper end of the choir in saint Peter at Westminster , be say to be of he : although the Scot untrue write , that he escape out of prison , and lead a solitary and virtuous life in Scotland , and there die , and be bury ( as they hold ) in the Blackfriar at Sterling . he live three and thirty year , reign two and twenty and three month . man of note in this king time . man of valour in his time be so many , that to reckon they all , will be a hard task ; and to leave out any , will be a injury : yet to give a instance in one , we may take John of gaunt duke of lanca•ter , who valour be no less see abroad then at home : in France , in Germany , in Spain ; in all which place he leave trophy of his victory . but of learned man , we may name these : William Thorne a Augustine friar of Canterbury , a historiographer : Adam Merimouth , a canon of Paul church in London , who write two historical treatise ; one entitle chronicon 40. annoru• ; another , chr•nicon 60. •nnorum . William Packington some ? time secretary to the black prince , a excellent historiographer : William Badbye a Carmelite friar , bishop of Worcester , and confessor to the duke of Lancaster : John •ourg , chancellor of the university of Cambridge : William sc•ade , a monk of buck•ast abbey in Devonshire : John Th•risbye archbishop of York , lord Chan ? cellour of England , and a cardinal : willi•m Berton chancellor of Oxford , a ad ? versary page 29 to Wickliff : Philip Repington abbot of Leicester , a defender of Wickliff : Walter Brit , a scholar of wickliff , a writer both in divinity and other argument : John sharp , a great adversary to Wickliff , who write many treatise : Peter Pateshall , a great favourer of Wickliff : Marcell Ingelno , a excellent divine , one of the first teacher in the university of Heidelberg : Richard Withee a learned priest , and a earnest follower of Wickliff : John Swasham bishop of Bangor , a great adversary to the wickliff : Adam Eston , a great linguist , and a cardinal : John trevise , a cornish man , and a secular priest , who translate the bible , bar ? tholmew , de proprietatibus rerum ; polichronicon of Ranulph Higden , and diverse oh ? the treatise : John moon , a english man , but a student in Paris ; who compile in the french tongue , the Romant of the rose ; translate into english by Geoffry Ch•wcer , and diverse other . page 30 the reign of king Henry the four . of his come to the crown . after the resignation of king Richard , and the sentence of his de ? pose open read in parliament ; Henry duke of Lancaster rise up from his seat ; and first , make the sign of the cross upon his forehead and breast , he say : in the name of the father , the son , and the holy ghost : i Henry of Lancaster claim the crown of England , as descend by right line from king Henry the three . and have thus speak , he sit down again . upon this , the archbishop confer with the lord ; and have hear their opinion , he •urned to the commons , ask they , if they will join with the lord , in choose Henry of Lancaster for their king : who all with one voice cry , yea , yea : where ? upon go to the duke , he bow his knee , and take he by the hand , lead he to the royal seat ; and then begin a sermon , take for his text , out of the first book of the king , cap . 9 vir dominabitur in populo : wherein he declare what a happiness it be to a nation to have a king of wisdom and valour , and show the duke of La•caster to be such a one ; and as much the defect in both , of the late king Richard . the sermon end , the king thank they all for his el•ction ; and testify unto they , that he mean not to take advantage against any man estate , a• come in by conquest ; but that every one shall free enjoy his own , as in time of lawful succession . and now a time be appoint for his coronation ; and accor ? ding , upon the 13th day of October follow , the very day wherein the year be ? fore he have be banish , he be crown at Westminster , by the archbishop of Canterbury , with all rite and ceremony accust•med . at his coronation , he be anoint with a oil which a religious man have give to Henry , the first duke of Lancaster , together with this proph•re , that the king anoint with this oil , shall be the champion of the church . this oil come to the hand of king Richard , as he be look among his jewel , go then into Ireland , he be de ? sirous to be anoint with it , but that the archbishop of Canterbury tell he , it be not lawful to be anoint twice : whereupon put it up again , at his come afterward to fli•t , the archbishop get it of he , and keep it till •he coronation of king Henry , who be the first king of the realm that be anoint with it . the day before the coronation , the king in the tower make one and •orty , some say but twelve , knight of the bath , whereof four be his own son , Henry• Thomas , Ioh• , and Humphrey , all then alive ; and with th•m , •hree Earles , a•d five page 31 ••rons . upon the feast-day , many claim office , as belong to their tenor , •o which , upon show their right , they be admit . and now the king •ade diverse new officer : the earl of Northumberland he make constable of Eng ? ••nd ; the earl of Westmoreland be make lord martial ; sir John Serle , chancellor ; •ohn Newberry esquire , treasurer ; and sir rich•rd Clifford be make lord keeper of •he privy seal : the lord Henry his elder son , be then about thirteen year •f age , be create prince of Wal•s , duke of Cornwall , and earl of Chester , and •oone after also duke of Aquitaine : and the crown be by parliament e••ailed •o king Henry , and the heir of his body lawful beget . after this a parliament be hold , in which the act make in the eleven year of king Richard be revive , and the act make in his one and twenty year be whole repeal ; and they who by that parliament be attaint , be re ? •tored to their land and honour : whereupon Richard earl of Warwick be de ? •ivered out of prison , and the earl of arundell son recover his inheritance ; •nd many other also that be banish , or imprison by king Richard , be then •ully restore to their liberty and estate . also the king give to the earl of west ? •erland the county of Richmond ; and to the earl of Northumberland the isle of m•n , to be hold of he by bear the sword wherewith he enter into England . and now be the time for show of spleen : sir John Bagot then prisoner in the tower , accuse the earl of A•merle for speak word against the duke of Lan ? c•ster , now king : also the lord Fitzwater accuse he for the death of the duke of Gloucester : the lord M•rley appeal the earl of Salisbury of treason : and one hall accuse the duke of Exeter , for conspire the death of John of gaunt the king father : but king Henry have enter the throne in a storm , be willing now to have a calm ; and therefore lay aside the one accusation , he accept of the other excuse , and receive the duke of A•merle , and the duke of Exeter into as much favour , as if they have never be accuse : and to qualify the hard opinion which foreign prince may conceive of king Richard depose , he send ambassador into diverse country , to make it know , by what title , and by what favour of the people he come to the king ? dome . to the court of Rome he send John Trenevant bishop of Hereford , sir John cheyny knight , and John cheyny esquire : into France he send Walter Sherlow bishop of Durham , and Thomas Percy earl of Worcester : into Spain he send John Trevor bishop of Assaph , and sir William Parre : and into Germany he send the bishop of Bangor , and certain other . most of these prince seem either not to regard what be do , or be easy persuade that all be do well : only Charles king of France be so distemper with this indignity offer to his son in law king Richard , that by violence of his passion , he fall into his old pang of frenzy ; but some ? what recover , he resolve to revenge it ; wherein many lord of France show themselves forward , but special the earl of S. Paul , who have marry king Richard halfsister : yet have prepare a army in readiness , when afterward they hear of king Richard death , they dissolve it again , as consider the time be then past . the aquitaine also , and special the citizen of Bordeaux , as be the place where king Richard be bear , be mighty incense : but sir Robert knoll lieutenant of Guyen , and afterward Thomas Percy earl of Worcester , be send to they by the king , so persuade they , that with much ado they continue in obedience . it be about this time , move in parliament , what shall be do with king Richard ( for he be not as yet murder : ) whereupon , the bishop of Carlile , • learned man and wise , and who have never give allowance to the depose of king Richard ; now that he be in a place of freedom of speech , he rise up , and say : my lord , the matter now propound be of marvellous weight and conse ? quence ; wherein there be two point chief to be consider : the first , why ? the king Richard be sufficient put out of his throne : the second , whether the duke of Lancaster be lawful take in . for the first , how can that be sufficient do , when there be no power sufficient to do it ? the parliament can , for page 32 of the parliament the king be the head ; and can the body put down the He•• you will say , but the head may bow it self down ; and so may the king •esign• it be true ; but what force be in that which be do by force ? and who know ? ? ? that king Richard resignation be no other . but suppose he be sufficient ou• yet how come the duke of Lancaster to be lawful in ? if you say , by con•uest , you speak treason ; for what conquest without arm ? a•d can a subj•ct take Ar•• against his lawful sovereign , and not be treason ? if you say , by el•ction of ? ? ? state , you speak not reason ; for what power have the state to el•ct , while any ? ? ? live that have right to succeed ? but such a succ•s•or be not the earl of Lancaster , as descend from Edmund Crouchback , the elder son of king Henry the three , though put by the crown for deformity of his body ; for who know not the falseness of this allegation ? see it be a thing notorious , that this Edmund be neither the elder brother , nor yet crooke-backr , ( though call so for some other reason ) but a goodly personage , and without any deformity . and your self can forget a thing so late do ; who it be , that in the four year of k••g Richard be declare by parliament to be heir to the crown , in case king ? ? ? shall dye without issue . but why then be not that claim make ? because , Sil••• leges inter arma ; what dispute of title against the stream of power ? b•• howsoever , it be extreme injustice , the king Richard shall be condemn , with ? out be hear , or once allow to make his defence . and now , my lord , i have speak thus at this time , that you may consider of it before it be too late ; for as yet it be in your power to undo that just , which you have unjust do . much to this purpose be the bishop speech ; but to as little purpose as if he have go about to call back yesterday : the matter be too far go ; and scarce a person there present , that have not a hope of either a private or a public benefi• by that which be do . yet against this speech of the bishop there be neither Pro ? test nor except ; it pass in the house as but one man opinion : and as for the king , it be neither fit he shall use much severity against any member of that parliament which have so late show so much indulgence towards he ; nor in ? deed safe , to be too hot in his punishment , when he be yet scarce warm in his go ? vernment . yet for a warning to use their liberty of speech with more moderation hereafter , the bishop be arrest by the martial , and commit to prison in the abbey of S. Alban , but afterward without further censure se• at liberty ; till upon a conspiracy of the lord , wherein he be a party , he be condemn to dye , though through extremity of grief he prevent execution . but as for king Richard , and Edmund Mortimer earl of march , enough be speak by the bishop in both their behalf , to undo they both : and indeed , king Richard be soon after make away ; the earl secure himself by retire far off , to his lordship of Wigmore : avoid the danger of contention , by not enter the list of aspire : but although the divine providence , for cause hide from humane knowledge , give way at this time to the advancement of the young , the house of Lancaster ; yet in the three generation after , the elder , the house of Clarence recover its right , in king Edwa•• the four ; that we may know , it be but stay the leisure of heaven , for every one to have his right , either in person , or by proxy . but whether incite by this speech of the bishop , or otherwise out of the ran••ur of envy be some , and malice in other ; it be not long after , before there grow in the mind of many both lord and other , a malignant inclination towards king Henry ; and come first to be a conspiracy in the house of the abbot of Westminster . this abbot be a kind of book-statesman , but better read in the politic of Aristotle then of Solomon ; who remember some word of king Henry , which he have speak long before , when he be but earl of Derby ; that prince have too little , and re ? ligious man too much : and fear , lest be now king , he shall reduce his word into act , he think it better to use prevent physic beforehand , then to sta•d to the hazard of a cure afterward : and thereupon invite to his house the dis ? content lord ••s namely , John Holland duke of Exeter , Thomas Holland hi• brother son , duke of Surry , Edward duke of A•merle , John Montacute earl of page 33 S•lisbury , Hugh Spenser earl of Gloucester , John bishop of Carlile , sir Thomas blunt , and Ma••lin one of king Richard chapel : who after dinner confer together , and communicationg their spleen against king Henry one with another ; they re ? solve at last , both to take away the king life , and of the way how to do it . the device be this : they will publish a solemn joust to be•olden at Oxford , at a day appoint , and invite the king to honour it with his presence ; and there , in the time of act the joust , when all man intention shall be otherwise busy , they will have he be murder . this device be resolve on ; oath for secrecy be t•ken ; and indenture sextipartite for perform condition agree upon between they , seal and deliver : the joust be proclaim ; the king be invite , and pro ? mise to come ; secrecy of all hand keep most firm to the very day : but though all other keep counsel , yet fortune will not , but she discover all ; for it for ? tune , that as the duke of Aumerle be ride to the lord at Oxford , against the day appoint , he take it in his way to go visit his father the duke of York ; and have in his bosom the indenture of confederacy , his father , as they sit at din ? ner , chance to spy it , and ask what it be ? to who his son answer , it be nothing that any way concern he ; by saint George , say his father , but i will see it : and there withal snatch it from he , read it ; and find the content , and revile his son for be now the second time a traitor , before to king Richard , and now to king Henry , he command his horse to be instant make ready , and with all the speed he can make , ride to Windsor , where the king then lie : but the young year of his son out-rid he , and come to the court be ? before he ; where lock the gate , and take the key from the po•ter , preten ? ding some special reason , he go up to the king , and fall on his knee , •sked his pardon . the king demand , for what offence ? he then discover the whole plot : which he have scarce do , when his father come rap at the courtgate , and come to the king , show he the indenture of confederacy which he h•d take from his son . This , though i• amaze the king , yet it inform he of the truth of the matter , whereof he be before doubtful ; and thereupon lay aside his journey to see the justing of other in jest , and take care that he be not justle in earnest out of his throne himself . in the mean time , the confederate lord be ready at Oxford , and hear nothing of the duke of Aumerle , nor see any preparation for the king come , be certain persuade that their treason w•s discover : whereupon fall into consideration of the case they be in , they find there be no place leave for they of mercy , and ther•fore be to stand upon their guard , and provide the best they can for their safety : to which pur ? pose , the first thing they do be to apparel Magdalen in princely robe , a man as like to king Richard in countenance and pesonage , as one man light can be to an ? other ; and to give forth that he be king Richard escape out of prison , thereby to countenance their proceed : the next thing be to dispatch me•senger• to the king of France , and require his assistance . this do , they set forward in battle-array towards Windsor , against king Henry ; but find he go to London before they come , they then deliberate what course to take : some advise to set king Richard at liberty , before their counterfeit Richard shall be discover : other •hought best to follow the king to London , and set upon he provide , and befo•e he have g•thered force . in this division of Advises , when they can not do both , they do neither ; but as man amaze , ma•ched on , though they know not well wh•ther , till they come to Colbrooke ; by which time the king have gather a army of twenty thousand , and be march towards they : but they not think so well of their c••se , that they dare put it to the trial of a battle ; or perhaps stay for aid out of France ; withdraw themselves back to Sunnings near to read , where the young queen lay• to who their come give some flash of comfort , but quench before they be thorough kindle : and from thence they march to Cicester ; where the duke of Surry and the earl of salisbury•o•ke up their lodging in one inn ; the duke of Exeter and the earl of Gloucester in anoth•• : and now a strange accident , beyond the reach of all consultation , give a period to their design ; page 34 for who will think that a private company dare oppose those lord have their army so near they ? yet the bailiff of the town , upon intelligence ( no doubt ) that these lord be up in Arme• against the king , take with he a company of townsman , in the night assault the inn where the duke of Surry and the earl of Salis•ury lie ; who thus assault , make shift to defend themselve• till three a clock in the afternoon ; but then , be in danger to be take , a priest , one of their company , set diverse house in the town on fi•e , think thereby to divert the assailant from prosecute the lord , to save their house : but this in ? flame they the more ; and so hot they pursue their as•ault , that they wound the duke and the earl to death ; who die that night ; their head be strike off , and send up to London . with they also be take , sir Bennet Shelley , sir Barnard Brocas , sir Thomas blunt , and eight and twenty other lord , knight and gentle ? man ; who be send to Oxford , where the king then lie , and there be put to exe ? cution . the duke of Exeter in the other inn , hear of this assault , flee out of the backside towards the camp , intend to bring the whole army to the rescue• but the soldier have hear a clamour , and see fire in the town , suppose the king have be come with all his force , out of a sudden fear disperse they self and flee ; which the duke see , he also , with sir John Shelley , flee into Essex , where wander and lurk in secret place , he be at last apprehend as he sit at supper in a friend house , and lead to Plashey , and there short after behead ; the place , where by his counsel and countenance , the duke of Gloucester former have be apprehend : that we may observe , how the divine providence , in revenge of injury , take notice , and make use of the very circumstance of place where the injury be •one . the earl of Gloucester flee towards wale , but be take , and behead at Bristol . Magdalen the counterfeit king Richard , be apprehend and bring to the tower , and afterward hang and quarter ; with mr. fereby , an ? other of king Richard chaplain . diverse other lord , and knight , and gentle ? man , and a great number of mean person , be in other place put to death ; that so much noble blood , at one time , and for one cause , have scarce be hear or read of . the abbot of Westminster , in who house the plot be contrive , hear of these misfortune , as he be go between the monastery and his mansion , fall shall ? den into a palsy , and short after , without speech , end his life . about this time also , a strange piece of treason be report to have be practise against the king life : that there be find in his bedclothe a iron with three sharp pike stand upright ; that when the king shall have lay he down , he may have thrust himself upon they . but see there be no far mention of inquire after it ; it seem to have be but a idle rumour not worth believe . but now that the hot english blood be well allay , the welsh blood spring up as hot : for now , Owen glendour a esquire of wale , bring up at the inn of court in London ; partly out of a desire to revenge a wrong do he ( as he con ? ceive ) in a suit for land in controversy between the lord grey of Ruthin and he , but chief out of a humour of aspire , endeavour to draw the Welshman to a general defection , tell they , that the english be at variance among they ? self , now be the time to shake off their yoke , and to resume their own ancient law and custom . to who persuasion the Welshman harken , make he their king and captain ; and he have get a competent army , set first upon his old advers•ry •ey•old lord grey of Ruthin , and take he prisoner ; yet with promi•e of releasement , if he will marry his daughte• ; which offer , though the lord grey at first not only refuse , but scorn , yet out of necessity at last he be content to accept ; when notwithstanding , his deceitful father in law trifle out the time of his enlargement , till he die . but the Welshman grow confident upon this success , break into the border of Herefordshire , make spoil and prey of the country as free as if they have leave to do it ; for indeed none oppose they but only the lord ed••nd Mortimer , who have former withdraw himself to his castle at Wigmore ; an• he have assemble the force of the country , and join b•ttell with they , be take prisoner , and then fetter , and cast into a deep and page 35 vile dungeon . it be think if glendour have as well know how to use his victory , as to get it ; he may at this time have put the english yoke into a great haz•rd to be shake off : but he have kill a thousand of the english , think he have do for that time , and so give over the pursuit , retire . the inhumanity of the welsh woman be here memorable , who fall upon the dead carcase of the english , first strip they , and then cut off their privy part , and nose ; whereof the o•e they thrust into their mouth , the other they press between their buttock• . many noble man , special his kinsman the Percy , solicit king Henry to deliver Mortimer ; but the king be deaf of that ear , he can rather have wish both he and his two sister in heaven , for than he shall be free from conceal come ? petitour . Theise affront be at this time suffer in the welsh , because the king be now employ in a more dangerous service with the Scot ; for they take advantage of the distraction in the kingdom ( as it be always their custom to do ) have make a inroad into the county of Northumberland , and sudden•y one night set upon the castle of work ; take and spoil it , and then return . in revenge whereof , the english invade and spoil certain island of the orkn•ys : then the Scot set forth a fleet , under the conduct of sir Robert Logon ; but before he come to any action , he be encounter , and the great part of his fleet take . but these be but such affront , as often happen between troublesome neighbour ; for all this while the peace be still in be between the nation , but at last it break out into a open war upon this occasion : Robert king of Scot have offer to match his son David with a d•ughter of geo•ge earl of Dunbarre , and have receive money of he in part of her portion ; and afterward will neither suffer the march to proceed , nor yet pay back the money ; but marry his son to a daughter of Archibold earl of d••glasse : upon which indignity , George of Dunbarre fly into England to king Henry ; and with his aid make diverse incursion into Sco•land : whereupon Rober• king of Scot send to king Henry , that if he will have the truce between they to continue , he shall deliver to he George of Dunbarre . king Henry answer , that he have give he a safe conduct , and can not now recall it with his honour ; but as for continue the truce , king Robert may do in that what he think best• upon this answer , the king of Scots present proclaim war against he ; but king Henry as ready in that matter as he , stay not for king Robert invade of England ; but himself with a puissant army invade Scotland , burn castle , and city , and not spare church , and religious house . about the end of Sep ? tember , he besiege the castle of maiden in Edenbourgh , where prince David , and the earl Douglas be : at which time , Robert duke of Albanye , who in the king of Scot sickness manage the business , send a herald to king Henry , protest upon his honour , that if he will stay but six day , he will give he battle . king Henry reward the herald , and stay ; but six time six day pass , but neither duke of Albany , nor any other for he appear . and now winter come on , vi ? ctuall grow scant , and which be worst , a mortality begin in the engl•sh camp ; for which cause , king Henry remove his siege , and retu•ned i•t•England . as soon as he be go , sir Patrick hebborne a Scottishman , have a good opinion of his valour , think to do great matter ; and with a competent army of the man of l••gh-deane , he invade Northumberland , make great spoil , and load his soul•diers with prey , and prisoner ; but in the retreat , march loose and licentious ? lie , be set upon by the earl of Northumberland vice-warden , at a town call neshye ; where hebborne himself , and all the flower of l•ugh-deane be slay ; sir John and William Cockburne , sir William buss , John and Thomas Hablington esq•ires and a multitude of common soldier take prisoner . on the engl•sh part few sl•in• and none of any rank or quality : in revenge whereof , Archibold Douglas with a army of twenty thousand enter Northumberland ; but at a place call Hom•ldon , be encounter by the english , under the lead of Henry lord Percye , surname ho•spu••e , and George earl of march , who put they to •light ; and after the slau•h ? ter of ten thousand of they , take five hundred prisoner ; whereof the chieft page 36 be Mordack earl of Fife , ( son of the general , who in the fight lose one of his eye ) Thomas earl of Murrey , Robert earl of A•gus , the earl of Atholl and Menli••• and among the slay , be sir John Swinton , sir Adam Gourdon , sir John Leviston , sir Alexander Ramsey , and three and twenty other knight . in this mean time , glendour of Wales have solicit the king of France for aid , who send he twelve hundred man of quality , but the wind be so contrary , that they lose twelve of their ship , and the rest return home . the english , de ? ride this ill success of the french , so exasperate the fencing , that present ? lie after he send twelve thousand , who land safe , and join with the welsh ; but as soon as they hear of the english army approach , whether mistrust their own strength , or suspect the welch-men faithfulness , they run to their ship and disgraceful go home . king Henry ambassador late send into Britain to fetch the lady Jane de na ? varre duchess of Britiane , the relict of John de Montford surname the Conquerour• with who the king by procurator have contract matrimony ; in the begin of February return with she in safety : the king meet she at Winchester , where the seven of February the marriage be solemnize . about this time some affront be offer by the french : Valerian earl of S. Paul , with seventeen hundred man , land in the isle of wight , where he burn two village and some few cottage ; but hear the people of the island to have assemble , he make haste to his ship , and return home . also John earl of Clermont ( the heir of Bourbon ) win from the english the castle of S. Peter , S. mary , and the Newcastle : the lord de la Brett , win the castle of cal••in ; place of great consequence to the english . and now to make k . Henry sensible that a crown can hardly ever sit easy upon the head , if it be not set on right at first ; a new conspiracy be hatch against he : the Percy , earl of Northumberland and Worcester , with Henry Hotspur , begin about thi• time to fall off from king Henry ; their reason be , first , because the king at their request refuse to redeem their kinsman Mortimer from glendour slavery ; and then because he deny they the benefit of such prisoner as they have take of the Scot , at Homildon or N•shye : whereupon they go of themselves , and procure mortimer delivery , and then enter into a league offensive and defensive with glendour , and by their proxy , in the house of the archdeacon of Bangor , they agree upon a tripartite indenture under their hand and seal , to divide the kingdom into three part ; whereby all England from Sever• and Trent , south and eastward , be assign for the portion of the earl of march : all wale and the land beyond see ? ver• westward , be assign to Owen glendour : and all the remainder of land from Trent northward , to be the portion of the lord Percy . in this , as glendour persuade they , they think they shall accomplish a prophesy ; as though king Henry be the mouldwarp curse of god own mouth ; and they three be the lion the dragon and the wolf which shall divide the land among they . in this mean time king Henry , not acquaint with this conspiracy , cause a Proclama ? cion to be make , intimate that the earl of march have voluntary cause himself to be take prisoner , to the end , the rebel have he in their custody , may pretend some colour for their conspiracy ; and therefore he have small reason to take care for his deliverance . hereupon the Percy assist with a company of Scot , and draw to their party the earl of Stafford , and Richard Scroop arch ? bishop of York and many other , purpose to join with the captain of the welsh , but first they frame certain article against the king , and send they to he in write . that he have falsify his oath give at his land , swear that he come but only to recover his inheritance , and will not meddle with the king , or with the crown . that most traitorous he have take arm against his soon ? reign lord , imprison he , and then most barbarouus cause he to be mur ? red . that ever since the death of king •ichard , he have unjust keep the crown from his kinsman Edmund M•rtimer earl of march , to who of right it belong . that upon no occasion , he have impose diverse tax upon the people . that by page 37 his letter he procure burgess and knight of the parliament to be choose ; for which cause and many other , they defy he , and vow his destruction , and the restore of the earl of march to his right . king Henry can not but know that all these article against he be true , yet see the know it hinder he not from seek to get the crown when he have it not ; it can less hinder he from seek to keep it now that he have it ; and if he be able , be a private man , to get it from a king , he be likely to be more able , be now a king , to keep it from privat• man ; and as for any objection that conscience can make , he have enough to answer they all : for , if his title be good against king Richard , by his re ? signation , it be as good against Mortimer by his swear allegiance ; and upon these ground , with a mind as confident as if all cyrcumstance be of his side , he raise a army , and march towards the lord , take care they may by no mean join with the welsh ; and about Shrewsbury , on Saturday saint mary Magda ? lens eve , he encounter they , in which fight though the Scot and Henry Hotspur show much valour , yet the victory rest on the king side ; Hotspur himself be slay , the earl of Worcester be take prisoner , together with sir Richard Ver ? non , sir Theobald Trussel , the baron of Kinderton ; and the rest flee . on the king part ( beside the earl of Stafford , who have that morning revolt from the con ? spirator ) be slay sir Hugh Shirley , sir John Clifton• sir John cockayn , sir ni ? cholas Gausell , sir Walter blunt , sir John Calverley , sir John massy of Puddingtr• , sir Hugh Mortimer and sir Robert Gausell , all which have be but that morning dub knight , with sir Thomas Wendsley , who die afterward of his wound ; of common soldier about sixteen hundred , but of the conspirator above six thousand , whereof 36 the king slay with his own hand , but be once unhorse by Douglas , who in his presence slay sir Walter blunt , with diverse other , that day in all thing attire like to the king ; for which exploit , Douglas ( be after by the fall of his horse take prisoner ) be by the king command , careful attend , and without ransom set at liberty : in this batttell , the young prince Henry , though wound in the face with a arrow , yet be not wound in his courage , but conti ? nue fight still . after this victory the king cause public thank to be give to God , and then cause the earl of Worcester to be behead , and many other of that rebellion to be draw hang and quarter , and their head place on Lon ? don bridge : and then the king send his son Henry prince of Wales , with his whole army into that country ; but before his come , Owen glendour be abandon by all his company , and lurk in the wood be there famish ; many of his as ? sociate be take and put to death . while the prince be in wale , Henry Percy earl of Northumberland , of his own accord , come and submit himself to the king , protest his innocency , a• not be once acquaint with any intent of treason and rebellion ; who excuse the king receive for the present with gen ? tle language , the rather for that he have the possession of Barwick castle and o ? the place of strength in his power , but yet he wipe not off the score of his misde ? meanor out of his mind . and now with the four year of his reign end all the great trouble of this k . Henry the four : those that follow be but such accident as be frequent in all time both abroad and at home . the britans under the lead of the lord of castiles , spoil the town of Plymouth ; in revenge whereof , the western-man , under the command of William Wilford , set forth • fleet , which arrive in Britain , take forty ship lade with oil and wine , and burn forty more . again the french land a thousand man in the isle of Wight• where they get together a great booty of cattle , but the islander come upon they take away their booty , and make many of they leave their carcase for a booty to the •sland . yet the french will not leave so , but a while after , as have get new spirit , they cast anchor before the isle of wight , and require no less than to have the island in ? to their possession , but a resolute answer of the islander fright they away , and make they glad they be go . soon after this the duke of Orleans , brother to the french king , in a vaunt stile , send a challenge to king Henry to meet he page 38 in the field , each of they to have a hundred in his company ; to which the king an ? swer , that for his own valour it have sufficient be try , and for this challenge of the duke , neither the person nor the cause be worthy of his undertake . upon this refusal of the king , diverse taunt and jeer be bandy be•weene they , till at last the duke , in great passion , fall upon Vergie a town in Guyen , but after three month assault it , be valiant defend by sir Robert An•field and three hundred Englishman , he be glad to give over with loss , and return into France . present upon this , the admiral of Britain , accompany with the lord du Castille , and thirty sail of ship , attempt to land at Dertmouth in Devon ? shire , but be repel , and the lord du Castille , and two of his brother , and four hundred of his man be slay , beside two hundred take prisoner ; of who , the lord Baquevile marshal of Britain , be one . after this , five hundred man of arm , five hundred crossbow , and a thousand Fleming , under the conduct of the earl of S. Paul , lay siege to the castle of Mar•k , three league fr•m c•llice ; but first by sir Philip hall captain of Callice , and after by sir Richard Aston lieutenant of the english pale , they be force to retire and fly : the earl of S. Paul esca ? bed to saint Omers , but leave many of his man of quality behind he , and more take prisoner . after this , Thomas duke of Clarence , the king second son , and the earl of Kent , with competent force enter the haven of sluice , where they burn four ship ride at anchor , and then return to the relief of Calais , besiege at that time by the french ; and in the way take three carrack of g•noua rich la ? den , and bring they into the chamber of rye . and these be the trouble of this king abroad : but now at home , the relic of the former northern re ? bellion begin to revive ; for now , Henry Percy earl of Northumberland , Richard Scroop archbishop of York , Thomas Mowbray earl martial , the lord , Hastings , Fawconbridge , and Bardolfe , with diverse other , conspire , at a time appoint , to meet upon yorkswould-downe , and there to bid defiance to king Henry . article of grievance be frame , and set up in all public place , which draw multitude to be partaker of the enterprise . but now , Ralph Nevil earl of Westme•land , with the lord John the king three son , the lord Henry fitz-hughes , Ralph Evers , and Robert Vmphrevile , make head against they ; and come into a plain in the for ? rest of Galltree , they sit down right against the archbishop and his force , which be twenty thousand ; and Westmoreland perceive the enemy force to be far more than they , he use this policy : he send to the archbishop , demand the reason why he will raise force against the king ? who answer , that his arm be not against the king , but for his own defence , who the king , upon the inn ? stigation of sycophant , have threaten ; withal he send he a scroll of their grie ? vance , which Westmoreland read , and seem to approve , and thereupon desire a conference with he : the archbishop more credulous than wise , persuade the earl martial to go with he to the place appoint to confer : the article be read and allow of ; and thereupon Westmoreland seem to commiserate the soul ? diers• have be in armour all day , and weary , wish the archbishop to ac ? quaint his party , as he will his , with this their mutual agreement ; and so shake hand , in most courtly friendship drink unto he ; whereupon the soldier be will to disband , and repair home : which they have no soon do , but a tro•p of horse , which in a colourable manner have make a show to depart , wheel about , and afterward return ; and be come in •ight , the earl of Westmoreland arrest both the archbishop and the earl martial , and bring they both prisoner to the king at Po•fret ; who pass from thence to York , the prisoner likewise be car ? ried thither , and the next day both of they behead . at Durham , the lord ha ? sting and F•wconbridge , with two knight , be execute . Northumberland , with the lord Bardolfe , flee first to Barwick , and after into Scotland , where they be entertain by David lord Fleming : whereupon the king give summons to the castle of Barwick , which at first they refuse to obey , but upon the plant and discharge of a piece , they present yield without composition : and here William Greystock , Henry Baynton , and John Blink•nsop , knight , and five other be page 39 present put to execution , and many other commit to several prison . about this time , Iames son and heir of Robert king of Scotland , a child of nine year old , attend by the earl of Orkney , as he be sail into France , be take by cer ? taine mariner of Norfolk , who bring he to the king at Windsor , the 30. of march , 1408. and the king send they to the tower of London . Northumberland and Bardolfe , after they have be in wale , France , and Flanders , to raise a power against king Henry , return back into Scotland , and after a year with a great power of Scot enter England , and come into Yorkshire , make great spoil and waste as they pass : but sir Thomas Rokesby sheriff of York , levy the force of the county , upon bramham-moore give they battle ; in which nor ? thumberland be slay , Bardolfe take , but wound to death , and the rest put to flight . about this time also , sir Robert Vmphrevile viceadmiral of England , with ten man of war enter Scotland , burn their gally•t , and many other ship over against lie , and bring away with he fourteen tall ship lade with corn and other staple commodity , which at his return he send into the market round a ? bout , and thereby bring down the prize of all thing , and purchase to himself the name of mendmarket . the prince have be a student in queen college in Oxford , under the tuition of his uncle Henry Beaufort , chancellor of that university , afterward bishop of lincol•e and Winchester , and last make a cardinal , by the title of Eusebius . from Oxford , the prince be call to court , and the lord Thomas Percy earl of Worcester be make his governor : but come afterward to be at his own dispose , when ? there be by nature valorous , and not yet well stay by time and experience ; o• whether incite by ill companion , and embolden by the opinion of his own greatness ; he run into many course so unworthy of a prince , that it be much doubt what he will prove when he come to be prince . once , it be say , he lie in wait for the receiver of his father rent , and in the person of a thief set upon they and rob they . another time , when one of his companion be arraign for felony before the lord chief justice , he go to the king bench bar , and offer to take the prisoner away by force ; but be withstand by the lord chief justice , he step to he , and strike he over the face : whereat the judge nothing abash , rise up and tell he , that he do not this affront to he , but to the king his father , in who place he sit ; and therefore to make he know his fault , he command he to be commit to the fleet . you will have wonder to see how calm the prince be in his own cause , who in the cause of his companion have be so violent : for he quiet obey the judge sentence , and suffer himself to be lead to prison . this passage be not a little please to the king , to think that he have a judge of such courage , and a son of such submission : but yet for these and such other prank , he remove he from be precedent of the council , and place in it his three son John . This make the prince so sensible of his father this ? pleasure , that he think it necessary to seek by all mean to recover his •ood opinion ; which he endeavour to do by a way as strange as that by which he lose it : for , at ? tire himself in a garment of blue satin , wrought all with eylet-hole of black silk , at every hole the needle hang by which it be sow , and about his arm a thing in fashion of a hound collar , stud with ss . of gold , he come to the court at Westminster : to who , the king ( though not well in health ) cause he ? self , in a chair , to be bring into his privy chamber ; where , in presence of but three of four of his privy council , he demand of the prince the cause of his un ? wont habit and come ? who answer , that be not only his subject but his son , and a son so tender always regard by he , he be worthy of a thousand death , if he shall intend or but imagine the least offence to his sacred majesty , and therefore have fit himself to be make a sacrifice ; and therewithal reach his dagger , hold it by the point to his father , for ( say he ) i desire not to live long , than i may be think to be , what i be and shall ever be , your faith ? full and obedient vassal . with this or the like answer , the king be so move , that he fall upon his son neck , and with many tear embrace he , confess page 40 that his ear have be too open to receive report against he , and promise faith ? full , that from thenceforth no report shall cause any disaffection towards him• the king about this time , make his son John duke of Bedford , and his son Humphe• duke of Gloucester ; he make also sir Thomas Beauford earl of Dorset , and the earl of Arundel he create duke of York . the rest of king Henry day , from this time forward , be scarce a year , be free from all trouble both abroad and at home ; unless perhaps he may be trouble in mind : for have shed so much english and noblebloud ; for expiation where ? of , or else to the end he may join valour and devotion in one action together , which hitherto he but use single ; he take upon he the crusado , and at a coun ? cell in White-friar , order be take , and great preparation be make for his jour ? ney to Jerusalem : but it be otherwise decree in heaven ; and yet not so other ? wise , but that he end his life in Jerusalem , as shall be show hereafter . of his taxation . in the very begin of his reign , it may pass instead of a taxation , that he find in king Richard coffer , in money and jewel , to the value of seven hun ? dread thousand pound . in his four year , a extraordinary subsidy be grand ? t he ; twenty shilling of every knight fee , and of every one that have twenty shilling a year in land , twelve penny and upward , accord to that rate ; and of every one that have twenty pound in good , twelve penny , and upward accord to that rate ; but with this caution and protestation , that it shall not hereafter be draw for a precedent , and that no record thereof shall be make . in his six year , the clergy grant to the king a ten . in his seven year , the clergy grant a ten and a half , and the commons two fifteen . in a parliament hold the nine year of his reign , the king move to have allow he in every year wherein there be no parliament kept• a ten of the clergy , and a fifteen of the Layity ; to which demand the bishop assent , but the commons will not . in his seven year , a parliament begin which last almost a whole year , in which a subsidy be at last grant ; so sharp , that even priest and friar who live of alm , be force every one to pay a noble . of law and ordinance make in his time . in this king day , burn and execution by fire for controversy in religion be first put in practice . also in the first year of his reign a act be make , that no person of what de ? agree soever , shall after that day allege for his excuse , any constraint or coa•cting of his Prince• for do of any unlawful act ; and that such excuse after that day , shall stand he in no stead . also a act be make , that no lord , nor other , may give any livery to any but their household and menial servant . in his twelve year , the king cause a new coin of noble to be make , which be of less value than the old noble , by four penny . also that all rypier , and other fisher from any of the seacoast , shall sell their fish in Cornhill and Cheapside themselves , and not to fishmonger that will buy it to sell again . also this king institute the duchy court , which he do in honour of the house of Lancaster ; to the end , the land belong to that duchy , may in all follow ? ing time be distinguish and know from the land of the crown . in his sixth year , the king call a parliament at Coventry , and send process to the sheriff , that they shall choose no knight nor burgess , that have any knowledge in the law of the realm ; by reason whereof , it be call the lay-men parliament . in his seven year , the major of London for preservation of fish ; obtain , that all wear which page 41 stand between London and seven mile beyond Kingston ; as also , such as stand be ? between London and Gravesend , shall be pull up and take away . Affaires of the church in his time . by reason of discord between John of Gaunt , and Wickham bishop of Winchester ; the bishop either in durance , can not , or in fear dare not come to the par ? liament house , at a time when the king require a supply of money ; but the Cler ? gie unanimous affirm , that without their brother , the bishop of Winchester presence , they neither can nor will consult of any thing• he be present send for , and by the king secure . after this , the king call a parliament at Coventry , and send process to the sheriff that they shall choose no knight or burgess that be lawyer , and be therefore call the laymen parliament : and short after a ? other parliament be call , and name the unlearned parliament , either for the unlearnedness of the person , or for their malice to learned man ; in which the commons present a petition to the king and the upper house ; desire that the king may have the temporal possession of the bishop and clergy ; the value whereof , they pretend will be sufficient maintenance for a hundred and fifty earl , one thousand five hundred knight , six thousand two hundred esquire , and a hundred hospital for maim soldier . they crave likewise , that clerk convict shall not be deliver to the bishop prison ; and that the statute make in the second year of the king against Lollards , may be repeal . but the king de ? nie their petition ; and in person command they from thenceforth , not to pre ? fume to trouble their brain about any such business , for he be resolve to leave the church in as good state as he find it . in the twelve year of his reign , certain learned man in Oxford , and other place , in their sermon maintain the opinion of Wickliff ; but the bishop and doctor of the university , inhibit and condemn they . in his time be a great schism in the church , by reason of two anti-pope ; but afterward in a assembly of cardinal and bishop , a three man be elect , name Alexander the five , who have be train up at Oxford . work of piety in his time . king Henry found a college at Battlefield in Shropshire , where he over ? come the lord Henry Percy . in his three year , the conduit upon Cornhill be begin to be build . also in his time sir Robert knoll make the stone bridge of Ro ? chester in Kent ; and found in the town of Pomfret a college , and a hospital ; he also re-edify the body of the White-friar church in Fleetstreet , where he be afterward bury : which church be first found by the ancestor of the lord grey of Codnor . in the eight year of his reign , Richard Whittington major of London , erect a house or church in London , to be a house of prayer , and name it after his own name , Whittington college ; with lodging , and weekly allowance for diverse poor people . he also build the gate of London , call Newgate , in the year 1420 , which be before a most loathsome prison : he build also more than half of saint bartholmew hospital in West-Smithfield , and the beautiful library in the grey friar in London• now call Christ hospital : he also build a great part of the east end of Guildhall , and a chapel adjoin to it , with a library of stone , for the custody of the record of the city . but he that exceed all at this time in work of piety , be William Wickham bishop of Winchester ; his first work be the build of a chapel at Tychfield , where his father , mother , and sister perr•t be bury : next , he found at Southwick in Hampshire , near the town of Wickham , the place of his birth , as a supplement to the priory of Sout•wicke ; a chantry , with allowance for five priest for ever : he bestow twenty thousand mark in repair the house belong to the bishopric ; he discharge out •f prison in all place of his diocese , all such poor prisoner as lie in execution for debt , under twenty pound : he amend all the highway from Winchester to page 42 London , on both side the river . after all this , on •he five of march 1379 , he be ? begin to lay the foundation of that magnificent structure in Oxford , call new-col ? ledge , and in person lay the first stone thereof ; in which place before , there stand naetius-colledge , build by alver , at N•tius entreaty ; and for the affinity of the name , come to be call new-colledge . in the year 1387 , on the 26 of march , he like ? wise in person lay the first stone of the like foundation in Winchester , and dedica••• the same , as that other in Oxford , to the memory of the virgin mary . the Grocer• in London purchase their hall in Cu••yhope lane for 320 mark ; and then lay th• foundation thereof on the ten of May . king Henry found the college of F•• ? ringhey in Northampto•shire ; to which king he•ry the five give land of the prio ? rise of monk alien , by he suppress . John Gower the famous poet , new build a great part of saint Mary overye church in south••rke , where he lie bury . in the second year of this king , a new mar ? ket in the poultry , call the stock , be build for the free sale of foreign fish ? monger and butcher . in his twelve year , the Guildhall of London be begin to be new edify ; and of a little cottage , make a goodly house , as now it be . casualty happen in his time . in his three year , in the month of march , appear a blazing-star ; first be ? betwixt the east and the north , and then send forth fiery beam towards the north ; foreshow perhaps the effusion of blood that follow after , in wale and Northumberland . in the same year , at Danbury in Essex , the devil appear in likeness of a gray-frier ; who enter the church , put the people in great fear , and the same hour , with a tempest of whirlwind and thunder , the top of the steeple be break down , and half the chancel scatter abroad . in his seven ye•re , such abundance of water break sudden over the bank in Kent , that it draw ? ned cattle without number . also this year , the town of Reystone in Hartford ? shire be burn . in his nine year be so sharp a winter , and such abundanc• of snow ; continue December , January , February , and march , that almost all small bird die through hunger . of his wife and child . he have two wife , the first be Mary , one of the daughter and heir of h•m ? phrey de bo•un earl of Hereford , Essex , and Northampton ; she die before he c•me to the crown , in the year 1394. his second wife be Joan , daughter to Charles the first king of Navarre , she be the widow of John de Montford surna ? m strea•y , or the conqueror , duke of Britain ; who die without any issue by king Henry , at Havering in Essex , the year 1437 , in the fifteen year of king Henry the six , and lie bury by her husband at Canterbury . he have four son and two daughter ; of his son , Henry his elder be prince of Wales , and after his father , king of England . his second son be Thomas duke of Clarence , and stew ? ard of England ; who be slay at Beaufort in Anjo• , and die without issue . his three son be John duke of Bedford ; he marry first with anne daughter to John duke of Burgundy ; and second with Iacoba daughter of Peter of Luxenbourgh , earl of saint Paul , but die also without issue . his four son be Humphrey ; by his brother king Henry the five create duke of Gloucester , and be general call ? lead the good duke ; he have two wife , but die without issue , in the year 1446 , and be bury at saint Alban ; though the vulgar opinion be , that he lie bury in saint Paul church . of king Henry the fourths daughter ; Blanch the elder be marry to Lewis Barbatus , Palatine of the Rhine , and prince elector : Philippe his young daughter , be marry to John king of Denmark , and Norway . page 43 of his personage and condition . concern his body ; he be of a middle stature , slender limb , but well pro ? portion . concern his mind ; of a serious and solid disposition , and one that stand more upon his own leg than any of his predecessor have do : in case of difficulty , not refuse , but not need the advice of other ; which may con ? firm , but not better his own . he be neither merry nor sad , but both : best please when he be oppose , because this be like to do he good , by sharpen his inn ? vention : most angry when he be flatter , because this be sure to do he hurt , by dull his judgement . no man ever more love , nor less dote upon a wife , than he : a good husband , but not uxorious ; that if there be reins to that passion , we may know he have they . it may be think , he affect the crown , not so much out of ambition as out of compassion , because the oppre•sions of his country he can not so well help be a subject , as a king ; for otherwise we may true say , he be a loser by the crown , be not so great for a king , as he be before for a subject : the crown rather be a gainer by he , which have ever since be the rich for his wear it . we may think he be either weary of his life , or long for death ; for why else will he take upon he the crusado , have be tell by a skilfu•l soothsayer , that he shall dye in Jerusalem ? but it seem , he do not be ? lief he . of his death and burial . in the fortysixth year of his age , have peace both at home and abroad , and be of too active a spirit to be idle , he take upon he the crusado , and great provision be make for his journey to Jerusalem : but alas , his journey to Jerusalem require no such provision ; for be at his prayer at saint Edward shrine , he be sudden take with a apoplexy , and thereupon remove to the abbot of west ? minister house ; where recover his sense , and find himself in a strange place , he ask what place it be ? and be tell that he be in the abbot house , in a chamber call Jerusalem : well then ( say he ) lord have mercy upon i , for this be the Jerusalem where a soothsayer tell i i shall dye . and here he die indeed , on the 20. day of march , in the year 1413. when he have live six and forty year , reign thirteen and a half . it be worth remember , that all the time of his sick ? ness , his will be to have his crown set upon his bolster by he ; and one of his fit be so strong upon he , that all man think he direct dead ; the prince come in , take away the crown : when sudden the king recover his then ? ses , miss his crown ; and ask for it , be tell , the prince have take it : where ? upon the prince be call , come back with the crown , and kneel down , say : sir , to all our judgement , and to all our grief , you seem direct dead , and therefore i take the crown as be my right : but see to all our comfort , you live , i here deliver it much more joyful than i take it , and pray God you may long live to wear it your self . well ( say the king sigh ) what right i have to it , God know . but ( say the prince ) if you die king , my sword shall mai•teine it to be my right against all opposer . well ( say the king ) i refer all to God : but i charge thou on my blessing , that thou administer the law indifferent , avoid flatterer , defer not to do justice , nor be spare of mercy : and then turn a ? bout , say , God bless thou , and have mercy on i : and with those word , give up the ghost . his body with all funeral pomp be convey to Canterbury , and there solemn bury . of man of note in his time . of man of valour in his time , of who there be great store , i shall need to say no more than what have already be say in the body of the story : only i can but remember sir Robert k•olls , who born of mean parentage , make he ? self famous over all Christendom ; and die at a manor of he in Norfolk , be page 44 bring to London , and bury in the church of the white f•ie•s in London , which himself have re-edify . but for man of learning , i must set in the first place , Will ? liam Wickham , a man of no learning , yet well wor•hy t• hold the place : in relate of who life , i must have leave to expatiate a little . his father name be John long , or as some say , Perot ; but as Campian prove , Wickham ; and not from the place of his dwell , though he be parish-clerke of Wickham in Hampshire , where he teach child to write : in which quality his son William prove so excellent , that Nicolas Wooddall , constable of Winchester castle , take he from his fa•her , •nd keep he at school , first at Winchester , afterward at Oxford , till himself be make surveyor-general of the king work , he send for this William to serve he as his clerk ; who in short time grow so expert in that employment , that Adam Torleto• b•shop of winche•ter , commend he to the king , who employ he present in survey his fortification at Dover , and Quinborough castle , and afterward make he surveyor of his building at Windsor castle , and his house of Henley and East-Hamstead . and here first , envy rise up against he ; for have cause to be engra ? when on the stone of a wall in Windsor castle , these word ; this make William VVi•kham : some that envy his rise , complain to the king of this insolency , as arrogate to himself , that excellent piece of building to be do at his charge : but VVickham call before the king about it , make answer , that his meaning wa• not , neither by any ind•fferent construction can it import , that VVickham make that bui•ding , but that the same building make VVi•kham , as be a mean of the king great favour towards he . this answer pacify the king , who take he daily more and more into his favour ; and be now enter into the ministry , be first make parson of S. Martins in the field , than minister of S. Martins le grand . •f•erwards Archdeacon of Lincoln , provost of vvell , and rector of Manyhens in Devo•shire ; so as at one time he have in his hand so many ecclesiastical live , that the value of they , in the king book , amount to eight hundred seventy six pound thirteen shilling : beside which , he be honour with many temporal place of great profit and respect , as to be his principal secretary , keeper of the privy seal , master of the ward and livery , treasurer of the king revenue in France , and some other office . after which , the bishopric of Winchester fall void , mean be make to the king to bestow that place upon he : and here , the ••cond time , do envy rise up against he , inform the king that he be a man of little or no learning , and no way sit for such a dignity : whereupon the king make stay of grant it : but when VVickham come before the king , and •old he , that what he want in personal learning , he will supply with be a founder of learning ; this so satisfy the king , that he bestow the place upon he . after this , he be make lord treasurer of England : and here the three time do envy rise up against he ; for the king require of his subject a supply of money , it be answer , that he need no other supply , than to call his treasurer to account : this blow strike deep upon the bishop ; for he be present charge to give ac ? count for eleven hundred ninety six thousand pound ; and while he be busy in prepare his account , all his temporalty , upon importunity of John of Gaunt . be seize into the king hand , and give to the prince of Wales , and himself• upon pain of the king displeasure , command not to come within twenty mile of the court . in this case , he dismiss his train , and send copy abroad of his account , if it may be receive ; but be hinder by the work of John of Gaunt against he . upon this ground ( as be think ) queen Philip wife to king Edward the three , upon her deathbed , by way of confession , tell VVi•kham , that John of Gaunt be not the lawful issue of king Edward , but a supposititiou son ; for when she be bring to bed at gau•t , of a daughter , know how desirous the king be to have a son ; she exchange that daughter , with a dutch woman , for a Boy• whereof she have be deliver about the same time with the queen . thus much she confess , and withal make the bishop swear , that if the say John and Gaunt shall at any time , either direct , or indirect attempt the crown ; or that right ? full , through want of issue , it shall devolve unto he ; that than he shall disco ? ver page 45 this matter , and make it know unto the king , and council . afterwards the queen be dead , and the bishop find John of Gaunt , as he think , too much aspire , he secret tell he this relation , and this adjuration of his suppose more ? there , advise he not to seek high than a private state ; for else he be bind by oath to make it know to all the world : thus far the bishop do well ; but when he see the son of John of Gaunt not only aspire , but possess of the crown , why do he not then discover it , and join at least with the bishop of Ca•lile , in open ? pose it ? certain , we may know , that either the whole relation be but a fable , or that Wickham be a temporizer , or that John of Gaunt be a most patient man , to suffer the affront of such a indignity , with l•sse than the death of he that do it . but howsoever it be , it be certain , the duke bear a mortal grudge to the by ? shop ; who have no way to withstand such a enemy , but by make Alice pierce his friend : by who mean , after two year , he be restore to all his live ; and of ? terward king Edward be dead , and Alice Pierce banish ; by the mean of a great friend than Alice pierce ( his full ourse ) he obtain in the second year of k . rich ? ard , a general pardon under the great seal of England ; and from that time for ? ward enjoy a quiet life , and die in the four year of this king Henry the four , be then of the age of above 80 year , and lie bury in the church of saint Swi ? then• in Winchester , in a monument of his own make in his life time ; leave for his heir Thomas Perrot , the son of his sister Agnes , marry to William Perrot . another great example of the volubility of fortune , in professor of learning , be Roger VValden , who die in the nine year of this king : he be at first a poor scholar in Oxford ; and the first step of his rise , be to be a chaplain in the col ? ledge there of saint Maries ; from thence by degree he get to be dean of York ; and after this , a high step , to be treasurer of England ; and yet a high after that , up•n the banishment of Thomas Arundel , to be archbishop of Canterbury : but bein• now at the top , he come down again , for in this king time , Thomas Arundel bei•g restore to the archbishopric , VValden be not only put out of •hat place , ? ? ? be call to account for the treasure•ship : and though he show hi•quietus est , yet all his temporalty be seize , and his person imprison , till by the media ? cion of the now archbishop Arundel , he be make treasurer of Calais , and after promote to be b•shop of London . the next place after these , be just due to Geoffry Ch•ucer , and John Gower , two famous poet in this time , and the father of english poet in all the time after : Cha•cer die in the four year of this king , and lie bury at Westminster : Gower , in this king nine year , and be bury in saint Mary overys church in south ? work . and now come other to be remember , who live and die in this king time : huge legate , bear in Hartfordshire , a monk of saint Albon , who write Scho ? lie upon Boetius the consolation . Nicholas Gorham , bear also in Hartfordshire , a Dominick friar , and the french king confessor , though a Englishman . VValte• Disse , so call of a town in Norfolk where he be bear , confessor to the duke of Lancaster . Laurence Holbeck , a monk of Ramsey , who write a hebrew di ? ctionary . John Cotton archbishop of Armagh : rich•rd Scroop , brother to William Scroop lord treasurer of England , make archbishop of York ; and write an in ? vective against king Henry , lose his head . William Thorpe , a earnest follower of John Wickliff , for which he be commit to Saltwood castle , where he die . Stephen Patrington , bear in York•shire , and Robert Mascall a Carmelite friar of lord ? low ; both of they confessor to king Henry the five . Boston a monk of the ab ? bey of bury in Suffolk ; who write a catalogue of all the writer of the church , and other treatise . John purvey , who be convent for teach doctrine con ? •rary to the church of Rome , and compel to recant . Thomas Rudburne bishop of S. Davids , who write a chronicle . Nicolas Riston , who consider the strife be ? tween the then anti-pope , write a book , de tollendo schismate . Robert Wansham a monk in Dar•etshire , who write a book in verse , of the original and signification of word . Robert Wimbledon a excellent preacher , as app•ar•th by the sermon he make upo• this text , red rationem villicatio•is tuus . page 46 the reign of king Henry the five . Henry of Monmouth ( so call from the place in wale , where he be bear ) old son of king Henry the four , succeed his fa ? there in the kingdom of England , to who the lord of the realm swear homage and allegiance , before he be yet crown ; a honour never do before to any of his predecessor : and after ? ward , on the nine of April , in the year 1412 , he be crow ? ned at Westminster , by Thomas Arundel archbishop of Canterbury ; with all ri•es and solemnity in such case accustom : and as the scripture speak of Saul , that assoon as Samuel have anoint he king , he have a new heart give he , and he become another man than he be before . So be it with this king Henry ; for present after his coronation , he call before he all his old companion , who have be fr•tres in malo with he ; strict charge they , not to pre•ume to come within ten mile of his court , until such time as they have give good proof of their amendment in manner ; and lest any of they shall pretend want of maintenance to be any cause of their take ill course , he give to every one of they a competent mean whereby to subsist . And know ( as he do ) the fashion of the Scot and welsh ; that in time of change they will common take adva•tage , to make in ? road upon the border ; he therefore ca•sed fort and bulwark in fit place to be erect , and place garrison in they , for prevent or repel any such incu• ? zion . immediate after this , he call a parliament , where a subsidy be grand ? t without ask : and in this parl•ament the commons begin to harp upon their old string , of take away the temporalty of the clergy ; and the bishop fear how it may take in the king ear , think it best to divert he , by strike upon another string , which they know will be more please to he ; which be , to show he the great right he have to the crown of France . and hereupon Chicheley archbishop of C•nterbury , in a long narration , deduce the king right from Is• ? bel daughter to fillip the four , marry to king Edward the second ; from who it descend by direct line to his majesty , and no hindrance of enjoy it , bu• pre ? tension of the sal•que law ; which ( say he ) be neither accord to the law of God , nor yet intend at first to that nation ; and though his predecessor , by reason of other encumbrance forbear to prosecute their claim , yet he be free from all such encumbrance , have no less power , than right to do it . This indeed strike up ? on the right string of the king inclination ; for as he affect nothing more than true glory , so in nothing more than in warlike action . hereupon , nothing be page 47 now think of , but the conquest of France . first there•ore he begin to alter in his arm the bear of semy-de-luces , and quarter the three flower deluce , as the king of fra•ce then bear they ; and that he may not be think to steal ad ? vantage , but to do it fair , he send ambassador to Charles the six then king of France , require in peaceable manner , the surrender of the crown of fra•ce ; which if he will yield unto , than king Henry will take to wife his daughter Katherine ; but if he refuse to do it , than king Henry will with fire and sword enforce it from he , or lose his life . the Ambassador• send , be the duke of Exe ? ter , the archbishop of Dublin , the lord grey , the lord high admiral , and the bishop of Norwich , with five hundred horse : who come to the court of F•ance , be at first receive and feast , with all the honour and show of kindness that ••ght be ; but assoon as their message be deliver , and that it be know what they c•me about , the copy of their entertainment be alter , and they be send a ? way with as little compliment , as they wer• before receive with honour ; only tell , that the king will speedy make answer to the king their master , by his own ambassador : and speedy indeed he do it ; for the earl of Vendosme , William b•••tier archbishop of Bourges , Peter Fresnel bishop of Lysea•x , with other , be arrive in England , assoon almost as the e•glish be returned• but be come , the archbishop of Bourges make a long oration in the praise of peace , conclude with the tender of the lady k•theri•e , and 50000 crown with she in dower , beside some town of no great importance : to which king h•••y , by the arch ? bishop of Ca•terbury make answer ; that these offer be trifle , and that without yield to his demand , he will never desist from that he intend : and with this answer , the french ambassador be dismiss . it be say , that about this time , the D•lphi• ( who in the king of France his sickness , manage the state ) send to king Henry a ton of tennis ball , in derision of his youth , as fit to play with they , than to manage Arm• ; which king he•ry take in such scorn , that he promise with a oath , it shall not be long ere he will toss such iron b•lls among they , that the best arm in France shall not be able to hold a racket to r•tur•e th•m . and now all thing be prepare and in a readiness for the king journey into France , his man ship , and himself ready to go on shipb••rd ; when sudden a treason be discover against his person , plot by Richard earl of Cambridge , h•••y lord Scroop of Masham , lord treasurer , and Thomas grey earl of n••thu•ber ? l••d , and plot and procure by the french agent . Theise be appreh••ded , and upon examination confess the treason , and the money ( which be say to be a million of gold ) by they for that end receive ; be all of they immediate put to death . from this Richard earl of Cambridge , second son of Edmund of L••gle• , do Richard afterward duke of York claim and recover the crown from the La•castrian family . this execution do , and the wind blow fair , king Henry weigh anchor ; and with a fleet of 1200 sail , ( Grafton say , but 140 ship ) but Enguerant say , 1600 , attend with six thousand spear , and 24000 Foo• , beside engineer and labourer ; he put to sea , and on our lady eve lan ? death at Caux ; where he make proclamation , that no man upon pain of death , shall rob any church , or offer violence to any that be find •narmed ; and from thence pass on , he besiege har•lew ; which when no succour come within certain day agree upon , the town be surrender and sack . of this town he make the duke of Exeter captain , who leave there for his lieutenant , sir John F•lstoffe , with a garrison of 1500 man . it be say that when king Henry enter H•r•lew , he pass along the street bare foot , until he come to the church of saint Martin ; where , with great devotion , he give most humble thank to God , for this his first achieve enterprise . from thence he march forward , and come to the river of Soame , he find all the bridge break ; whereupon he pass on to the bridge of sir Maxenae , where 30000 french appear , he pitch his camp , expect to be fight with ; and the more to encourage his man , he give the •r ? der of knighthood to John lord Ferrer of Groby , Reynold Graystocke , Percy Temp•s• , Christopher Morisby , Thomas Pickering , William Huddleston , Henry Mortimer , Ioh• page 48 Hosbalton , Philip hall , but not perceive the fre•ch to have any mind to figh• he march by the town of A•yens to bow•s , and there stay two day , expec••ing battle , and from thence march to Corby ; where the peasant of the coun•ry , with certain man of arm send from the Dolphi• , charge the right wing of the Eng ? lish , which be lead by Hugh Stafford lord Bo•rchier , and win away his standard , but be recover again by John Bromeley of Bromeley , a commander in the Lo••Staffords regiment , who with his own hand slay he that have take the Colo•••• and then take they up , display the same ; with sight whereof , the english be so encourage , that they present ro•ted the fre•ch , and put they to flight : which valiant exploit , the lord Stafford recompense , by give to Bromeley a a•••ity of fifty pound a year out of his land in Staffordshire . after this , the king mar ? she|will towards Callice , so strict observe his proclamation against church robbing• that when one be complain of for have take a silver pyx •ut of a church , he not only cause the same to be restore , but the soldier also to be hang : which point of discipline , both •ept the re•• from offend in that kind , and draw the people of the country , under hand to relieve his man with all thing necessary . the french king hear that king He•ry have pass the river of s•ame ; by advice of his council ( who yet be divide in opinion ) send Montjoy the french king at arm to defy king Henry , and to let he know he shall be fight with ; which king Henr• , though his army be much infect with fever , whereof the earl of Stafford , the bishop of Norwich , the lord Molines and Burnell , be late dead• yet he willing hear , and reward the herald for his me••age : and first have clear a passage over a bridge , where of necessity he be to pass , on the 22 of October he pass over with his army : at which time the duke of York that lead the rearward , have discover the enemy to come on •pace , whereof he send word to the king ; who thereupon make a stand , and appoint his officer what course to hold , and encourage his soldier , they all attend when the battle shall begin . the french army be divide into three battle ; in the first be place eight thousand man at arm , four thousand archer , and fifteen hundred crossbow , the wing consist of two thousand two hundred man at arm ; this battle , be lead by the constable of France himself , the duke of Orleans and Bourbon , the earl of ewe , Richmond , and Va•dosme , the lord Dempier , the lord admiral of France , the martial bouciquale , and other . the middle battle , wherein be more man at arm , be command by the duke of bar , and A ? l••so• , and by the earl of V••mon• , saling , Blamont Grantpee , and Rusey . in the rearward , we•e all the remainder of the french force , guide by the earl of m•rle , Dampmartin , Fauco•bridge , and the lord Lo•rey , captain of Ardy . the Frenchman thus order , be six time , some say ten time as many as the english , ( who be not above nine thousand ) think of nothing , but of the booty they shall get : in the mean time king Henry have make choice of a piece of grou•d half fen•ed on his back with the village , wherein they have rest the night before , on both side have strong hedge and ditch , begin there to order his battle ; but first he appoint a ambush of two hundred archer , which upon a watch ? word give , shall discharge their whole flight upon the flank of the enemy horse : the vanguard consist of archer only , be conduct by the duke of York ; who out of a heroic courage make su•e for that place , with who be join the lord Beaumont , Willoughby , and F••hope . the main battle be lead by the king himself , which consist of billman , and some bowman ; with he be the duke of Gloucester his brother , the earl martial , Oxford , and suff•lke . the rearward be lead by Thomas duke of Exeter , the king uncle , consist of all sort of weapon ; the horseman as wing guard the company on both side . the king to prevent the fury of the french cavalry , by the direction of the duke of York , appoint diverse stake stud with iron at both end , of six foot long , to be pitch behind the archer , and appoint pioneer to attend to remove they , as they shall be direct : these thing thus order , public prayer be humble make , and the onset be present give by the french horseman ; where ? upon page 49 sir Walter Orpington , accord to direction , cause the bowman behind the ••dges , to let fly their arrow ; which so gall the french horse , that either they cast their rider , or through their unruliness so open their rank , that the right wing of the english horse have way to come in upon the french foot ; and withal , the french horse disorderly retire , they be miserable tread down and disrank by their own company . upon which , the king with his main-battle come on with such ? ? ? , that himself in person charge the duke of ala•son , by who he be well near unhorse ; but afterward , have first slay two of the duke man , he ch••ged the duke again , and with his sword beat he from his horse ; who the king guard , notwithstanding the king cry out to the contrary , slay outright : and with his fall , the maine-battle of the french first give ground , then turn their back , and last cast away their weapon and flee . but then certain of the french-horseman that first run away , lead on by Robert bondile and the captain of Agincourt , mean to wipe away the blot of run away from soldier , by fight with boy , set upon the page and laundress that be leave in the camp ; who give such a lamentable shriek , that king Henry very think some fresh force have be come : whereupon he cause all the arrow that be stick in the field , to be g••hered , and the stake to be pluck up , and make ready to be again use ; ah ? among which the duke of York body be find , miserable hack and deface : the fight whereof , together with danger of a second charge , make king Henry give o•der , the prisoner shall be all slay , except only some principal man , who •e cause to be bind back to back , and so leave . for which fact , though do in cold blood , yet the king can not just be tax with cruelty , see the number of the prisoner be more than of his own soldier ; and nothing can give assurance of safety , but their slaughter . but all be not yet do : for the earl of Marle and F••co•bridge , with six hundred man at arm , who have stand still all day , begin now to stir , and give a brave charge upon king Henry army : but be but few , and their horse gall with the stake , they have only the honour to dye brave ; and indeed , they slay more of the english , than the whole army have do before . and now at last , the king be satisfy by the scout , that no enemy be more to be see , he ask what the place be call ? and be tell , Agincourt ; well then ( say he ) this shall be from henceforth call the battle of Agincourt : and present he c••sed the whole army , in their array as they be , to give God thanks ; cause the clergy there present , to sing the psalm of David , in exitu Israel de Aegypto ; and make proclamation , that every one , at the verse , non nobis domine , sed nomini tu• d• gloriam , shall kneel down , and the horseman bow their body : and then sing te deum and other holy hymn , they march to the enemy camp , where the soldier have liberty give they to take the spoil . a great victory no doubt , but yet a victory by which the english gain not one foot of ground in France , more than they have before ; and which •o•shelet attribute not so much to the valour of the english , as to the indiscretion of the french , who have so straighten the vanguard of their army , and pen they up so close together , that they have not room to draw out their sword ; so true be that say , quos deus vult perdere , dementat . the next day after the battle French He••uld• come to ask leave to bury their dead , and have it ; and the english he ? ra•lds , appoint to make search , make return that there be slay of the french above ten thousand , whereof a hundred twenty six be of the nobility bear ? ? ? ; of knight and gentleman of coat-armour , seven thousand eight hundred seventy four , whereof five hundred be knigh•ed the night before the battle : and of common soldier , about sixteen hundred . among the slay of the nobility , be Charles le bret high constable , Jaques of Chatillon admire ? … ? , the great master of France , the master of the crossbow , the duke o•••a•son , Bra ? •••• , and bar ; the earl of Nevers , Marle , Vaudemont , Beaumont , gra•••ee , Rousey , F•uconbridge , f•ys , and lestreuck : there be take prisoner , Charles duke of or ? leance , John duke of Bourbon , the lord Danvert , Fosseux , humiers , roy , C•wn• , •••court , no•ll , Bonciqualt ; to the number in all of fifteen hundred . on the english page 50 part be slay , Edward duke of York , and the earl of Suffolk , and not full six hundred in all ; but ( say C•xt•n ) not above six and twenty in all ; and Paulu• Aemilius say , beside the two lord , only two knight , and but ten private soul ? diers in all : a miracle rather than a victory . but not only king Henry be the death of the french lord beforenamed , in the field with his sword ; but of another great prince , at home , with his victory ; for Lewis the dolphin , elder son of Ch•rles the six , king of France , present upon it , without any other cause apparent , fall sick and dye . yet king he•ry , to make his enemy the better content with their overthrow , and to take away the envy of his victory ; at his return into England with his prisoner , which be on the sixth of November follow , he present give straight order , that no ballad or song shall be make or sing , more than of thank ? give to God for his happy victory and safe return ; but without word of either disgrace the fre•ch , or extol the english . at his entrance into London , the city present he with a thousand pound , and two basin of gold worth five hundred pound more . the body of the duke of York and the earl of Suffolk be bring into England , and the duke bury at Fodringhey in Northamptonshire , the earl at new-elm• in Oxfordshire . about this time , the emperor Sigismond cousin-german to king Henry , have be first in France , come accompany with the archbishop of Rheims , ambassador from the french king , into England ; for who there be thirty great ship send from the king to waft he over : but approach to land at Dover , the duke of Gloucester , with a company of gentleman , have their sword draw , s•ept up to the knee in water , say to he , that if he come as the king friend , he shall be welcome ; but if as claim any jurisdiction , they will resist he : whereupon the emperor renounce all imperial authority ; and be thereupon admit to land , and receive with as much honour as can be do he ; and afterward , to ? gether with Albert d•ke of Holland , who be late likewise arrive at Winchester , be elect companion of the order of the garter , and sa•e in their cell at the so ? lemnity of the feast . a principal cause of the emperor come , be to mediate a peace between England and France ; wherein he have bring king Henry to a good degree of inclination ; till news come of the besiege of harflew by the french , and of the earl of armi•iacks set upon the duke of Exeter , be governor there : and then he present grow so averse from peace , that he will hearken no more to any treaty of it ; not that he mislike they shall treat of peace with their sword in their hand , as all wise man will do ; but that to treat of peace , and in the time of the treaty to do• act of hostility , be a affront to all honesty , and not to be tolerate with any patience . and now the earl of arminjack have set down before the town , the vice-admiral of France bring up the whole navy of the french , with intent while the earl shall assail it by land , to have enter the town by the water side : but of this purpose , the valour and diligence of the duke of Exce•er prevent they . a••oone as king Henry have intelligence hereof , he will present have go he ? self ; but be dissuade by the emperor , he send his brother the duke of Bedford , with the earl of march , Oxford , Huntington , Warwick , Arundel , Salisbury , De••• ? shire , and diverse other , with two hundred sail , to the rescue of harflew ; who upon the feast of the assumption of our lady , come to the mouth of the river Seyne : whereupon , Norbo• the french admiral set forward , and get the mouth of the haven : and here begin a fight , which be resolute maintain on both side , until the english have sink five hundred vessel one and other of the french , and take three great carrack of Genoua , win the harbour , and at last , though with some opposition make by their galley , relieve Har•lew , and make the earl of arminjack glad to raise his siege . upon the news hereof , the emperor de ? sist from mediate any further for peace with France ; and enter into a league defensive and offensive with king Henry , wherein only the pope be except , on the 19 of October he depart towards Germany , who king Henry accompany to Calais ; whither the duke of Burgundy come , to confirm the league conclude page 51 on before by the earl of Warwick and he , concern Flanders and Arthois only . in the mean time the french have hire diverse carrack and other great ship of the geno•aes and italian , which join with the french-fleet , lay at the mouth of the river of Seyne , under the command of Jaques bastard of Bourbon , to hinder all succour from come to har•lew ; but John earl of Huntington ( son to the duke of Exeter behead at Cicester ) be send to s•oure the coast , encounter with he , and after a long fight take he prisoner , and three of his great carrack , with all the money for the half year pay of the fleet , and sink three other of his carrack , and disperse the rest , clear the mouth of the river and then return to the king at Southampton . and now upon the twenty three of July , in the •ourth year of his reign , the king himself , with the duke of Clarence and Gloucester , the earl of Huntington , Warwick , Devo•shire , Salisbury , Suffolk and Somerset , the lord rise , Willoughby , fits-hugh , Clinton , Scroop , Matrevers , bourch•er , Ferrer of Groby , Ferrer of Chartley , Fa•hope , grey of Codnor , sir Gilbert vmphre ? vile , sir Gylbert Talbot , and a army consist of twenty five thousand five hun ? dread twenty eight fight man , beside a thousand artificer and pioneer , take ship at Portsmouth , and upon the first of August land in Normandy near to the castle of Tonque , which he present besiege , and upon the nine of August have it yield to he , at which time the earl of Salisbury take the castle of all ? bervillier which the king give he , to he and his heir , be the first land give by the king in France . at the win of Tonque , the king make eight and twenty knight ; and from thence march with his army to Caen ; where to prevent the citizen from sally ? king out , he cast up a mount ; and then make many assault , but find they to do little good , he cause his pioneer to undermine the wall : which be do , upon the four of September he offer the besiege their life , if they will sub ? mit : which they refuse , he thereupon make a show of a general assault , while many of his man enter the city under the foundation , of who the duke of Cla ? rinse with his company be the first : and they come upon the back of those that defend the wall , easy overcome they ; and then the whole army enter without resistance . the next day , the king cause all the principal man of the town to come before he at their senate house ; where some of they , for their stubborn refuse the grace he have offer they , be adjudge to death , and the rest fine : the spoil of the town be distribute among the soldier . the captain of the castle stand out a while ; but be advertise that the king have swear to show no mercy , if he do not surrender ; he give twelve hostage , that if it be not relieve before the twenty of September , he will then give it up ; which not come , he perform : and so the king have possession both of c•en and the castle . and now Charles the new dolphin , be but seventeen year of age and bare of money , have get into his possession all the jewel , plate and money of the queen his mother ; which so incense she against he , that to do he a spite , she pla ? ce the duke of Burgundy in chief authority about the king , who by reason of his infirmity be u•able himself to manage the state ; and the duke have now the sword in his hand , mean first •o repress the grow boldness of the dolphin , and afterward to repel the common enemy : and the dolphin likewise , envy the duke advancement above he , mean first to take down his swell greatness , and afterward to fall upon the foreign adversary ; and thus while private respect be prefer before public , while the duke and the dolphin have their first intention against one another , not look afte• king Henry , but in the se ? cond place , after their own turn serve , a easy way be leave for king Henry proceed , and he go on at his pleasure with small opposition . he send the duke of Clarence , who take in the city of Bayeux , as likewise the duke of Glo• ? cester the city of lyse•x ; while himself remain still at Caen , put out of the city the native that be impotent or young infant to the number of fifteen hundred , and in their place put english people , and find a great mass of money and plate , de ? posit page 52 by the citizen in the castle , •e cause the same , upon proof , to be re ? spective deliver to the right owners• upon condition they will acknowledge he for their sovereign ; which moderate and just deal win he more heart than the force of his arm have win he knee , special with the norman , who be easy to be draw with gentleness and love , then force by violence and come ? pulsion . from hence the king march the first of October to corfye castle , which within three day yield . the four of October he come to Argenton , which not relieve by a day agree upon , be likewise surrender . the town of al•n ? son endure eight day siege , but in the end do as other their neighbour town have do . from Alanson the earl of S•lisbury be send to Faleys , to view the strength thereof , who the king present follow , where the besiege conclu ? dead , if it be not relieve before the second of January , than to yield up the town : no relief come , the town be yield up , and soon after upon the like term , the castle . from hence the king return to Caen , to put in exe ? cution a proclamation he have former make ; that if the inhabitant of Normandy that be flee , return not by a day assign , he will then grant their land to his soldier : and thereupon he give to the duke of Clarence during life , the Vicoun ? tie of a•ge , or•er and Pon•i•• , with all the land of those that be not return accord to the proclamation . all the lend the king lie at Bayeux , while his navy still keep the sea , and daily take many french ship , but upon the sixteenth of July such a tempest take they , that they be drive to fall in with Southampton ; and yet , with all their diligence , can not so save themselves , but that two Ballin ? gers , and two great carrack lade with merchandise , be in the very haven drown . in the mean time the earl of Warwick and the lord Talbot besiege the strong castle of D•mfront : the duke of Cl•rence take court•n and Burney ; and many other be take , as Cha•bois , Bechelouyn , H•rcourt , Fantgernon , credit ? •en•r , anvyll•ers , b•gles , in all of they he place captain and garrison , and particular in fres•y , sir Robert burn , late make Viscount . the duke of Glo• ? cester also , with the earl of march , and the lord of Codnor , take in all the isle of co•st••ti•e , except Chereburg , and then return to the king , but be send back to take in that city also : which after some time , when no relief come , be , toge ? there with the castle , likewise surrender ; although by this time the duke of Bur ? g••di• and the dolphin , by mediation of the pope , be reconcile , and begin to join thei• force to make resistance . and now the duke of Exeter the king uncle , with a supply of fifteen thousand man out of England , come to the king , who present take in the city of eureux ; and the earl of rhyme , the strong cast•e of mill•y le Vesco . the next thing attempt , be the siege of Ro•• , a city strong fortify , both with wall and di•ches , and to which there be no convenient passage , but by the city of Lovie• ; to this city therefore he first lay •iege , which when no relief come within a time agree on , be surrender ; and yet there be another imp ? diment to be remove , a stone-bridge , which hinder the approach to roan , be exceed strong guard : for this , king Henry devise float of wicke• , cove ? read with be•sts hide , by which the duke of Cl•rence with his quarter pass the ri ? ver , •nd then lay siege to the town on •hat side ; and for the other side , he have other devise make with hogshead and pipe , fasten to •irrepoles and barge , with which he pass his man over at pleasure ; and in the mean time he cause diverse of his soldier that can swim , to make show of pass the river three mile off another way ; with which the Frenchman be delude , draw all their force thy ? there , •nd by this mean the fort be leave unfurnish of sufficient guard , be present force to surrender , and the soldier be take to the king grace ; the bridge be thus gain , the duke of Exeter be send , and with he Windsor the herald , to summon the citizen to surrender the town ; who not only give proud answer , but also make a sally forth , though with the loss of thirty of their man . upon this obstinacy of they , the king present order his siege ; his own quarter be the ch•rteux , the duke of clar•nce at saint Gervays , the duke of Exeter page 53 at port saint Dennis , and every great commander have his quarter assign , so as the city be begird round , and a great chain of iron set upon pile , and a strong wooden bridge for passage from one camp to the other , be make over the river . at this time the earl of Kilmayne with sixteen hundred irish come to the king , and have their quarter assign they , who behave themselves with great valour : the king cousin germane the king of Portugal , send likewise a navy of ship to the mouth of the river of Seyne , which stop all passage of succour to roan ; many policy and practice be use against the city , but none prevail , till famine for ? ce it ; for there be in roan 210000 person at the begin of the siege , and the siege continue long , it grow to that extremity , that the citizen drink no thing but vinegar and water , and have little to eat , but rat and mouse , cat and dog , and such like : great number of the poor sort be thrust out of the city , who not suffer to pass the english army , miserable perish ; only •pon Christmas-day , in honour of Christ birth , the king relieve and suffer to pass as many as be at first put out , but not other that be put out the second time , but suffer they to perish . in this distress , a parley be require by the citizen ; who notwithstanding their misery , yet stand upon such high term , that nothing be conclude , only a truce for eight day be grant they ; the eight day end , and nothing yet agree upon among themselves , they crave one day long , and neither in that day can any thing be agree on ; then they crave four day more , in which the multitude and common people so press the magistrate and governor of the city , that on the four day , be about the nineteenth of January , the city be surrender , and the inhabitant themselves , and all their good be yield to the king mercy ; the duke of Exeter be appoint to take possession , who accord enter with his soldier . the next day after , be Friday the twenty of January , the king himself make his entry , with four duke , ten earl , eight bishop , sixteen baron , and other , and be by the clergy conduct to our lady church ; where after public thanksgiving , he take homage and fealty of the burgess and inhabi ? tants ; make proclamation , that all that will come and acknowledge he to be their sovereign , shall enjoy the benefit of his protection , and retain their po ? session , whereupon many come in , and many town be surrender . in this time of the king lie at roan , the earl of Salisbury take in hunflew , Munster de Villiers , ewe , and Newcastle ; the duke of Clarence take Vernon , and aunt ; and the earl of Warwick la Roche Guyon . and now the duke of Burgundy see the great success of king Henry , can think of no better way for his own safety , than to make a reconciliation between the two king ; to which end , ambassador be send to procure their meeting ; at which time , king Henry for their service already perform , and in hope of more here•fter , make the valiant Gascoigne captain le Beuff , earl of longuevyle , sir John Gra• earl of t•nkevyle , and the lord bo•rch•er earl of E•• . upon the l•st of m•y , king Henry accompany with the duke of Clarence , Gloucester , and Exe ? ter , his uncle Beaufort , the bishop of Winchester , with the earl of march , and salisb•ry , and a thousand man at arm , enter the place appoint for the meet ? ing of the two king . the french queen ( her husband be take with hi• ? ? ? ) with the duke of burg•igne , and the earl of saint Paul , and a company of Ladies• among who , as a bait to entangle the king affection , be the king d•ughter , the beautiful lady Katherine ; with who sight , though the king be marvellous take , yet he make no show thereof , till other thing shall be agree upon ; but the dolphin have make mean to the duke of Burgoigne to hinder all agreement , nothing be effect ; whereupon at their part , the king tell the duke , that he will have both the lady , and all his other demand , or else drive the king of France out of his kingdom , and he out of his dukedom : upon thi• , the duke think it best to agree with the dolphin , and upon the six of July , article of their reconcilement be sign and seal ; in the mean time , the ea•le of long••vyle surprise the town of ponthoyse , but have scarce be able to page 54 make good the surprise , if the duke of Clarence have not co•e to his •uc••ur ; ? ? ? thence the duke march to Paris , and there stay two day , but pe•ceivi•• no show of sally to be make , he return to ponth•yse , whither the king himself come ; and from thence march on , take in the castle of Vanyon villeir ; and on the last of August , the castle of Gysors , and Galyard , and Dumall ; so that now all Normandy ( mou•t saint Michael only except ) be reduce to the possession of the king of England , which have be wrongful detain from he , ever since the year 1207. the dolphin all this while , though have outward make a reconcilement with the duke of Burgoigne , yet inward bear a spleen against he , intend not ? thing so much as his destruction ; which to e••ect , he procure a meeting between the duke and he , and all the peer of the realm at mountstrew ; where the duke though humble himself in reverence to the dolphin on his knee , be most bar ? barous murder ; which act , be so much the less to be pity in the duke , by how much he in the like kind , upon the like interview , have cause Lewis the duke of Orleans to be murder . but though this barbarous act may just incens•philip earl of Carolois the duke of Burgoig•es heir to seek revenge ; yet as a wise and and politic prince , he forbear for the present to make show of choler or distemperature , and consider with himself , that difference between the dolphin and he , will but give king he•ry the great advantage , he en ? deavour to propose a overture of peace between the two king ; and to that end ambassador be send from the king of France , and the young duke of Burgoig•• , who the king kind entertain , but seem to intimate unto they , that he can give no great credit to their proposition , unless the lady Katherine will join in they , who innocence he know will never abuse he . while these thing be in agitation , the earl of Salisbury take in fres••y , and the earl mar ? shall and Huntington enter into main , who approach ment , be encounter by the force of the dolphin , whereof they slay five thousand , and take two hundred prisoner ; for which , news be bring to roan , whither king Henry be come to solemnize the feast of Christ birth , thanksgiving to God be pub ? lick make ; and in the instant thereof , arrive other ambassador from the king and queen of France , and a letter from the lady Katherine to king Henry , be secret by the bishop of Arr•s deliver ; the conclusion of all be , that the king of England shall speed himself to Troyes , there to be espouse to the lady Ka•he ? rind , and to have assurance of the crown of France , after the decease of the pre ? send king Charles : whereupon , with a guard of fifteen thousand choice soldier , accompany with the duke of clare•ce and Gloucester , the earl of Warwick , Salis ? bury , Huntington , Lo•g•evile , tankervile and ewe ; the king of England come to Troyes in Champaign , upon the eighteenth day of May , where he be meet by the duke of Burgoign• , and diverse of the french nobility , who attend he to the palace , where the queen with her daughter , the duchess of Burgoigne , and the lady ka ? therine give he princely entertainment ; and after some intercourse of compliment between the prince and the lady , king Henry tender to the lady Katherine a ring of great value , which she ( not without some blush ) receive ; and afterward , up ? on the twenty day of May , she be affiance to he in saint Peter church , and on the three of June follow , the marriage be solemnize ; and therewithal king Henry be publish to be the only regent of the realm , and heir apparent to the crown of France ; the article whereof , with all convenient expedition be proclaim both in England and in France , and the two king , and all their noble , and other subject of account , be swear to observe they ; and in particular the duke of Burgoigne . and thus be the salique law violate , and the heir male put by his succession in the crown , which the genius of France will not long endure , a while it must ; and therefore the main endeavour of both king now be , to keep he down , who they have put down ; and thereupon , on the four day of June , king Henry with the french king , Iames king of Scot , who be new arrive , the duke of Bur ? goig•e• page 55 the prince of Orange , one and twenty earl , five and forty baron , with many knight and gentleman , and a army consist of french , english , Scotish , irish , and dutch , to the number of six hundred thousand , march towards the Dol ? phin ; and upon the seven day , lay siege to the town of Se••s , which side with the dolphin , which after four day siege be yield up . from thence they re ? move , have the duke of Bedford in their company , who be new come out of e•gla•d , with large supply of man and money to Monst•••• , which be take by Escalado , only the castle hold out still ; during the siege whereof , king Henry ere ? ••ed a officer of arm , to be king of herald over the Englishman , and entitle he garter ; who he send with offer of mercy to the castle , but be by the cap ? take thereof reproachful upbraid : for punishment of which his presumption , • gibbet be erect , and in view of mounsieur Guitry the say captain , twelve of his friend be execute : whereupon those of the castle treat for peace ; but the king , in eight day together , will not grant so much as a parley• so that after six week siege , they be enforce ( their life save ) simple to yield . from thence the king march to Melun upon sein , and besiege it the thirty of July ; the captain whereof be Barbason a Gascoigne , no less politic than valiant , who countermine some , and stop other mine make by the english , and fo•ght hand to hand in the barrier with king Henry ; yet at last , through famine and pestilence be force to yield ; but be suspect to have have a hand in the murder of the duke of Burgoigne , he be send prisoner to Paris ; and present thereupon , both the king with their queen , the duke of Burgoigne and his duchess , with a roy ? all train come thither ; where the french king be lodge in the house of S. Paul , and the king of England in the castle of Lo•vre . and here the three state of France anew under their hand and seal in most a•thenticke manner ratify the former article of king Henry succession in the crown of France ; the instrument whereof be deliver to the king of England , who send they to be keep in his treasury at Westminster . and now king Henry begin to exercise his regency , and as a badge of his au ? thority ; he cause a new coin which be call a salute , to be make , whereon the arm of France and England be quarterly stamp ; he place and displace diverse officer , and appoint the duke of Exeter with five hundred man , to the guard of Paris : he award out process against the dolphin , to appear at the marble-table at Paris , which he not obey , sentence be denounce against he , as guilty of the murder of the duke of Burgoigne ; and by the sentence of the parliament , he be banish the realm . after this , the king make Thomas duke of Clarence his lieutenant general of fra•ce and Normandy ; on the 6th of January , with his belove queen Katherine he leave Pari• , and go to Amiens , and from thence to Calli• , and thence land at do ? for , come to Canterbury , and afterward through Lo•do• to Westminster ; where the queen upon saint Matthews day , the four of Febru•ry be crown ; the king of Scots sit at dinner in his state , but on the left hand of the queen , the archbishop of Ca•terbury , and the king uncle the bishop of Winchester be on the right hand , all be serve with cover mess of silver , but all the feast be fish , in obser ? vation of the lend season . after this , the king take his progress through the land , hear the come ? plaint of his poor subject , and take order for the administer of justice to high and low ; and then meet the queen at Leicester , where they keep their easter . in the mean time , the duke of Clarence make a road into A•jo• , come to the city of amper , where he knight sir William Rosse , sir Henry G•d•ard , sir row ? la•d vyder , sir Thomas Beauford his natural son ; and return home laden with prey , be advertise that the duke of Alanson intend to intercept his passage ; whereupon , he send the scoutmaster , Andrew Fogosa•Lombard , to discover the face of the enemy ; who be corrupt , bring report that their number be but small , and those but ill order , that if he present charge , there can be no resistance . the duke credulity cause he to draw all his horse together , and page 56 leave his bow and bill• behind which be his chief•st strength , with he ? ? ? only he make towards the enemy ; but the traitor lead to a straight , where by his appointment a ambush be lay , tha• the duke can neither retreat , nor flee ; he soon perceive the trea•chery , but find no remedy , he manful set sp•• to his horse , and charge upon the enemy ; but overlaid with multitude , and wea ? ried with fight , be himself , with the earl of Ta•kervile , the lord Rosse , the ea•le of Angus , sir John ? ? ? , and sir John vere•d , and above two thousand english slay ; the earl of S••erset , Suffolk and perch , sir John berkl•y , sir Ralph ne ? will , sir Willi•• b•wes , and 60 gentleman be take prisoner : the body of the duke of Cl•rence , be by sir John Beauford his base son , ( the D. die without other issue ) convey to England , and bury at Canterbury beside his father : and this disaster happen upon •aster-eve . the king be at Beverley when he hear of his brother death , and present thereupon , dispatch away Edmund earl of m•r ? t••gne into nor•••dy , make hi• lieutenant thereof ; and then call his high court of parliament to Westminster , require aid by money to revenge his br• ? there|be death , which be ready grant ; and the king thus provide , send his bro ? ther the duke of Bedford with a army to C•lli• , consist of four thousand man at arm , and four and twenty thousand archer , who about the middle of may he follow himself , and saf•ly a•riving at C•lli• , haste to relieve charter , which the dolphin with seven thousand man have besiege ; but hear of the king come ? ming , be retire to Tours . the king of Scot , with the duke of Gloucester , about the eight of July besiege Dreux ; which agree , if it be not relieve by the twen ? ti of that month , than to surrender it ; no relief come , it be surrender . the king pursu•d the dolphin from place to place , but can not overtake he , but in the way , surprise the town of b•wg••cy , where all that crave it , he •ooke to mercy , as likewise he do at ro•gemo•t ; from thence he go to Orleans , and from thence to Vigne• saint To• , and from thence to Paris ; where have fit himself with supply , he go and sit down before menixe in Brye , which after some opposition , he also take ; and thereby have possession of all the fortress in the isle of France , in ? ? ? , in •rye , and in champagne . upon saint Nicholas day , in the year 1422 , queen Katherine be bring to bed of a son at Windsor , who be by the duke of Bedford , and Henry bishop of Winche ? star , and the countess of Holland christen by the name of Henry ; whereof , when the king have notice , out of a prophetic rapture he say ; good lord , i Henry of Monmouth shall small time reign and much get , and Henry bear at Windsor , shall long time reign and lose all , but god will be do . about this time the dolphin lay siege to Cosney , which the king be intentive to relieve , as be a town of the duke of Burgoignes ; and therefore tendredit more than if it have be hi• own ; and make overhasty journey , he overheat himself with travel ; and come to S••lys , find himself so ill at ease , that he be force to remain there , and to send his brother the duke of Bedford to prose ? cut his design , which the duke perform , and the dolphin upon his approach , retire into berry ; whereof , in mockage he be after call the king of berry . but the king fever and fl•• increase , he be remove to boy de vincens ; where grow worse and worse , within a few day he die . but somewhat before his departure , he have make his brother the duke of Bedford lieutenant general of nor•••dy , and regent of the kingdom of France , and his brother the duke of glow ? cester , he have make protector of England , and of his son person : exhort all to be true and faithful to the duke of •urgo•g•e , to be at unity among themselves , to be loyal to their young prince , to be serviceable to he dear belove queen , to hold a•d preserve what he by his valour , and god assistance have win ; and never to conclude contract of amity with the dolphin , or duke of Alanson , until they have submit themselves to the king Grac• . and so give God thank for all his favor and blessing bestow upon he , in the midst of say a psalm of David , he depart this life ; who may just have pray God with David , take i •ot away in the midst of my day , for he die about the age of five or six and thirty year , page 57 which in David account be the midst of the number of the day of man life : but though he die in the midst of his day , yet he die in the fullness of his glory ; and of who it may he say , — jam { que } arce potitus , ridet anhel••tes dur• ad fastig•• montis . when he have reign nine year and five month . of his taxation . in his first year a incredible sum of money be give he by the clergy , to di ? •ert he from a motion propound to take away their temporalty . and in the same year a subsidy be grant he both by the clergy and the Laity . in his four year be grant he , towards his war in France , two whole ten of the clergy , and a fifteen of the Laity ; which be far too short to defray his great charge , he be force to paw his crown to the bishop of Beauford his un ? cle for a great sum of money , as also certain jewel to the lord major of London , for ten thousand mark . in his nine year in a parliament at We••minster , for revenge of the duke of Clarence death , two ten of the clergy , and one fifteen by the Laity , which because the haste of the business can not stay the usual course of collection , the bishop of Winchester bring in present twenty thousand pound , to receive it again when the subsidy shall be gather . the same year also , the duke of Bedford in the king absence call a parliament , wherein be grant towards his war , one fifteen to be pay in such money as be at that time cur ? rend . these be all the subsidy that be give he , notwithstanding his many and great achievement , by which it appear what great matter a moderate prince may do , and yet not grieve his subject with taxation . of law and ordinance make by he , or in his •ime . he ordain the king of herald over the english , which be call g•rter . in his nine year , in a parliament hold at Westminster , it be ordain , that no man shall offer gold in payment , unless it be weight ; and thereupon be appoint balance and weight . a act make in the thirteenth year of king Richard the second , which disable the alien religious to enjoy any b•nefices within England , be in the begin of this king reign put in execution : and further , this king exclude also the french from all preferment ecclesiastical ; and those prior alien conventual , who have institution and induction , be bind to put in security , not to disclose or cause to be disclose , the counsel and secre•s of the realm . Affaires of the church in his ti•e . in the begin of his reign , the wickliff increase great , of who sir John Oldcastle be a chief ; who by marriage of a kinswoman of the lord Cobham• of C••ling in Kent , obtain that title : this knight , be very valorous , and in great favour with the king , be in a synod at London accuse for maintain of Wickliff• doctrine : whereof the king be inform , send for he , and instant deal with he to submit himself to the censure of the church : but sir John old ? castle tell the king , that he owe his subjection only to his majesty ; and as for o ? there|be , he will stand for the truth against they , to the uttermost of his life . upon this , he be serve by process , to appear in the archbishop court ; and not ap ? pea•ing , be condemn of contumacy , and afterward in a synod at Rochester , be by the archbishop pronounce to be a heretic ; who then enact that de ? cree , that the holy scripture ought not to be translate into the english tongue : but mark the judgement that fall upon his own tongue , who•e root and blade short after ( as be record ) grow so big in his mouth and throat , that he can neither speak , nor swallow down meat , but in horror lie languish , till at last ••••ved by famine , he so die . in the mean time , sir John Oldcastle write he be ? lief , page 58 and present it himself to the king ; which the king will in no wise re ? ceive , but suffer he , in his presence , and privy chamber , to be summon ; who appear before the archbishop , after diverse examination , he be condemn of heresy , and commit to the tower of London , from whence short after he e ? escape , and get into wale . the king , by his proclamation , promise a thousand mark to any that shall bring he in : but so much be his doctrine general fa ? voured , that the king offer be not much regard , but he continue four year after undiscovered : at last he be take in the border of wale , within a lordship belong to the lord Powes , who bring he to London , before the duke of bed ? ford regent of the realm ; where in the end he be condemn , and final be draw from the tower to saint Giles field , and there hang in a chain by the middle , and after consume with fire , the gallows and all . at the time of his first con ? viction , four year before , it be rumour , that twenty thousand man in arm be assemble in saint Giles field : whereupon , the king , at midnight , himself in per ? son go thither , where he find many indeed , who upon examination confess , that they come to meet their captain sir John Oldcastle , but without any intent against the king : yet be sir Roger Acto• , and eight and twenty other of they apprehend , and execute in Smithfield ; and all the prison in and about London be fill with they . in his three year , the order of church service throughout England , be change from the use of Paul to the use of S•lisbury , to the great dislike of many in those day . in his four year , a council be hold at Constance , whither he send Ambas ? sador , the earl of Warwick , the bishop of Salisbury , bath , and Hereford ; the abbot of Westminster , and the prior of Worcester : in which council it be de ? creed , that England shall have the title of the english nation , and shall be ac ? count one of the five principal nation in rank before Spain ; which often be ? fore have be move , but never grant till then . and herein be all wickliff position condemn : also John Husse , and Hierome of Prague ( notwithstanding the emperor safe-conduct ) be both of they burn . in this council , the schism of anti-pope , which have continue the space of nine and twenty year , be reform : •e•edict the 13. have be elect by the Spaniard ; Gregory the 1• . by the french ; John the 24. by the italian : and now in this council , begin in February 1414 , and continue above three yea•es ; wherein be assemble , be ? side the emperor , the pope , and the palsgrave of r••ime , four patriarch , twenty seven cardinal , seven and forty archbishop , one hundred and threescore Bishop• , prince and baron with their attendant , above thirty thousand ; the foresay e ? lected pope be all put down , or else resign ; and in the place , as legitimate pope , be elect otho lolo•na , by the name of Marti• the five . in this year also , fall out a accident , which show the strict observance of Ec ? clesiasticall censure in those day . the wife of the lord strange , and sir John Trussell of War•ington in Cheshire , strive for place at a sermon in saint dunst••s church in the east , their husband be present , fall themselves to strive in their wife behalf• , and great partaking there be on both side , some slay , and many wound : the delinquent be commit to the counter , the church suspen ? dead , and upon examination , the lord strange be find guilty , be by the arch ? bishop of Canterbury adjudge to this penance , which be accord perform : the parson of S. Dunst••s go before , after who follow all the lord servant in their shirt ; after they go the lord himself , bareheaded , with a wax taper in his hand ; then follow the lady , barefooted ; and then last come the arch ? deacon Reynold r•••ood : in which order they go from Pauls where the sentence be give , to saint dunst••s church ; where at the rehallow thereof , the lady fill all the vessel with water , and accord to the sentence , offer to the Altaran or ? nament of the value of ten pound ; and the lord , a pix of silver , of five pound a penance , no doubt , which the lord and the lady will have redeem with a great deal of money , if the discipline of the church have in those day allow page 59 it : but it seem , the commutation of penance be not as yet come in use . in his nine year , in a parliament at Leicester , a hundred and ten priory alient be suppress , because they speak ill of his conquest in France ; and their posse ? zion be give to the king : but by he , and king Henry the six , be afterward give to other monastery , and college o• learned man . work of piety by he , or other in his time . this king re-edify his royal manor , which be then call sheen , now Richmond , and found two monastery not far from it ; the one of Carthu ? sian , which he name Bethelem ; the other of religious man and woman of they or ? there of saint Bridget , which he name Zion : he also found the brotherhood of saint Giles without Cripplegate in London . in the second year of his reign , moor ? gate near to Colemanstreet be first make , by Thomas Fawkener major of London , who cause also the ditch of the city to be cleanse , and a common privy that be on the moor without the wall , to be take down , and another to be make within the city upon Wallbrooke , into the which brook he cause the water of the city to be turn by grate of iron in diverse place . in his six year , Will ? liam of Sevenoak major of London , found in the town of Sevenoak a free school and thirteen almshouse . this man be find at Sevenoak in Kent , anew-borne in ? fant of unknown parent , but by charitable people be christen and bring up , bind prentice in London , and come at last to be major of the city . also Robert chic•ely major of London give liberal to the almshouse found by his brother Henry chiche••y archbishop of Canterbury , at Higham-Ferrers in Northamptonshire , where they be bear . but Henry Chicheley the archbishop found two college in Oxford ; one call Bernard college , renew by sir Thomas white , and name saint John college ; the other call all-soule , which continue at this day as he leave it . also John Kempe archbishop of Canterbur• , convert the parish-church of Wye in Kent where he be bear , into a college of secular priest . casualty happen in his time . in the five year of his reign a great part of the city of Norwich be burn , with all the house of the friar preacher , and two friar of that order . in his three year , on the feast of the purification , seven dolphin come up the river of th•mes , whereof four be take . of his wife and issue . he marry Catherine the daughter of king Charles the six of France , who be his queen two year and about three month , marry at Troyes in champagne the three day of June 1420. and afterward February the fourteen crown at Westminster : she survive king Henry , be remarry to Owen teu ? ••• a esquire of wale , who pretend to be descend from Cadwallade• the antien• king of wale , though some write he to be the son of a brewer , who mean ? ness of estate be recompense by the delicacy of his personage ; so absolute in all the lineament of his body , that the only contemplation of it may well make she forget all other circumstance ; by he she have three son , Edmond , i•sper , and Owen , and a daughter that live but a while . her son Owen take the habit of religion at Westminster , the other two be by king Henry the sixth ( their half bro ? ther ) advance in honour : Edmond be create earl of Richmond , and marry the sole heir of John Beaufort duke of Somerset , be father , by she , unto Henry the s•aventh , king of England , the only heir of the house of Lancaster . Jasper her second son be first create earl of Pembroke , and after duke of Bedford , but die without lawful issue . This Queen• , either for devotion or her own safety , •oke into the monastery of Bermo•dsey in Southwark , who die the second o• page 60 January 1436. she be bury in our lady chapel within saint Peter church at Westminster , who corpse take up in the reign of king Henry the s•aventh , her grandchild ( when he lay the foundation of that admirable structure ) and her coffin place by king Henry her husband tomb , have ever since so remain , and never since re-buried , where it stand ( the cover be loose ) to be see and handle of any that will . by her king Henry have only one son , name Henry , who succeed he in the kingdom . of his personage and condition . he be tall of stature , lean of body , and his bone small but strong make , somewhat long neck , black haired , and very beautiful of face , swift in run ? king , so as he with two of his lord , without bow or other engine , will take a wild buck or do in a large park : he delight in song and musical Instru ? ment , insomuch that in his chapel among his private prayer , he use certain psalm of D•vid , translate into english meet by John Lydgate monk of Bury . and indeed it may be true say of he as be say of aenae•s : quo justior alter ; nec pi•tate fuit , nec bello major and ar•i• , for he seldom fight ba••ell where he get not the victory , and never get victory whereof he give not the glory to God , with pub ? lique thanksgiving . he be a better man , a king than a subject ; for till than he be not in his right orb , and therefore no marvel if he be something exorbitant . he be of a merciful disposition , but not to the prejudice of wisdom ; as think ? ing wise cruelty to be better than foolish pity . he be no less politic than valian• , for he never fight battle , nor win town , wherein he prevail not as by stratagem as by force . he be so temperate in his diet , and so free from vainglory , that we may true say , he have something in he of Caesar which Alexander the gre•• have not , that he will not be drink ; and som•hing of Alexander the great , which Caesar have not , that he will not be flatter . he be indeed a great of ? fector of glory , but not of glory the bl•st of man mouth , but of the glory that fill the sail of time . he die of full year , though not full of year : if he have live long he may have go over the same again , but can not have go further . if his love be great to military man , it be not small to clergy man , insomuch as by many he be call the prince of priest . of his death and burial . some say he be poison , which Polydore Virgil say be much suspect : the Scot write that he die of the disease call saint Fi•cre , which be a palsy and a cramp : E•guerant say that he die of saint Anthony fire : but Peter Basset e ? squire , who at the time of his death be his chamberlain , affirm that he die of a pleurisy , which at that time be a sickness strange and but little know . be dead his body be embalm and close in lead ; and lay in a chariot-royal rich apparel in cloth of gold , be convey from boy the vin••n•es to Paris , and so to Roa• , to a•bevyle , to C•llys , to d•ver , and from thence through London to west ? minster , where it be inter next beneath king Edward the confessor ; upon who tomb queen Katherine cause a royal picture to be lay , cover all oh ? ver with silver plate gilt , but the head thereof altogether of massy silver ; all which at that abbey suppression be sacrilegious break off and transfer to p•o ? phaner use . he die the last day of August , in the year one thousand four hun ? dread twenty two , when he have reign nine year and five month , live eight and thirty year . of man of note in his time . man of valour in his time be so frequent , that we may know it to be a true say , regis ad exemplu• ; and man of learning likewise in such number , that page 61 we may know the prince to have be their patron . first alayn de lyn , a Carme ? light friar in that town , who write many treatise ; then Thomas Otterborne a franciscan friar who write a history of England ; then John seguerd , who keep a school in Norwich , and write sundry treatise , reprove as well the monk and priest as poet for write of filthy verse . Robert Ros• a Carmelite friar in nor ? which ; who write many treatise , yet say nothing against the wickle•ists . Richard C•yster bear •o Nofolke , a man of great holiness of life , favour ( though secret ) the doctrine of VVickliff• ; William Wallis a black friar in Li• , who make a book of moralization upon Ovid Metamorphosis• William Taylor a priest and a master of art in Oxford , a steadfast follower of Wickliff doctrine , and burn for the same at Smithfield in London the last year of this •ings reign . Bartholomew Florarius , call so of a treatise which he write call Florarium , who write also another trea ? tise of abstinence , wherein he reprove the corrupt manner of the clergy , and the p•ofession of the friar men•icants . Als•Titus Livi•• de Fo•• l•vis•is a it•lian born• , but see he •as r•siant here , and w•ote the life of this king , it be not unacustomated ? fit to make mention of he in this place : also many other . page 62 the reign of king Henry the six . there have be a race of prince , of which for three generation together , it may be right say ; Pulcherrima prole ; Magna ? nimi hero nati melioribus annis . for king Edward the three have many son , not inferior in valour to the many son of king pri•••s , not except his valiant son Hector , have so equal a match for he , as Edward the black prince , who want but a Homer , to have be a Achilles . then John of G•un• like ? wise have diverse son , man as valorous as any that age afford . then Henry the four have four son , o• so heroical disposition all , that you may know they all to be his son , only king he•ry the five to be his old . and now that in he the heroical nature be come to the height , it degenerate again in king Henry the six , which must needs be attribute to the mother side ; who though in her self she be a princess of a noble spirit , yet be the issue of a crazy father , what marvel , if she prove the mother of a crazy issue ! and yet even this issue of she , a prince no doubt , of excellent part in their kind , though not of part kind for a Princ• ; in a private man praiseworthy enough , but the sword of a king require a hard mettle than the soft temper of king Henry the six be make of : and in he we may see the fulfil of the text ; vae genti cujus rex est puer ; woe to that nation who king be a child ; for he be not above eight month old , when he succeed his father in the kingdom ; although that text perhaps be not mean so much of a child in year , for which there may be help by good protector ; as of a child in ability of rule , whereof , though possible there may , yet probable there can be no sufficient supply , of which , in this king we have a pregnant example ; for as long as he continue a child in year , so long his kingdom be keep flourish by the providence of his careful uncle ; but assoon as he leave be a child in year , and yet continue a child in ability of rule , then present begin all thing I• pejus ruere , and retro sublapsa referri , all thing go to wrack both in France and England . and thus much be necessary to be say by way of a preface to that great fall as it be of Nilus , in king Henry the six . Henry call of Windsor , because bear there , the only child of king Henry the five , as yet scarce nine month old , succeed his father , and be proclaim king of England on the last of August , in the year 1422 ; by reason of who in ? fancy , king Henry his father have before by his will appoint , and now the lord by their consent confirm , the regency of France to John duke of Bedford , the government of England , to Humphrey duke of Gloucester , the guard of his person to Thomas duke of Exeter , and H•nry Beauford bishop of Winchester , and lord page 63 chancellor , wherein it be wise provide that one man shall not rule all , lest it shall prove a spur to aspire ; and withal stay they from envy one another , when many be alike place in the high form of authori•y : and indeed they all carry themselves so upright and careful in their place , that it well appear the trust repose in they by the die king , have make a strong impression of love and loyalty towards his son the duke of Bedford regent of France , be to keep that by the sword , which king Henry the five by his sword have get , wherein he have many and great as ? sistant , special the two terror of France , Thomas Montacute earl of Salisbury , and John lord Talbot ; and among the french themselves , the duke of Burgoigne , a friend no less powerful , than firm unto he . the dolphin also ( now crown king at Poytiers , and call Charles the seven of France , his father be new dead , within little more than a month after king Henry ) have likewise great assis ? tants , the duke of Alanson , and many other peer of France , and of the sco•s many , and some perhaps of the english that take part with he ; by mean whereof , the game of fortune be a long time play between they with great variety . the first act of the duke of Bedford regency , be a oration which he make to the french in Paris , which wrought this good effect ; that king Henry be proclaim king of England and of France , and such french lord as be present do their ho ? mage , and take their oath to be true unto he . the first act of hostility be perform by the new king of France , who send the lord Granvile to Pont meulan , who surprise it , put all the english soldier to the sword ; but the regent send thither Thomas Montacute earl of Salisbury , so strong beleaguer it , that the lord Granvile not only surrender it , but swear allegiance ( though he keep it not ) to the king of England , from thence the earl march to Seyne , which he take by assault , and put all the soldier ( except the captain sir William Maryn ) to the sword . at this time the regent , the duke of Burgoigne , John duke of Britain , and his brother in law the earl of R•chmond , ( who revolt afterward to the new king of France , and be by he make constable of France ) meet at Amiens ; and there not only renew the old league , but further enlarge it ; to be offensive and defen ? sieve respective : and to make the friendship the more firm , the regent marry Anne the sister of the duke of Burgoigne at Troy . in this mean time the parisian take advantage of the regent absence , conspire to have let in the new king in ? to Paris ; but the day before the night appoint for his admission , the regent with his power enter , apprehend the conspirator , and put they to public execu ? cion . that do , he furnish all the fort and place of strength with English ? man , and send sir John Falstaff , who take in pacye , and coursay , two strong ca ? stle ; while himself with his force take in tray•els , and br•y upon Seyne . the constable of France the mean while with the new king force , lay siege to cravant in Burgoigne ; but the regent send thither the earl of Salisbury , who set upon the french , and after a long fight , put they to flight , slay about 1800 knight and gentleman of note• and three thousand common soldier , Scot , and french , take prisoner the constable himself , the earl of Ventadour , sir Alex ? ••der Alerdyn , sir Lewis ferignye , and two and twenty hundred gentleman . of the english part , be slay sir John grey , sir William hall , sir Gilbert Halsall , Richard •p Maddock , and one and twenty hundred soldier . from thence the e•rle lead his force to Montaguillon , and sit down before it , which after five month siege he take , while the duke of Suffolk take in the two strong castle of cowcye , and le Roche . while these thing be do in France ; in England the protector ransom and enlarge the young king of Scot , Iames the first ; ( who by the space of eigh ? ten year have be keep a prisoner ) which he do out of opinion , th•t he may withdraw the Scot out of France , take hom•ge and fealty of he for the crown of Scotland , in these word ; i•ames s•eward , king of Scot• , shall be true and faith ? full to you lord Henry , king of England and France , the superior lord of Scotland• page 64 and to you i make my fidelity for the say kingdom , which i hold and claim of you , and shall do you service for the same , so God i help , and these holy evangelist ; and there ? withal , with consent of all the nobility , the protector give he to wife , Jane daughter to the decease duke of Somerset , and cousin germane to the king , with a large dowry , and marry they at saint mary-overys in Southwark ; yet all this cur ? tesie can not keep he afterward from be unfaithful , and unthankful . and now the protector send over to the regent ten thousand well furnish soul ? diers , with which fresh succour he win many town and place of strength ; which the french see , and find themselves too weak by plain force to with ? stand the english , they seek by subtlety to compass their end ; and first , they work upon the inconstancy of the duke of Britain , and his brother Arthur , by king Henry the five create earl of Yewry , who by gift and promise they sub ? orn , perfidious to deliver over into their possession , the castle of Crotoye , and Yerney ; but the english before the french garrison be settle , fall upon Cro ? toy and recover it ; and that do , the regent besiege Yerney , and by secret mine , and violent battery so shake the wall , that they agree to yield it up , if not relieve by a certain time : whereupon the duke of ala•son , with sixteen thousand French come to the rescue , but perceive the english to be prepare to receive they , he wheel about to ver•oyle , and swear to the townsman that he have put the regent to flight , and rescue Yerney ; which they believe , rendr•d up vernoyle to he : but the regent follow he thither , when by the encourage ? mean of some fresh company of Scot come to his succour , he come to a battle in the field , where the english , with the loss of two thousand one hundred common soldier , and two of the nobility , the lord Dudley , and the lord Charleton ; get the honour of the day , and slay of their enemy , five earl , two viscount , twenty ba ? ron , and above seven thousand other of the french , beside two thousand seven hundred Scot late arrive , and take prisoner the duke of Alanson himself , the lord of her•ys , and diverse other French , and sir John tour••ull , and two hun ? dread gentleman , beside common soldier . this battle be fight the eight and twenty day of August , in the year 14•4 , and thereupon vernoyle be pre ? sent redeliver . after this , the earl of Salisbury with ten thousand man , ta ? keth in the strong town of m•••ts , the town of saint Susan , the fort S• . by|our ? nard , and other ; from thence he go to A•jou , where he perform such he ? roicke act , that his very name grow terrible in all France ; as for instance , the new high-constable perfidious Richmond , with forty thousand man lay siege to the good town of saint Iames in Benyo• , the garrison whereof consist but of six hundred english , who be drive to some extremity , sally forth , cry sa•nt George , a Salisbury ; which word of Salisbury so fright the french , think he have be come to rescue they , that cast away their weapon , they run all away , save some few that yield themselves prisoner , leave all their tent , fourteen piece of ordnance , forty barrel of powder , three hundred pipe of wine , much armour , and some treasure behind they . after which , other castle , as that of beam••t , of viscount , Tenney , Gilly , Osce , Rusey , vasicke , and many more be take in by sir John Mon•gomery , and sir John Falstaff ; so as once again the french be glad to betake themselves to their old course of fraud ; they compound with a Gascoigne captain for delivery of al••son to they ; whereof the regent have notice , he send the lord Willoughby , and sir John Falstaff to prevent it , who en ? counter with Charles de Villiers , that with two hundred horse , and three hundred foot , be come to the place appoint for entry , take and slay they all , except some few horse , which save themselves by fly . after which , the earl of Salis ? bury take in and demolish above forty castle and strong pile , for which there be public thanksgiving to God in London . while these thing be do in France , a unkind variance fall out between the protector , and his brother the bishop of Winchester , lord chancellor : for ap ? pease whereof , the regent have substitute the earl of Warwick lieutenant general in his absence , come into England , where in a parliament he compound page 65 all difference between they : in honour whereof , king Henry keep a solemn feast ; at which time the regent dub the king knight , not yet above four year old ; and then the king present invest with that dignity many of his servant : and Edmund Mortimer the last earl of march , at this time die , his inheritance de ? scend to Richard Plantagenet son and heir to Richard earl of Cambridge be ? head at Southampton , who be now create duke of York , and be afterward father to king Edward the fou•h : and at this time also , John Mowbray son and heir to Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk , banish before by king Richard the second , be restore to the title of duke of Norfolk . and now , all thing peaceable settle in England , the regent , with the bishop of Winchester , return into France ; where , at the intercession of the duke of Burgoigne , the duke of Alanson be ransom , for two hundred thousand crown : and the bishop of Winchester return to Callice , where he be invest with the dignity and hat of a cardinal , which his brother the regent put upon his head . about this time , the duke of Gloucester , protector , take some blemish in his ho ? nou_r_ , by marry another man wife , I•queline countess of Haynoult , holland and Zealand , who be marry before to John duke of Brabant yet live , and have live with he ten month as his lawful wife , but at that time upon some discontent go from he , intend to be divorce : at which injury offer to the duke of braba•t , the duke of Burgoigne , be his cousin , take so great offence , that first by friendly letter he admonish the duke of Gloucester of it , and that not prevail , they grow to term of challenge , and a combat between they be appoint ; but in the mean time , the lady betray , be carry to the duke of Burgoigne , who convey she to gaunt ; from whence , by friendship of a burgonian knight , in man apparel she escape into holland , and there make a defensive war against her hus ? band the duke of Brabant , and the duke of Burgoigne . to her aid , the duke of Gloucester send the lord Fitzwater , with a power of a thousand man : but she be discomfit by the duke of Brabant , and the pope also pronounce the first mari ? age legal , the duke of Gloucester desert she , and then take for a second wife Eleanor daughter of the lord Cobham of Sterborough , his old mistress : and the lady Jaqueline , after the death of John duke of Brabant , marry a mean gentle ? man ; who the duke of Burgoigne imprison , and bring herself to live in much trouble . and now in France , the constable with forty thousand man besiege the town of S. Iames de Benuron ; and have make a breach fit for assault , while his captain stand strain of courtesy , which of they shall first enter , sir Nicolas Burdet with all his force sally forth , cry aloud , a Salisbury , a Suffolk ; who name strike such a terror into the besieger , that they stand like man amaze , of who six hundred be slay , two hundred drown in the ditch , fifty take prisoner , with eighteen standard , and the constable be glad to quit the place , and give over the siege . at the same time also , the earl of Warwick and the lord scale , with seven thousand besiege Ponterson many week together ; but pov•sion wax scant , the lord scale with three thousand man go a forage into the enemy country ; and in his return with plenty of provision , be encounter with six thousand french , of who he slay many hundred , take above a thousand prisoner , and then retur ? ned safe into the camp . about this time also , sir John Falstaff besiege the strong town of Gravile , which after twelve day , offer to render it self by a day , if it be not relieve . the offer be take , and pledge deliver : but before the day come , they within •he town have victual and man the place , and thereupon neglect their pledge , refuse to render the castle accord to agreement : whereupon the pledge be bring before the sight of they within the castle , and there open put to death . and now a conspiracy of the clergy and magistrate in mant so prevail , that the marshal of France with five hundred man , about midnight come to the town ? wall ; page 66 where the guard of the english , by those that seem their friend , be shall ? den massac•ed , and set open the gate , make way for the enemy to enter : whereupon , the alarm give , the earl of Suffolk with the survive English withdraw to the castle , wherein they be sharp assail by the french , who yet have more mind to ransack house , and to make good cheer : whereof the lord T•lbot have intelligence by captain Goffe , who he have send to discover the state of the french , he secret give notice to the earl of Suffolk , who thereupon sally forth of the castle at a time when the lord T•lbot be ready with his troop , and on both side cry , saint George , a T•lbot , they fall upon the careless french , who lose four hundred of their best man , the rest be all take , the town regained , and the conspirator , thirty citizen , twenty priest , and fifteen friar , condemn and put to execution . while these thing go on prosperous in France , a great disaster fall out in England ; for the right noble Thomas Beauford ( son of John of G•u•t , and Katherine Swi•ford ) duke of Exeter , and guardian of the king , make king Henry his heir , and at East-Greenwich in Kent end his life ; who place be present supply by the earl of Warwick , and the earl place in France , by the earl of Salisbury ; who thereupon with five thousand man come to orlea•ce , and besiege the city , and win from the french the great fort . but here happen another great disaster : for from a high tower in this fort , the besieger observe the passage of the townsman ; when the noble earl of Salisbury , intend to inform himself of the state of the town , unfortunate look out at a window of the fort , with sir Th•••• G•rgrave ; a great shot from the town strike the bar of the window , the splin ? ter thereof be drive into his head and face ; of which wound , within eight day he die . this be now a second weaken to the english party : but in his place the earl of Suffolk succeed ; to who the regent send sir John Fals••••• with fresh supply , who the lord de la bret , nine thousand strong , endeavour to intercept : but sir John resolve to abide the charge , place his carriage behind , the horse next , and the foot before , line his bow with bill-man , and pitch stake behind the archer , who have discharge their first volley , retire behind the stake : on which the french , forget their former defeat by that course , run and gore their horse ; by which their vanguard be disorder , the battle make a stand : which sir John perceive , cry out , saint George ! They••ie ! at which word they flee indeed , and lose two thousand five hundred of their man , with the lord de la bret , and William steward ; eleven hundred be take prison ? ners : with who , and a rich booty , they come to the camp before Orleans . hereof the besiege have notice , they offer to submit themselves to the duke of burg•igne , who be content to receive they , so as the regent will consent : but the regent consent not ; and therefore in the mean time , the besiege make mean to the duke of Al••so• , who furnish the town with fresh force and provision ; which put such spirit into the citizen , that they make a sally out , slay six hundred english , and adventure upon the Bastile , where the lord T•lbot come ? mand , who repel they with great slaughter of their man ; but yet the next day the earl of Suffolk give over his siege , and disperse his army into their gar ? rison . and now the wheel of fortune begin to turn to the french against the english , which once set a go , be not easy to be stay . and first , the duke of Al••so• take by assault the town of Iargeux , and in it the earl of Suffolk and one of his brother , and slay sir Alexander pole another of his brother , and many other pri ? soner in cold blood , by reason of a contention among the french , to who the prisoner shall belong . present upon this , •nother great blow be give the english : for the lord Talbot , Scale• , and Hungerford , go to fo•tifie the town of S. Meu• , be encounter by the say duke of al••son , and Arthur of Britain , with three and twenty thousand man : with who the english lord interchange some blow ; but oppress with multitude , be all three take prisoner , all sore wound , twelve hundred of their company slay , and the rest hardly escape page 67 to Me•• , where they fortify themselves the best they can against future assault . Theise be great blow give to the english fortune in France ; Salisbury slay , and now Talbot take prisoner : which though they make she a little to totter , yet there must be great blow give before she will fall . and indeed , these disaster be second by the perfidious surrender of many town and strong hold to the french king ; who now encourage by these success , march into champagne , where by composition he take Troyes the chief city of that province ; Chalto•s re ? bell , and enforce their captain to yield it up : by who example the citizen of Rheims do the like , where the french king be anew proclaim , and with ac ? custom ceremony anoint and crown ; whereupon many town submit themselves to he , and revolt from the english . upon this , the duke of Bedford ( to make the french know , that all the english strength consist not in only sa ? lisbury and Talbot ) with ten thousand english , beside Normans , march out of Pa•is , and send letter of defiance to the french king , affirm , that deceitful and by unjust mean he have steal many city and place of importance belong to the crown of England ; which he be come to justify by battle , if he will ap ? point a time and place . to which the king of France make a slight answer , the regent march apace towards he , and as fast the king of France march away : the regent follow he , but can not overtake he , till he come near se•lys : there both the army encamp and embattle , yet only some light skirmish p•••ed between they ; and a night or two after , the french king flee with his army to br•y : which the duke think to be but a plot to draw he further off from pa ? ris , of who fidelity he have no great assurance , follow he no further , but re ? turn thither . at which time , the regent brother the cardinal , have prepare force to assist pope Martin in Bohemia , the regent borrow they of he for a pre ? send expedition , and with they march into champagne , where he find the french king encamp upon the mount pihall ; who number be twice as many as the regent , yet by no provocation can he be draw to battle , but secret flee to Crispis ; whereupon the regent also return to Paris . whil•st these thing be do in France , in England , upon saint Leonards day the 6. of November 1429 , king Henry not yet eight year old , be with great solemnity crown at Westminster : at who coronation be make six and thirty knight of the bath , and after the solemnity , a feast ; and if any man desire to know so much cookery , he may read in Fabian , all the dish of meat that be serve at that feast . about this time , in France , a strange impostor arise ; a maid call la Pucelle , take upon she to be send from God , for the good of France , and to expel the english : and some good indeed she do ; for by her subtle work , the king be re ? ceive into champagne , and many town be render to he ; while the lord L•nguevile take by surprise the castle of Aumarle , and slay all the english that be in it . but all these be but petty acquest to the king of France : there be a knot of friendship between the duke of Bedford and Burgoigne , which must be bro ? ken , or he will never be able to compass his design . he therefore labour by all mean possible to disunite they ; wherein he so little prevail , that the duke of burg•ig•e acquaint the regent with all the practise ; who thereupon , with many thank , exhort he to continue fi•me , of which he shall never have cause to repent he : and because Normandy be a principal part of the english strength in France , he go thither , and by many reason persuade they , as their ancestor have always be , to be faithful to the crown of England . in this time of the regent absence from Paris , the king of France draw all his force thither , use all mean possible , by Escalado , battery , and burn the gate , to enter the city ; but be so withstand by the vigilancy of the citizen , that he be glad to sound retreat , leave his slay and maim soldier behind he , all but the Pucelle , who be hurt in the leg , and almost stifle with mire in the ditch , be by a servant of the duke of Alanson draw up , and convey after the king to berry , who by the way receive the submission of the inhabitant of l•ig•ye . page 68 some other service be perform on both side , by the duke of Suffolk and sir Thomas Kyriell , for the english ; by the bastard of Orleans and sir Stephe• le high , for the french ; but of no great importance : till at last , the Pucelle ( who a little before have cause a english captain head to be cut off , because he will not humble himself to she upon his knee ) be by sir John of Lu•zemburgh take , and present to the duke of Burgoigne , who send she to the regent , and he to the bishop of the diocese , who judicial proceed against she as a sorceress , and deceiver of the king and his subject , she be ( after many delay of promise to discover se ? great practise , and last of her feign to be with child ) public burn at roan . and now , the regent find how much the crown of the french king have further his design , he make account the like effect will follow the crown of king Henry in France : whereupon he be send for to come over ; and come to Paris , be , by his uncle the bishop of Winchester and cardinal of Eusebius , not yet above nine year old , with all usual ceremony crown king of France , re ? ceive the oath of homage and fealty of all the french nobility that be present , and of all the inhabitant of Paris , and of the place adjacent . upon this , pope Eugenius labour a reconcilement between the two king , but can effect nothing , but only a truce for six year : which agree upon , king Henry re•urn• into England , and land at Dover , the eleven of February . but the six-yeares• truce be scarce open proclaim , when the french have cunning possess themselves off diverse castle and place of strength , justify their action , affirm ? ing• that what be politic obtain without blow , be no infringement of the truce : and afterward they perfidious convey two hundred man into the castle of Roan , with intent to have surprise it ; but be discover , they be all take , and either ransom , or put to execution . upon this , the regent ( who wife , the sister of the duke of burgoig•e , be late dead , and he marry again to Iaquelin• the earl of S. Paul daughter , with who he go over into England ) return again to Paris ; to who the lord Talbot , have now pay his ransom , come , bring with he seven hundred try soldier ; and with they the regent take the field , where the french army lie ; but the french slun• away in the dark , as not dare to abide the hazard of a battle . about this time , the duke of Bourbon , take at the battle of Agincourt , after eighteen year imprisonment , pay eighteen thousand pound for his ransom , the same day he be enlarge , dye at London . and now a very great effect be produce out of a very small cause : there have be spark of unkindness between the two great duke of Bedford and Burgoig•• , which break out into a flame upon this occasion : a time and place be appoint , where they shall meet to compound some difference that be between they ; the place agree upon , be saint Omers , a town in Burgoigne : when the time come , they stand upon this nice point , which of they shall first come to the place ; as think that he which do so , shall thereby acknowledge himself to be the measure ? ner person . the duke of Bedford think he have no reason to do it , see he be regent of France , and therefore superior to any subject in the kingdom : and the duke of Burgoigne think he have no reason to do it , see it be to be do in his own dominion , where he be himself the sovereign lord . upon this nice point they part without meeting ; and the unkindness grow afterward to so great hatred , that the duke of Burgoigne choose rather to be friend with he th•t have murder his father , than ever to have any more commerce with the duke of Bedford . thus be one great branch of assistance lop off from the english , which have be a great mean before to make it flourish : and it be not so much , that the assista•ce be take from the english , as that it be add to the french ; for after this , the duke of Burgoig•e bring more assistance to the new king of France , than ever he have do before to the king of England . by which we may see , when the divine providence have a work to effect , what slight occasion it oftentimes take to effect the work . page 69 great blow have be give before in France , to the english fortune by the ene ? my , but now a blow be give to it by destiny , which make the enemy blow the more incurable ; for now the wise , valiant , faithful regent of France , duke of •••ford , Anjou , and alans•n , earl of main , Harcourt , Drieux , Richmond , and car ? lile , and Viscount Be•mont ; upon the fourteenth of September 1435 , end his life at P•ris , which be in a manner the end the life of the english fortune in France : all former blow have be upon inferior member , but this be a blow upon the head , and therefore mortal , and indeed the english fortune in France , never ? ? ? li••ed up its head , but very weak . he be bury in our lady church at ? ? ? , whereat the nobility of Normandy much repine , who will have have thei• own territory honour with his sepulchre : yet see the levity of these man , who a few year after , in the reign of Lewis the son of Charles , will have have his monument to have be demolish , as be dishonourable , such a arch ene ? my to France , shall be inter in the metropolitan city of that province : but ? ? ? answer , God forbid , i shall give way to so dishonourable a act , to disquiet his dead bone , who live will have disquiet we all , and it savour of too much baseness to insult upon a dead lion . but yet in these disaster , there may have be some reparation by a good suc ? ce••or , have not envy and ambition breed disturbance ; the duke of Somerset desire the succession , but the duke of York obtain it ; which breed such a envy in the duke of Somerset towards he , that he labour nothing so much as to cross his design , and be a mean to hinder the duke of York go to his charge so long , th•• the p•risians have time to think of free themselves from the english servi ? ••de ; and thereupon the city after it have remain seventeen year in the posse ? •••• o• the english , yield to the constable , and upon composition expel all the Eng ? lish ; and which be worse , many other town follow this example of Paris , for what town will not willing do as Paris do , the epitome as it be of all France ? and which they stick not to call le monde de Paris , as though there be upon earth no o•h•r world but Paris . Even the norman , who have always be most firm to the english , y•• have run the •ame course , if the lord Talbot have not keep they in awe , with the •laughter of five thousand of they that way incline . and now after thes• great loss , we must be content to play small game , cast at castle and fort , and some small town , like the struggle of die man , do act of life , till there be no more life remain ; and this be now our case in France . the new re ? gentle with eight thousand soldier arrive at harfl•w , and from thence march to ? ? ? , where he win the reputation of justice and uprightness , notwithstand ? ing all the calumniation of the duke of Somerset : when the revolt duke of ? ? ? pretend title to the town of Calais , approach it with a army of forty thousand man , take the poor ••stile of Oy• , and slaughter and hang many of the ••fendants . the ••xards besiege the castle of saint Mark• , take it , and demolish it• from thence they begird Calais with a •iege , but be repel : then the duke of B•rgoig•e send the lord Croy to besiege the castle of Guysnes• but be repel th•r• also : in the mean time Pembroke the herald bring a defiance to the duke of •urgoigne from the duke of Gloucester the protector , that he will give he bat ? tell if he will abide it ; to who the duke of Burgoigne answer , he shall be ? ? ? to find he where he now be : whereupon he call a council , and while they be debate what be best to be do , the calliciens make a sally , take the ba ? ••••• which they have build , by force , and slay eight score of the burgoig•ians , which so terrify they , that they upbraid the duke of Burgoigne , and make both he , •nd the lord Croy to quit their quarter , and in such haste to be go , that they leave ••reat part of their best ordnance , and all their provision for the relief and help of the besiege ; and it seem they have reason so to do , for the next day be the s•ven and twenty of July , the duke of Gloucester land at Calais , with five and twenty thousand good fight man , who find the enemy recol , forage all the country thereabouts , and for the space of six week •arrowed all th• part of fl••ders , Arthol• , and Hainault ; and then return by saint Omers , Arde , and g••s•es , arrive at Calais . page 70 and now we must look a little home , for the duke of York return into•e•gl•n• find the castle of Roksborough be•ieged by the king of Scot , with thirty th•usand man ; but he hear of the earl of Northumberland app•o•ch , and the duke re ? turn , incontinent flee . and now again to France , where the town of h•r ? fly be sell to the french , but the duke of Somerset , and the lord Talbot besetting it both by sea and land ; though the earl of ewe , and the bastard of Orleans and Bourbon , wi•h four thousand man come to relieve it , yet upon composition , it be surrender . and here we may have leave to speak of a private matter ; for about this time the duchess of Bedford marry sir Richard Woodville , a gallant young gentleman , but of small mean , which though it offend her friend , yet it seem offend not God , who make her mother of many child by he ; and among the rest , of the lady Elizabeth , afterward marry to king Edward the four . also about this time Iames king of Scot , who before have be eighteen year prisoner in England , and afterward release , with a wife of a noble house , a great dowry , and many honourable present , yet prove ungrateful , be murder in his bedcham ? ber by night , who murderer be find out , be cruel torture . and now again to France ; when the duke of Burgoigne can neither by force nor po ? licie take c•llice , he attempt a ridiculous practice , to cut a ditch that shall drow• both the town and country ; but after much labour and expense , his design like a vapour vanish into air . the lord Talbot besiege Tankervile , and after four month siege , have it render to he : in revenge whereof , the french king in his own person lay siege to Monstreau ; which while the duke of York be provi ? ding to rescue , he be discharge of his office , do of purpose by his enemy , to lay a blot upon he : a lamentable thing in a state , when private envy shall be suffer to undermine the public safety ; and by this mean sir Thomas G•rard have the more opportunity to sell the town , for which , if he be a gainer in money , he be yet a loser in reputation , and hate both of french and english , in much this ? content die . Arthur constable of France , and John duke of Alanson besiege the town of auranc•es , but be with dishonour repel by the lord Talbot : after this , le hire send letter to they , that he have a promise from diverse burgher of Ro•• to let they in at any time appoint , against which time they come to r•ze , within four league of roan ; but the lord Talbot have notice hereof , march covert to Roa• , and from thence before day to ryze , where he surprise the french , take the lord fountain , sir Allan Geron , and many other , and with a rich booty re ? turn to roan . the sixth day of November , in the sixteenth year of the king reign , the earl of Warwick have oftentimes be aboard , and still beat back by tem ? pest , land at harfl•w with a thousand fresh soldier , and from thence come to Roa• ; but in the mean time the duke of Burgoigne see no new regent yet come , besieg•th the town of cro••y , to the relief whereof , the new regent now come , send the lord Talbot with five thousand man , who approach the duke not endure , retire to ab•evyle , leave only four hundred , with who he have man the ••style by he there erect , which be soon gain , and all the soul ? diers either take or slay . and here the valiant Talbot send word to the duke , that if he will save his country from vastation , he shall come to a battle ; but the duke not like the match , convey himself to a•ye•s : twenty day to ? gether do the lord Talbo• with fire and sword pass through Piccardie , and artho•s without opposition , and then return : sir Th•m•• Kyriell seize upon the duke carriage and ordnance ; and have leave in Crotoy victual enough for six hundred man for a whole year , he bring the rest to the earl of Warwick . and now Henry earl of mortaig•e , son to Edmund duke of Somerset , arrive with two hun ? dread archer , and three hundred spear , take the castle of saint A•yo• , wherein be three hundred Scot and french ; the Scot he fly all , and hang the french , be ? cause they have swear fealty to England , and break it ; he take likewise the castle of Algarche , and by mean of a ambush , take the lord camerois , come to the rescue thereof . on the other side , the town of Neux in Brye , and Susan be sell page 71 and deliver to the french by the treacherous burgher . in June , the earl of Hun ? tingt•• with two thousand archer , and four thousand spear be send into Gas ? coign , whither the earl of Danois be late come to buy town and castle , but the earl of Huntington upon his come thither , change all the captain and of ? ficer , whereby he prevent all such bargain ; and so far have bribery spread it self at this time , that even in Normandy , the english captain •ad but small confi ? dence in the native , and not much in some of their own nation ; whereupon sir Richard Wo•dvile , sir William Chamberlaine , and sir William pe•o be send thither to stop the current of that corruption . at this time , the council of France procure a reconcilement between the king and the dolphin , who have be long in jealousy and dissension ; which if •t have not be do , the kingdom have be tear with faction , and never be able to subsist . and now in a great frost and snow , the english under the conduct of sir John Clifford , have cover their armour with white shirt , and their head with white Alm•• skull , come to Ponthois by night , and undiscovered past the ditch , scale the wall , slay the guard , and take the town ; but this good luck be accom ? pany with a bad of more importance , for present upon it , the earl of Warwick die in the castle of Roan , and convey into England , be bury in his castle of W•rwicke . to reduce Pont•ois , the french king in person lay siege unto it ; when Richard duke of York be the second time make regent , have with he the earl of Oxford , and the earl of ewe , levy a power to raise the siege ; and arrive there , send word to the king , that the next morning he will give he battle ; but the king like not his bid , but leave his ordnance , at mid ? night steal away to poyssy ; thither also the regent follow he , but with no provo ? cation can draw he to fight . about this time , a treaty for peace between the two king be appoint to be hold at Calais , by the mediation of the duchess of Burgoigne , a Portugal lady ; Com ? missioner meet of both side , but nothing conclude , only the duke of Orleans who have be prisoner to the english five and twenty year , be by the duchess i ? d•ation , ransom with three hundred thousand crown of the duke of Burgoignes money . the lord Willoughby besiege deep , which the dolphin with sixteen thousand man come to raise ; and there young Talbot be take prisoner , with sir Ioh• Peto , and sir John Repley , but be short after redeem by exchange . and now another weaken happen to the english party , the earl of saint Paul forsake they , and be reconcile to the king of France . the english lie siege to Tartus , for the raise whereof , the french king march thither with 60000 man , re ? lieve the town , and then march to Saveryne , which he take in , and in it , sir John Rampston ; after which , he take in Arques , but then the english cut off all convoy of victual from come to he , he be force to return ; after who departure , the english recover all that he have take ; and to boot , take his lie•tenant prisoner , slay or hang all his soldier . in this mean while the lord Talbot take in conquer , and drive the bastard of Orleans from the siege of Gagli•rd• ; but the french in the castle of Cornhill detain many english prisoners• for redeem of who , sir Francis the aragonist use this stratagem ; he apparel ? lead half a dozen lusty fellow like Peasants• carry basket with corn and victu ? all|be , and send they to the castle , while he with his company lie in ambush , in a valley near the castle ; the six unsuspected be admit , and come to the captain chamber , seize upon he , and withal give the sign to the ambush , who come ready on , enter the castle , put the soldier to the sword , set the pri ? soner at liberty , burn down the castle , and with the booty and captain of the castle , return to roan . while these alternation pass in France , a more unnatural pass in eng•and , the uncle rise against the nephew , the nephew against the uncle ; the duke of Gloucester article against the cardinal , charge he with affect Prehemi ? nence , to the derogation of the king prerogative , and contempt of his law ; page 72 which article be deliver to the king , and by he to his council , who be most of the clergy , dare not meddle in they , for offend •he cardinal . on the other side , the cardinal find nothing whereof direct to accuse the duke of Gloucester himself , accuse his or her self , the lady Eleanor cotham•he duke wife , of treason , for attempt by sorcery and witchcraft the death of the king , and advancement of her husband to the crown : for which , though acqui•ed of the treason , she be adjudge to open penance , namely , to go with a wax taper in her hand , hoodless ( save a kerchief ) through London , diverse day together , and after to remain in perpetual imprisonment in the isle of man the crime object a ? against she , be procure Thomas Southwell , John Hunne priest , Roger Bollingbrock• a suppose necromancer , and Margery Iourdan call the witch of eye in Suffolke• to devise a picture of wax in proportion of the king , in such sort by sorcery , that as the picture consume , so the king body shall consume : for which they be all condemn ; the witch be burn in Smithfield ; Bolingbroke be hang , constant affirm upon his death , that neither the duchess , nor any other from she do e ? ver require more of he , than only to know by his art , how long the king shall live : John Hunne have his pardon ; and Southwell die the night before he shou•d have be execute . about this time , the countess of Cominges be dead , the king of France and the earl of arminjack be competitor for the inheritance : the earl take pos ? session ; but fear the king of France his greatness , make offer of his daughter in marriage to the king of England , with a large portion in money , and beside , to de ? liver full possession of all such town and castle as be by he or his ancestor detain in Aquitaine , and have be former by the progenitor of the king of England , conquer . the ambassador for this business , be by king Henry gra ? cious hear , and honorable return : after who be send sir Edward hall , sir Robert rise and other , to conclude all thing , and the young lady be by proxy of ? fiance to king Henry . but the king of France not like the proceed of the match , sende•h the dolphin with a puissant army , who take the earl , with his young son , and both his daughter , and gain the county of arminjack , louverne , rouergue , Moulessenois , with the city of sever•e and Cadeack , chase the bastard of arminjack out of •he country ; by mean whereof , the marriage be then defer , and leave in suspense . in this distraction of Christendom , many prince , the king of Spain , Denmark , and Hungary , become mediator for a peace between the two king of France and England : ambassador of both side be send , many meeting be have , many more ? tion make , but in conclusion , only a truce for eighteen month be agree upon . in the mean time , the earl of Suffolk one of the commissioner for the peace , take upon he beyond his commission , and without acquaint his fellow , to treat of a marriage between the king of England , and a kinswoman of the king of France , niece to the french queen , daughter to rayn•r duke of Anjou , still him•elfe king of Sicily and Naples : in which business he be so intentive , that it bring a aspersion upon he of be bribe : but howsoever , a interview betwixt the two king be appoint , without any warrant of king Henry part , to be between Charter• and Roan . the commissioner return ; the earl of Suffolk set forth the beauty of the propose bride , and the great benefit that will redound to the kingdom by this match . the king be easy induce to credit the relation ; but diverse of the king council , especial the duke of Gloucester , oppose it ; partly for the meanness of the match , her father be only a titular prince , and withal but poor , able to give any portion at all ; and partly , for the wrong which shall hereby be offer to the duke of arminiack daughter , to who the king have be in solemn manner public affiance . but reason can not prevail against fa ? vour : the earl of suffolks affirmation must not be undervalue . and hereupon , a new creation of lord first make ; ( John Beaufort earl of Somerset , make duke of Somerset ; John lord Talbot make earl of Shrewsbury ; John Holland earl of Hun ? tington , make duke of Exeter ; Humphrey earl of Stafford , make duke of Buckingham ; page 73 Henry ? ? ? earl of Warwick , make duke of Warwick ; Edmund beaufo•t earl of Dorset , make Marquesse Dorset ; and William de la pool earl of Suffolk , make marquess of Suffolk : ) this new marquess honorable accompany , be send into fra•ce to fetch the lady Margaret the propose bride ; who short after be man ? ried at Southwick in Hampshire , and crown queen of England at Westminster , on the 30 day of May 1444 , in the three and twenty year of king Henry reign . and now in stead of benefit by this marriage , there present follow great incon ? venience : for first , in exchange of her person , the duchy of Anjou , the city of ? ? ? , with the whole county of main , ( the best prop of the duchy of nor ? mandy ) be agree to be surrender into the hand of the french : and then the duke of arminjack , to revenge the injury offer to his daughter , be a mean to ex ? pell the english •ut of all Aquitaine . at this time , the duke of somerset spleen against the duke of York , not only be revive , but be grow strong ; for the duke of York , who be now after the death of the earl of Warwick , make the second time regent of France , be so unacustomated ? dermine by he , through assistance of the new marquess of Suffolk , who bear now all the sway with the king and queen ; that not only he supplant he in his place , but plant himself in it , to the great heart-burn of the duke of York and his friend ; but he wise dissemble his anger , and for the present pass it ove• . and now be no man in grace , but the new marquess of Suffolk ; all favour from the king and queen must pass by he , and the extent of his power over-r•acheth all the council : he get of the king the wardship of the body and land of the coun ? tesse of Warwick , and of the lady Margaret , sole daughter and heir of John duke of Somerset , afterward mother to king Henry the seven . and now , the king weakness in judgement grow every day more apparent than other , while go ? verne by no counsel , but of his queen ; and she by no counsel but her own will , and the new marquess of Suffolk . king Henry be himself the least part of the king , and serve but to countenance the device of other , whereof he little understand the drift ; and which , prove ill , the blame must be he ; if well , the benefit and ho ? nou_r_ , other . for by instigation of the queen , he suffer the duke of Gloucester , for his care of the commonwealth call the good duke , to be exclude not only from command , but from the counsell-table ; and permit informer , s•t on by the marquess of Suffolk , the duke of Buckingham , the cardinal bishop of Win ? chester , and the archbishop of York , to come against he ; who lie to his charge , that he have cause diverse person to be execute contrary to law : wherein though he justify himself , yet no justification will be hear ; but to avoid tumultuary partaking , it be conclude , he shall be private convict and condemn : and to this end , a parliament by the procurement of his enemy , unwit to the king , be call at bury ; to which the duke of Gloucester resort , be , on the second day of the session , by the lord Beaumont L. high constable ( abet by the duke of Buckingham ) arrest and put in ward , all his follower sequester from he , whereof two and thirty be commit to several prison ; and the next day after his imprisonment , he be find in his bed , murder ; yet show the same day , as though he have dye of a imposthume ; though all that see his body , see plain that he die of a violent and unnatural cause : some say , strangle ; some , that a hot spit be put up at his fundament ; and some , that he be stifle between two feather ? bed . his corpse the same day be convey to saint Alban , and there bury . five of his menial servant , sir Roger Chamberlaine knight , Middleton , Herbert , Arizis , esquire , and John Needham gentleman , be condemn to be hang , draw , and quarter ; and hang they be at Tyburn , let down quick , strip naked , mark with a knife to be quarter ; but than the marquess of Suffolk , to make a show as though he have no hand in the business , bring their pardon , and deli ? vex it at the place of execution , and so their life be save . it be no unmemo ? rabble thing which sir Thomas Moore write of the pregnancy of this duke of Gloce ? star : it happen , the king come one time in progress to saint Alban , a beggar bear blind , as he say , at the shrine of saint Alban obtain his sight : which miracle page 74 be noise in the town , the duke of Gloucester be there with the king , d• ? sire to see he , who be bring unto he , he ask if he be bear blind , who tell he , yes true ; and can you now see ( say the earl ) yes i thank God , and saint Albon , say the beggar ; then tell i say the earl , what colour be my gown ? the beggar ready tell he the colour ; and what colour say the earl be such a man gown ? the beggar likewise tell he present , and so of diverse other . then say the earl , go you counterfeit knave , if you have be bear blind , and can ne ? ver see till now , how come you so sudden to know this difference of colour ? and thereupon , instead of a alm , cause he to be set in the stock . but in the death of this duke , the queen who have a special hand in it , be either not so intelligent , or no• so provident as she may have be ; for as long as he have live , his primogeniture will have keep back the duke of York claim to the crown , be but descend from the five son of Edward the three , where this duke Humphrey be descend from the four . and here be the first seed sow be ? between the two house of La•caster , who badge be the red-rose , and York , who badge be the white-rose . and now upon the death of this duke of glow ? cester , the duke of York begin among his familiar privy to whisper his right and title to the crown ; but so politic carry his intent , that all thing be provide to further his project , before his purpose be any whit discover . and in this time the rich cardinal and bishop of Winchester die , who lie on his death bed , as doctor John Baker his privy counsellor and his chaplain write , use such like word ; why shall i dye , say he , have so much riches ? if the whole realm will save my life , i be able either by policy to get it , or by money to buy it : fie , will not death be hire ? will money do nothing ? and other word to such purpose . but he be dead , there succeed in his bishopric a more deserve prelate ; William wa••le•e , call so of the place in Lincolnshire where he be bear , though his name be pattern , of the worshipful family whereof he be descend . and now to the end the marquess of Suffolk may not come behind they in dignity , who he go before in power , he be about this time make duke of Suffolk . in France about this time a victory be get , which prove no better than a overthrow ; before the truce be expire , sir Francis sur•ens a aragonoi , a man think worthy to be admit into the honourable order of the •arter ; take advantage of the security of the french garrison , sudden surprise a frontier town call Fougiers , belong to the duke of Britain ; the duke advertise the french king thereof , who by his ambassador complain both to the king of England , and to the duke of Somerset then regent in France : answer be make , it be the fault of the aragonoi , who do it without warrant from either the king , or the council ; nevertheless commissioner be appoint to meet at Louviers , to treat of some course for satisfaction ; but in the time of the treaty , news be bring to the regent , that the french by a stratagem of a carter that with a load of Hey come over the drawbridge , cause the axletree to break ; and while the porter be ready to help the carter , the porter brain be beat out , the town of arde surprise , and the lord Fawco•bridg• captain thereof be take prisoner . restitution be require by the english , answer be make they in their own language , it be do without warrant from either the french king , or any of his council , so it be but one for another ; and from thence forward the truce be break of both side , and all thing grow worse and worse . the french king by composition take Louviers , Gerbury , and ver•oyle , while the regent stand demur ? ring what be best to be do ; if he command , not obey , if he counsel , not follow , as it happen to man once blemish in reputation , to have a ill con ? struction make of all their action ; by which mean the french go on without re ? sistance , get con••••ce , guisard , gatiard , saint Loe , festampe , and many other piece in Normandy ; upon notice whereof , Maulesson in Guyen surrender to the earl of Foi• , and by their example the city of ro•n it self take composition to surrender , where the E. of Shr•wsbury , and the lord butler , heir to the E. of Ormond , be keep page 75 pledge till it be perform . it be true , succour be provide to be send out of England , under the conduct of the duke of York ; but a rebellion happen in Ireland , which be think of more importance to be speedy suppress , divert he and his force thither , where not only he suppress the rebel , but so win the heart of that people , that it be no small furtherance to his proceed after ? ward . a fresh supply indeed of fif•eene hundred man , under the command of sir thom•s Kyriell be send over ; but what can a handful of man do against such multi ? tude as oppose they ? for he march with the rest of the army towards Baugeux , be encounter by the earl of Clermont , with seven thousand french and scots , who yet at first he make to recoil , till the constable of France with four hun ? dread man at arm , and eight hundred archer come to the rescue , and then fresh man come upon they that be already tire , the english lose three thousand and above seven hundred , beside diverse that be take prisoner . after this loss of man , follow present a loss of town ; Harflew be assault , and though vali ? ant for a while defend by sir Robert Curson , yet surrender at last upon come ? position : then the french king with a army royal besiege Caen in Normandy , a town belong to the duke of York , defend in his absence by his lievte ? nant sir David hall ; but the duke of Somerset be regent , in commiseration of his duchess be in the town , notwithstanding the s•out opposition of sir dam ? with hall , surrender it upon composition to the french ; whereof sir David give notice to the duke of York , it breed such a deadly quarrel between the two duke , that they be never after thorough reconcile . and thus be all Normandy recove ? read from the english , after it have be in their possession a hundred year ; and fi ? nal , all France be reduce to the obedience of Charles the french king . and now hereafter there will be little to do abroad , but there will be the more to do at home , and more blood will be shed in England by civil dissension , then be shed before in all the war of France . this loss of Normandy and other part in France , be impute much to the duke of Somerset , at that time regent ; but the duke of Suffolk must bear a great part of the blame , partly for have be the cause of the surrender of Anjou and Mayne , and the chief procurer of the duke of gloucester death , and partly for have wilful waste the king treasure , and be a mean to remove the able man from the council board ; of all which asper ? zion the queen take notice , and know how far they trench upon the duke destruction , and her own ; she so wrought , that the parliament assemble at the Blackfriar , be adjourn to Leicester , and from thence to Westminster ; but though all mean be use to stop these accusation against the duke , yet the low house will not be take off , but exhibit their bill of grievance against he : that he have traitorous incite the bastard of Orleans , the lord Presigny and other to levy war against the king , to the end that thereby the king may be destroy ; and his son John , who have marry Margaret daughter and sole heir of io•n duke of So•••set , who title to the crown the say duke have often declare , in case king Henry shall dye without issue , may come to be king ; that through his treache ? ry the french king have get possession of the duchy of Normandy , and have a ? ken prisoner the valiant earl of Shrewsbury , the lord Fawc••bridge and other : but to these accus•tions , he peremptory affirm himself not guilty , so much as in thought . then be further allegation make against he , that be with other send ambassador into France , he have transcend his commission , and without pri ? vity of his fellow commissioner , have presume to promise the surrender of Anjou , and the delivery of the county of mau•ts to duke Rayner , which accord be •erformed , to the great dishonour of the king , and detriment of the crown ; that he have traitorous acquaint the french king with all the affair of state , and passage of secrecy , by which the enemy , be thorough instruct in all the design of the king and council : that he have receive reward from the french king , to divert and disappoint all succour send to the king friend in France . up ? on these and diverse other accusation bring against he , to blear the peop•es eye , he be commit to the tower ; but the parliament be no soon dissolve , page 76 but he be set at liberty ; which so incense the common people , that they make a insurrection ; and under the lead of a desperate fellow , styl himself blow ? beard , they commit many outrage ; but by the diligence of the gentleman of the country , the captain be apprehend , and the rebellion cease . and now another parl•ament be call , where great care be take in choose of burgess , presu ? ming thereby to stop any further proceed against the duke of Suffolk ; but his personal appearance at the parliament give such a general distaste to the house , though he come in the company of the king and queen , that they forbear not to begin the assembly , with petition the king , for punishment to be inflict upon such as have plot or consent to the resignation of A•jo• , and main , whereof by name they instance in the duke of Suffolk , John bishop of Salisbury , sir Iame• Fynes , lord say and other . This petition be second by the lord of the up ? per house : whereupon , to give some satisfaction to the house , the lord say lord treasurer , be sequester from his place , the duke officer be all discard , and himself formal banish for five year , but with a intent after the multitude have put out of mind their hatred against he , to have revoke he : but God do otherwise dispose of he , for when he be ship in Suffolk , with intent to have pass over into France ; he be meet by a Englishman of war , take and carry to Dover sand , and there have his head chop off , on the side of the longboat , which together with the body be leave there on the sand , as a pledge of some sa ? tisfaction for the death of duke H••phry . whil•st these thing be do in England , the duke of York in Ireland begin to make his way to the crown , as descend from Philippe daughter and heir of George duke of Clarence , elder brother to John of Gaunt , great grandfather to the present king Henry the six . and for a beginning , it be private whisper , that king H•nry be of a weak capacity , and easy abuse ; the queen of a malignant spirit , and bloody ambitious , the privy council , if wise enough , yet not honest enough , regard more their private profit , than the public good , that through their delinquency all fr••ce be lose , and that God will not bless the usurp possession of king he•ry : with these suggestion the Kentishman seem to be ta ? ken ; which be observe by a instrument of the duke of York , call Mortimer , he take his time , and tell the multitude , that if they will be rule by he , he will put they in a course to work a general reformation , and free they for ever from those insupportable burden of taxation , so often , upon every slight occasion obtru ? dead upon they . Theise promise of reformation and freedom from imposition , so wrought with the people , that they draw to a head ; and make Mortimer , otherwise Jack Cade their leader , who still himself captain mend-all , march with no great number , but those well order , to bl•ck-heath , where between Eltha• and Greenwich , he lie by the space of a month , exercise his man , and send for who he please , and for what he please : then he present to the parliament the complaint of the Common• : that the queen favorite share among they the revenue of the crown , whereby the king be enforce for the supportation of his present estate to tax and burden the commons , to their utter undo , and to the general impoverishment of the kingdom : that the commons have their come ? modity daily take from they , for the purveyance of the king household , for which they be not pay , nor any assurance for payment thereof give , but only court promise : that upon the apprehension of any man for treason or felony , the king menial servant , before conviction , b•gge the good and land of they in ? peach ; whereupon indirect and unlawful proceed be use by subornation of witness , embracery of juror , and great man letter to the judge ; whereby Ju ? stice be pervert , and the innocent after attaint , if not execute , yet at least in ? prison to their undo : that the commons have no legal proceed in their lawsuit , so as the rightful owner of inheritance , dare not ( if oppose by any courtier ) maintain their title , or attempt the recovery of their interest , how just so ever : that the king collector and other accomptant be much trouble in pass their account , by new extort fee , and by be enforce to procure page 77 a late invent write of quorum nomina for allowance of the baron of the cinque-port , and their sue out their Quietu• at their own charge , without allowance from the king : that the bailiff of sheriff under colour of the green wax out of the exchequer , do levy great sum than be by the record justifiable , yet maintain ; that they can have the freedom of elect knight and burgess ? ses for the parliament ; but by letter from the favourite of the court , to their friend and retainer , the knight and burgess be common choose : that they be too much trouble with too often come to attend the general session , be en ? force in many place to make five day journey to the place where they be keep . Theise and some other , be the complaint of the commons ; but the captain for his own particular ( after protestation make to live and dye in the quarrel of the king ) require , that his majesty will be please to receive again into favour , the true noble prince the duke of York , and with he the right honourable the duke of Exeter , Buckingham , and Norfolk , and the ancient nobleman of the realm ; by the undue practise of Suffolk , and his complice , command from his presence , and that all their opposite may be banish the court , and put from their office : that there may be a general amotion of corrupt officer , a abolition of the green wax , and other instrument of extortion out of the exchequer ; a qualification of the rigour of proceed in the kings-bench ; a inhibition of une ? quall purveyance of provision for the king household , and a present execution of the promoter , slegge , cr•mer , Isell , and east , who he pretend by wrongful information to have abuse the king , and wrong his subject . Theise petition be send from the lower-house to the upper , and from thence commit to the lord of the king privy council , who have examine the particular , explode they as frivolous , and the author thereof to be presumptuous rebel . where ? upon the king be solicit by his privy council , to prosecute they by force rather than intreary ; which advice be second by the queen as conceive they secret aim at she : and hereupon the king draw his force to Greenwich , and appoint ? t diverse lord to assail the rebel ; but the lord can get no follower to fight against they who seek only for reformation of abuse ; and for punishment of such traitor as the lord say the king chamberlain be : whereupon the lord say be present commit to the tower , the king and queen retire to London , from whence within two day , the king be now fifteen thousand strong , mar ? che•h in person towards captain mend-all , who politic withdraw his force into seven•ake wood ; upon notice whereof , the king retire again to London , but the queen long for dispatch , send• the two Staffords , sir Humphrey , and William , with many hotspur of the court to follow the rebel , who be soon cool ; for they find captain mend-all in good order , ready to receive they , and in the first encounter , slay sir Humphrey , and afterward his brother , and put all the rest to flight ; the k . Forces be at black•eath , can neither by threat nor entreaty be get to go to the rescue , but rather wish the queen and her favorite in the Staffords case , or that the duke of York be in England , to aid his cousin Mortimer , ( now first acknowledge to be of his kindred ) and many of they steal away to the rebel , who number from Sussex and Surrey daily increase , who yet their captain re ? strain from forage or take away any thing by force , and so return again to black•eath , where the king army lie the night before , but be now fall down to Greenwich . and now the archbishop of Canterbury , and the duke of buck ? ham be send to expostulate with the rebel about their demand ; to who Jack Cade give very good language , but direct affirm no cessation from arm , un ? less than king in person will hear the grievance of the subject , and pass his princely word for reformation of their wrong . this resolution of his mad know to the king , who be not sure of his own soldier faith , make he march present away to Killingworth castle in Warwickeshire , where he fortify himself , as expe ? ct a siege , have leave the lord scale only to guard the tower . Jack Cade take advantage of the king departure , come to south••rke , where he quarter his man , straight charge they to commit no outrage , nor do wrong page 78 •o any ; which be due ob•erved . the next morning •e march to London-bridge , where he cause his man to cut the rope of the drawbridge , no resistance be make against he ; and so in good order march up by London ? stone , upon which he strike his sword , say , now be Mortimer lord of London . the major of London , sir Thomas Chalton , stand upon the threshold of his door bid he take heed he attempt nothing against the quiet of the city : to who •e make answer , let the world take notice of our honest intention by our action . and indeed this orderly carriage of himself and his company , win he a good o ? pinion among the common sort of people : and now ass•ming to himself the place of chief , he send o•• his letter of safe•conduct , to such who he please to make use of : among other , he write this letter to Thomas co•k draper of London . by this our writing enseal , we grant , that Thomas cock of London Draper , shall safe come into our presence , and avoid from we again at his pleasure , with all other person come in his company . subscribe thus : his majesty loyal subject , John Mortimer , captain mend-all . upon cock admission , he have private conference with three other that come with he ; to who , at their departure , he give these instruction in write : you shall charge all Lombard and merchant-stranger , genona , Venetians , florentine , and other , this day to draw themselves together , and to ordain for we the captain , twelve harness complete of the best fashion , four and twenty brigandi•es , twelve battle-ax , twelve Glaves , six horse with saddle and bridle complete furnish , and a thousand ma•ks in ready money : and if they shall fail herein , we shall strike off the head of as many as we can get . but they fail not , but send he what he have demand : who thereupon the next morning , be the three of July , return to London ; and pre ? sent send to the lord scale , to bring his prisoner the lord say to the Guildhall , whither he have call the lord major with his brethren ; before who he cause the lord say to be arraign , who crave to be try by his peer , be forth ? with take from his keeper , carry to the standard in cheap , and there have his head chop off , which be pitch upon a pike , be bear before he to Mileend , why ? there he go to have conference with the rebel of Essex ; and by the way meet with sir Iames Cromer high-sheriff of Kent , who have late marry the lord say daughter , he cause his head also to be strike off , and carry likewise before he in de•ision . the next morning he come again to London ; where , after public execution do upon some of his fellow , and particular upon a petty cap•aine of he , name Paris , that have do thing contrary to his proclamation ; upon a displeasure take against alderman Malpas , he send and seize upon all his ware and good , and fine alderman horn in five hundred mark : whereupon , the city ? zen find he to grow every day more insolent than other , they send to the lord scale for assistance , who send Matthew Gough a old soldier to they , with some force and furniture out of the tower ; who present make a stand at the bridge , where Cade notwithstanding force his passage , and then begin to set fire on house where many age and impotent people miserable perish ; captain bough alder ? man , Sutton and Robert Hayson , valiant fight , be slay : yet upon a fresh supply , the Londoner recover the bridge again , and drive the rebel beyond the stoop in South-work ; at which time , both side be weary , agree of a truce , till the next day . after the retreat , Cade find he have lose many of his best man , be drive for supply , to set at liberty all the prisoner in Southwark , aswell felon as debtor : when now his company enter into consideration of their danger , and of the desperate service their captain have bring they to , begin to discover by their countenance their willingness to leave this course : whereof the archbishop of Canterbury have notice , he with the bishop of Winchester come from the tower by water to Southwark , and there show the king generall-pardon under the great seal of England ; which be so welcome to the rebel , that without take leave of their captain , they withdraw themselves that night to their several habitation . Jack Cade with some few follower bend his page 79 journey to Quinborough castle , where be deny entrance , he disguise himself , and privy flee : but upon proclamation , with promise of a thousand mark to any that shall bring he dead or alive ; he be afterward , by one Alexander Eden gentleman , attach ; and make resistance , in a garden at Hothfield in Sussex , be there slay ; his body be bring to London , behead and quarter , his head set upon London bridge , his quarter disperse in diverse place in Kent . upon the news whereof , the king send commissioner into Kent , to inquire of the abettor of this rebellion : whither he follow himself in person , and though five hun ? dread be find guilty , yet eight only be execute . though London be the chief stage of this rebellion , yet other country be not free ; especial wil•shire , for the rebel there , upon the nine and twenty day of June , draw William askot bishop of Salisbury , from the high altar , where he be say mass in Edington church , to the top of the hill ; and there in his priestly robe , most inhumane mur ? red he . this insurrection be not unknown to the king of France , who take advan ? tage thereof , seize upon all place which the english have in France , leave they nothing but only Callice , and the castle of Hames and Guisnes ; and this be the issue of the duke of somerset regency in France : whereupon come into England , at a p••liament hold at Westminster , the six of November , in the nine and twenti ? eth year of the king r•igne , he be put under arrest ; upon notice whereof , the commons of London despoil his house at Blackfriers , and cease not , till Procla ? mansion be make to inhibit they : for disobey whereof , there be one man be ? head , at the standard in cheap . at this time , the duke of York , under pretence of come to the parliament , come out of Ireland ; and at London have private conference with John duke of Norfolk , Richard earl of Salisbury , the earl of Devonshire and other his assure friend ; where it be resolve , to keep the chief purpose , ( the claim to the crown ) secret ; and only to make show , that his endeavour be but to remove ill counselor from the king ; of who they instance in the duke of Somerset as chief ; and hereof , the duke send diverse letter to the king , complain of the wrong the duke of Somerset have do he , but withal make protestation of his own loyalty . to which the king make answer , that he will take his complaint in ? to consideration ; but somewhat blame he for the death of the bishop of Chester , by his mean suspect to be slaughter , and for dangerous speech utter by his sir ? vaunt , tend to rebellion : conclude , that notwithstanding any thing say or do to the contrary , he take and esteem he a faithful subject , and a love kin ? man . but the duke of York , not herewith satisfy , depart into wale , and there levi••h man , make his colour for the good of the common wealth : and the re ? remove of bad counselor . the king advertise hereof , present raise a army ; and with the duke of Somerset ( now enlarge ) march towards wale : while the duke of York , have notice which way the king come , by another way march towards London ; but be tell , the Londoner will not admit he en ? trance ; he pass the river Thames at Knightbridge , march into Kent , and en ? camp at burnt-heath . the king in his pursuit , come to black-heath , and there pitch his tent , from whence he send the bishop of Winche ? star and Ely , the lord river , and Richard Andrews keeper of the privy seal , to know the cause of this commotion , and to make offer of reconcilement , if the duke demand be not unreasonable . the duke make answer , that nothing be intend against the king person , his crown or dignity : all that be seek , be to remove ill counselor from about the king , but especial Edmund duke of Somerset ; who if the king will be please to commit towards , till his legal trial may be have in parliament , he will then not only dismiss his army , but come unto his presence as a loyal subject . hereupon the duke of Somerset be come ? mit to prison : the duke of York dismiss his army , and come in person to the king : in who presence , ( contrary to his expectation ) he find the duke of Somerset , which so move he , that he can not hold , but present charge he page 80 with treason : which the duke of Somerset , not only deny , but ? ? ? a•re the duke of York , to have conspire •he king death , and the usu•pation of the crown : whereupon , the king remove to London , the duke o•yorke as a prisoner ride before he , and the duke of Somerset at liberty , which be not a little mer ? vail at by many . and now the king call a council at Westminster , where the two duke be earnest in accuse each other ; but while the counsel be debate of the matter , there come a flash of lightning out of France , which divert they ; for the earl of Kendal , and the l'espar , c•me ambassador from Bordeaux , offer their obedience to the crown of England , if they may but be assure to be de ? fend by it : but withal , at the same time there come a report , that Edward earl of march , son and heir to the duke of York , with a great power be march to ? ward London . here be matter for a double consultation : and for this latter , it be resolve on , that the duke of York , shall in the presence of the king and his Nobi ? lity , at the high altar in Paul• , take his oath of submission and allegiance to king Henry : which he accord do , and then have liberty to depart to his castle of Wigmore . and for the former , the earl of Shrewsbury with about three thou ? sand man be send into Gascoigne , who arrive in the isle of Madre , pass forth with his power , and take Fro•sack and other piece , but have receive in the night in ? struction from Bordeaux of certain conspirator , he make all the speed he can thy ? there ; and be enter the town before the french have notice of his come : so that many of they be slay by the lord L'Espar in their bed . Shortly after there arrive , the earl of shrewsbury son , sir Ioh• Talbot , with the bastard of so ? merset , and two and twenty hundred man , by who mean Bordeaux be well man with English : in which time the earl be not idle , but go from place to place , to receive the offer submission of all place where he come : and have take Chatil ? lo• , he strong fortify it , whereupon the fre•ch king raise a army , and be ? siege Chatillon , to the rescue whereof , the earl make all possible speed with eight hundred horse , appoint the earl of Kendal , and the lord L'Espar to fol ? low with the foot : in his way he surprise a tower the french have take , and put all within it to the sword ; and meet five hundred french man , that have be for ? rage ; many of they he slay , and the rest he chase to their camp . upon who approach , the french leave the siege , and retire to a place which they have former fortify ; whither the earl follow they , and resolute charge they so home , that he get the entry of the camp : where be shoot through the thigh with a harquebus , and his horse slay under he ; his son desirous to relieve his father , lose his own life , and therein be accompany with his bastard brother Henry Talbot , sir Edward hall , and thirty other gentleman of name . the lord no ? lius with threesco•• other be take prisoner , the rest flee to Bordeaux , but in the way a thousand of they be slay . and thus on the last day of July , in the year 1453. at Chatillo• , the most valorous earl of Shrewsbury , the first of that name ; after four and twenty year service beyond the sea , end his life , and be bury at Roa• in Normandy ; with this inscription upon his tomb : here lie the right noble knight John Talbot earl of Shrewsbury , Weshford , Waterford , and va ? lence , lord Talbot of Goodrich and Orchenfield , lord strange of Blackmere , lord Ver ? don of Acto• , lord Cromwell of Winkfield , lord lovet•ft of Worsoppe , lord Furni ? vall of Sh•ffield , knight of the noble order of saint George , saint Michael , and the gol ? den fleece , great marshal to king Henry the six , of his realm of France . the earl of Kendal , the lord montserat , Rosaine and D••gledas enter the castle of Chatillon , and make it good against the french the space of ten day ; but then ha ? ving no hope of succour , they deliver it , upon composition to have liberty to de ? part to Bordeaux : and now the gascoig••s be as ready to open their gate to the french , as they be before to the english ; by mean whereof , in short time , the french recover again all gascoig•e except Bordeaux , and that also at length , up ? on condition that both garrison and inhabitant with all their substance , may safe depart for England or Callice , and that the lord L'Espar and Durant , with thirty other , upon pain of death shall never after be find in the territory of France . page 81 at this time upon saint bartholomews day , a ancient custom be , that the ma ? jor of London , and the sheriff shall be present in give prize to the best wrestler ; it h•ppened that at the wrestle place near Morefields , the prior of S. John be there to see the sport , when a servant of he , not brook the disgrace to be foil before his master , against the custom of the place will have wrestle again , which the major deny , whereupon the prior fetch bowman from clark•••ell , to resist the major , and some slaughter be commit ; the major cap be shoot through with a arrow , he nevertheless will have have the spo•t go on , bu• no wrestler come , yet the major sir John norman tell his brethren , he will stay awhile , to make trial of the citizen respect towards he : which he have no soon say , but the citizen with banner display come in great number to he , and fetch he home in great triumph . upon the neck of this , begin the quarrel in Holborn , be ? tween the gentleman of the inn of chancery and some citizen , in appease whereof , the queen attorney and three more be slay . and now the duke of York , by all mean labour to stir up the hatred of the commons against the duke of Somerset , repeat often , what dishonour England sustain by somerset give up the strong town of Normandy , and how he abum ? se the king and queen favour to his own gain , and the commons grievance , than he address himself to those of the nobility that can not well brook his too much command over the king and queen affection : among other he fasten upon the two Nevil , both Richards , the father and the son , the one earl of Salisbury , the other of Warwick ; with who he deal so effectual , that a indissoluble knot of friendship be knit betwixt they ; by who assistance , ( the king lie dangerous sick at Claringdon ) the duke of Somerset be arrest in the queen great chamber , and send to the tower ; and in a parliament now convoke , appe•ched of treason , and many heinous crime object against he : whereup ? on , the king though weak be bring to London , of purpose to dissolve the Parlia ? mean , and that di•solved , the duke of Somerset be present set at liberty again , and not only so , but be make captain of Callice and guysnes , the only remainder the english have in France . upon this , the duke of York and his party , with a great power march towards London : against who , the king attend with the duke of Somerset , the duke of Buckingham and his son , both name Humphrey , Henry earl of Northumberland , Iames earl of Wiltshire , Jasper earl of Pembroke , and two thou ? s•nd man , march forward ; at saint Alban both army meet : the duke in the morning send• a letter to the king , protest his fidelity and synderity ; only he desire , the duke of Somerset may be deliver , to stand or fall by the judgement of his peer ; and this he will have , or dye in the pursuit . the king for answer , command he to disband , and submit to his mercy ; and not expect , that he will deliver any in his army , who have show their love in stand to he . herewith the duke acquaint his friend , who hereupon fall every one to his quarter : the earl of Warwick fall upon the lord Clifford quarter , where the duke of Somerset , h•sting to the rescue , be slay , and with he the earl of Northumberland , humh ? fry earl of Stafford , the lord Clifford , and about five thousand other , beside man ? nigh that be hurt ; the king himself shoot in the neck with a arrow ; the duke of B•ckingham and the lord scale , in the face ; the earl of Dorset so hurt , that he be fain to be carry home in a cart : the king army have be increase after his come forth , to eight thousand ; but now they be all disperse or slay , and the king unguarded , be leave in a poor thatch house ; whither , to be free from the danger of arrow , he have withdraw himself . the duke of York have notice where the king be , go with Wa•wick and Salisbury , who all three upon their knee present themselves before he , make humble petition to he , for pardon of what be pass : and now , see the common enemy be slay , they have what they aim at . to who the king thorough affright , say : let there be no more kill then , and i will do what you will have i . this first battle of saint Alban be fight upon the three and twenty day of May , in the three and thirty year of king Henry reign . the body of the duke of Somerset , the earl of Northumberland page 82 and the lord Glifford , be bury in the chapel there . and now the duke of York , in the king name , command a surcease from ••rther hostility : and in all re ? verent manner convey the king to London ; where they keep the feast of pente ? cost together ; at which time , a parliament be summon to begin at Westminster , the nine day of July ; and therein it be enact , that the duke of Glo•cester shall be decl•red public a loyal subject , and that none shall misreport or dispute the action of the duke of York , or of any in his company ; and moreover , the duke of York be m•de protector of the king person , and of the realm , the earl of Sali• ? bury be make lord chancellor , and the earl of Warwick captain of Calais , wherein they all carry themselves with unblameable demeanour . in this mean time , the queen not well please with these proceed , s•ekes all me•ns to incite the lord of her party , and they as much seek to incite she to make opposition ; she put the duke of Buckingham in mind that these traitor have slay his hopeful son at S. Alban ; she tell the now duke of Somerset , that by they his deer father lose his life : and they again put the queen in mind of the unsufferable indignity do to she , in make her husband only a king in name , set a tutor over he , as though he be a child , while the duke of York and his complice manage all : upon which incitation , all the enemy of the Yorkshire faction be assemble by the queen at Greenwich ; where it be debate of some course to be take for restore the king to his former liber•y and government ; at length it be conclude , that the duke of York shall be comma•ded to give over his place of protectorship , for that the king be of year and discretion sufficient to rule of himself without a guardian , and the earl of Salisbury to surrender his place of be lord chancellor , for that the great seal be never deliver he , see ? king that which be now use , be make since the king restraint , and therefore not sufficient ; to which conclusion of they , the king easy to be wrought upon , yield his co•sent , and thereupon they be both discharge from their office , and sum ? moan to appear at the council table at Gr•enwich ; but the lord be wise than to put themselves into their hand , and therefore make answer , that none have power to displace they , nor to command their appearance in any place , but in par ? liament , and so they continue about lond•n , place and displace who they please , •nd by their triumvirat authority , take John Holland earl of Exeter out of sanctuary , and send he prisoner to po•f•et castle . Theise proceed give occasion to the licentious multitude to raise commotion , and the prentice of Lon ? don upon a very slight occasion , fall upon outlandish merchant , rifle and rob their house ; and the major assemble a company of substantial citizen to sup ? press they , the ringleader of the disorder fly to sanctuary ; commissioner be send to inquire and punish the offence , but when the major and Commissioners be set , tiding come that the commons be up in arm ; whereupon the come ? missioner leave the business to be proceed in by the major , who so discreet orde ? red the matter , that many of the offender be punish , some by death , other by fine , and all thing be quiet and appease . at this time the french have little to do against the english in France , will needs be do something against they in England : they set out two fleet , one under the conduct of William lord Pomyers , the other of sir Peter Bressy ; the lord fall •pon Fulney in the west-country , the knight upon S••dwich in Kent , where some hurt they do , but not of importance to countervail their voyage . and now the queen find the little respect the Londoner bear to her party or the king , persuade the king , as for his health and recreation , to make a progress into Warwickeshire , which he do , by the way hunt and hawk , and the queen make show of mind nothing but pastime ; and this she do , with a purpose the easy to entrap the three lord , of York , Salisbury , and Warwick , to who she write most love letter , earnest invite they to be at Coventry by a hour ap ? point ; which they , not doubt any fraud , intend to have do , but hear by the way of the mischief plot against they , they cause their retinue to go onward the way to the court , as though themselves be come after ; but they page 83 provide otherwise for their safety , the duke of York with a groom and a page get he to Wigmore castle , the ea•le of Salisbury to his castle of Middleham in the north , and the earl of Warwick to the sea side , and so to Calais ; but before they part , they agree upon a alphabet , by which they may have intercourse of letter , yet their intention keep undiscovered . the king unwit of this mischief intend against the duke of York and his friend , return to London , where he call a council ; and therein of his own accord desire that some course may be invent for a perfect reconcilement of all party ; promise upon his salvation ( a asseveration not usu•ll with he ) so to entertain the duke of York and his friend• , that all discontent shall be remove , and a perfect amity on all part •stablished : to which end messenger be dispatch to the duke of York , and all other of his party , command they upon urgent of ? fair of the realm , and upon royal promise of safe conduct , to repair to his court at London , at a day appoint . the duke of York accord come , and with 400 man well apparel , lodge at his house call Baynard castle ; t•e earl of S• ? lisbury with 500 man , lodge likewise at his house call the herbour ; the duke of Exeter ( late release ) and the duke of Somerset with 800 man , be lodge within temple-barre ; the earl of Northumberland , the lord Egremont , and the lord Clifford , with 1500 man , be lodge in Holborn ; the earl of Warwick with 600 in red jacket with ragged staff embroider behind and before , be lodge at the grey friar in London . upon the seventeenth of march the king and the queen come to London , and be lodge at the bishop palace ; the major ha ? ving five hundred well appoint man in readiness , ride with a competent num ? ber all day long round the city , for preservation of the king peace : the lord lodge within the city , hold their council at Blackfriar ; the other , at the chapterhouse at Westminster : between both , the reverend archbishop of canter ? b•ry , the son of Henry Bourchier earl of Essex , with some other of the most able prelate intercede so , that by their mediation it be at last conclude , that all wrong and misdemeanour on every side shall •e forget and forgive , that each side shall be friend to the other , and both be obedient to the command of the king . beside this in general , there be some particular article to be perfor ? m by the duke of York , the earl of Salisbury , and Warwick , which afterward be ratify under the great seal of England , the 24 day of march , in the 36 year of the reign of king Henry the six . upon the publication whereof , a solemn procession be make in Paul church , at which the king be present with his cr•wn on his head ; before he , hand in hand go the duke of Somerset , and the earl of Salisbury , the duke of Exeter , and the earl of Warwick , and so one of the one , and another of the other part , till they be all marshal ; behind the king come the queen , the duke of York lead she by the hand , who in go make show of favourable countenance towards he : divine service end , they return to the court , in all outward appearance true reconcile ; but all be dissemble , as will present appear ; for present upon this , a affray fall out between a servant of the earl of Warwick , and a courtier , who in the encounter be dangerous woun ? dead , the Earles man fly ; the king servant see their fellow hurt , and then of ? fender escape , watch the earl come from the council table , and assail he ; many be hurt , but the earl get a Wherry , and so escape to London ; the queen incontinent command the earl to be commit to the tower , but he foresee the danger , post to Yorkshire , where he acquaint the duke of York , and his father the earl of Salisbury of all the occurrence , with the palpable discovery of the queen canker disposition , advise they to stand upon their guard , and to provide against the approach storm . himself speed to Calais , and be then lord admiral , take with he all the king ship that be in readiness , and scou ? ring the sea , meet with five great carrack , three of Geno•a , and two of Spain ; and after two day fight , take two of they , with which he return to Calais where he unload their fraught , and find it worth ten thousand pound in staple commodity , beside the ship and prisoner . page 84 in the mean time , the earl of Salisbury with about five thousand man march through Lanc•shire , to pass that way to the king , with a purpose to acquaint he with the affront offer to his son , and the inveterate malice discover in the queen against he : the queen with the duke of Buckingham and Som•rset , hear of his come , give order to the lord Audley to use mean to apprehend he ; who thereupon levy ten thousand man in Cheshire and Shropshire , and with they about a mile from Drayton , in a plain call Bloreheath he attend the earl , there be but a small brook of no great depth between they . early in the morning the earl make a seem retreat , which the lord Talbot observe , present cause his troop to pass the river , but before they can be reduce again into order , the earl with his whole strength fall upon they , and with the slaughter of the lord Audley , and most of they that have pass the river , he discomfit the rest , and slay about 24. hundred of they ; sir John and sir Thomas Nevil knight the Earl• son be sore wound , who with sir Thomas Harrington travel into the north country , be apprehend and send as prisoner towards Chester , but upon a message from the marchman be present release . and now the duke of York think fit no long to conceal his design , make• preparation to take the field , the earl of Salisbury and Warwick do the like ; and among other of approve valour , who the earl of Warwick have bring from Calais with he , be two principal note man , John blunt , and Andrew trolloppe . likewise the king , with the duke of Somerset , and Exeter , draw his force to Worcester , from whence Richard Beauchamp bishop of Salisbury , be send to offer the Yorkists a full and general pardon , if they will lay down arm , and become loy ? all subject . whereunto they answer , that there be no trust to the king par ? don , as long as the queen have a predominant power ; but if they may have assu ? rance of safety , they will express their loyalty , and humble render themselves at his service . hereupon the king advance near , and approach the lord be ? mie , cause proclamation to be make , that whosoever will abandon the duke of York , shall be receive to mercy , and have pardon . upon this , the night fol ? low , Andrew trolloppe , with all the callicians submit to the king , and by he be all the counsel of the duke of York discover ; which so much discourage he , that he with his young son , the earl of Rutland , flee first into wale , and then into Ireland : the earl of march , Salisbury , and Warwick get into Devonshire , where by the mean of John Dynh•m esquire ( the same man that afterward by king Henry the seven be make lord treasurer of England ) they be ship from Exmouth , to Gernsey , and so to Calais . all the common soldier the king pardon , only make exemplary punishment of some few captain , send the duchess of York , and her two young child , to the duchess of Buckingham her sister to be •afely keep ; and then have spoil the town and castle of Ludlow , he dismiss his be ? mie . and now a parliament be call at Coventry , wherein the duke of York , ed ? ward earl of march his son , Richard earl of Salisbury , richard•arle of Warwicke• John lord Clifford , and many other the confederate of the duke of York , be con ? vict of treason , and all their land and good seize on to the king use . Henry D. of Somerset by the queen mean be make captain of Calais , whither come to take possession , he be , by reason of ordnance shoot at he from rice-bank force to retire ; which the queen hear , be so incense , that in great passion she give order to make ready all the king ship lie at Sandwich , to give assistance to the duke of Somerset : but the forementioned John Dynham , out of love to the earl of march , board those ship in the harbour , and take the lord river design admiral for that service , and carry both he and the ship to Callice , from whence the earl sail to Ireland , to the duke of York , who have confer and con ? cluded what course to take , he return to Callice , the new admiral the duke of Exeter not dare to stop his course . sir Simon Montford be appoint •o guard the cinque port , have diverse ship under his command to bar the earl of war ? wick•s entrance ; but the earl by his espial have perfect intelligence of all pass ? sage , fall sudden upon sir Simon before his ship be ready , take he prisoner , page 85 ransack the town of Sandwich , and carry his prisoner and the ship to Callice : by the way he understand how much the kentishman desire his return and long for his come ; whereupon he come the second time to Sandwich , to who present resor ? t the lord Cobham and very many gentleman of the country : so as now his be ? my be five and twenty thousand strong ; with which he march towards London , against who the lord Scales be appoint to go , and with some convenient troop to assure London : but the major direct refuse to admit he ; whereup ? on he resort to the tower , from whence afterward he do the Londoner not small displeasure . the earl of Warwick have notice , that his father the earl of Salisbury be upon march to meet he : pass over his man ; and without he ? peachment , join with he and his friend near Exeter . the king with the duke of Somerset and Buckingham with a great army march ? eth towards they , and near to the town of Northampton both army meet : the earl of march with the advice of the earl of Warwick prepare for the fight : the queen ( the king more intentive to devotion then fight ) do they like , the fight continue about two hour , wherein be slay of both side above •en thousand man ; but upon the fall of Humphrey duke of Buckingham , the king side be this ? comfit , and John Talbot earl of Shrewsbury , Thomas L. Egremont , John L. Beau ? mont and some other of account be slay : the queen with the duke of summer ? s•t , take with they the young prince , flee to the bishopric of Durham : the king himself be take , and as a prisoner convey to London : where the tower be yield to the earl of Warwick ; the lord scale in disguise apparel endea ? vour to escape , be take by the watermen , and by they behead , and his corpse careless leave upon the sand . Thomas Thorpe one of the baron of the exchequer , in the habit of a monk , his crown shear , purpose to fly to the queen , be take and commit prisoner to the tower , and after by the commons behead at Highgate . the duke of York be advertise of this good success , leave Ireland and post to London , where in the king name he summoneth a parliament , which be assem ? bleed , he in the presence of the lord in the upper house , place himself in the in ? periall seat , and with great boldness lay open his rightful claim to the crown of England , as be the son and heir of anne daughter and heir of Roger Morti ? mer earl of march , son and heir of Philip the sole daughter and heir of Lyonel duke of Clarence , the three son of Edward the three , and old brother of John of gaunt duke of Lancaster , father of the usurper Henry the four , grandfather to Henry the five , who be father to he that at this time untrue style himself king Henry the six . and after relate the many misery that have befall the realm since the time of this usurpation , he conclude , that he will not expect nor desire possession of the crown , except his descent be undisputable , and his title without exception . This be a business of importance , require deliberati ? on : but in conclusion , the duke have before hand prepare the lord spiritual ; and few of the nobility be present , that be not of his part , the burgess be easy persuade : and it be general resolve , and enact accord , that king Henry during his life , shall retain the name and honour of a king ; that the duke of York shall be proclaim heir apparent to the crown , and protector of the king person , his land and dominion ; and that if at any time , any of king Henry friend , ally or favourite , in his behalf shall attempt the disa••lling of this act , that than the duke shall have present possession of the crown . it be not unwor ? thy then note , that while the earl of march be declare his title in the upper house , it happen in the nether house , that a crown which hang in the middle of the house , to garnish a branch to set light upon , without touch or wind , fall shall ? den down : as likewise at the same time , fall down the crown which stand on the top of Dover castle : a sign as some thought , that the crown of the realm shall be change . assoon as the parliament be dissolve ; the duke dispatch ? eth letter into Scotland ; require in the king name , the queen , the duke of Somerset and Exeter , and all other of the nobility , that remain in that kingdom , with all speed to repair to his presence in London : but they have other work in page 86 hand ; for have goten together of english and scots , to the number of eighteen thousand , they come ma•ching into England• against who go the duke of York , with his young son the earl of Rutland , and the earl of Salisbury , ( leave the king in the custody of the duke of Norfolk and the earl of Warwick ; ) and approa ? ch near the que•ns a•my , he be certify by his sc•uts , that the enemy far exceed his power , both in number and in all warlike preparation , ( he not have in his army above five thousand man ) and thereupon the earl of Salisbury advise he to rety•e , and to attend the come of the earl of march , who be go into wale to raise the march man ; but the pride of his former victory make he deal to all counsel of decline the battle ; and so hasten on by his destiny , from s•nd•ll castle he march on to Wakefield green ; where the lord Clifford on the one side , and the earl of Wiltshire on the other be place in ambuscado ; the duke of York suppose that the duke of Somerset who lead the battle , have no more force than what be with he , undauntedly march towards he : but be en ? tread within their danger , the ambush on both side break out upon he , and slay he , with three thousand of his man , the rest flee ; the earl of Salisbury be take prisoner ; and harmless Rutland , not above twelve year old , who come thither but to see fashion , be make a sacrifice for his father transgression , who kneel upon his knee , with tear beg life , be unmerciful stab to the heart by the lord Clifford , in part of revenge ( as he swear ) of his father death ; and the queen most unwomanly inn cold blood , cause the earl of Salisbury , and as many as be take prisoner , to be behead at P•mfret castle , and to have their head place on pole about the wall of York . thus die Richard Plantagenet duke of York , who have take to wife Cicely daughter of Ralph nevyll , the first earl of Westmoreland , by who he have issue , eight son and four daughter ; his elder son Henry die young , his second son Edward be afterward king of England ; his three Edmund earl of Rutland , be slay with his father•iohn , Thomas and William die young , his seven son George , be after duke of Clarence , his young son Richard , surname crouchb•ck , w•s after king of England . Anne his elder daughter be marry to hen ? ry holland duke of Exeter , his second daughter Elizabeth be marry to John de la p•ole earl of Suffolk , his three Margaret to Charles duke of Burgoigne , his four Ursula die young . this duke be dead , have his head crown with a paper crown , together with many circumstance of disgrace he : but this act of spite be full afterward recompense upon their head that do it . the earl of march hear of his father death , labour now so much the more earnest , in that he labour for himself ; and part from Shrewsbury , who inn ? habitant be most firm unto he , he increase his army to the number of three and twenty thousand , and present take the field ; and have advertisement , that Jasper earl of Pembroke , with the earl of Ormond and Wiltshire follow after he with a great power of Welsh and irish : he sudden march back again , and in a plain near Mortimer cross , on Candlemas day in the morning give they bat ? tell , wherewith the slaughter of three thousand and eight hundred , he put the earl to flight . Owen Tewther who have marry queen Catherine , mother to king Henry the six , and diverse welsh gentleman be take , and at Hereford behead . be ? before the battle , it be say , the sun appear to the earl of march like three sun , and sudden it join all together in one ; for which cause , some imagine , that he give the sun in its full brightness , for his badge or cognisance . the queen in the mean time encourage by the death of the duke of York , with a power of northern man march towards London : but when her soldier be once south of Trent , as if that river be the utmost limit of their good behaviour , they fall to forage the country in most barbarous manner : approach saint Alban , they be advertise that the duke of Norfolk and the earl of Warwick be ready to give they battle ; whereupon the queen vanguard haste to pass through saint Alb••s ; but be not suffer to pass , they encounter with their enemy in the field call Barnard heath ; who perceive the main battle to stand still , and not to move ; which be do by the treachery of Lovelace , who with the kentish man page 87 have the lead of it ; they soon make the southern man to turn their back and f•y ; upon who flight , the rest in doubt of each other well mean , shift away ; and the lord about the king perceive the danger , withdraw themselves : only the lord B•nvile com•ing in a complemental manner to the king , and say it grieve he to leave his majesty , but that necessity for safeguard of his life , enforce it• be importune , and sir tho•as Kyriell a knight of Kent likewise , by the king to stay ; he pass his royal word , that their stay shall be no danger to they ; upon which promise they stay , but to their cost : for the queen hear that the commo•s have behead baron tho•pe at Highgate ; •he in revenge thereof , cause both their head to be strike off at saint alb••s : so as there be slaughter at this battle the full number of three and twenty hundred , but no man of name , but one ? lie sir John grey , who the same day be make knight , with twelve other at the village of Colney . and now the king be advise , to send one thom•s hoe , ( tha• have be a bar ? rister ) to the victor , to tell they ; that he will glad come to they , if with con ? veyance it may be do : whereupon the earl of Northumberland , appoint di ? vers lord to attend he to the lord cl•ffords tent , where the queen and the young prince meet to their great joy : but it be now observe , as it be in the destiny of king he•ry , that although he be a most Piousman , yet no enterprise of war do ever prosper , where he be present ; that we may know the prosperity of the world to be no inseparable companion to man of piety . at the queen request , the king honour with knighthood thirty gentleman , who the day before have fight against the part where he be ; the prince likewise be by he dub knight , and then they go to the abbey , where they be receive with anthem , and withal a humble petition , to be protect from the outrage of the loose souldiers• which be promise , and proclamation make to that purpose , but to small purpose ; for the northern man say , it be their bargain to have all the spoil in every place , after they have pass Trent : and so they rob and spoil whatsoever they can come at . the lond•ners hear of this disorder , be resolve , see there be no more assurance in the king promise , to keep the northern man out of their gate ; insomuch that when they be send to , to send over to the camp certain cart ? load of lenten provision ; which the major accord provide : the commons rise about Cripplegate , and by strong hand keep the cart from go out of the city . hereupon , the major send the recorder to the king Counsell• and withal intreat the duchess of Bedford , and the lady Scole• , to intercede for h•m to the queen ; and to excuse his not use force , consider how dangerous it may be in these doubtful time , to stir their fury , that will not easy be a•layed . it be well advise to send woman to entreat a woman , for by this mean they pre ? veil , that some of the lord of the counsel , with a guard of four hundred good soldier , be appoint to go for London , to inquire and certify of these thing : when sudden news be bring , that the earl of march with a great ar•y be march towards they : for the earl of Warwick have gather together his scatter troop , and join with the earl of march , they haste towards Lo•don , and be joyful receive upon the eight and twenty day of February , and upon Sunday , the second of march , the earl of Warwick muster all his army in saint John field , and have cast they into a ring , read unto they the agreement of the last P••li ? ament , and then demand , whether they will have king Henry to reign still who all cry , no , no : than he ask they , whether they will have the earl of march elder son of the duke of York ( by that parliament proclaim king ) to reign over they ? who with a great clamour cry , yea , yea• then go there certain cap ? taine , and other of the city , to the earl of march at Baynard castle , to acquaint he with w•at be pass ; who at first seem to excuse himself , a• able to exe ? c••e so grea• a charge : but animate by the archbishop of Canterbury , the bishop of London , and Exeter , and the earl of Warwick , he at last consent to take it up ? on he ; and thereupon , the next morning he weep in procession at Pauls , and offe ? read there , and after te deum sing , he be in great state convey to Westminster , page 88 and there in the great hall , seat in the king seat , with the sceptre of saint Edw••d in his hand ; and then again the people , of who there be a great concourse , be aloud demand , if they will acknowledge he to be their king ? to which with great willingness they all cry , yea , yea . then take homage of diverse noble ? man there present , he be with procession and great solemnity convey to the abbey , and place in the qui•e as king , while te deum be sing : that do , he offer at saint Ed•ards shrine , and then return by water to Pauls , and be lodge in the bishop palace , and upon the fou•th of march he be general Pro ? claim king , by the name of Edward the fo•r•h . and here in the course of all writer , end the reign of king he•ry the six ; that it may be true say , never any come to be king so soon •fter his birth , nor leave to be king so long before his death ; for he come to be king at eight mon•ths old , and he leave to be king , live twelve year after . there be indeed in that space of time , a certain vicissitude , sometime a king , and sometime no king ; the passage where off must be relate in the follow king reign . of hi• taxatio•s . in the first year of his reign , a parliament be hold at London , where the queen mother , with the young king in her lap come and sit among the lord ; and there be then grant a subsidy of five noble upon every sack of wool that shall pass out of the land , for three year , but if carry out by merchant stran ? gers , then to pay three and forty shilling for every sack . in the three year of his reign , a parliament be hold at Westminster , wherein be grant a subsidy of twelve penny in the pound of all merchandise come in , or pass out of the realm , and three shilling of a ton of wine , for the term of three year . in his six year in a parliament at Wes••inster be grant a subsidy , of every ton of wine three shillings• and of other merchandise except wool , fall , and cloth , twelve penny in the pound : also of every parish through the realm ( except ci ? tie and borough ) the benefice be in value ten mark ; ten of th•t parish shall pay six shilling eight penny ; and of every benefice of the value of ten pound , ten parishioner shall pay thirteen shilling four pe•ce , and so rateable of every benefice , from the low to the high . and for the inhabitant of city and bo ? rough , every man be worth twenty shilling above his householdstuff , and the apparel of he and his wife , shall pay four penny , and so after that rate to the rich . of l•wes and ordi•ances in his time . in this king time , the lord major of Lond•• first begin to go by water •o Lo•do• , where before they use to go by land . also in this king reign the art of Prin ? ting wa• first find at mog••ce in germa•y , by a knight call John Cuttenberghe• , and bring into England by William Caxton of Lo•don mercer , who first practise the same in the abbey at Westminster , in the year 1471. in the 23 year of his reign , in a parliament then hold , it be enact , that when wheat be so•d for six shilling eight penny the quarter , rye for fo••e shilling , and barley for three shilling ; it shall be lawful for any man to carry the say kind of corn , into the part beyond the sea without licence , so it be not to the king enemy or Rebel• ; which act be afterward confirm by king Edward the four . Affa••es of the church in his time . a great schism be in the church in this king time by reason of anti-pope ; for remedy whereof , a council be call at co•sta•ce , to which the emperor of constanti•ople and trabiz•nd send their amba••adors . in this council Ioh• the three and twenty be convent , condemn , depose , and imprison : Gr• ? gory the twelve , and Benedict the thirteenth be deprive , and Otho Colonn• , by page 89 the name of Martin the five , be choose pope . during these confusion in the we ? stern church , the christian in the eastern church be utter ruinate : the emperor smother to death in a press of people , and the great city of Constan ? tinople win by the Turk , make ever since the seat of his empire . in the six• and thirty year of this king , Reynold Peacocke bishop of Chichester , who have la ? bour many year in translate the holy scripture into English , be accuse and convict , for hold and publish certain opinion at that time hold heretical ; which at last , open at Paul cross he revoke ; that he have hold there be no ne ? cessity to believe that Christ descend into hell ; also , no necessity to believe in the communion of saint , or that the universal church can err in matter of faith , or that it be necessary to believe and hold whatsoever a general council shall determine : also that he have hold , that spiritual person ought to have no temporal possession , and that personal tithe be not due by God law : these point he open renounce , but be notwithstanding deprive of he by ? shopricke ; only a certain pension be assign he to live on in a abbey , where soon after he die . work of piety do by he , or other in his time . the king himself found two famous college , the one in Cambridge , to our lady and saint Nichol•s , call the college royal , or the king college ; the other of Eate• beside Windsor , call of our bless lady ; to the maintenance whereof , he give 3400 pound by year . in the 28 year of his reign , his queen Margaret begin the foundation of queen college in Cambridge . in the time of his reign also , Henry Chicheley archbishop of Canterbury found two college in Oxford ; one call all-soule college , the other Bernard college . in his time also , h•mp•ry duke of Gloucester ( but other say , Thomas Kempe archbishop of ca• ? ter••ry ) build the divinity school in Oxford ; also the say archbishop build paul's-cross in form as now it stand ; and William w•ynflete bishop of Winchester , and lord chancellor of England found Mary Magdalen college in Oxford . in his seventeenth year , Ralph lord Cromwell , build the college of Tatshall in Lin ? c•l•shire . also this year , William ••stfield major of London , cause to be build at his own charge the water-conduct in Fleetstreet . in his nine year , John vvell major of London , cause the cond•ict common call the standard in cheap , to be build . in his first year , the west gate of London , sometime call cham ? berlaine gate , and now Newgate , be begin to be new build by the executor of sir Richard VVhittington lord major of London . in his five year , John Reynwell major of London , give certain land to the city of London , for which th• city be bind to pay for ever , all fif•eens that shall be grant to the king , ( so as it pass •ot three fifteen in one year ) for three ward in London ; namely , dowg•te-ward , billi•gsgate-ward , and Aldgate . also this year , the tower at the drawbridge of Lo•don be begin by the same major . in his four and twenty year , Simon Eyre lord major of L•ndon build the leaden-hall in Lo•do• , to be a storeho•se for grain and fuel for the poor of the city , and fair chapel at the east end of the same , leave in stock a thousand pound , which a•terward king Edward the four borrow and never pay it again . also in this king time , William de la pool duke of Suffolk , and Alice his wife , daughter to Thomas Ch••cer , son of Geoffry chawcer the famous poet ; translate and increase the manor place of Ewelme in Oxfordshire , and build new the parish church of Ewelme , and a ho ? spitall or almshouse for two priest , and thirteen poor man , to which he give three manor , Ramruge in Hampshire , co•ocke in Wiltshire , and me•sh in Buc ? kingh•mshire : they also found the hospital of Do•nington castle . of Casualtie• happen in his time . in his five year be •o unseasonable weather , that it rain almost continual , from easter to Michaelmas . in his seven year , the eight of November , the page 90 duke of Norfolk be like to have be drown pass through London-bridge , hi• Barge be set upon the pile , overwhelm , so that thirty person be drown , and the duke with other that escape , be fain to be draw up with rope . in his 18 year , all the lion in the tower die : also this year , the 18 day of July , the postern-gate of London by E•st-Smithfield against the tower of London , sink by night more than seven foot into the earth . in his two and twenty year , on newyears day , near unto Bedford , a very deep water , which run betwixt the town o•Swelstone and Harleswood , stand sudden still , and divide it self , so that by the sp•ce of three mile the bottom remain dry ; which wonder , many thought to signify the division of the people , and fall away from the king , which happen short after . in the three and thirty year of his reign , beside a great blaze star , there happen a strange sight , a monstrous cock come out of the sea , and in the presence of a multitude of people at Portland , make a hideous crow three time , each time turn about clap his wing , and beckon toward• the north , the south , and the west ; as also many prodigious birth . in his six and thirty year , in a little town in Bedfordshire , it rain blood , whereof the red drop appear in sheet hang out to dry . of his wife and issue . he marry Margaret daughter of Rayner duke of Anjou , and ti•ular king of Jerusalem , Sicily , and Arragon ; by who he have small portion , and little strength of alliance ; yet may have be a good match , if they can have chan ? ged condition with one another , that he may have have her active and stir spi ? rit , and she his softly and mild disposition ; she be his wife six and twenty year , and after her husband depulsion from the regal throne , his force be van ? quish at the battle of Tewkesberry , in a poor religious house , where she have flee for safety of her life , be take prisoner and carry captive to London , where she remain in durance , till duke Rayner her father purchase her liberty , unto who she return , and last die in her native country . by she , king Henry have issue only one son name edw•rd , who when the day be lose at T•wkesberry , seek to escape by flight , but be take , be bring into the presence of king Edward ; who r•solute answer provoke king Edward so much , that he dash he on the mouth with his gauntlet , and then Richard the crouchback run he into the heart with his dagger ; his body wa• bury among the poor person there slay , in the monastical church of the Blackfriar in Tewkesberry . of his death and burial . upon king Edward recover the crown , he be commit to the tower ; where the 21 of may , in the year 147• , he be murder by the bloody hand of •ichard duke of Gloucester : the day after he be bring to Paul church in a open coffin barefaced , where he bleed ; thence carry to the Blackfriar , where •e •lso bleed ; from thence in a boat to Chersey abbey , without priest or clerk , •orch or taper , say or sing , and there bury ; but afterward at the appointment of king Edward , be remove to Windsor , and there inter , and a fair monument make ov•r he . of his personage and condition . he be tall of statu•e , spare and slender of body , of a comely countenance , and all part well proportion . for endowment of his mind , he have virtue e ? nough to make he a saint , but not to make he a god , as king be say to be god ; for of that command power there be two part , parcere subjectis and debellare •u ? perbos ; he want the latter . he be not sensible of that which the world call ho ? nou_r_ , account the great honour to consist in humility ; his great imperfe ? ction page 91 be , that he have in he too much of the log , and too little of the stork ; for he will not move , but as he be move , and have rather be devour , than he will devour . he be not so stupid , not to know prosperity from adversity ; but he be so devout , to think nothing adversity , which be not a hindrance to devotion : he be fit for a priest than a king , and for a sacrifice than a priest ; and he can not choose but dye a martyr , who all his life have be a confessor . he have one immunity peculiar to himself , that no man can ever be revenge of he , see he never offer any man injury . by be innocent as a dove , he keep his crown upon his head so long ; but if he have be wise as a serpent , he may have keep it on long . but all this be not sufficient , if we express not in particular his see ? verall virtue : so modest , that when in a Christmas , a show of woman be presen ? t before he with their breast lay out , he present depart ; say , fie , fie for shame , forsooth you be to blame . so pitiful , that when he see the quarter of a traitor over Cripplegate , he cause it to be take down ; say , i will not have any Christian so cruel handle for my sake . so free from swear , that he never use other oath , but forsooth , and very : so patient , that to one who strike he when he be take prisoner ; he only say , forsooth you wrong yourself more than i , to strike the lord anoint : so devout , that on principal holiday he use to wear sackcloth next his skin : once for all , let his confe••or be hear speak , who in ten year confession never find that he have do or say any thing , for which he may just be enjoin penance . for which cause , king Henry the seven will have procure he to be canonize for a saint , but that he be prevent by death• or perhaps because the charge will have be too great , the canonization of a king be much more costly than of a private person . of man of note in his time . there be man of valour in this king reign , of extraordinary eminency ; as first , John duke of Bedford regent of France , who when a french lord upbraid , that his sword be of lead ; he make he answer , and make he feel that it be of steel . next he be Thomas Montacute earl of Salisbury , who very name be a sufficient charm to daunt a whole french army . then the next be John lord Talbot , so great a terror to the french , that when the woman will still their child from cry , they will use to say , Talbot come . then be Richard Nevil earl of Warwick , so much great than a king ; as that which make , be grea ? ter than that it make , and such a one be he . many other beside these , not much inferior to these ; that we may true say , there never be a more heroical king of England than Henry the five ; nor ever a king of England that have more heroical subject , than Henry the six . and though arm and letter seem to be of diffe ? rend condition , yet they common grow up and flourish together ; as in this king reign , be John Leland surname the elder , who write diverse treatise for in ? struction of grammarian : William white a priest of Kent , profess the doctrine of Wickliff , for which he suffer martyrdom by fire : Alexander carpenter , who write a book call Destructorium vitiorum , against the prelate of that time : Pedro ? ter Basset esquire of the privy chamber to king Henry the five , who life he write : John pole a priest , who write the life of saint walhorayle a english woman : also , thom•s Walden , alias Netter , who write diverse treatise against the wickliffift : Pedro ? •er Clerke a student in Oxford , and a defender of Wickliff doctrine ; for which he flee , and be put to death beyond sea : Thomas Walsingham bear in Norfolk a diligen• historiographer : Thomas Ringstead the young , a excellent preacher , who write diverse treatise : Thomas Rudborn a monk of Winchester , and a historiographer : Peter p•yne a earnest professor of Wickliff doctrine , for which he flee into ••be ? ••• : Nicholas Vpton a civilian , who write of heraldry , of colour in armoury , and of the duty of chivalry : John capgr•ve bear in Kent , a Augustine friar , who write many excellent treatise , particular the legend of english saint : humh ? phry duke of Gloucester , protector of the realm , well learn in astrology , whereof page 92 he write a special treatise , inti•u•ed Tabula directionum : John Whethamstead , other ? wise call Fr•mentariu• , abbot of saint Alb•ns , who write diverse treatise ; and among other , a book of the record of thing happen while he be abbot , which book Holinshead have see , and in some passage of his time follow : Roger o•l•y accuse of treason , for practise with the lady El••nor Cobham by sorcery to make the king away ; and thereof condemn , and die for it : he write one trea ? tise entitle contra ••lgi superstitiones ; and another , de sva innocentia : Henry Walsingham a Carmelite friar o•Norwich , who write sundry treatise in divinity : John Lidgate• monk of Bury , who have travel France and Italy to learn langua ? guess , and write many work in poetry : Thomas Beckington bishop of bath , who write against the law salique of France : Michael trigurie bear in cornw•ll , who for his excellent learning king Henry the five make governor of the university of ca•n in Normandy , after he have conquer it : Reynold Peacocke bishop of Chichester , who write many treatise touch Christian religion : Robert Fleming , who write a d•ctionary in greek ••d latin , and a work in verse of sundry kind : Nicholas M•ntacute a historiographer : John stow a monk of Norwich , and doctor of di ? vinity in oxf•rd : Nich•l•• Bu•geie , bear in a town of Norfolk , of that name , who write a history call Ad•••ti•nes Chronicorum : Robert •als•cke , who write a book de •e milit•ri : Thomas D••d• a Carmelite friar of M•rleborough , who write the life of Alphred king of the westsaxons : Robert b•le , •irnamed the elder , Recor ? there of London , who gather a chronicle of the custom , law , foundation , Chan ? ges , office , order , and public assembly of the city of London , with other matter touch the perfect description of the same city ; he write other work also touch the state of the same city , and the act of king Edward the three . page 93 the reign of king Edward the four . Edward earl of march , bear at Rouen in Normandy , son and heir of Richard Plantagenet duke of York , slay in the battle at Wakefield , succ•eded his father in the right , but exceed he in the possession of the crown of England ; and that by virtue of a act of parliament late make ; wherein the say duke of York not only be declare heir apparent to the crown , and appoint ? ted protector of the king and kingdom ; but it be further en ? act , that if king Henry , or any in his behalf , shall attempt the disannul of this act ; that than the say duke or his heir shall have the present possession : which because his friend attempt to do , therefore just do Edward earl of march his son , by virtue of this act , take possession of the crown ; and be proclaim king of England , by the name of Edward the four , through the city of London , on the five day of march in the year 1460. but before he can have leisure to be crow ? ned , he be force once again to try his fortune in the field by battle : for king Henry in the north be raise a new army ; against who king Edward , upon the twelve of march , march with his force from London , and by easy journey come to Pomfret castle , from whence the lord Fitzwater be send to guard the pas ? sage at Ferribridge , to stop the enemy approach that way ; king Henry likewise add ? vance forward , send his power , under the conduct of the duke of Somerset , the earl of Northumberland and the lord Clifford , while himself with his queen and son stay at York . the lord Clifford very early on palm Sunday , with a troop of northern man , fall upon those that guard Fetribridge , and defeat they with the slaughter of the lord Fitzwater and the bastard of Salisbury . the earl of Warwick hear of this defeat , come post to king Edward c•mpe , and in his presence kill his horse , pro•ested his resolution to stand with he to the death . upon •his resolution of the earl , the king make present proclamation , that all who be afraid to sight , shall at their pleasure depart ; but to those that will stay , he promise good reward , add withal , that if any that stay , shall after turn his back or flee , than he that shall kill he , shall have double pay . after this , he give order to the lord Fawconbridge , and sir Walter blunt , to lead on the vaw•rd ; who in their march about Dandingdale , encounter with the lord Clif ? ford ; ( who former in cold blood have slaughter the young earl of Rutland ) and page 94 he be strike into the throat with a arrow ( some say ) without a head ; and present die : the lord Nevil son and heir of the earl of Westmoreland be also slay , with most of their company , and the rest put to flight . the next day likewise ( the duke of Norfolk be dangerous sick , to who that place be as ? sign ) F••conbridge and Blunt continue the lead of the vanguard ; and on Palm-sunday , by break of day , they come to a plain field between Towton and Saxto• , from whence they make a full survey of king Henry army , and certify king ed ? ward , that the enemy be threescore thousand strong ; where his army be but forty thousand and six hundred : whereupon a second proclamation be make through the camp , that no quarter shall be keep , nor prisoner take . the army be both in sight , the lord Fauconbridge give direction to the archer ( upon a signal by he give ) to shoot every man a flight-arrow ( for that purpose provide ) and then to fall back three stride , and stand . the northern man in the mean time ply their bow , till all their sheaf be empty ; but their arrow fall short of the enemy by threescore yard , and not only do not hurt to the enemy , but do hurt to themselves ; for their arrow be spend , and come to hand-blow , their own arrow stick in the ground , gall their shin , and pierce their foot . ten hour the battle continue doubtful ; till the earl of Northumberland be slay , with the lord , Beaumont , grey , Dacres , and well , sir John Nevil , Andrew T•ollop , and many other knight and esquire ; the earl of Exeter and Somerset flee , leave the conquest to king Edward , but the bloody that ever England feel , for there fall that day six and thirty thousand seven hundred threescore and sixteen person , no prisoner be take but the earl of Devonshire . the battle end , king Edward haste to York , where he cause the head of his father and other friend , to be take down and bury with their body , set in their place the head of the earl of Devonshire , and three other , there at that time execute . the earl of Somerset ac ? quaint king Henry with this overthrow , persuade he , with his queen and son , to fly to Barwick ; where leave the duke of Somerset , they fly further for succour to the king of Scot , who comfort they with promise of relief , but make a sure bargain ; for in lieu of a pension to be allow king Henry during his abode there , the town and castle of Barwick be deliver to he . queen Margaret and her son be send into France , who obtain of Lewis the eleve•th her cousin , that all of king Edward friend be prohibit stay or traffic in the french king dominion : but all king Henry friend may live there free . after this , king Edward come to London ; and upon his entrance to the tower , make four and twenty knight , and the next day four more ; and upon the 28 day of June , in the year 1461. he ride from the t•wer to Westminster , and be there crown in the abby-church . Shortly after , a parliament be summon , which begin at Westminster the four of November ; in which , all act of king Henry the six , prejudicial to king Edward title , be repeal : and therein , John earl of Oxford , a valiant and wise man , ( he who in a former parliament have dispute the question concern the precedency of temporal and spiritual baron ; a bold attempt in those day ; and by force of who argument , judgement be give for the lord temporal ) with his son Aubry de veer , sir Thomas Tiddingham knight , William Tyrrell and Walter Montgomery esquire , be , without answer , convict of treason , and behead . and to en ? courage other to well-deserving , king Edward at this time advance many in ho ? nou_r_ : he brother George he create duke of Clarence ; his brother Richard , duke of Gloucester ; John lord Nevil brother to the earl of Warwick , he make first vis ? count , than Marquesse montacu•e ; Henry Bourchier brother to the archbishop of Canterbury , be make earl of Essex ; and William lord Fauconbridge , earl of Kent . and now their new honour be present put into employment ; the earl of Essex and Kent , accompaneid with the lord Audeley and Clinton , sir John Howard , sir Richard Walgrave and other , to the number of ten thousand , be appoint to scour the sea , who land in Britain , take the town of Conque• , and the isle of Ree , and then return . at this time Henry duke of Somerset , Ralph Percy and diverse other page 95 come in , and humble submit themselves to king Edward mercy ; who protest his propension of free pardon they , and as many other that will submit themselves as they do . all this time king Henry be in Scotland , and queen Margaret in France ; where she obtain of the french king , a company of five hundred man ; with who she sail towards Newcastle , and land at Tinmouth , but sudden again return , and be herself by tempest beat to Barwick , but her company be drive on the shore before Bamburg castle ; where they set their ship on fire , and flee to a isl•nd call holy island , but be so assail there by the bastard Ogle and John manner esqu•re , that many of they be slay , and almost four hundred take prisoner , only their colonel Peter Bressie h•ppened upon a fisherman , who bring he to •••wick to queen Margaret , and by she be make captain of the castle of Alne ? wick , which he with his Frenchman keep , till they be resc•ed . Shortly after• queen Margaret have get together a great company of Scot , and other of her friend bring her husband with she , and leave her son at Barwick , en ? tread Northumberland , take the castle of Bamburg , make captain thereof sir Ralph grey ; and then come forward to the bishopric of Durham : whither resor ? t to she the late reconcile , and now again revolt duke of Somerset ; sir Ralph Percy and diverse other , who altogether make a competent army . king Edward hear hereof , make preparation both by sea and land ; and first he send viscount Montacute with some company into Northumberland ; who he in person follow ? eth with his whole power : the viscount march towards king Henry , and by the way encounter the lord Hungerford at hegley-moore ; but he , with lord base , up ? on the first charge , run away , leave sir Ralph Darcy alone with his own regiment , who there valiant fight , die . after this the viscount understand that king Henry be encamp in Levels plain , near the river of Dowell in Hexamshire , march ? eth thither by night , and set upon he in his camp , who charge the northern man receive with a desperate resolution , but be in the end with great slaughter overcome . Henry Beaufort duke of Somerset , the lord base , molin , Hungerford , Wen•worth , Hussey and sir John Finderne knight , with many other be take prison ? ners : king Henry himself by the swiftness of his horse escape , but very hardly ; for one of his henchman that follow he be take , who have on his head king Henry helmet , or as some say , his high cap of estate , call Abacot , garnish with two rich crown , which be present to king Edward at York the four of May . the duke of Somerset be behead present at Exam ; the other lord and knight be have to Newcastle , and there , after a little respite , be likewise put to death . beside these , diverse other , to the number of five and twenty , be execute at York and in other place . this duke of Somerset be never marry , but have a na ? turall son name Charles Somerset , who be afterward create earl of VVorcester . sir Humphrey Nevil , and William Tailbois call himself earl of kyme , sir Ralph grey and Richard Tunstall with diverse other that escape from this battle , hide they ? self in secret place ; but yet not so close , but that they be espy and taken• the earl of kyme be apprehend in Riddesdale , and bring to Newcastle , and there behead , sir Humphrey Nevil be take in Holdernesse , and at York lose his head . after this battle , call exam-field , king Edward come to the city of Durham , and send from thence into Northumberland , the earl of Warwick , the lord Montacute , the lord Fawconbridge and Scroop , to recover such castle as his enemy there hold ; which they effect ; and take in the castle of Dunstanburg , they find in it John go servant to the duke of Somerset , who be bring to York and there be ? head : and take in the castle of Bamburg , they find in it sir Ralph grey , who because he have swear to be true to king Edward , and be now revolt to king hen ? ry• they degrade from his order of knighthood at Doncaster , by cut of his gil• spur , rent his coat of arm , and break his sword over his head , and then behead he . in this mean time , king Henry ( upon what occasion , no man know ; but only lead by the left hand of destiny ) venture in disguise to come into England , and shif ? ting page 96 from place to place , be at length discover , and take by one C•ntlow , or as other say , by Thomas Talbot son to sir Edward Talbot of Bashall , who deceive he be at his dinner at VVaddington hall in Lincolnshire , and bring he towards London , with his leg tie under the horse belly ; in who company be also take doctor han•ing deane of Windsor , D. b•dle , and one Ell•rton , who the earl of Warwick meet by the way , •nd bring they all to the tower of London ; whils• the distress queen with her son once again be drive to fly for shelter into France ; whither the new duke of Somerse• and his brother John sail also , where they livre ? ve in great misery ; and the earl of Pembr••ke go from country to country light ? tle better than a vagabond . at this time , king Edward , to reward his follower , distribute the land and po ? session of those that hold with king Henry among they , but first make Proclama ? cion that whosoever of the contrary faction will come in and submit , shall be receive to grace and restore to their patrimony . in the four year of king Edward , in Michaelmas term be make eight serje ? ant at law , Thomas young , Nicholas Geney , Richard Neale , Thomas Brian , Richard pi ? get , Ioh• Catesby and Guy Fairfax ; who hold their feast in the bishop of ely' place in Holborn , where the lord grey of Ruthin then lord treasurer of England , be place before the lord major of London , be invite to the feast , which give such a distaste to the major , that he present depart with the alderman and Sheriff• , without taste of their feast : and it be register to be a precedent in time to come . and now king Edward no less intentive to perform the office of a king in peace , than he have be before of a captain in warr• , consider with himself that se ? ditious and civil dissension must needs breed disorder in a state , and that disorder breed by trouble time , be not like trouble water , that will in time settle of they ? self and recover clearness ; but be rather like weed , which once spring up and let alone , will in time over run the whole gro•nd where they grow : he like a good gardener seek to weed they out before they grow too rank , and endeavour to make a general reformation of abuse ; and to that end in Michaelmas term in the second year of his reign , three day together he sit public with his judge in Westminster-hall on the king bench , to acquaint himself with the order of that court , and to observe what need reformation in it , either at bench or •t bar : as likewise he order the officer of his exchequer , to take more moderate fee ; and to be more intentive to the benefit of the subject , than to their own unjust gain : he also daily frequent the council table ; which he furnish for the most part , with such as be gracious among the citizen , who he in ? ploy about reference and business of private consequence ; while mystery o• state be intimate only to such who he select to be of his more private Cabi ? net counsel ; by who , he be now of the age of three and twenty year , w•• ad ? vised that it be now time to provide for posterity , by take a wife , and to provide also for the present time , by take a fit wife , which they conceive to be no where so fit find as in France ; both thereby to bury old grudge between the two Nati ? once , and also to avert assistance from queen m•rg•ret , the only disturber of the state ; and this be conclude , it only remain to make choice of a fit man for that employment , for which none be think so fit as Richard Nevil earl of war ? wick ; he therefore be present send into fra•ce , to treat of a marriage to be have between king Edward and the lady Bon• , daughter to Lewis duke of Savoy , and si ? star to the lady carlote then queen of fra•ce : a lady , no less for beauty and vir ? tuous quality , then for nobility of blood , worthy to be a queen . the proposi ? cion be in fra•ce ready embrace , and willing assent unto on all part . but in the mean time king Edward be hunt in Witchwood forest beside stonystrat ? ford ; he chance to come to the manor of Grafton , where the duchess of bed ? ford then lie , and where her daughter by sir Richard Woodville , the lady Elizabeth gr•y widow of sir John gr•y of Gr•vy , slay at the last battle of saint Alban ; be ? come a suitor to he for some land which her •usband have give she in jointure ; page 97 with who beauty and gr•cefull behaviour , king Edward be so take , that he present become a suitor to she ; and when he can not obtain his suit by term of wanton love , he be force to s•eke it by term of marriage . and here we may well think there be no small c•fl•ct in king Edward mind , between the two great commander , love and honour , which of they shall be most potent ; honour put he in mind , that it be against his law to take to wife a mean person than himself ; but love will take no notice of any difference of degree , but take it for his prerogative to make all person equal ; honour pe•swaded he that it stand he much upon to make good the ambassage , in which he have send the earl of Warwick to a great prince ; but love perswad•d he that it stand he more upon , to make good the ambassage send to himself from a great prince : in conclusion , it appear to be true which one observe , improbe •mor quid non mortalia pectora cogis ? what be it that love will not make a man to do ? whether it be , that love bring upon the mind a forgetfulness of all circum ? stance but such as tend to its own satisfaction ; or whether it be that love be among passion , as oil among liquor , which will always be supreme and at the top ; honour may be honour , but love will be obey : and therefore king Edward , though he know no superior upon earth , yet he obey the summons of love ; and upon the first day of May , marry the say lady grey at Grafton ; the first of our king since the conquest that marry his subject : at which marriage none be present but the duchess of Bedford , the priest , two gentlewoman , and a young man to help the priest at mass : the year after , with great solemnity she be crown queen at Westminster . it be not unworthy the relate the speech which king ed ¦ ward have with his mother , who seek to cross this ma•ch : where you say ( say he ) that she be a widow , and have already child ; by god bless lady , i be a bachelor , and have some too , and so each of we have a proof , that ne ? ther of we be like to be barren ; and as for your objection of bigamy , ( for his mother have charge he with be contract to the lady Elizabeth Lucy ) let the bishop ( say he ) lay it to my charge when i come to take order , for i under ? stand it be forbid a priest , but i never wit it be forbid a prince . upon this marriage , the queen father be create earl river , and make High-Consta ? ble of England ; her brother the lord Anthony , be marry to the sole heir of the lord scale , and by she have that barony ; her son sir Thomas Gray be create Mar ? quesse Dorset , and marry Cicelie , heir to the lord Bonvile . it may be think a h•ppy fortune for this lady to be thus march ; but let all thing be consider , and the misery accrue to she by it , will be find equivalent , if not overweighing all the benefit : for first , by this match she draw upon her self the envy of many , and be cause that her husband flee the realm , and her self in his absence glad to take sanctuary , and in that place to be deliver of a prince , in a most unprincely m•nner . after which , survive her husband , she live to see she two son most cruel murder ; and for a conclusion of all , she live to see her self confine to the monastery of Berdmondsey in Southwark , and all her good confiscate by her own son in law . and n•w the earl of Warwick at his return , find that knot tie in England , which he have labour to tie in France : he ambassage frustrate , the lady Bona delude , the king of France abuse , and himself make a stale , and the disgraceful instrument of all this ; which although he resent in a high degree , yet he have not be a courtier so long , but in that time he have sufficient learn the art of this ? semble ; he pass it over light for the present , but yet carry it in his mind till a fit opportunity ; and thereupon procure leave to retire himself to his castle of Warwick . king Edward in the mean time , have just cause to suspect he have make the french his enemy , seek to make other prince his friend : he enter into a league with John king of Aragon ; to who he send for a present a score of Cotsall ewe , and •ive ram , a small present in show , but great in the event ; for it prove of more benefit to Spain , and of more detriment to England then can at first sight have be page 98 imagine . and to secure himself at home , he take truce with the king of Scot for fifteen year . and where he have marry before his two sister , anne the elder to Henry Holland earl of Exeter ; and Elizabeth to John de la pool duke of Suf ? folk ; he now match Margaret his three sister , to Charles duke of Burgoigne ; which prove a great assistance to he , than that which he have lose in France . by this time the earl of Warwick spleen begin so to swell within he , that he can no long contain it ; and have with much ado draw to his party his two brother , the archbishop of York , and the marquess Montacute ; he seek• also to draw in the king two brother , the duke of Clarence , and the duke of Gloucester ; but he find Gloucester so reserve , that he dare not close with he ; the duke of Clarence he find more open , and to he he address himself , complain of the disgrace he have sustain by the king , in his employment into France , and other wrong : to who the duke present make answer , in as great complaint of his brother unkindness to himself ; say , he have marry his wife brother Anthony to the heir of the lord scale , and her son Thomas to the heir of the lord Bo•vile , but can find no match of preferment for he be his own brother : and upon this agreement in complaint , they agree to join against king Edward ; and to make the knot the firm , the duke of Clarence take to wife Isabel the earl o•Warwicks daughter , and with she have assure unto he half of the land the e••l hold in right of his wife , the lady Anne , daughter of Richard Beauchamp earl of W•rwicke decease . upon this marriage , the earl of Warwick discover to hi• what hitherto he have conceal ; concern his project for the restore of k . H•nry ; to which Clarence give approbation , with promise to assist he in it to his uttermo•• . at this time , sir Thomas cook late major of London , be by one Hawkins appea ? she|will of treason , for the which he be send to the tower , and his place in Londo• seize by the lord river . the case be this ; the say Hawkins come to sir tho ? mass , request he to lend a thousand mark upon good surety ; who answer , he will first know for who it shall be , and for what intent ; and understand it shall be for the use of queen Margaret , he refuse to lend a penny . the matter rest two or three year , till the say Hawkins be lay in the tower , and bring to the brake , call the duke of exeters daughter ; by mean of which pain , he confess among other thing , the motion he have make to sir Thomas Cook• , and accuse himself so far , that he be put death . sir Thomas Cooke lie in the tower from Whitsuntide till Michaelmas , have his place in Essex name gyddihall , spoil , his deer in his park destroy ; and though arraign upon life and death , he be acquit of the indictment ; yet can not be deliver till he have pay eight thousand pound to the king , and eight hundred to the queen . and now the earl of Warwick send to his brother the arcbbishop and the marquess , to prepare all thing ready to set on foot the intend revolt from king Edward , and to procure some rebellious commotion in the north , while he and his new son in law will provide to go forward with the work ; which they accor ? ding do in Yorkshire , a occasion be take for the breach of a ancient cu ? stome there , to give to the poor people of saint Leonards in the city of York , certain quantity of corn and grain . this commotion the archbishop and the marqu•sse underhand foment ; yet to colour the matter , the marquess oppose the rebel , and cut off the head of Robert huldorne their captain ; but his head be cut off , the rebel get they other captain ; Henry , son and heir to the lord Fi•zhugh , and sir Henry Nevil son to the lord Latimer ; the one the neph•w , the other • cozen-germane to the earl of Warwick , with who they join the valiant cap ? taine sir John Conyers : these when they can not enter York , come march to ? ward London , all the way exclaim against king Edward as a unjust prince , and a usurper . king Edward hear of this commotion , send sir William Herbert , who of a mean gentleman , two year before , he have make earl of Pembroke , and his brother sir Richard Herbert , together with the lord Stafford of Southwick to sup ? press the rebel ; and they with a army of seven thousand , most Welshman , march towards they ; but the lord Stafford be put from his inn where he use page 99 •o lodge , by the earl of Pe•brooke , take such a distaste at it , that he withdraw his arche•s , and give over the business ; yet the earl of pemb•ooke though thus for ? •••en , with his own regiment encounter the rebel , slay sir Henry Nevil , and diverse others• when be upon the point of victory , one John Clappa• a servant of the e•rle of Warwick , come in with five hundred rascally fellow , and cry ? king aloud , a W•rwicke , a Warwick ; the Welshman suppose the earl have be ? ? ? , turn present their back and flee ; five thousand of they be slay , the e••le of pembr••ke himself , and his much lament brother sir Richard Herbert , a most goodly personage , be take prisoner , bring to Banbury , where both o• th•• , with ten other gentleman be put to death . and now the Northampton ? shire man join with the rebel , in this fury , make they a captain name Robert hilla•d , but they name he robin of Riddesdale , and sudden come to Grafton , where they take the earl river father to the queen , and his son sir John Woodville ; bring they to Northampton , and there without judgement behead they . king Edward advertise of these mischance , write to the sheriff of somersetshire and d•v••-shire to apprehend the lord Stafford of Southwick , ( who have treacherous •••saken the earl of Pembroke ) and if they can take he , to put he to death ; who be soon after find in a village within Brentmarsh , be bring to bridge ? •a•er , and there behead . after this battle fight at Hedgecote , common call B••bury field , the northern man resort to Warwick , where the earl with great joy receive they ; and hear that king Edward with a great army be come thy ? there , he send for his son in law the duke of clare•ce , with all speed to repair ••to he ; who join together , and use mean cunning , by have some co•••nication of peace , to make the king secure , and to take little heed of he ? self•• they take advantage of his security , and in the dead of night set on his camp , and kill the watch , before the king be aware , at a place call Wolney four mile from Barwick , they take he prisoner in his bed , and present convey he to Middleham castle in Yorkshire , to be there in safe custody with the archbishop of York . and now they have the prey in their hand , if they have as well look to ke•p it , as they have do to get it : but king Edward , whether bribe his keeper , or otherwise win they by fair promise , get so much liberty , sometime for his re•reation to go a hunt ; by which he cause sir William Stanley , sir Thomas off ? ? ? and diverse of his friend , at a certain time to meet he , who take he from hi• keeper , and set he again at liberty : while the earl of ●arwicke nothing doubt his brother the archbishop care in safe keep he , and think the brunt of the war to be now past , dismiss his army , and intend only to find out king Henry• who be keep a prisoner , but few man know where . king Edward be now at liberty , post to York , and from thence to Lanca ? ••e• ; where his chamberlain the lord Hastings have raise some force , with which he march to London , and be there joyful receive : the earl of Warwick likewise send to his friend , and make preparation for a new army ; while in the me•n time , by mediation of diverse lord , a interview in vvestminster-hall be a ? agree upon ; and solemn oath take on both side for safety , between king Edward , the duke of Clarence , and the earl of Warwick ; but each party stand strict ? lie upon term tend to their own end ; they part as great enemy as they meet : and so from thence the king go to Canterbury , the duke and the E. to Lincoln : why ? there they have preappoint their force to repair , under the conduct of sir Robert W•l• , son and heir of the lord Wels , a man of great valour and experience in the war : king e•••rd , to take off so able a man from the earl part , send for his father the lord well to come unto he ; who take with he , his son in law sir Thomas Dymock , and come to attend the king pleasure , be tell by his friend how wonderful the king be incense against they : whereupon for their safety , they take sanctuary at westmi•ster . but upon the king princely word , they come unto he , who come ? m•ndeth the lord well to write to his son , to desist from adhere to the ea•le of Warwick , which the lord Wells accord do : but sir Robert Wells notwith ? s••nding his father letter , continue firm to •he earl still , so much incense page 100 king Edward , that he cause both his father and sir ? ? ? Dymock to be behe•ded . he suppose perhaps , that the lord W•lls be himself underhand a friend to the earl , and have not deal sincere with he , in procure his son to leave that party . but now sir Robert Wells see the king draw near to Stamford , where he have pitch his tent , and hear of his father behead , be much distract what to do : to decline b•ttell with the king , he think will show too much fear ; and •o give he battle before the e•rle of Warwick be come with his force , will show too much boldness ; but his vein be so fill with a desire of revengi•• his father death , that he think he can never show boldness enough ; and thereupon encounter with the king army , far great •hen his own , oppress with multitude be take prisoner , together with sir Thomas de l••d and diverse oh ? there|be ; who present in the place be put to execution : as soon as sir Robert W•ll• be take , the Lincolneshir• man to make themselves the light to run away , throw off their coat , for which cause , this battle be afterward call l•se-•oate-field , in which , it be report , be slay above ten thousand man . the earl of Warwick ? ? ? of this de•eate , and not have present ? … ? raise a army sufficient to oppose king Edward• when he can by no mean dr•• the lord Stanley to his party , he determine to sail into Fr••c• , and hire ship at Dartmouth in dev••••ire , he with his son in law the duke of Clarence , ? ? ? their wife , take to sea ; and think to land at c•lli•e , of which town he hims•••• be captain , he be by the lord V••cleere a Gascoigne , who he have leave his de ? puty there , repel ; and with so great inhumanity , that the duchess of Clar•••• who be then in labour , be fain to be deliver in the ship , ( all the courtesy ? ? ? th•• distress show , be only to send a flagon or two of wine , ) which fact of V•• ? clear when king Edward hear of , he be so well please with it , that he present ? lie scent he a patent to be captain of the town himself : and the duke of ? ? ? for the same service , send unto he fillip the comi•es ( who have write the Histo ? ry of these time ) with a grant of one thousand crown pension during his life . ne ? for man be better pay for one act of di•sembling ; for the truth be , prae ? ? ? excl•sit for•• , it be out of his love , that he suffer he not to enter the town , for he know there be many great one in it so addict to king Edward , and so ma ? licious bend against the earl , that if he or any of his company shall have come , they will in all likelihood have do they some mischief : and hereof he make a good proof soon after : for when the earl take to sea again , the lord ? ? ? send he word , he shall take heed where he land ; for that the duke of ? ? ? lay in wait to take he ; which advertisement do the earl more good , than the keep he out of Callice do he hurt . the earl upon this advertisement , ••• ? dead at d•epe in nor•a•die , whereof when king Lewis hear , he send and invite he to come to his court at Amboi• , where he receive he with no less honour , than •f he have be a king . in the mean time king E••ard make enquiry for all such as be aider to the earl of Warwick• of who some be apprehend as guilty , some flee to sanctuary , and some submit to the king mercy ; as John Marquesse Mo••• ? cute , who he courteous receive . queen Margare• , who at this time sojourn with duke Rayner her father , hear of the earl of Warwick arrival , with her son prince Edward , come to Ambois , and with she also come Jasper earl of Pembroke , and John earl of Oxford , late escape out of prison and flee into France ; between who a new combination be make ; and for a foundation of firm ami•ie , king he•ries son prince Edward , marry anne the earl of Warwick second daughter : after which marriage , the duke of Clarence and the earl take a solemn oath , never to leave the war till either king Henry or his son prince Edward be restore to the Crown• but notwithstanding this oath , this marriage put new thought into the duke of Clarence his mind , cast with himself that the issue of it can be no less than the utter extirpation of the house of York : whereupon , make fair show still to his father in law the earl of Warwick , he underhand fall off , and see ? cret give advertisement to his brother king Edward of all their proceed . and now the earl of Warwick have be six month in France ; in this time he have page 101 ? ? ? from the king of France , both ship , and man , and money , and receive ? ? ? out of England , that many lord and other be ready to adventu•e their life in his qua•rell , if he will come , ( for the people general hold he in such ? ? ? , that they think the sun be take from the world , when he be ? ? ? and this in great part for his gre•t hospi•ality , who it be say , use to spend •spam• a breakf•st ) he with the earl of Oxford and Pembroke take to ? ? ? ; and though the duke of B•rgoigne have a Fle•• at sea , to in•ercept he ; ye• his fleet be ? ••g by •empest scatter , and king edw•rd•rusting to that Flee• , have provide no other• the earl have a quiet passage to land at Dar•mouth in Devonshire , whe•e be land , he make proclamation in king he•ry the six•h• name , that all good Subj•ct• shall prep•re to fight against king Edward , who contrary to right have usurpe••he crown : upon which proclamation , it be scarce to be believe , how m• ? nigh tho•••nds of man resort to he ; with which fo•ces , he make towar•s lo•don : upon notice of who approach , on the Sunday next after ? ? ? day , one do ? ctor G•ddard a chaplain of Hi• , preach at Paul• Cross• , do so s•t fo•th his earl pious intention , that many of his auditory be move to favour the earl : pro ? ceed : insomuch , that the m•rquesse montacu•e , who have in king Edward beh•lf , ? ? ? six thousand man about London , find they all inclinable to go with he ? ? ? the earl of Warwick , and accord w•nt and join with he . king ed ? ••rd h••ring of the great flock of people to the earl , send forth letter into all part of the realm for raise a army ; but few come , and those few , with no great good will : which when he perceive , he begin to doubt his case ; and thereupon ••co•panied with the duke of Gloucester his brother , the lord Hastings his chamber ? ••••• , ( who have marry the earl of VVarwick• sister , yet co•tinued ever true to ? ? ? Edward ) and the lord Scales brother to the queen ; he depart into Li•col• ? shire , and c•mming to lyn , he find there a english ship , and two hul•s of holland ready to make sail : whereupon he , with the forename lord , and about seven or ? ? ? hundred person enter the ship , have no provision with he but only the apparel they wear ; and so bare of money , that he be fain to reward the master of ? ? ? ship with one of his garment : and thus make course towards the duke of ? ? ? country , they be present chase by eight great ship of Easterling , op•n enemy both to England and France ; which drive he before a town in the country call Alquemare , belong to the duke of Burgoigne : where by ch•nce , the lord grunture governor of that country , at that time be , who defen ? dead they from the Easterling , and bring they to the h•ge in holland , where they have all thing minister to they , by order from the duke of Burgoigne . at this time , upon news of the earl of VVarwick• approach , queen Eliz•beth fo•saketh the tower , and secret take sanctuary at Westminster , where in great p•nury forsake of all her friend , she be bring a bed of a son call Edward , who like a poor man child be christen ; the godfather be the abbot and p•y•r of Westminster , and the lady Scroop godmother . and now the earl of Warwick enter the tower , remove king he•ry out of his hold of durance , whe•e he have be almost nine year , into his own lodging , where he be serve accord to his estate ; which the ear•e do more congratulate , then t•e king himself . upon this six day of October , king Henry accompany with •he archbishop of York , the prior of S. John , the bishop of London , the duke of Cl•rence , the earl of Warwick and other nobleman , apparel in a long gown of •lew velvet , be conduct through London , •o the bishop palace where he rest •ill the thirteenth of •hat month , on which day he go in solemn process ? •••••bout Paul• church , wear his imperial crown ; the earl of war ? •ick bear up his train ; and the earl o•Oxford the sword before he . the next day , in all usual place about London , king Edward be proclaim a usurper , ? ? ? all his partaker traitor to God and the king ; whereof John lord Tip•of• earl of Worcester , as a partaker with king Edward , be make the first example . Thi• lord have be lieutenant for king ed•ard in Ireland , where have do something ? ? ? which he flee , he be afterward find on the top of a high tree , in the Forres• page 102 of VV••bridge , in the county of ? ? ? •nd be there take , be bring to Lo•do• , attain•ed , and ? … ? the tower hill , and af•er bury at the black ? fry•rs . about this time happen•• ? … ? to be relate : sir Willi•• H••kesford knight• one of ? … ? Jus•i••s •t the L•w• who dwell at anno•y in d•vo•s•ire , a man of grea• ? ? ? , and ••ving no so•ne , •he lord Fitz•a•re• , Si•Io•• S••••eger , and sir Willi•• ? ? ? m•rried his d•ughte•• , and be his heires• this m•n grow into such • deg••• of Melancholy• th•t one ? ? ? he call to he the keeper of hi• Par• , ch••ging he ? ? ? n•gligence , in suffer his deer to be steal : and thereupon comm•nded he , •hat if he meet any man in his circuit in the night ? time , that will not stand or ? ? ? he sho•ld not spar• to kill he whatsoever he were• the knight have th•• la•d hi• found•tion , and mean to end his dole ? full day ; in • certain dark night se••••ly convey himself out of his house , •nd walk alone in his P•r• . the keeper in hi• night-walk •e•ring one stir , and come towa•ds he , ask , who be there ? but no answer be make , he will he to stand• which when he will not do , the keeper shoot and k•lled he , and come to see who he be , fo••d he to be hi• master . on the twenty d•y of ? ? ? , a p•rli•ment be hold at vvestmi•ster , wherein king Edward and all his p•rtak••••re •ttain•ed of high treason , and al• their land and good seize on to king ? ? ? use . ge••ge Pl••t•gene• duke of Clarence , be by authority of this parliament , adjudge heir to Richard duke of York his father , and that duchy settle upon he and his heir , notwithstanding the Primogeni ? ture of Edward : upon he also wa• entail the crown of England , in case heir male of the body of king he•ry f•iled . Jasper earl of Pembroke , and John earl of Oxford , be full restore •o their land •nd Honour• and VVa•wick and Cl•rence be make governor of the king and kingdome• to this parliament come the m•rquesse Montacute , e•cusing himself , that •or •eare of dea•h he have take king Edward part , which excuse be accept . Que•n Margaret i• send for into France , but by reason of contrary wind be keep back all that winter . about this time , Jasper earl of Pembroke go into Wales to view his land in Pembrookeshire , find there the lord Henry , bear of Margaret the only daughter and heir of Ioh• the first duke of Som•rset , not be then full ten year of age , keep in manner like a captive , but honourable bring up by the lady Herbert ; he he bring with he to Lo•do• , and p•esents he to king Henry ; who when the ki•g have a good while behold , he say to the lord about he : lo , this be he , to who both we and our adversary , leave the possession of all thing , shall hereafter give place . which if it be true , it show a very prophetical spirit to have be in king Henry ; that can so long before• foretell a thing so unlikely to happen : for this be he , that be afterward king h••ry the seven , before who at that time there be many life in be , of bo•h the hous•• of York and L•ncaster . Shortly after this , by the duke of Burgoignes mean , king Edward be furnish with eighteen tall ship , two thousand Dutchman , and fifty thousand floren of gold ; and thus furnish , he take to sea , and land at ravenspurre in Yorkshire , where he find but cold entertainment ; nevertheless he make a wary march to York , where likewise he find no great expression of welcome , so as he be force to change his pretence , swear deep and receive the sacrament upon it , that he come not to disturb king Henry , but only to recover his own inheritance ; and for the more show thereof , wear a Estrich• feather , prince Edward livery ; which •ro ? position seem so •easonable , that many who resist he before , be as ready to assist he now : and if he be blame for break his oath ; it must be consider , it be reg•i causa , to recover his kingdom , which perhaps be the inheritance he mean , when he take his oath , that he intend nothing , but to recover his Inhe ? ritance : and so he break not his oath neither . from York he march towards wakefi•ld and sendal , leave the castle of Pomfret upon his left hand• where the marquess Montacute with his army lie , but do not offer to stop he : from wake ? field he come to Do•caster , and from thence to Nottingham , where there come to page 103 he sir William Parre and sir Iames Harrington with six hundred man ; also sir tho ? mass Burgh and Thomas Montgomery with their aid , who cause he to make pro ? clamation in his own name : affirm •hey will serve no man but a king . from Nottingham he come to Leicester , where three thousand able man , and well arm come unto he : from Leicester he come before the wall of Coventry ; into which city the earl of Warwick have withdraw himself , keep himself close therein , with his people , be about six or seven thousand man ; three day together king Edward provoke he to come forth to battle ; but he stay for more force , and will not do it : whereupon king Edward march forward to Warwick eight mile from Coventry , think thither at least he shall have draw the earl of Warwick , but neither will that do it : indeed the earl look for the come of the duke of Clarence , with twelve thousand man to join with he , but that ex ? pectation prove vain , for the duke be now full reconcile to his brother king Edward , and bring all his force to join with he ; only he seek to make amity between king Edward and the earl : but though king Edward offer general pardon , and other fair condition ; yet none will please the earl , without re ? store of king Henry . but now to repair the defection of the duke of Clarence , there come to the earl of Warwick at Coventry ; the earl of Oxford , the duke of Exeter , and the marquess Montacute , by who come that side be not a little strengthen ; yet all this aid will not make the earl of Warwick to come to battle : whereupon king Edward march forward towards London : both side seek to make London their friend ; the earl of Warwick send to his brother the archbishop of York to labour in it ; who thereupon cause king Henry to mount on h••seback , and to ride from pa•ls through cheap down Walbrooke , suppose that this show of the king , will have allure the citizen to assist he : but this de ? vice prevail little , bring not in above seven or eight thousand man , a small pro ? portion to withstand king Edward ; and when the archbishop of York see this back ? wardnes in the citizen , or rather indeed a inclination to king Edward , he secret send to he , to receive he into grace ; which upon promise to continue faithful hereafter , he obtain . the eleven of April in the year 1471 , and the eleven of his reign , king Edward make his entry into the city of London , ride first to Paul church , and from thence to the bishop palace , where the archbishop of York pre ? scent himself unto he , and have king Henry by the hand , deliver he to king edw•rd ( six month after his readeption of the crown ) and then king Edward be seize of his person , go from Paul to Westminster , and there give God most hear ? thy thank for his safe return . the reason allege hereby Philip Comines for the citizen receive of king Edward , seem scarce worthy of so good a author : one cause ( say he ) be , because king Edward be extreme indebt in the city , if they have not receive he , they shall have lose their debt ; another , because he have win the love of many citizen wife , who importune their husband to re ? ceive he . the earl of Warwick have intelligence that king Edward be receive into Lo•don , and king Henry deliver into his hand ; march out and encamp at saint Alban• , and after some refresh of his army , remove towards Barnet , and in a large plain there , call Gl•dmore heath , pitch his camp ; which king Edward hear , on easter Eve the thirteenth of April , he march forth , and come that evening to Barnet , where he will not suffer a man of his army to stay in the town , but command they all to the field , and lodge with his army more near to the enemy than he be aware , by reason of a mist , ( raise some say , by one Bungey a conjurer ) which make it so dark , that it can not be well observe where they be encamp . in take his ground , he cause his people to keep as much •i•ence as be possible , thereby to keep the enemy from know of their approach• great artillery they have on both part , but the earl more than the king ; and therefore in the night time , they shoot from his camp almost continual , but do little hurt , because they still overshoot they , as lie near than be conceive . on easterday , •arly in the morning , both army be order for battle ; the earl of war ? wick page 104 appoint they command of the right wing , which consist of horse , to his brother the marquess Montacute , and the earl of Oxford ; the left wing consist likewise of horse , be lead by himself and the duke of Exeter ; and the main battle consist of bill and bow , be conduct by the duke of Somerset . on the king part , the vanguard be command by the duke of Gloucester ; the battle ( in which be king Henry ) be lead by king Edward himself ; and the lord H•stings bring on the rear . after exhortation for encouragement of their s•uldiers , the fight begin ; which with great valour be maintain by the space of six hour•s , without any ap ? parent disadvantage on either side ; only the Earles vanguard , by the valiancy of the earl of Oxford , seem somewhat to overmatch the king ; which make s•me fly ? ing towards London to carry news , that the earl of Warwick have win the field ; and he have perhaps do so indeed , but for a strange misfortune which happen to the earl of Oxford and his man ; for they have a star with stream on their livre ? very , as king Edward man have the sun , the earl of Warwick man , by reason of the mist , not well discern the badge so like , shoot at •he earl of Oxford man , that be on their part : whereupon the earl of Oxford cry , treason ! and flee with eight hundred man . at length after great slaughter make on both side• , king Edward have the great number of man , ( as some write , though other say the con ? trary ) cause a new power of fresh man ( which he have keep of purpos• ) to come on : which the earl of Warwick observe , be a man of a invincible courage , no ? thing dismay , rush into the midst of his enemy , where he adventure so •arre , that among the press he be strike down and slay . ( though some write , that the earl see the desperate estate of his army , leap on a horse to fly ; and come ? ming to a wood where be no passage , one of king Edward man come to he , kill ? lead he , and spoil he to the naked skin . ) the marquess Montacute , think to succour his brother , lose likewise his life , and leave the victory to king Edward . on both sid•s be slay , as hall say , ten thousand at the least ; Fabian say , but fifteen hu•dred , but than he mean only of the king side . upon the king part be slay the lord Cromwell , the lord say , the lord montjoye son and heir , sir Humphrey Bo•rchier son and heir to the lord Berners , and diverse other knight and gentleman . on the earl part be slay , the earl himself , the Marqu•ss•Montacute , and three and twenty knight , of who sir William Tyrrell be one . the duke of Somerset , and the earl of Oxford flee into Wales , to Jasper earl of pembro•ke . the duke of Exeter be strike down , and so wound that he be leave for dead , among other the dead body , because he be not k•own ; but come ? ming to himself , he get up , and escape to Westminster , and there take sanctuary . the dead body of the earl and Marquesse be bring to London in a coffin , and by the space of three day lie open-faced in the cathedral church of saint Paul , and then bury with their ancestor , in the priory of Bissam . this earl of Warwick be Richard Nevil , son and heir of Richard Nevil earl of Salisbury , who marry the daughter of Richard Beauchamp the six earl of Warwick , and in her right be earl of Warwick , in his own , of Sali•bury : he be also lord Monthermer , great cham ? berlaine , and high admiral of England , lord warden of the north march to ? ward Scotland , and high steward of the duchy of La•caster : he have issue two daughter , Isabella marry to George duke of Clarence ; and Ann• , ••rst mar ? ried to prince Edward king Henry the sixths son , and after to Richard duke of glow ? cester . we may here observe a constellation of disastrous influence , concur all to the overthrow of this great Warwick ; whereof , if any one have be miss , the wheel of his fortune have perhaps not turn : for if the city of York have not too credulous believe king Edward oath , not to d•sturbe king Henry ; or if the marquess Mo•tacute have stop ( as he may ) his passage at Pomfret ; or if the duke of Clarence have not at the very point of the battle at saint Alban , desert his party and join with king Edwards• or if qu•en Margaret have not by tempest be keep from come into e•gla•d in time ; or if the Londoner have not be re ? trograde and deceive his expectation , he have never perhaps be overthrow as page 105 he be : but fata viam invenient ; destiny will find way that be never think of , will make way where it find none ; and that which be ordain in heaven , shall be effect by mean of which earth can take no notice . queen Margaret , when it be too late , accompany with John Longstrother pri ? or of saint John , and the lord Wenlock , with diverse knight and esquire take ship at harflew , the four and twenty of march , but by tempest be keep back till the thirteenth of April ; and then with her son prince Edward , she land at Weymouth , and from thence go to a abbey hard by call ceern , and then to bew in Hampshire , whither there come unto she Edmund duke of Somerset , and Thomas Courtney earl of Devonshire , with diverse other ; among who , it be re ? solve once more to try their fortune in the field ; but than the queen will have have her son prince Edward to be send into France , there to remain in safety , till the next battle be try ; but they be of a contrary mind , and special the duke of Somerset , she at length consent , though afterward she repent it . from bew she with her son and the earl of Somerset pass on to Bristol , intend with what power they can raise in Glocestershire , to march into wale , to join with I•sper earl of Pembroke , who be there make preparation of more force . king E•ward hear of these thing , resolve to cross this conjunction , and follow queen Margaret with a great power so close , that near Tewkesbury in Glocestershire he overtake her force , who resolute turn and make head against he ; where so ? merset , on the queen part , lead the vanguard , perform the part of a valiant commander ; but find his soldier thro•gh weariness begin to faint , and that the lord Wenlock , who have the conduct of the battle on the queen part , move no , the road unto he , and upbraid he with cowardice or treachery , never stay , but with his pole-axe beat out his brain ; and now before he can bring in his man to the rescue , their vanguard be rout , and John earl of Devonshire , with above three thousand of the queen part be slay : the queen her self , John Beaufort the duke of somerset brother , the prior of saint John , sir Gervis Clifton and diverse other be take prisoner ; all which except the queen , be the next day behea ? dead . at which time sir Richard Crofts present to king Edward king Henry son Edward , who he have take prisoner ; to who king Edward at first show no unacustomated ? courteous countenance ; but demand of he , how he dare so presumptuous enter into his realm with arm ? and he answer , though true , yet unseasonable , to recover my father kingdom and heritage ; king Edward with his hand thrust he from he , or ( as some say ) strike he with his gauntlet , and then present George duke of Clarence , Richard duke of Gloucester , Thomas grey marquess Dorset , and William lord Hastings stand by , fall upon he in the plac• , and murder he . his body be homely inter with other ordinary corpse , in the church of the monastery of the Blackfriar in Tewkesbury . after the victory thus obtain , king Edward repair to the abbey church of Tewkesbury , to give God thanks for his good success ; and find there a great number of his enemy , that be flee thither to save themselves , he give they all free pardon ; only edmuud duke of Somerset , ? ? ? Longstrother prior of saint John , sir Thomas Tressham , sir Gervi• Clifton and diverse other knight and esquire , who be apprehend there , and bring be ? before the duke of Gloucester , sit that day as constable of England , and the duke of Norfolk as Marshall , be all arraign , condemn and judge to dye , and accor ? ding upon the Tuesday be the seven of May , they be all , and twelve other knight more , on a scaffold set up in the middle of the town , behead , but not this ? membred• and permit to be bury . the same day queen Margaret be find in a poor house of religion , not far from thence , into which she be flee for safeguard of her life ; but she be after bring to London , and there keep a prisoner , till her father ransom she with great sum of money . this be the last pitch battle that be fight in England , in king Edward the fourths day , which happen on the four of May , be Saturday , in the eleven year of his reign , and in the year of our lord 1471. king Edward be assure , that as long as any partaker of king Henry live and page 106 be at liberty , he shall never be free from plot against his life ; send Roger Vaugha• , a gentleman much reckon of in his own country , to entrap Jasper earl of Pembroke , who have escape from the last encounter : but he have notice of the plot before , prevent it by strike off Vaughan head . after these great cloud be thus disperse , there arise a little cloud , which give the realm , at least the city of London no small disquiet . for now , Thomas bastard Fa•conbridge , who have be employ by the earl of Warwick to scour the sea , hear of these defeat ; have enrich himself by piracy , gather together a army of seventeen thousand man , and come to London , imp•riously common ? dead admission into the city , and releasement of king Henry out of prison : but be deny entrance , and hear that king Edward with a great power be come towards he , he bring up his ship to saint Katherine , and take with he his most desperate man , with they he march to kingstonbridge , but find that bridge break down , and all the place of passage guard , he withdraw his force into saint George field , from whence he prepare to assault the city of London ; for the effect whereof , he land all his ship ordinance , and plant they all alongst the banks-side , with which he batter down many house , and much annoy the city ; but the citizen on the other side , lodge their great artillery against their adversary , with which they so gall they , that they dare not abide in any pla•e alongst the water side , but be drive even from their own ordinance : then he appoint his man to set fire on the bridge , and withal cause three thousand to pass over the Thames , and some of they to assault Aldgate , and some Bishopsgate , but be in all place , by the industry of the citizen repel , and chief by Robert Basset and Ralph Iocelyne alderman : upon this he retire to black-heath and there encamp by the space of three day ; but then hear that king Edward be come ? m with a great army , he get he to his ship , but the rest flee some one way , some another . the one and twenty of May , the king come to London , thank ? ed the citizen for their pain and care , and dub the major , the recorde•vrse ? wick , and b•sset and iocelyne alderman , knight . and now the time be come for king Henry to be deliver out of all his trouble ; for the bloody duke of Gloucester enter the tower , where he find king Henry , nothing at all trouble with all his cross , strike he into the heart with his dagger and there slay he . and now we have have within the space of half a year , one parliament proclaim king Edward a usurper , and king Henry a lawful king ; and another proclaim king Edward a lawful king , and king Henry a usurper : that we may know in humane affair , there be nothing certain , but uncertainty ; nothing stable , but instability . king Edward present after the inte•rment of king Henry , draw his force to ? ward •andwich in Kent , where some of the follower of F•uconbridge , to the number of eight or nine hundred , have in the castle there strong fortify themselves , but upon their ask pardon and submit themselves to the king , with promise to be faith ? full subject ever after , they have their pardon grant they , and then they deliver up both castle and ship to the number of thirteen , to the king use . but how this composition be observe , may be imagine ; when Fauconbridge who be come ? prise in the same pardon , be afterward take and execute at Southampton Spi ? ce and quintine the captain that affail Aldgate and Bishopsgate , and be in Sandwich castle , at the surrender thereof ; be present behead at Canterbury , and their head place on pole , upon those gate : and by a commission of oyre and te•miner , many both in Essex and Kent , be arraign and condemn for this re ? bellion , and more fine . and now king Edward , desire to be secure from all suspect person , send the archbishop of York , brother to the earl of Warwick , over to Guisnes , there to be keep in safe custody ; and there he remain a long time , till at length by friend ? ship he be deliver , and short after die . likewise John earl of Oxford , who after Barnet field yield himself to king Edward , have his life pardon ; but yet be se•t over sea to the castle of h•mmes , where for the space of twelve year he page 107 be shut up in strong prison , and narrow look too . as for the earl of Pem ? brook and Richmond , who be flee out of the realm , to the duke of Britain , king Edward send to the duke , require to have they deliver up unto he , upon pro ? mouse of great reward ; to which the duke make answer , that he can no• with his honour deliver they up , who he have take into his protection ; but that for king Edward sake , he will take such care of they , that he shall need to take no care for they ; and to that end , he sequester their own servant from they , and ap ? point Britain to attend upon they . it be now the thirteenth year of king Edward reign ; in which a parliament be call at Westminster : wherein all act former make by he , be confirm or revive ; and all their land and good confiscate , that have take part against he and be flee and all their land and good restore to such as have take part with he . king Edward be destine to be always in trouble ; now that he have quiet ? ness at home , be draw into new broil abroad ; for the duke of Burgoigne at this time have war with France , think he can no way make a better har ? ve to himself , then by sow seed of dissension between France and England ; and to this end , he send ambassador to king Edward , to solicit he to set on foot his title to the crown of France ; make great offer , with protestation to assist he in it , both with purse and person . this proposition be serious deba ? t by the king privy counsel , be at last approve of , as be both lawful and behooveful , for the honour of the king , and good of the kingdom . only mean to bear the charge of the war , be want ; to supply which by a parliamentary course , will ask too much time : a new course therefore be devise , to procure money from the subject by way of benevolence ; and this course be take . about this time , Henry Holland duke of Exeter and earl of Huntington , dis-in ? herit by act of parliament , in the four year of this king , ( though he have marri ? ed king Edward sister ; yet grow to so great misery , that pass over into Flanders , he be there force all ragged and barefoot to beg his bread : ) be find dead , and strip naked , between Dover and Callice : but how he come to his death , no enquiry can bring to light . provision for this french expedition be thorough make ; and order take for the quiet government of the kingdom in his absence , and the stop of incursion , if any by the Scot shall be make : king Edward with a army of fifteen hundred man at arm , all of the nobility and gentry , fifteen thousand archer on horseback , eight thousand common soldier , and three thousand pioner , come down to Dover ; whither the duke of Burgoigne have send five hundred flat bottomed boat , to tran ? sport the horse to Callice ; yet for all that help , it be two and twenty day before the king force be all pass over . before the king departure from Dover , ( to the end he may not seem to surprise he ) he send a herald name garter , a norman by birth , with a letter of defiance to the french king , ( so well write , say counterfeit ? ••••s , that he think it not of any english man endite ; as though Englishmen can not indite aswell as the french ) require he to yield unto he the crown of f•••ce , his unquestionable inheritance ; which if he shall dare to deny , •e ? ? ? then endeavour to recover it by the sword . this letter the french king read and thereupon withdraw himself , cause the herald to be bring to his presence• to who in private he give this answer : that the duke of Burgoigne and the earl of saint Paul the constable , ( by who instigation , he know the king of E•gland be draw to this design ) will but delude he , for that they be dissembler••nd impostor ; and therefore say , it will conduce more to the honour of the king of ? ? ? to continue in league with he , though a old adversary ; then to hazard th• fortune of the war , upon the promise assistance of newcome dec•ivers••nd so commend i ( say he ) to the king thy master , and say what i have tell •he• ; and then with a honourable reward of three hundred crown , dismiss he : the herald promise to do all that in he lie , and ( beyond his commission ) show ? •d the french king way , ( by work upon the lord Howard and Stanley ) by page 08 which he may enter into a treaty for peace , which he doubt not , will sort to a good conclusion . the french king glad to he•r it , give the herald , beside the other reward , • piece of crimson velvet of thirty yard long ; and withal send to king E• ? ward the goodly horse he have in his stable , as also a a••e , a Wolph , and a wild••ore , bea•ts at that time rare in England : and then the herald return to Callice , de ? liver to king Edward the french king •nswer . and now to make good the french king a••egation to the herald ; the duke o•Burgoigne , who have promise in the word of a prince , to bring to Callice by this time , two thousand lance and four thousand seradiot or •ight ho•se , fail to come : whereupon the lord Scales be by king e•ward send to the d•ke , to put he in mind of his promise , and to ha•ten his come with his promise force : but the jour ? ney be to little purpose ; only it occasion the duke with a small •roop of horse to come to •he king , formal to excuse himself for have be so backward ; but the cause ( he say ) be , for that have be embroil in the siege of N•z , he can not depart thence without infinite disgrace , if neither composition nor submission be enforce ; which now notwithst•nding• because he will not too much tre ? spasse upon his pat•ence , he be enforce to do , by the ob•t•nacy of the besiege : but promise to supply all defect , both with his presence and power , and that speedi ? lie . the constable likewise by his letter persuade the king of England to pro ? ceede in the action , and not to doubt both from the duke and himself , to be suffici ? ent every way accommodate . king Edward thus encourage , pass on , but in his way find no performance of promise , either on the duke or constable part ; for the duke do not accommo ? date the soldier at their come to Pero••• , with victual or lodging in such man ? ner as be requisite and expect ; and the constable in stead of surrender up Sain• ? ? ? accord to agreement , make a sa•ly out upon such as be send from the king of e•gla•d to take possession , and play upon they with his great ordinance ; whereupon k . Ed•ard begin to suspect the truth of the french k . description of the duke and constable condition ; and from thence forward stand upon his own guard , and give no further credit to their protestation ; which the duke of Burgoig•e resent , pretend occasion for the haste forward his forces• and promise speedy return together with they , take his leave and depart , which do not a little in ? crea•e the king suspicion . the french king have intelligence of the duke of Burgoignes departure , fore ? cast the danger , if they shall unite their force ; resolve with himself , to ? ? ? what may be do to mediate a peace in the duke absence ; and yet so to ? ? ? , that if it take not effect , he may disclaim the knowledge of the overture : where ? upon he private dispatch a messenger , in •hew a herald ; but be indeed• fellow of no o••ice or estimation , and not know to any of the king household , but to Villiers the master of the horse , who only be acquaint with the plot and par ? ty . this counterfeit pursuivant at Arm• , with a coat make of a trumpet Banne• ? towle , address himself to the king of e•gla•d , and upon admission to his pesence , insinuate the french king desire , which be , to have commissioner on both part assign , to confer of the mean to reconcile the difference between the two king ; or at least to conclude a cessation from arm fo• some time : and so well this messenger deliver his errand , that it be credit , and the king request grant•d ; and thereupon letter of safe conduct , be send of both side , for such commissioner as to this purpose shall meet at a•ye•s . for king Edward , come the lord ho•••d , sir A•tho•y Se•tleger , and doctor mor•on , after make lord chancellor of e•gla•d . for king Lewis , come the admiral of France , the lord saint Piers , and Heberg•• ? shop of E•reux . after long conference , article of peace be conclude on •o this effect : that the french king shall pay present to the king of e•gla•d , three ? score and fifteen thousand crown , and from thence forth , annual , fifty thous•nd crown , during the life of king Edward : that within one year , the french king shall send for the lady ? ? ? the king of England daughter , and join she in marriage to the dolphin : that the lord how•rd , and sir John Cheyney master of the page 109 horse , shall remain in hostage there , till the english army have quit France , and • general peace for nine yeer• ; wherein the duke of Burgoigne and Britt•••e , be ••cluded , if they will accept thereof : this conclusion be the more easy compass ? sed , by the king of France his follow the Herauld• counsel ; fo• he distribute sixteen thousand crown among king Edward counselor and favourite ; two thousand crown to the lord Hastings the king chamberlain , and to the lord ? ? ? , sir John cheyn•y , sir Anthony Sentleger , and Mo••gomery , the residue ; beside great store of plate and jewel , distribute among inferior officer of the court . the duke of Gloucester only oppose this accord , as not suit with his design ; nevertheless it proceed , and not•ce thereof be present send to the duke of ? ? ? ; who thereupon only with fifteen horse , come post to the english camp , who king Edward persuade to enter into the peace , accord to the reservation ; but he in a great chafe , reproach king Edward for enter into it he ? self ; say , that his predecessor have by many brave exploit get fame and re ? p•tation upon the french ; and now he have bring his soldier only to show they the country , and return as they come ; add withal , that to make it ap ? pe••e he be able without help of the english to subsist of himselfe• he utter this ? cl••med any benefit by that truce , until three month after the english be re ? •••ned to their own country ; and so in a great snuff return home . for the better confirmation of what wa• agree upon between the two king , an ? ? ? be desire ; but before the same be e••ectua•ed , the french king send to the eng••sh army a hundred ton of Gascoigne wine , to be drink out among the priv••e •ouldiers , and therewithal , free licence for commander and gentleman to recreate themselves in amye•s , where they be love entertain by the burgher of the town , by the king express command . the place of interview of these two ? ? ? be agree on to be at picquency , a town three mile distant from am•e•s , seat in ••ottome , through which the river of some run , over which a strong bridge be bu••t , and in the midst thereof a gra•e make overthwart with •artes , no wide ? ? ? than a man may well thrust in his arm ; cover with board overhead• to avoid the rain•foure of the bedchamber on both side , be appoint to search the room• , to prevent trap of instrumen•• of treachery : and be by they certify that •ll as be clear , the king advance themselves . king Edward be come in sight of the place , make a stand ; be tell , that the circumstance of come f•r•t to th• place , be a matter of great disparagement in point of state : but the french king •o•e regard subst•nce then circumstance , give the king of England the advan ? •••• to come at hi• pleasure , and go first to the bar appoint for conference , ? ? ? the•e do attend king Edward leisure . he have in his company , John duke of ? ? ? , with his brother the cardinal , and eight hundred m•n at arm king ed ? •••• h•d with he , his brother the duke of Clarence , the earl of Northumberland , •he lord Chamberlaine and chancellor , and at his back his whole army in b•t ? •e•• . the king love salute each other , and compliment of courtesy re•ipro ? ? … ? which finish , they with their nobleman there present , take all •heir ? ? ? upon the holy evangelist , in all to their •ower , to observe the article o• ? ? ? agre•d on . after which , in private the french king impor•u•es king ed ? •••• , that the duke of Britain may be leave out of these article : but after much ? ? ? to that purpose , king Edward give his resolute answer• that if king Lewis ? ? ? the friendship of engl•nd , he shall not molest the duke of Brittaine• for •hat he be resolve , at any time to come in person to relieve him• if he be distu• ? •ed : king Edward pretend the many kindness he have forme•ly rec•ived of the duke of Britain : but it be conceive , that the desire of compass the ea•les o• ? ? ? and Pembroke , now in the duke of Britain country , be the great ? ? ? of his stand •o •irmely for he . the money to be pay to king ed••rd ? ? ? the article , be accord pay ; and thereupon the french hostage be deli ? vex , and the Englis• army re••res to Callice , and from thenc• be transport into ? ? ? and then the english hostage be likewise deliver . this peace be ? ? ? •o be make only by the holy ghost ; because on the day of mee•ing , a white dove page 110 come and sit upon the king of England tent : though the duke of Gloucester and Burgoig•e think it be make by no good spirit . king Edward be return into England , have his mind run still upon the dange• that may grow from the earl of Richmond : he therefore dispatch D. Stillington and two other his ambassador to the duke of Bri•aine , to send he over to he , under this subtle pretence , that he mean to match he in marriage with the lady Cicill• his young daughter ; and withal , send also no small store of angel to speak for he : which so prevail with the duke , that he deliver the earl o•Richmond to the ambassador , who conduct he thence to saint Malo• , where while they stay for a wind , the young earl , by the cunning plot of Peter Landoi• the duke treasurer ( moor out of scorn that he be not gratify by the english ambassador to the proportion of his place , than for any love to the earl ) escape into sanctuary ; from whence neither prayer nor promise can get he cut : nevertheless , upon Peter Landois his promise he shall be safe keep there , the ambassador depart , and return home , acquaint king Edward with the duke of B••goig••s courtesy in deliver he , and their own negligence in suffer ? ing he to escape , only make amends with the promise of Peter Landois ; which may be to king Edward some contentment , but be no satisfaction . at Christmas follow , be the sixteenth year of his reign , he create his elder son Edward , prince of Wales , duke of Cor•wall , and earl of Chester : his second son he make duke of York ; give the order of knighthood to the son and heir of the earl of li•col•e , and many other . he create also four and twenty knight of the bath , whereof Brian chief justice , and Littleton a judge of the common plea , be two . about this time , there be two example of severity see ; not unworthy the relate , if but only to make we see how dangerous a thing it be ludere cum sancti• , to speak word that may be take as reflect upon the king . the first be of one Walter Walker , a wealthy citizen , dwell at the sign of the crown in Cheapside : this man one day when his child cry , bid he be quiet , and he will make he heir of the crown : which word be subject to interpretation , he be call in question about they , arraign , condemn , and put to death . the other be of Thomas Burdet of arrow in Warwickeshire esquire : it happen that king Edward hunt in his park , he be from home ; and there kill a white buck , whereof mr. Burde• make special account : so as come home , and find that Buck kill , he wish it horn and all in his belly that have counsel the king to kill it : and because none counsel the king to kill it but himself ; it be think those word be not speak without a malignant reflect upon the king : and thereupon Burdet be arraign and condemn , draw to Tyburn , and there be ? head : though M•rkh•• then chief justice , choose rather to lose his place , than assent to the judgement . and now begin ambition to boil in Richard duke of Gloucester ; whereof the first heat fall upon his brother the duke of Clarence , how to rid he out of the way ; to which end , he seek to raise jealousy in king Edward head against he , tell he , that some of clare•ce his follower be sorcere•s and necromancer , and have give forth speech , that one who name begin with G. shall disinherit his child and get the crown : and for a colour of this suggestion , one of the duke of clar••ce his servant , who come with he out of Ireland , from Dublin , where the duke be bear ; be in his master absence , by the procurement underhand of the duke of Gloucester , indict , •rraigned , condemn and execute at Tyburn for a conjurer , and all within the space of two day : and the duke of Gloucester , to make show that he have no hand in this fellow death , set on the duke of Clarence to complain of it to king Edward ; and in the mean time find matter , at least colour of matter , to make he be commit to the tower ; •nd then again , to make show he have no hand in his imprisonment , bid he be of good cheer , for it shall not be long ere he will see he release : and he keep his word ; for not long after , by his procure ? mean , he be drown in a but of malmsey , ( and this be his releasement ) and page 111 then lay in his bed , to make the people believe that he die of discontent ; who death , king Edward though perhaps consent to it , so much resent , that after ? ward when he be sue unto for any man pardon , he will •ighing break out in ? to such word : oh unfortunate brother• for who life not one man will open his mouth . be dead , he be bury at Tewkesbury in Glocestershire , by the body of his duchess , who great with child , die of poison a little before . it be now the two and twenty year of king Edward reign , when Iames king of Scotland send ambassador to treat of a marriage between his elder son Iames duke of Rothsay , and Cicely king Edward second daughter . this overture for a march , be by the king and his council ready embrace , and a great part of the portion be deliver to the Scot , with this proviso , that if the marriage di• not proceed , the provost and merchant of Edenbourgh shall be bind to rep•y it again . but the Scotish king , who have other fantasy in his head , and will take counsel of none but his own will , and divert also perhaps by the king of France ; not only dally the proceed in the ma•ch , but affront those of the nobility th•t persuade he to it ; in so much that his brother the duke of Albany be en ? force to abandon the country , and to fly for refuge into England : by who king Edward be inform of king Iames his fickle disposition , be so much in ? cense , that under the conduct of the duke of Gloucester , accompany with the duke of Albany , he send a army of twenty thousand against Scotland ; who in their way take in Barwick , and besiege the castle ; which be resolute defend by the earl Bothwell , the duke leave the lord Stanley to continue the siege , while he , wi•h the rest of the army , march towards Edenbourgh ; where within the castle of maiden , king Iames have immure himself . but the nobility of Scotland , see ? ing the danger they be in , endeavour by humble submission , to procure a peace , at least a cessation from war ; which with much importunity they obtain , upon these condition : that full satisfaction shall be present give , for all damage sum ? stain by the late incursion : that the duke of Albany shall be full restore to grace and place , with a abolition of all discontent between his brother king Iames and he : that the castle of Berwick , ( which have be now out of the possession of the english , one and twenty year ) shall immediate be surrender into the general hand ; and from thence no reduction of that or the town attempt : that all such sum of money as upon the proposition of the marriage , have be delive ? red , shall be repay . all which , except the first article , be accord p•• ? form . when this business with Scotland be indifferent accommodate ; king Edward receiv•s intelligence from his ambassadour-leidg in France , that the french king not only deny the payment of the annual tribute of fifty thousand crown , agree upon and swear to upon the ratification of the late conclude peace ; but have also marry the dolphin of France to the lady Margaret , daughter of Maxi ? mill•n son of the emperor ; which so much incense king Edward , that he resolve to revenge it ; and by the advice of his counsel , open war be present Procla ? m against France : but while king Edward be make preparation , and intentive to the business , he be attach by the hand of death ; and upon the nine of April , in the year 1483 , at Westminster end this mortal life . of his taxation . in his second year , he send his privy seal through England , to move man to give he a certain sum of money towards resist the Scot , wh•ch be grant and give liberal•y . in his seven year , in a parliament at Westminster , be ••su ? m all manner of gift , which the king have give , from the first day he take po ? session of the realm , to that time . in his eight year , at a parliament , be grant•d two fifteen and a demy . in his thirteenth year , a parliament be hold , where ? in , a sub•idie be grant ; and the year follow , towards war to be undertake in France , a new way of raise money be devise , call a benevolence , by which page 112 great sum of money be get of the subject : and it be not unworthy the re ? late , what a old rich widow at this time do ; who king Edward , amonsto ? there|be have call before he , merry ask , what she will willing give he to ? ward his great charge ? by my troth ( quoth she ) for thy lovely countenance , thou shall have even twenty pound . the king look scarce for half that sum , thank she , and love kiss she ; which so wrought with the old widow , that she present swear , he shall have twenty pound more ; and pay it willing . no• long before his death , he be by ill counselor put upon a distasteful course for raise of money ; which be , by fine man for delinquency against penal stature by which course some money be gather ; but before it come to full execution , he die , that also die with he . of his law and ordinance . in his four year , he new devise the coin both of gold and silver , as a• this day it be ; the gold , he name royal and noble ; the silver , groat and ? ? ? groat : the new groat weigh scant three penny ; and the noble of six shil ? ling eight penny , appoint to go for eight shilling four penny . in his five year , it be proclaim in England , that the beak or pike of shoe and boot , shall not pass two inch , upon pain of curse by the clergy , and forfeit twenty shilling , to be pay one noble to the king , another to the cordwainer of London , and the three to the chamber of London ; and for other country and town the like order be take . before this time , and since the year 1382. they pike of shoe and Bootes be of such length , that they be fain to be tie up to the knee with chain of silver and gilt , or at least with silken lace . Affaires of the church in his time . in this king time , the jubilee which be before but every fifty year , be by pope Six••• the four , bring to be every five and twenty year . also , where before this time , the scottish bishop have no metropolitan , but the bishop of York be metropolitan and primate of Scotland ; now in this king time , pope Six••• ap ? point the bishop of saint Andrews to be metropolitan of Scotland , who have twelve bishop under his obedience . of work of piety do in his time . this king lay the foundation of the new chapel at Windso• , and his queen Elizabeth found the queen college in Cambridge , and endow it with large possession . about his fifteen year , doctor Woodlarke provost of king college in Cambridge , found katherine-hall there . in his seventeenth year , the wall of the city of London , from Cripplegate to Bishopsgate , be build at the char ? ges of the citizen , also Bishopsgate it self be new build by the merchant ? ? ? of the styliard . also in this year die sir John Crosby knight , late major of Lon ? don ; who give to the repair of the parish-church of saint Helen in Bishopsgatestreet , where he be bury , 500 mark : to the repair of the parish church of he•w•rth in Middlesex , forty pound : to the repair of london-wall , a hundred pound : to the repair of rochester-bridge , ten pound : to the warden and common ? nalty of the grocer in London , two large pot of silver chase half gilt , and other legacy . about this time also , Richard Rawson one of the sheriff of London , cause a house to be build in the churchyard of saint mary hospitalll without bishop ? gate , where the major and alderman use to sit and hear the sermon in easter ? holiday . in his nineteenth year , William tailor major of London , give to the city certain tenement ; for the which the city be bind to pay for ever , at every fifteen grant to the king , for all such as shall dwell in cordwainers-street-ward , sess at twelvepence apiece , or under . and about the same time , one Thomas ? ? ? page 113 sheriff of London , build at his own cost the great conduit in Che•pside . in his three and twenty year , Edmund shaw goldsmith , who have be major of London , at his own cost re-edify Cripplegate in London , which gate in old time have be a prison . of casualty happen in his time . in his three year , the minster of York , and the steeple of Christ church in nor ? which be burn . in his seventeenth year , so great a pestilence reign in Eng ? land , that it sweep away more people in four month , than the war have do in fifteen year past . also in his nineteenth year be another pes••lence ; which begin in the late end of September , continue till the begin of November twelvemonth follow ; in which space of time innumerable people die . of his wife and issue . king Edward have be contract to Eleanor daughter of John Talbot earl of Shrewsbury , marry after to sir Thomas butler baron of S•dely : but he marry Elizabeth the widow of sir John grey , daughter of Richard Woodville by his wife Jaqueline duchess of Bedford : she live his wife eighteen year and eleven month ; by who he have three son and seven daughter . Edward his elder son , bear in the sanctuary at Westminster : Richard his second son , bear at Shrewsbury : George his three son , bear also at Shrewsbury , but die a child . Elizabeth his elder daughter , promise in marriage to Charles dolphin of France ; but marry afterward to king Henry th• seven : Cicely his second daughter , pro ? miss in marriage to Iames duke of •othsay , prince of Scotland ; but be marry of ? terward to John Viscount well , who she outlive , and be again remarried , but by neither husband have any issue : she lie bury at Quarena in the isle of wight . Anne his three daughter be marry to Thomas Howard duke of Norfolk , earl mar ? shall , and high treasurer of England ; by who she have two son , both die without issue : she lie bury at Framingham in Norfolk . Bridget his four daugh ? ter , bear at Eltham in Kent , become a nun in the nunnery of Dartford in Kent , which king Edward have found . Mary his five daughter , be promise in marriage to the king of Denmark , but die in the tower of Greenwich , before it can be solemnize : she lie bury at Windsor . Margaret his six daughter , die a inn ? fant . Katherine his seven daughter , be marry to William Courtney earl of de ? vo•shire ; to who she bear lord Henry , who by king Henry the eight be ere ? ated marquess of Exeter . concubine he have many , but three special ; and will use to say , that he have three concubine , who in their several property excel : one , the merry ; a ? other , the wyly ; the three , the holy harlot in his realm ; as one who no man can light get out of the church to any place , unless it be to his bed ; the other two be great personage than be fit to be name : but the merry be shore wife ; in who therefore he take special pleasure : this woman be bear in London , worshipful descend . and well marry : but when the king have abuse she , anon her husband ( as he be a honest man , and do know his good , not pre ? sume to touch a king concubine ) leave she up to he altogether . by these he have natural issue ; Arthur surname Plantagenet , ( who mother , as be suppose , be the lady Elizabeth Lucy ) create Viscount Lisle , by king Henry the eight , at Bridewell in London : and Elizabeth , who be marry to sir Thomas Lumley knight ; to who she bear Richard , afterward lord Lumley , from who the late lord Lumley do descend . of his personage and condition . he be ( say Comines ) the goodly personage that ever my eye behold ; ex ? ceed tall of statu•e , fair of complexion , and of most princely presence : page 114 and we may true say , he be of full age before he come to one and twenty ; for be but eighteen year old when his father die , he sue out his livery present : so as he begin the race of his for••ne just like Augustus Caesar , each of they at the same age succeed a ancestor after a violent death ; and each of they leave to set on a roof , where but only a fo••••tion be lay before . for his condition , he be of a erect composure both of body •nd mind , but something sag on the flesh side ; and never any man that do marry for love , do so little love Mari ? age ; for he take as much pleasure in other man wife as in his own . he be ne ? for more confident , than when he be in danger ; nor ever more doubtful , than when he be s••ure . of the four cardinal virtue , for••nde and prudence be in he natural ; temperance ••d justice , but to serve his turn . he be politic even to irreligion ; for to compass his end , he will not stick to swear what he never mean . yet he be religious beyond policy ; for before battle , he use to make his prayer to God ; after victory , to give he thank . he be far from be proud , yet very ambitious ; and can use familiarity , and yet retain majesty . he be a great briber ; and wha• he can not get by force , he will by reward ; as much as what he can not get by battery , he will by mine . H• be too credulous of report , which make he be in error , sometime to the h•rt of himself , oftentimes of other . he have make the white rose to flourish as long as Henry the four make the red , if he have not make it change colour with too much blood . he have be fortunate in his child , if he have not be unfortunate in a brother : but he be well enough serve , that will think a wolf can e ? ver be a good shepherd . he have a excellent art in improve his favour ; for he can do as much with a small courtesy , as other man with a great benefit : and that which be more , he can make advantage of disadvantage ; for he get the love of the Londoner by owe they money ; and the good will of the citizen by lie with their wife . of his death and burial . whither it begin from his mind , be extreme trouble with the injuri ? ous deal of •he king of France ; or from his body , by intemperance of diet , to which he be much give ; he fall into a sickness , ( some say a Catarche , some a fever ) but into a sickness whereof he die . in the time of which sickness , and at the very point of his death , sir Thomas Moore make he to make a speech to his lord ; which i may think to be the speech of a sick man , if it be not so sound , and of a weak man , if it be not so long : but it seem , sir Thomas Moore deliver rather what be fit for he to say , than what he say ; the content be only , to exhort his lord , who he know to be at variance , to be in love and concord a ? among themselves ; for that , the welfare of his child , who he must now leave to their care , can not otherwise be preserve but by their agreement . and have speak to this purpose as much as his weakness will suffer he , he find himself sleepy ; and turn on one side , he fall into his long sleep , the nine of April , in the year 1483. when he have live one and forty year , reign two and twenty and one mo•eth ; and be bury at Windsor , in the new chapel , who foundation himself have lay . of man of note in his time . man of valour in his time be many , but himself the chief , the rest may be observe in read his story . for man of letter , we may have leave at this time to speak of some stranger , have be man of extraordinary fame ; as io ? ha ? nes de monte Regi• , Purbachiu• and Bl••chinu• , all great astronomer ; Ludovicus Pontanus , Paulus Castrensis , and A•thonius Rossellanus , all great lawyer ; Servisanus , Sava•arola , and Barzizius , all great physician ; Bessarion and Cusanus , both great cardinal ; argyr•pole , Philelphus , Datus , Leonardus Aretinus , and Poggius , all great page 115 man in humane lit•rature . and of our own countryman ; John Harding a e•quire , bear in the north part , who write a chronicle in english verse , and among o•her special point therein touch , have gather all the submission and homage make by the scottish king , even from the day of king Athelstan : whereby it may evide•••y appear , how the scottish kingdom , even in manner , from the first esta ? blish•ng thereof here in Britain , have be appertain unto the king of Eng ? land , and hold of they as their chief and superior lord . Julian beme , a gentle ? woman of excellent gift , who write certain treatise of hawk and hunt ; also a book of the l•wes of arm , and knowledge pertain to hera•lds . John for••scue a judge , and chancellor of England , who write diverse treatise concer ? ning the law and politic government . Rochus a charterhouse-monk bear in London , who write diverse epigram . Walter h•nt a Carmelite friar , who for his excellent learning , be send from the whole body of the realm , to the general counsel h•ld•• fir•• at Ferr•ra , and after at Florence , by pope E•genius the four ; where •e am•ngs• other dis•uted with the greek i• defence of the order and ceremo ? ••es o• the latin church . William Caxton , who write a chronicle call Fructu• Temporum , and a appendix unto Trevisa beside diverse other book and translati ? once . John Milverton , a Carmelit• friar of Bristol , and provincial of his order , who because he defend such of his order as preach against endowment of the church with temporal possession , be commit to prison in the castle of saint Angel• in Rome , where he continue three year . David Morgan a Welshman , who write of the antiquity of wale , and a description of the country . John Tiptoft , a nobleman bear , who write diverse treatise , but lose of his head in the year 1471. Robert Huggon bear in Norfolk , who write certain vain prophecy . Thomas Norto• bear in Bristol , a Alchymist•Scoga•• a learned gentleman , and a student for a time in Oxford ; who for his pleasant wit and merry conceit , be call to court . but most worthy of all to be remember , Thomas Littleton a reverend judge of the common ple•s , who bring a great part of the law into a method , whic• lie before confu ? sed disperse ; and his book call Littleton tenor . page 116 the reign of king Edward the five . king Edward the four be dead , his elder son Edw••• , scarce yet eleven yee•• old , succeed in the kingdom , but not in the crown ; for he be proclaim king , but never crown : and indeed it may not so proper be call the reign of e••••d•he five , as the tyranny of Richard the three ; for from the time of king Edward• death , though not in name , yet in effect• he not only rule as king , but rage as a tyrant . prince Edwa•• when his father die , be at Ludlow in Wales , where he have live some time before , the better by his presence , to keep the welsh in awe ; he have about he of his mo ? there|be kindred many ; but sir Anthony Woodville , the earl river his uncle , be ap ? point his chief counsellor and director . the duke of Gloucester be at this time in the north , but have word present send he , from the lord Hastings lord Chamberlaine , of his brother king Edward death ; who acquaint he withal , that by his will , he have commit the young king , his queen and other child , to his care and government ; and thereupon put he in mind , ? ? ? necessary it be for he speed•ly to rep•ir• to London : but the duke of Gloce••er need no spur to set he forward , who be already in a full career ; for he have long before project in his mind , how he may come to attain the crown ; and now he think the way be make he . for as it be say , the very night in which king ed ? ward die , one Misselbrooke , long ere morning , come in great haste to the house of one potter dwell in red-crosse-streete without Cripplegate ; where he show unacustomated ? to potter , that king Edward be depart : to who Potter answer , by my troth man , then will my master the duke of Gloucester be king : what cause he have so to think , be hard to say ; but sure it be not likely he speak it of nought . and now the young king be come up to London with a strong guard ; partly to make a first expression of his greatness , and partly to oppose any disorder that may be offer . but the duke of Gloucester find this proceed like to be a rub in his way , at least not fit for his design , he present fall to undermine ; write most love letter to the queen , protest all humble and faithful service to the king and she , but withal persuade she , that this great guard about the king may be present dismiss ; which do but minister matter of suspicion , and will be apt to breed new jealousy in they who be now thorough reconcile . the queen of a nature easy to be wrought upon , give credit to his gloze letter ; and there ? upon page 117 send in all haste to her son , and to her brother the lord ri•ers ; require they by all mean , for some cause to she know , to dismiss their g•••d , ( not •en••oning by who advice she write they ; which if she have do , they will ne ? for have do ) but now upon her letter , they present do ; and come forward with o••ly a sober company . and now be gloucester first work ? ? ? but he know ? king that the work yet behind be too great to be do by himself ••one , get the d•ke of Buckingham and the lord Hastings ; two of the great man of power at that time in the kingdom , to join with he in opinion , that it be not fit •he ? ? ? kindred shall be so whole about the king ; and other of better blood and d•••rt , to be estrange from he ; and therefore by all mean , fi••o endeavour to •emove they : to which the duke of Buckingham be easy wrought , upon a pro ? mouse to have the earldom of Hartford confer upon he : and the lord Hasting• not hardly , upon a hope by this mean to cut off many , who in king Edward day ? … ? •ustly offend . and now another great work be do ; it remain in ? … ? place , to put it in execution , which be present this e•fected : then ? ? ? king have be at Northampton , and from thence be go to Stonystratford , ? ? ? the two duke of Gloucester and Buckingham a•rived ; but pretend the town to be too little for the entertainment of their comp•nies , they go back to •••thampton , and alight at the same in•e where the earl Ryver• have take up h•s lodging for that night , intend the next morning early to overtake the king . upon this their accidental meeting , great show of courtesy pass between they ; and supper end , the duke pretend weariness , retire to their lodging , the earl to he ; but the duke be enter into their chamber , enter into consultation ? ? ? their private friend , in which they spend a great part of the night , and then secret get the key of the inn gate , suffer none to pass either in or out ; whereof the earl have notice by his host , though he suspect the worst , yet set a good countenance upon the matter , and trust to his own innocency , he bold•y go to the duke of gloucester chamber , where he find the duke of buck ? ingham and the rest close set in counsel ; with who he expostulate the reason of this co••se , to imprison he in his inn against his will ? b•t they in stead of answer , c•mmand present to lay hand on he , charge he with many crime , whereof themselves be only guilty : and then take order for his safe imprisonment , they speedy take horse , and come to Stonistratford , at such time as the king be take horse , who in all reverent manner they salute : but present in the king presence , a quarrel be pick against the lord Richard grey , the king half brother : the duke of Buckingham make relation to the king , that he and the marquess his brother , with the earl river the queen brother , have endeavour and almost e•fected to draw to themselves the whole manage the affair of the kingdom• , and to set variance between the peer of the realm : and particular , that the l••d marquess without any warrant , have take out of the tower of London both treasure and armour , to a great quantity ; but to what purpose , though they be ignorant , yet there be just cause to suspect it be to no good end : and therefore it be think expedient by the advice of the nobility , to attach he at Northamp ? ••• , to have he forthcoming to make his answer for these and many other his ev••-b•ld action ; the king unable to sound the depth of these plot , mild •aid ? ? ? he : what my brother Marquesse have do , i can say ; but for my uncle ? ? ? brother here , i dare answer , that they be innocent of any unlawful practise ? ? ? against i or you . oh ( say the duke of Buckingham ) that have be their ? ? ? , to keep their treachery from your •races knowledge : and thereupon •n ? •an••y in the king presence , they arrest the lord Richard , sir Thomas Vanghan , sir Richard hall , and bring the king and all his company back to Northampton , p•••ing away a•l his old servant , and place in their room• creature of their own , who they have power to command . at which •ealing , the young king weep , but it ? ? ? nothing ; and to colour the matter , the duke of Gloucester at dinner , send a dish from his own table to the lord river , bid he •e of good cheer , for all ? ? ? shall be well : but the lord river thank the duke , pray the Messen ? she page 118 to carry it to the lord Richard , with the same message for his comfort , as one to who such adversity be strange ; but as for himself , he have all his day be ac ? quaint with it , and therefore can the better bear it . but for all this comfort ? table courtesy of the duke of Gloucester , he send the lord river , and the lord ri ? chard , with sir Thomas Va•g••• into the north country , into diverse place to pri ? son , and afterward to Po•fres , where in conclusion they be all behead . and now the duke of Gloucester have thus get the custody of the king , set forward towards London , give out by the way , that the marquess and the queen kindred have plot the destruction of the king , and of all the ancient nobility of the realm , and to alter the government of the commonwealth ; and that they be only imprison to be bring to their trial accord to law : and the better to settle these suggestion in the apprehension of the vulgar , they bring along with they diverse cart lade with armour , ( of their own provide ) with dryfat and great chest , wherein they report to be treasure for the payment of soldier ; with which they so possess the common-people , that all be believe for truth which be thus rumour : but the fine devise of all be , to have five of the duke of gloucesters instrument manacle and pinion like traitor ; and these in every place where the king lodged• to be disperse and give out to be man of great birth , draw into this vile plot of treason by the queen brother ; who must seem to be penitent for their offence , and to confess their own guilt : and this devise continue act till the king come to l•ndon , where their visard be pull off , and the disguise be soon discover . the queen in the mean time have intelligence of these doleful accident , and fear there be worse to follow , with her second son and five d•ughters take sanctuary at Westminster : and the young king hear of these thing , with tear and sigh express his grief ; but the duke make protestation of their fidelity , and care of his safety , seem only to marvel why he shall be melancholy . at this time a messenger come from the lord Chamberlaine , to the archbishop of York lord chancellor of England , to signify to he , that there be no fear of any thing , for that he assure he all shall be well . well ( quoth the archbishop ) be it as well as it will ; i assure he , it will never be so well as we have see it . and thereupon , present after the messenger departure , he call up his servant ( be ? king then in the night ) and take the great seal with he , come before day to the queen , who he find sit alone aloe on the rush , all desolate and dismay ; who he comfort the best he can , a••uring she that if they crown any king but her son who they have with they , he will present after crown his brother who she have with she ; and therewithal deliver to she the great seal , depart : but soon after , bethink himself better , he think he have do too rash , to deliver the great seal to the queen ; and therefore send for it again , and have it deliver he ; yet short after reprove for deliver it , by the counsel table , he have it take from he , which be then deliver to doctor Russell bishop of Lincoln , the most learned man of that time . and now th• duke of Gloucester so respective carry himself towards the king , with so much show of care and faithfulness , that by a general consent of the coun ? sell he be appoint and establish protector of the king and kingdom ; and by this mean he have the king in his custody : it remain now how to get his brother the duke of York , for without have both , he be as good ( as to his purpose ) have neither : and to effect this , he make the effect to become a cause : for where by his undue dealing• he have make the king melancholy , he now make that melancholy ? lie a cause to require his brother company to make he merry ; and therefore wish some course may be take , either by persuasion or otherwise , to procure the queen to send the duke of York to keep his brother the king company : here the arch ? bishop of York the lord cardinal , the man think most fit to be send in this in ? ployment , rise up and faith , he will do his best endeavour to persuade she ; but if he can not , he then think it be not to be attempt against her will , for that it will turn to the high displeasure of God , if the privilege of that holy page 119 place shall now be break , which have so many year inviolable be keep , which ? ? ? king and pope so good have grant , so many have confirm ; and which ho ? lie ground be more than five hundred year ago , by saint Peter in his own person , ac•ompani•d with great number of angel , by night so special hallow and de ? dicate to God ; and for proof whereof , there be yet in the abbey saint Peter cope ? ? ? show : that from that time hitherward , there never be so undevo•• a king that dare violate the sacred place , nor so holy a bishop that dare presume to consecrate it • and therefore ( say he ) God forbid , that any man for any earthly thing , shall enterprise to break the immunity and liberty of that sacred sanctuary ; and i trust w••h god grace , we shall not need it , at least my endeavour shall not be want ; if the moth•rs dread and womanish fear be not the let . womanish fear , nay woe ? manish forwardness ( quoth the duke of Buckingham ) for i dare take it upon my soul , she well know there be no need of any fear , either for her son or for herselfe• and prosecute his discourse , declare at large , that as there be no just ? ? ? for the queen to keep her son , so there be great cause for they to require he ; and that for breach of sanctuary in this case there can be none ; for that he have often hear of sanctuary man , but never hear of sanctuary child . and to this purpose have speak much , it be all assent to by the lord that be present , and with this instruction be the archbishop ( upon who the queen special rely ) send unto she ; who after humble salutation , acquaint she with his message , ear ? ne••ly persuade she not to oppose the lord protector request , and give her many reason , first that she ought not , and then that she can not keep he in San ? ctuary : she answer all his reason , though with great mildness , yet with great earnestness ; so as the archbishop find little hope to prevail with she by perswa ? sion , turn the tenor of his speech another way ; tell she plain , that if she do not consent to send her son , he doubt some sharp course will speed•ly be take . this warning sink so deep into the queen mind , that after a little pause , take her son by the hand , she say , my lord archbishop , here he be , for my own part i will never deliver he ; but if you will needs have he , take he , and at your hand i will require he ; and therewith weep bitter , deer child ( say she ) let i kiss thou before we part , God know whither ever we shall meet again ; and so the child weep as fast as she , go along with the archbishop to the star ? chamber , where the lord protector and other lord have stay all the while look ? ing for his come back : and as soon as he be enter the room , the protector spy the child , rise up and embrace he say , dear nephew , now well ? come with all my heart : next to my sovereign lord your brother , nothing give i so much contentment as your presence : and we may believe he , he speak as he think ; for now he have the prey which he so much desire . a few day after , pretend to have they lodge in a place of more security , until the distemper of the commonwealth may better be quiet ; he cause they in great pomp and state to be convey through London to the tower , there at pleasure to remain , till the time of coronation ; whereof there be great show of preparation make . but now the great work be to be do ; the prince be to be make away : and how to have it do , hoc opus , hic labour est : there must be potent instrument ; and none so potent as the duke of Buckingham ; and he , by a match to be conclude betwixt their child , and a equal partition of the treasure of the realm betwixt they two ; not only be draw to condescend , but be most forward to contrive and plot stratagem to effect it . the first rub in the way be the lord Hastings ; who be sound so firm to his old master king Edward son , that nothing can remove he , it be fit to remove he out of the way ; which be do in this manner : all the lord of the privy council , in the protector name , be convoke to the tower ; where •itting preparation for the coronation of the young king be propose , un ? till the protector come in ; who take his chair , very affable salute they , mer ? ry jest with some , and more than ordinary ple•sant with they all : when after a little talk , he say to the bishop of Ely ; my lord , i hear you have very good strawberry at your garden in Holborn ; i pray let we have a mess of they . Most page 120 glad ( say the bishop ) and present send for some : and then the protector rise up , pray the lord to spare his absence a little ; and so depart . within the sp•ce of a hour he return ; but so change in countenance , and with such inward per ? turbation , which with sigh and other passionate gesture he express so , that it make they all to marvel . after long silence ( the better to prepare they to the more attention ) he confuse interrogates• what they deserve that ne•ariously have pr•ctised his destruction ? this unexpected interrogation strike such ama•e ? mean among the lord , that they all sit gaze on one another , and be , as •t be , strike dumb : at length the lord Hastings , by buckinghams instigatio• , as one presume of his intimacy with the protector , bold answer , that they do ? serve the punishment of traitor ; which all the rest by their silence approve : whereat the protector rise up , and with a stern look upon the lord Hastings , reply : why it be the old sorceress my brother widow , and her partner that come ? mon strumpet Jane shore , that have by incantation conspire to be•eave i of my life ; and though by god grace i have escape the end of their malice , yet see the mischief they have do i ; for behold ( and then he bare his left arm to the el ? bow , and show it ) how they have cause this dear limb of i to wither , an• grow useless ; and so shall all my body have be serve , if they may have have their will a little long . those to who the queen religious course be not unknown , a•d who know his wither arm to have be such from his birth , •at• gaze one upon another , not know what to think or say ; until the lord Hastings , think thereby to leave all blame upon the queen , and excuse his Para ? mour mistress shore , ( who ever since the death of king Edward , he have entertain for his bedfellow , and have but that morning part from she ) with a sober look submiss say , if the queen have conspire — : which word be no soon cut of the lord Hastings mouth , when the protector clap his hand upon the board , and frown look upon he , say : tell thou i of if and and ? i tell thou , they , and none but they have do it ; and thou thy self art partaker of the villainy . who i my lord , quoth he ? yea thou traitor , quoth the protector ; and therewith , upon a watchword give , those prepare before for that purpose , in the outer chamber , cry , treason , treason ! when present a great number of man in arm• come rush in as it be to guard the protector ; one of which with a pole-axe strike a main blow at the lord St•nley and wound he on the head ; and have slay he outright , if he have not avoid the stroke by slip backward , and fall down to the ground . forthwith the protector arrest the lord Hastings of high treason ; and wish he to make haste to be confess , for he swear by saint Paul ( his usual oath ) that he will not touch bread nor drink till his head be off . it boot no• to ask , why ? for he know the protector action be not to be exami ? ned . so he be lead forth unto the green before the chapel within the tower , where his head be lay down upon a long log of timber , and there strike off . his body afterward with his head be inter at Windsor , beside the body of king Edward . in this man death we may see how inevitable the blow of destiny be : for the very night before his death , the lord Stanley send a secret messenger to he at midnight , in all the haste , to acquaint he with a dream he have , in which he think that a boar with his tusk so gore they both by the head , that the blood run about their shoulder : and forasmuch as the protector give the boar for his cognisance , this dream make so fearful a impression in his heart , that he be thorough resolve to stay no long ; and have make his horse ready , require the lord Hastings to go with he , and that present , to be out of danger , before it shall be day . but the lord Hastings answer the messenger : good lord ! lean ? eth your master so much to such trifle , to put such faith in dream , which either his own fear fanta•ieth , or else do rise in the night rest , by reason of the day thought : go back therefore to thy master , and commend i to he , and pray he to be merry , and have no fear ; for i assure he , i be as sure of the man he wo• ? •eth of , as of my own hand . the man he mean , be one Catesby , well learn in the law of the land ; who by his favour be grow into good authority in Leicester ? shire , page 121 where the lord Hastings estate lie . of this man he m•de himself so sure , •hat he think nothing can be plot against he , which he will not present re ? veale unto he . but this man deceive he ; and be grow so inward with the protector , that be set by the protector to draw he to be a party in his de ? sign , and find he can not do it , be himself the first mover to rid he out of the way . another warning the lord Hastings have : the same morning in which he be behead , his horse twice or thrice stumble with he , almost to fall ; which though it often happen to such to who no mischance be towards , yet have it of old be observe as a token forego some great misfortune . also at the tower-wharf , near to the place where his head soon after be strike off , he meet with one Hastings a pursuivant of his own name ; to who he say : ah ha ? sting , do thou remember i meet thou here once with a heavy heart ! yea my lord , say he , i remember it well ; and God be thank , that time be past . in faith , man , say the lord Hastings , i never stand in so great dread of my life , as i do when thou and i meet here : and lo how the world be change ! now stand my enemy in the danger , as thou may hap to hear hereafter ; ( for the enemy he mean be the lord river , and other of the queen kindred , who that very day be behead at Pomfret ) and i never so merry , nor in so good surety as now i be . that we may know , there be not a great omen or sign of ill fortune , than to pre ? fume of good . and indeed , such be the uncertainty of our estate in this life , that we seldom know when we be in a tempest at sea , nor when we be in a calm on shore ; think ourselves oftentimes most safe , when we be most in danger ; and often ? time to be in danger , when we be most safe : he only be in the true haven , that can say as Christ teach we , thy will be do in earth as it be in heaven . but this lord be thus put to death ; the lord protector , to colour the matter , immediate after dinner , in all haste send for many substantial citizen ; at who come , himself with the duke of Buckingham stand harness in old rusty Bri ? gandine , to make a show they be force by the sudden danger to take such as they can first come by : and withal , a herald of arm be send with a Proclama ? cion in the king name , signify , that the lord Hastings with some other have conspire the same day to have slay the lord protector and the duke of buck ? ham , as they sit in counsel ; and after to have take upon they to rule the king a•d kingdom at their own pleasure . now be this proclamation make within two hour after the lord Hastings be behead ; and be so curious indict , and so so fair write in parchment , and withal so long , that every child may perceive it be prepare before : which make one that be schoolmaster of Pauls , stand by when the proclamation be read , to say , here be a gay goodly cast , foul cast away for haste : to who a merchant answer , it be write by prophesy . and now by and by , as it be in revenge of her offence , the protector send the sheriff of Lo•do• into the house of shore wife , and spoil she of all her good , above the value of three thousand mark ; and then convey she through London to the tower , there leave her prisoner : where he lay to her charge , that she go about to bewitch he , and be of counsel with the lord Hastings to destroy he . in con ? clusion , she be lay into Ludgate , and by the bishop of London put to open penance for incontinency ; go before the cross in procession , upon a Sunday , with a taper in her hand : in which , although she be out of all array , save her ki•tle only ; yet go she so fair and lovely , and withal so womanly and demure , that m•ny who hate her course of life , yet pity her course usage , and be not a little grie ? ve to see her misery . and indeed , this may be say in her behalf : that be in extraordinary favour with king Edward , yet she never use it to the hurt of any , but to the relief of many : and be ever a mediator , a oppressor never . now it be so contrive by the protector , that the very day in which •he lord Hastings be behead at London , and about the very same hour , there be be ? head at Pomfret , the lord river and the other lord and knight that be a ? ken from the king at Northampton and Stonistratford ; which be do in the pre ? sense , and by the order of sir Richard Ratcliff knight , who service the Prote ? ctour page 122 special use in that business ; who bring they to the scaffold , and not suffer they to declare their innocency , lest their word may have incline man to hate the protector , cause they hasty without judgement or order of process to be behead . when these be thus rid out of the way , then think the protector that now be the time to put himself in possession of the crown : but all the study be , by what mean this matter be so hein•us in it self , may be break to the people , in such wise , as that it may be well take : for which purpose , it be think fit to call to this counsel ed•••d Sh•• knight the then major of London ; who upon pro ? mouse of advancement , shall frame the people inclination to it . and because Spi ? ritual man be best hearken to for matter of conscience , some of they be use also ; among who , choice be make of John Shaw clerk , brother to the major ; friar Penker , provincial of the order of the Augustine friar : both great P••a ? cheer , both of more learning than virtue , of more fame than learning . Theise two be appoint to preach , the one at Paul cross , the other at the hospital , in praise of the protector : Penker in his sermon so lose his voice , that he be sane to leave off and come down in the midst : Shaw by his sermon lose his reputation , and soon after his life , for he never after dare come abroad , for very shame of the world . but now be all the labour and study , to find out some convenient pretext , for which the people shall be content to have the prince depose , and the protector be receive for king ; to which purpose many thing be devise ; the chief be to allege bastardy either in king Edward himself , or in his child , or in both• to •ay bastardy to king Edward , sound open to the reproach of the protector own mother , who be mother to they both ; he will therefore that point shall more favourable be handle : but the other point concern the bastardy of his child , he will have enforce to the uttermost : the ground whereof be , that king Edward have be former contract to the lady Elizabeth Lucy , by who he have a child ; though the say lady , have be examine about it , confess plain , they be never assure . yet upon this pretext , doctor Shaw take for his text , bastard plant shall take no deep root ; in his sermon declare , that king Edward be never lawful marry to the queen , but be before God , husband to the lady Eli ? zabe Lucy , and so his child bastard . and beside that , neither king Edward himself , nor the duke of Clarence be reckon very sure for the child of the noble duke Richard , as those that by their favour more resemble other know man ; but the lord protector ( say he ) be the father own figure• his own count ? nance , the very print of his visage , the plain express likeness of that noble duke . now , it be before devise , that just at the speak of these word , the protector shall have come , to the end that th•se word meet with his presence , may be take among the hearer , as though the holy ghost have put they in the preacher mo•th , and so shall move the people even then to cry , king Richard , king Richard that it may be after say , he be special choose by God , and in a manner by Mira ? cle : but this devise fail ; for whither by the protector slackness in come , or the doctor haste in preach , he have pass those word , and be go to clean another matter , before the protector come ; so as afterward see he come , he be •aine to leave the matter , he have in hand , and out of all order and frame begin to repeat those word again : this be the very noble prince , the father own figure , his own countenance , the very print of his visage , the plain express likeness of that noble duke . while these word be in speak , the pro•e•tour accompa ? nie with the duke of Buckingham , pass through the people into the place where the doctor sit ; and there sit to hear the sermon : but the people be •o far from cry king Richard , that they cry shame on the preacher , for abuse his sacred function with so shameful a sermon . the Tuesday follow this sermon , the duke of Buckingham with diverse lord and knight come to the Guildhall in London ; and there before the major and whole assembly of citizen , make a very solemn and long oration , wherein he recite many grievance of the late king Edward government , his many unnecessary taxa ? tion page 123 and unjust severity ; thereby to bring his child into hatred : and then re ? •embred they of the late sermon make at Paul cross , by a learned doctor ; who clear show the bastardy of king Edward child ; and that Richard duke of Gloucester be the only rightful and indubitate heir to the crown of England : which the lord of the kingdom have take into their consideration , have there ? upon agree to accept he for their king ; and now himself be come to acquaint they with it , and to require their consent . which oration end , all man stand wonder at the motion , but no man offer to speak a word . at which the duke marvel , as suppose the major have prepare they before ; he ask the major private , what this silence mean ? who answer , that perhaps they have not hear or understand what it be he say . whereupon the duke with a more a•dible voice repeat the same matter again , in a more earnest and plain expression ; yet neither do that move they to show any inclination to the motion . then the duke whisper with the major , it be think , that the citizen be use to have such motion make they by their recorder , they will better it from he ; and thereupon the recorder be command to move they in it : but the recorder ( call ? lead Fitzwilliams ) be a honest man and new come to his place ; repeat one ? lie as near as he can the word of the duke , but add nothing of his own ; so as neither do this move the people to break their silence . at last , the duke see their resolve •ullennesse , tell they plain , that all the nobility and commons of the realm be agree to choose the protector for their king , as the true and unacustomated ? doubt heir ; so as he need not to have move they to it , but only for the great respect they all bear to this honourable city ; and therefore require they plain to speak their mind , whether they will join with they in this choice or no . at this , certain servant of the duke , and other of their procure , stand at the low end of the hall , cast up their cap , and cry aloud , king Richard , king Richard ; whereat , though the whole multitude of citizen marvel what they mean ; yet the duke take advantage of it , as of a unanimous conset : a good ? lie cry ( say he ) and thank they all for their universal approbation ; promise he will acquaint the protector with the great love they show towards he : and then require the major and chief citizen to meet he the next morning at bay ? nard castle , where the protector then lie ; there to join with he , in petition the protector to accept of this their free proffer subjection ; he take his leave and so depart . the next morning accord to appointment , they all meet at Baynard castle ; where the duke of Buckingham send up word to the • . protector , th•• himself with the lord major and his brethren , be come to present a supplication to he , concern a business of great importance : but the protector though ( preacquaint with all passage , yet make it strange what their supplication shall be ; and answer , that though he suspect nothing which the duke of Buckingham present to he ; yet he desire at least some some slight in•imation to what it may tend . to this it be answer , that the business they come about be to be make know to himself in person ; and therefore humble beseech he of admission in his presence : upon this , as if not yet well assure of their well mean towards he ; he appear unto they in a upper gallery , make semblance as though he will prevent all dan ? she , by stand something aloof and in his fort : to who the duke of buck ? ••• , in behalf of the major and nobility there present ; in most respective and re ? •erent manner make req•est , that his grace will pardon what he shall deliver to he : and much circumstance he use , before he will discover their cause of •omming : but though long first , yet at last , he tell it : that in respect of the ur ? gentle nec•ss•ties of the commonwealth , they all humble entreat he to take upon he the government of the kingdom , as in his own right , to who they all ten ? dread their allegiance . at which word , the protector start back , as if he have hear something most unpleasing to he , passionate answer : i little think , good cousin , that you of all man will have move i to a matter which of all thing in the world i most decline : far be it from to accept of that , which with ? out page 124 apparent wrong to my dear decease brother sweet child , and my own up ? right conscience , i can well approve of . and then be about to proceed in his premeditate di••imulation ; the duke in a seem abrupt passion , kneel up ? on his knee , say ; your grace be please to give i free liberty to deliver unto you , in the name of this worthy assembly , the tender of their ••tifull obedience to you : but i must further add , that it be unanimous resolve on , that your late brother king Edward child , as be general know to be illegitimate , shall never be admit to the crown of England ; and therefore if your grace shall nei ? there regard your self , nor we so much , as to accept it , we be direct determine to confer it upon some other of the house of L••caster , that will be more sensible of his own and our good . Theise word wrought so powerful upon the Prote ? ctours passion ; that with some change of countenance , and not without a seem reluctation , he say ; since i perceive the whole realm be so resolve , by no mean• to admit my deer nephew , be but child , to reign over you ; and see the right of succession belong just to i , as the indubi•ate heir of Richard Plan ? tagenet duke of York , my illustrious father : we be content to condescend to your importunity , and to accept of the royal government of the kingdom , and will to the uttermost of my power endeavour to procure and maintain the well ? fare thereof . and have so say , he come down from his gallery , and very for ? mal salute they all : which so please the giddy multitude , that present they fall to acclamation , long live king Richard our dread sovereign Lord• and then every man depart . page 125 the reign of king Richard the three . it be now the eighteenth day of June , in the year 1483. when Richard duke of Gloucester take upon he the crown : so as the imaginary reign of Edward the five , continue but just ten week . the next day , king Richard with a great train go to Westminster-hall , and place himself in the court of the king bench , say , he will take the crown upon he in that place where the king himself sit and minister the law ; because he consider that it be the chief duty of a king to administer the law : and here to get the love of the people by a feign clemency ; he send for one fog out of sanctuary , who for fear of his displeasure be flee thither ; and there in the fight of all the people , cause he to kiss his hand . after his return home , he take to wife the lady Anne , young daughter of the great Warwick , and the relict of prince Edward , son of Henry the six ; though •hee can not be ignorant , that he have be the author both of her husband and ? ? ? death . but woman affection be eccentric to common apprehension ; whereof the two pole be passion and inconstancy . against his coronation he have send for five thousand man out of the north ; and these be come under the lead of robin of Riddesdale , upon the four of in ? ly• together with his new bride , he go from Baynard castle to the tower by wa ? ••• , where he create Edward his son a child of ten year old , prince of Wales• ? ? ? lord Howard duke of Norfolk , his son sir Thomas Howard earl of Surry• ? ? ? lord Berckley earl of Nottingham , Francis lord Lovel Viscount Lovel , ? … ? chamberlain , and the lord Stanley ( who have be commit pri•oner to the •ower , in regard his son the lord strange be report to have levy force ? … ? ) not only that day be release out of prison , but be make lord ? ? ? of his household . the archbishop of York be likewise then delive ? read ; but Morton b•shop of Ely ( as one that can not be draw to the disinherit of ? ? ? Edward child ) be commit to the duke of Buckingham , who send he to his castle of Brecknock in Wales , there to be in custody . the same night be make seventeen knight of the bath , Edmund the duke of Suffolk son , George page 126 grey the earl of Kent son , Willia• the lord zouch son , Henry Aburga•••• Christopher Willoughby , Henry Babington , Thomas Arundel , Thomas Boleigne , Gerv•• Clifton , William •ay , Edmund Bedingfield , William Enderly , Thomas Lewku•• , Th•m•• of Vrmond , John bromne , and William Berckley . the next day , be the five o•iuly , the king ride through the city of London to Westminster , be accompany with the duke of Norfolk , Buckingham , and Suffolk ; the earl of Northu•b•rland , Arundel , Kent , Surrey , VVil•shire , Huntington , Nottingh•m , Warwick , and Lincol•• the viscount list and Lovel ; the lord Stanley , a•dely , d•cres , pe••ers of Chartley , Powis , Scroop of •psale , Scroop of Bolton , grey of Codner , grey , of Wilton , Sturton , Cobham , Morley , Burgeveny , zouch , Ferrer of Croby , Wells , Lumley , matr•vers , her ? bert and Beckham , and fourscore knight . on the morrow , be the six of July , the king with queen an•e his wife , come down out of the white-hall , into the great hall at Westminster , and go direct to the king bench ; and from thence , go upon ray-cloath , barefooted , go unto saint Edward shrine , all his nobility go with he , every lord in his degree . the bishop of Rochester bear the cross before the cardinal : then follow the earl of Huntington , be•ng a pair of gilt-spur , signify knighthood : then follow the earl of ••• ? ford , bear saint Edward sta•fe , for a relic : after he come the earl of ••• ? thumberland bareheaded , with the pointl•sse sword naked in his hand , signify mercy : the lord Stanley bear the mace of the constableship : the earl of Ken• bear the second sword , on the right hand of the king , naked , with a point ; which signify justice to the temporalty : the lord Lovel bear the three sword on the king leave hand , with a point ; which signify justice to the clergy : the duke of Suffolk follow with the sceptre in his hand , which signify peace : the earl of Lincoln bear the ball and cross , which signify monarchy : the earl of S•rry bear the four sword before the king , in a rich scabbard ; which be call the sw••d of estate : then go three together ; in the midst go gartar king of arm , in his rich coat ; and on his right hand go the major of London , •earing a mace ; and on his left hand go the gentleman-usher of the privy chamber : then follow the duke of Norfolk , bear the king crown between his hand : then follow king Richard in his robe of purple-velvet , and over his head a canopy , bor•e by four baron of the cinque-port ; and on each side of the king go a Bishop• on one side , the bishop of bath ; on the other , of Durham : then follow the duke of Buckingham , bear the king train , with a white staff in his hand , signify the office of high steward of England . then follow the queen train , before who be bear the sceptre , the ivory rod , with the dove , ( signify innocency ) and the crown : herself apparel in robe like the king , under a rich canopy , at every corner thereof a bell of gold : on her head she wear a circlet , set full of pre ¦ cious stone , the countess of Richmond bear her train ; the duchess of nor ? folk and Suffolk in their coronet , attend ; with twenty lady of estate most rich attire . in this order they pass the palace into the abbey : and go up to the high altar , there shift their robe ; and have other robe open in diverse place from the middle upward , be both of they anoint and crown : and then after the sacrament receive , ( have the host divide betwixt they ) they both offer at saint Edward shrine ; where the king leave saint Edward crown , where ? with he have be crown , and put on his own : and this do , in the same order and state as they come , they return to Westminster-hall , and there hold a most princely feast : at the second course whereof , there come into the hall sir Robert Dymock the king champion , make proclamation , that whosoever will say th•• king Richard be not lawful king of England , he be there ready to prove it against he ; and thereupon throw down his gauntlet : and then all the hall cry , king Richard , king Richard . and thus with some other ceremony , the coronation end ; and the king and queen return to their lodging . present after this , king Richard send a solemn ambassage to Lewis king of France , to conclude a leag•e and amity with he : but the french king so ab ? horrid he and his cruelty , that he will not so much as see , or hear his page 127 ••b•ssadors ; but send they away with shame , in disgrace of their master . at this t•me , with his queen , he make a progress of Gloucester , under colour to ? … ? of his old honour ; but indeed , to be out of the way , have a special ? … ? to be act : for though he have satisfy his ambition , by deprive he ? ? ? nephew of their livelihood ; yet it satisfy not his fear , if he deprive ? … ? also of their life . for effect whereof , his old friend the duke of buck ? •••••• be no fit instrument ; it must be one of a base metal : and to find out ? … ? hencede not go far ; for upon inquiry , he be tell of two that lie ? … ? it chamber to he ; sir Thomas and sir Iames Tyrrell• two brother , like ? … ? , not more near in blood , than different in condition ; off equal ? … ? of personage both , but not of equal goodness of mind ; sir Thomas ? ? ? off in honest and sober disposition ; but sir Iames of a turbulent spirit , and one ? … ? after preferment , will not stick to make a fortune out of any villainy . ? ? ? tell of this man , as he be sit at the close-stool , he present ro•e and ? ? ? to he : where be meet , the ma•ch be soon make up between they ; for he ? ? ? sir Iames more ready to undertake the work , than he be himself to set he ? ? ? it . it only remain , to procure he free passage to the place where then ? ? ? be to be do : for king Richard have former send a trusty Privado of he , ? ? ? John green , to sir Robert Brackenbury then lieutenant of the tower ; think ? ? … ? , have be raise by he , will not have refuse to do the deed he ? self , but when he hear how averse he be from it , good lord ( say he ) who ? ? ? man trust ? once he see plain , that while he be lieutenant , there be ? … ? to effect it . to remove therefore this rub , he send his letter man ? •••• to Br•ckenbury , to deliver present the key of the tower to sir Iames ? ? ? : who be now lieutenant for the time , and have the two innocent ? ? ? under his custody ; get two other , as very villain as himself ; the one ? … ? , the other Iames Dighton his horsekeeper , a big sturdy knave : and ? … ? make his under-agent ; who come into the child chamber in they ? ? ? , ( for they be suffer to have none about they , but one black-will , or ? ? ? ••••ghter , a bloody rascal ) they sudden lap they up in their clothes , ? … ? down by force the featherbed and pillow hard unto their mouth , so ? … ? , that their breath fail , they give up their innocent soul ; to God : ? ? ? when the mur•herers perceive , first by their struggle with the pain of ? ? ? , and then by their long lie still , to be thorough dead ; they lay their bo ? die out upon the bed , and then fetch sir Iames to see they ; who present cause their body to be bury under the stair , under a heap of stone : from whence they be afterward remove to a place of christian burial , by a priest of sir Robert ? ? ? ; who die within a few day after , and none know the place but ? ? ? , be cause that it have not be know to this day ; and give occasion after ? ward•• the imposture of Perkin Warbeck , in king Henry the seven reign . some ? ? ? , that king Richard cause their body to be take up , and close they in lead , and then to be put in a cousin full of hole , hook at the end with iron ; and so ? … ? a place call the black deep , at the Thames mouth , to be sure they shall ? ? ? rise up , not be see again . and now see the divine revenge upon the actor ? … ? ••cerable murder : mile forest , at saint Martins le grand , piecemeal rot ? ••• away : Dighton live at Callice a long time after ; but detest of all man , dye ? ? ? misery : sir Iames Tyrrell be behead afterward on the tower-hill for ? ? ? and king Richard himself , after this abominable fact do , never have ? ? ? mind ; trouble with fearful dream , and will sometime in the night ? ? ? of his bed , and run about the chamber in great fright , as if all the fury of ? ? ? be hang about he : that it be verify in he , •ltrix Tisiphone vocat ? ? ? seva sororum . con••deracies in evil be seldom long-lived , and common end in a reciprocal ? ? ? : and so be it now with king Richard and the duke of Buckingham : they have confederate together to the destruction of many ; and now their confe ? deracy dissolve in both their ruin : but what the cause be of their dissolve , be page 128 not so certain : whether it be that the duke think not himself so well rewar ? dead , as his great service have deserve ; or whether it be , that king Richard think not himself absolute king , as long as the duke , by who mean he come to be king , be in such a height of greatness ; or whether it be ( as be rather think ) that the duke be a man ambitious and of a aspire spirit ; though he have himself be the mean to bring king Richard to the crown ; yet when the crown be put upon his head , so envy at it , that he turn his head another way , •s not endure the sight ; and for the same ca•se , be willing not to have be pre ? send at the coronation , pretend sickness in excuse of his absence ; but that king Richard send he a sharp message , require he to come or he will fetch he : whereupon the duke go , but with so ill a mind , that he bear it in mind ever of ? ter . whatsoever it be , certain it be , that present after the coronation , there grow great jealousy between they ; and the duke retire himself to his castle at Breck ? nock , where he have the bishop of Ely in custody . and here we may observe the unsearchable depth of the divine providence ; the bottom whereof , the sound judgement of man can never sound , as work effect by contrary cause : for where king Richard have commit the bishop to the duke , as to one that will have a most watchful eye over he ; this which the king do for the bishop grea ? ter punishment , prove a mean afterward of the bishop great advancement , and a mean at the present of king Richard ruin . for the duke be retire home , and have his head so full of thought , that of necessity it require •ent ; for his own recreation , will sometime fall in talk with the bishop ; with who this ? course ( as he be a man of great wit and solid judgement ) the duke be so take , tha• he grow to delight in nothing more than to be confer with he . one time it happen , that the duke have open his mind something free to he ; and the bishop follow he in his own way , and cunning work upon that humour of the duke , which he find most work in the duke ; which he conceive to grow out of envy to king Richard : he say to this purpose ; my lord , you know i follow first the part of king Henry the six , and if i can have have my wish , his son shall have have the crown , and not king Edward : but after that God have ordain king Edward to reign ; i be never so mad , that i will with a dead man strive against the quick . and so be i to king Edward also a faithful chaplain , and glad will have be that his child have succeed he : how be it , if the s• ? great judgement of God have otherwise provide ; i purpose not to labour to set up that which God pull down . and as for the lord protector , and now King• ; and even there he leave : say , he have already meddle too much with the world ; and will from that day meddle with his book and his bead , and no further . then long the duke exceed to hear what he will have say ; because he end with the king , and there sudden stop : and thereupon entreat he to be bold to say whatsoever he think ; whereof he faithful promise there shall never come hurt , and peradventure more good than he will think ; and withal , that himself intend to use his secret counsel ; which ( he say ) be the only cause for the which he have procure of the king to have he in his custody . the bishop humble thank he , and say : in good faith my lord , i love not to talk much of prince , as a thing not all out of peril , though the word be without fault , for so much as it shall not be take as the party mean it , but as it please the prince to construe it . and ever i think on Aesop tale , that when the lion have proclaim on pain of death , that no horn beast shall abide in a certain wood ; one that have in his forehead a bunch of flesh , flee away a geart pace : the fox that see he run so fast , ask he whither he make all that haste ? who answer , in faith i neither wot nor reck , so i be once hence , because of the proclamation make of horn beast : why fool , ( quoth the fox ) thou may abide well enough , the lion mean it not by thou , for it be no horn that be in thy head : no mary ( quoth he ) that wot i well enough ; but what if he call it a horn , where be i then ? the duke laugh at the tale , and say ; my lord , i warrant you , neither the lion not the boar shall pick any matter at any thing here speak ; for it shall never come near page 129 their ear . then say the bishop , in good faith sir , if it do , the thing i be about to say , take as well as a fore God i mean it , can deserve but thank ; and yet take as i ween it will , may happen to turn i to little good , and you to les•e . then long the duke much more , to hear what it be : whereupon the bishop say , my lord , as for the late protector , sith he be now king in possession , i purpose not to dispute his title ; but for the weal of the realm , i can wish he have in he those excellent virtue which God have plant in the person of your grace : and there leave again . the duke somewhat marvel at his sudden pause , say , my lord i can but note your sudden stop in your speech , so as your word come not to any direct sentence , whereby i may have knowledge , eith•r what your inward intent be now towards the king , or what your affection be towards i : i therefore entreat you to use no more such obscurity , but plain to disclose your mind unto i , who upon my honour will be as secret in the case , as the deaf and dumb person be to the singer , or the tree to the hunter . the Bp. then upon confidence of the D. promise , said• my lord , i plain perceive , the kingdom be in the case as it be , under such a king as now we have , must needs decay and be bring to confusion ; but one hope i have , that when i consider and daily behold your noble personage , your justice , your ardent love towards your country , and in like manner the great love of your country to ? ward you ; i must needs think this realm fortunate , that have such a prince in store , meet and apt to be a governor ; in who person consist the very undoub ? ted image of true honour . and then tax the present king with many cruelty and oppression , he conclude , say : and now my lord , if either you love God , your lineage , or your native country , you must your self take upon you the crown and imperial diadem of this realm ; but if your self will refuse to take it upon you , i then adjure you , by the faith you owe to God , and by the love you bear to your native country , to devise some way , how the realm may by your princely po ? licy be reduce to some convenient regiment , under some good governor by you to be appoint : and if you can devise to set up again the lineage of Lan ? c•ster ; or advance the old daughter of king Edward to some puissant prince : not only the new crown king shall little enjoy the glory of his dignity , but all ci ? will war shall cease , and peace and profit shall again flourish . when the bishop have end his say , the duke sigh , and speak not of a good while ; which sore abash the bishop , and make he change colour : which the duke per ? ceive , he say ; be not afraid my lord , all promise shall be keep : so for that time they part . the next day , the duke send for the bishop , and have rehearse unto he the communication have between they the day before , he go on and say : my lord of Ely , since i perceive your true heart and sincere affection towards i ; i will now discover unto you , all that have pass my own imagination . after i have find the dissimulation and falseness of king Richard , and speci ? ally after i be inform of the murder of the two young prince , to which ( God be my judge ) i never condescend ; i so much abhor the sight , and much more the company of he , that i can no long abide in his court ; but feign a cause to depart , i take my leave of he ( he think nothing less , than that i be displease ) and so return to brecknok to you ; but in that return , whether it be by inspiration , or els• through some melancholic disposition , i have diverse imagination how to deprive this unnatural and bloody butcher of his royal seat and dignity . first• i fantasy , that if i listen to take upon i the crown , now be the time , when this tyrant be abhor and detest of all man ; and know not of any that can pretend title before i : in this imagination i rest ? ed two day at Tewkesbury ; in my journey from thence , i muse and think , that it be not best nor convenient to take upon i as a conqueror , for than i be sure that all man and special the nobility will oppose i ; but at last there spring up a branch in my head , which i sure think will have bring forth fair flower , but they turn indeed to dry weed : for i sudden remember that the lord Edmund duke of Somerset , my grandfather , be with king Henry the •ixth , in two or three degree of John of gaunt duke of lanc•ster ; so that i think page 130 certain , my mother be elder daughter to duke Edmund , that i be next heir to king H•nry the six , of the house of lanc•ster : this title please well such as i make of my counsel , and much more it eleva•ed my ambitious intent ; but while i be in a maze , whether i be best sudden to set this title open amongs• the common people , or else keep it secret a while , see what chan•ed : as i •ode be ? tween Worcester and Bridgenorth , i meet with the lady Margaret countess of rich ? mond , now wife to the lord Stanley , who be the daughter and sole heir to John duke of somers•t my grandfather elder brother ( which be as clean out of my mind , as if i have never see she ) so that she and her son the earl of Richmond h•ve both of they title before i , and then i clear see how i be deceive : w•••eupon i determine , utter to relinquish all such fantastical imagination concern the obtain the crown my selfe• and find there can be no better way to settle it in a true establishment , then that the earl of Richmond , very heir of the house of Lancaster ; shall take to wife the lady Elizabeth , elder daughter to king Edward , the very heir of the house of York ; that so the two rose may be unite in one : and now ( say the duke ) i have tell you my very mind . when the duke have say this , the bishop be not a little glad , for this be the mark he have himself aim at : and thereupon , after some compliment of extol his device , he say : since by your grace incomparable wisdom , this noble conjunction be now move ; it be in the next place necessary to consider , what friend we shall first make privy of this inten ? cion . by my truth ( quoth the duke ) we will begin with the countess of Richmond the Earles mother ; who know where he be , either in captivity or at large in Brit ? taine . and thus be the foundation lay of a league , by these two great man ; by which the death of the two young prince be full revenge : and it be not talk• of only , but present put in execution ; for now be Reynold Bray employ by the bishop , to his mistress the duchess of Richmond ; doctor Lewis the duchess physician be employ by she to the queen Elizabeth ; Hugh Conway and Thom•• r•me be employ to the earl of Richmond ; to acquaint they , but in most see ? great manner , with the intend plot , and to procure their promise to the propon ? dead marriage ; which be no hard matter , to make they all will to their own wi ? she . this do , instrument be employ , to draw in party to the confede ? racy ; bray by his credit draw in sir Gyles danbe•y , sir John Cheyney , Richard guild ? ford , Thomas r•me and other ; Urswick likewise draw in Hugh Conway , Thomas coal ? pepper , Thomas Roper with some other ; doctor Lewis draw in Edward Courtney and his brother Peter bishop of Exeter . it be memorable , that Thomas Conway be sen• most part by sea , and Thoma• r•me most part by land ; yet come to the ea•le of Richmond in Britain , within the space of little more than a hour ; upon who information of the plot , the earl acquaint the duke of Britain with it , who , though by Hutton king Richard ambassador , he have by many great offer be solicit to detain he in prison ; yet he both ready promise and real perfor ? m both his advice and aid to the earl proceed . in this mean time bishop Morto• , not without ask the duke leave , though without obtain it , secret in disguise , get he into his isle of Ely ; and there have do the earl good of ? fice by procure of friend , he thence pass into Britain to he ; from whence he return no more , till afterward the earl be king , send for he home and make he archbishop of Canterbury . but though all these thing be carry close , and oath take by all for secret ? fie , yet come it to king Richard knowledge ; who notwithstanding dissemble it , send for the duke of Buckingham to come unto he ; and he put off his come with pretend excuse , be at last peremptory send for to come upon his allegiance : when he return this resolute answer , that he owe no allegiance to such a perjure inhumane butcher of his own flesh and blood : and so from that time , preparation for arm be make on both side . the duke have get a good power of Welshman ; and the marquess Dorset have get out of sanctuary , be labour in Yorkshire to raise force ; the like do the two •ourtneys in Devonshire and Cornwall , and Guilford and r•me in Kent . king Rich•rd set forward with page 131 ? ? ? force ; the duke of Buckingham do the like , intend at Gloucester to have ? ? ? Severn , and so to have join with the two courtney ; but such abundance o••aine at that time fall , that the Severn be break out , and impossible to be pass ? ? ? ; which the Welshme• see , and take it for a ill sign , they secret sl•pt a ? way : so as the duke le•t well near alone , without either page or so much as a foot ? m•• ; repair to the house of one Humphrey Bannister near to Shre•sbury ; who ha ? ve be raise by he , and his father before he ; he think himself safe under his roof : but Bannister , upon proclamation make by king Richard , that whosoever can apprehend the duke , shall have a thousand pound for his labour ; like a un ? grateful and perfidious wretch , discover he to John Milton high sheriff of ? ? ? , who take he in a peel black cloak , as h• be walk in a orchard behind the house ; and carry he to Shrewsbury , where king Richard then lie ; •nd there without arraignment or legal proceed , be in the market place be ? head . whether Bannister receive the proclaim reward from the hand of the king , be uncertain ; but certain it be , that he receive the reward of a villain from the hand of divine justice ; for himself be afterward hang for man-slaugh ? ter , his elder daughter be deflower by one of his carter , or as some say , strike with a foul leprosy ; his elder son in a desperate lunacy murder himself , and be •ound to have do so , by the coroner inquest ; and his young son in a small puddle be strangle and drown . upon this disaster of the duke of Buckingham , his complice shift for they ? self ; s•me take sanctuary , some keep themselves in unknown place , but many convey themselves into Britain to the earl of Richmond• of who the marquess Dorset , John lord well , the bishop of Exeter and his brother sir Ioh• ? ? ? , sir Edward Woodville brother to queen Elizabeth , sir Robert Willoughby• sir Giles Da•beney , sir Thomas Arundel , sir John Cheyney and his two brethren , sir will ? lia• b•rckly , sir William Brandon and his brother Thomas , sir Richard Edgecombe , hol ? lowell and Poynings captain , be the chief . while these thing be in do , king Richard receive intelligence from Hutton his ambassador leiger in Britain ; that the duke not only refuse to restain the earl of Richmond , but intend also to give he assistance : whereupon the king ••oke present order for prepare his navy to stop the earl land in any port of England . upon the twelve day o•October in the year 1484. the earl of Richmond with forty ship , and five thousand wage Britain tooks , to sea ; but that evening , by tempest of weather , his whole fleet be disperse , so as only the ship wherein the earl himself be , with one little bark , be drive upon the coast of cornw•ll ; where discover upon the shore great store of arm soldier to resist his land ? ing ; he hoist sail , and return towards France , arrive in Normandy ; from whence send messenger to Charles the eight king of France , he be by he not only kind invite to come to his court , but be aid also with good s•mmes of money to bear his charge . after this , the earl return into Brit ? t•i•e , receive there the news of the duke of buckinghams death , and the disp•r•ing of the confederate force ; with which though he be at first much trouble , yet be he as much comfort afterward , when he see the marquess Dorset and those other lord and captain come unto he : soon after who come , upon Christ ? ••sse day before the high altar in the great church of Rheims , the earl of Richmo•d give oath , to marry the lady El•zabeth , as soon as he shall be quiet •e•led in the government of England : and thereupon all the lord and knight there present , do he homage , and in the same place , each to other religious vow , take the sacrament upon it ; never to cease prosecute war against king ri ? chard , till either his deposition or destruction . king Richard be inform of these thing , make diligent enquiry after all such as may be suspect to be favourer of Richmond association ; of who sir George brown , and sir Roger Clifford with four other gentleman be apprehend and ex•cuted at London : sir Thomas Sentl•ge• , who m•rried Anne the duke of exce ? t•rs widow , this king own sister , and Thomas Rame esquire be execute at ex ? ceter . page 132 Thomas Marquesse Dorset , and all such as be with the earl of rich•••d , be at a parliament then hold att•inted of treason , and all their Good• a•d land seize on to the king use : beside these , a poor gentleman call c•lli•g ? bor•• , for make a small rhyme of th•ee of his wicked co•nsellours ; the lord l•••ll , sir Robert Ratcliff , and sir William Catesby : which rhyme be thus frame : ? ? ? cat , the rat , and ••vell the dog ; rule all Engla•• under a ••og : be put to deat• , •nd his body divide into four quarter• . at this time , a truce be concl•ded betwixt England and Sc••land , for three years• and for a se•ling a firm amity between the two kingdom , a marriage it treated• of between the duke of Rothsay , elder son to the king of Scot ; and the la ? dy anne de la pool , daughter to John duke of Suffolk , by anne sister to king Ri•hard , which sister he so much favour , that after the death of his own son , who die some time before ; •e cause John earl of Lincoln , her son and his nephew , to be proclaim heir apparent to the crown of England . and now king Richard , to take away the root of his fear , once again send be ? b•••adors to the duke of Britain , with orde• ( beside the great gift they carry with they ) to make offer , that king Richard shall year pay and answer the duke of all the revenue and profit of all land and possessions• as well belong to the earl of Richmond , as of any other nobleman or gentleman that be in his come ? pany ; if he after that time will keep they in continual prison , and restrain the• from liberty . but the duke of Brit•ine be at that time fall into such infirmity , that the ambassador can have no audience ; they address themselves to •eter Landois , the duke chief treasurer : and he take with this golden hook , faithful promise to satisfy their request ; and have do so indeed , but that B. Morto• , sojour ? ning then in fl••ders , have by his friend intelligence of his purpose , and present inform the E. thereof . the E. be then at Va••e•• who , upon the Bps. information , take with he only five servant , as though he go but to visit some friend ; when he be five mile forward on his way , sudden turn into a wood adjoin ; and there change apparel with one of his servant , follow after as their attendant ; and never rest , till by way unknown he come to his company abide at Angi•r• : yet be not his departure so secret nor so sudden , but that Peter Landois have notice of it ; who send post after he , be so near overtake he , that he be scarce enter one hour into Franc• , when the post arrive at the con•ines , and then dare go no further . in the mean time , sir Edward Woodville and captain p•y ? ning , who with their company be leave behind in Vannes , have be in danger of Peter L•ndis his malice ; but that the duke be inform by the chancellor of their case , not only protect they , but furnish they with all necessary for their journey to the earl : and be so incense against L••dois for this action of he , that for this and some other overbold pre•umptions , he be afterward hang . the earl have pass this danger in Britain , and be arrive in France , ad ? dress himself to the french king , implore his aid ; and have it promise and perform : and in this time John veer earl of Oxford , who have long time be keep prisoner in the castle of ham , so far prevail with Iames blunt captain of the fortress , and sir John Fortescue porter of the town of Callice ; that not only they suffer he to be at liberty , but accompany he also to the earl of Richm••• , to who captain Blunt give assurance that the fortress remain whole at his de ? votion . at this time also there resort to the earl , diverse young gentleman that be student in the university of Paris , proffer he their service ; among who be Richard fox , at that time famous for his learning ; with who after ? ward the earl advise in all his affair , make he one of his most privy counsel , and at last bishop of Winchester . but now king Richard have be disappoint of his design in Britain , have another way in his head , to disappoint the earl of Richmond of his marriage with the daughter of queen Elizabeth : and to this end , he send to the Queen• ( be still in sanctuary ) diverse messenger , who shall first excuse and purge he of all thing former attempt and do against she ; and then shall large promise promo ? tion page 133 innumerable , not only to her self , but also to her son lord Thomas mar ? quesse D•r•et• by •or•e of which promise , the messenger so prevail with she , •hat no• only she begin •o relent , but ? … ? be content to submit her self whole to th• king• pleasure . and thereupon put in oblivion the murder of her inno ? •••• child , the butcher of her own brother and son , the infamy of her •oy•ll hu••and , the aspersion of adulte•y cast upon her self , the imputation of ba ? stardy lay to she Da••hter•• forget also her oa•h make to the earl of Richmond moth•r ; seduce by fla•tering word , she first deliver into king Richard hand her •ive daughter , and after send letter to the marquess her son , be then at Pari• wit• the earl of Richmond ; will he by any mean to leave the earl , and with all speed to repair into England• where for he be provide great honour and promotion : assure he further , that all offence on both part be forget ? •en •nd forgive ; and both he and she incorporate in the king favour . if we wonder at this credulity in the queen , we may conceive she be move with they ? … ? motive of fear and hope ; she fear ( no doubt ) that if she deny the king• request , he will present take some sharp course both against she and her d•••ht•rs ; and she hope that if she yield to his request , he will undoub ? •e•ly perform his promise , see it be as easy for he to keep it as to break it . but now king Richard purpose be to marry one of his brother king Edward daughter : there be one impediment which direct hinder it ; that he have a wife live ; and how to be rid of she , that he may not bring new aspersion upon hi•selfe , he can not well tell ; yet this he resolve , that be rid of she he will by some way or other : but before he will use extremity , he will first try mild way ; and first he abstain both from her bed and company , and complain to diverse of her barrenness ; which come to her •are , he hope may cause she •o dye with grief : and when this device fail , he then cause a rumour to be s••••d among the people , that she be sudden dead ; hope the very conceit thereof will kill she : when this device also fail , ( for the queen hear of it , and mistrustr the worst , with a most sorrowful countenance come unto he , demand what she have do , that he shall judge her worthy to dye ? who an ? swer with fair word , bid her be of good cheer , for ( to his knowledge ) she shall have no other cause : ) he then make sure work ; for within few day after , whether by poison or by what other •eans , it be not certain know , she depart this life ; and with all solemnity , not without some formal tear of king Richard , be inter in saint Peter church at Westminster . king Richard now by his wife death , have make himself way to marry another ; ? ? ? all the allure mean he can devise , to win the love of the lady Elizabeth his ? ? ? , but mean at last to purchase his desire by rape , if he can not other ? wise• and have perhaps do it , but that the storm threaten from beyond the sea , grow every day more strong than other , force he to prorouge the execution of his desire , and look to the prevention of his present danger . the lord Stanley be command present to levy force for the kingsayde , as he will justify his inte ? grity to he ; but yet be not permit to go down into the country , until he have leave George lord strange his elder son , as a pledge of his loyalty , behind he . and now king Richard be inform ( though the information be crafty subor ? ned by his enemy ) that the earl of Richmond be out of hope of any great assi ? stance from France ; discharge the ship which he have appoint to guard the sea , ••d likewise all the soldier ; only order be give for diligent watch of the beacon . at this time , one Morga• Kidwelly , a student at the inn of court , with great ha ? ••d of his life , pass over to the earl ; inform he , that king Richard by all mean labour to match himself with the lady Elizabeth : which so wrought with the earl , that he see there be no linger : and the more , be by he further inform , that Ric• ap Thomas and John savage , two powerful man in their con ? •r•es , be ready with great force to assist he : whereupon not have above page 134 two thousand mercenary , and but indifferent ship to convey he over : a ? about the middle of August he put to sea , and by the advice of the say Kidwelly , stee ? read his course for wale , and on the seventee••• day after his departure from Har ? fly , arrive at Milford haven ; and there land his for•es without trouble or he ? peachment , from thence m•••hed peaceable ? ? ? Hereford , where by the inhabitant he be joyful receive . here he receive news by captain Arnold butler , that the earl of Pembroke with all hi• reti••• , be upon the way to join with he ; also thither come to he R•chard Griffith and John Morgan , with a band of brave welsh man ; and the same day , sir Gi•ber• T•lbo• with all the earl of Shewsbury•s tenant , ( be about two thousand well appoint man ) come unto he : with these he march towards Shrewsbury ; at which time word be bring he , that sir Robert Herbert and rice ap Thomas , be ready with a great power to stop his passage : which somewhat trouble he , that his friend so sudden shall revolt : but it be but a trick of r•ce ap Tho••• to make his bargain the sure : for soon after , rice ap Thomas meet he , and offer he his service , so as the earl will pledge his faith to perform his promise former make ; which be , that have once obtain the crown , he will make rice sole governor of Wales : which be now assent to , and afterward performed• at this time the lord St••ley with five thousand man , have take up his lodging at the town of Leicester ; but hear of the earl march that way , he le•t Leicester and go to Adde•t•• , not dare to show himself open for the earl ; for fear the king shall put his son the lord strange to death , who he have leave a hostage with he . all this time king Richard lie at Nottigham , and be as it be fatal take with a spirit of security , hear that the earl have but small assistance either from France or in England ; and therefore slight he as little able to do any great matter : but when he hear that part of his own force be revolt to he , than he begin to look about he , and send present direction to the duke of Norfolk , the earl of Northumberland and Surry , with sir Thomas Brackenbury lieutenant of the tower , with all speed to bring their force to he at Lutterworth , from whence upon their arrival , hear that the earl be encamp at Lichfield : he mar ? ch thitherward : at which time , sir Walter Hungerford and some other , with ? draw themselves from king Richard part : and sir John savage , sir Bryan Sta•ford , and sir Simon Digby , with their several force , join with the earl . king Richard take the advantage of a large plain near Bosworth , adjoin to a hill call anne beam ; where he encamp : and observe by his adversary manner of approach , that they mean to give he battle ; he the next morning put his force in order : the vanguard be lead by the duke of Norfolk , which con ? sist of one thousand two hundred bowman , flank with two hundred Cuyras ? sier , under the conduct of the earl of Surrey : the battle king Richard lead he ? self , which consist of a thousand billman , empale with two thousand pike : the rearward be lead by sir Thomas Bracke•bury , consist of two thousand mingle weapon , with two wing of horseman , contain fifteen hundred , all of they cast into square maniple ; expect the lord Sta•ley's come with two thousand , most of they horseman : but the lord Stanley carry himself so wary , that he may neither give cause of suspicion to the king , nor yet cause of disadvan•tage to the earl : that when , early in the morning , the earl send unto he , de ? sire his prese•t repair ; he answer , that he must look for no aid from he , till the battle shall be join ; and therefore advise he , with all possible speed to give the onset . This answer somewhat stagger the earl , because his number do but little exceed one half of the king : yet to make the best show he could• by the advice of his counsel of war , he make his vanguard open and thin ; of which John earl of Oxford have the lead : the earl himself lead the battle : sir Gil ? bert Talbot command the right wing , and sir John savage the left : who soul ? dyer be all alike clad in white coat and hood of freeze ; by the reflection of the sun upon they , make they appear in the view of their enemy , double the num ? ber . the rearward be govern by the earl of Pembroke , which consist most page 135 of •orse , and some pike and black bill . king Richard to encourage his soldier , make a solemn speech unto they : but alas ! what hope co•ld he have to put they in heart , who heart he have lose ? or to rise alacrity in other , who have none in himself ? for now the remembrance of his forepass villainy , and special a fearful dream he have the night before , ( wherein it seem to he he see diverse i ? mage like devil , which pull and hale he , not suffer he to take any rest or quiet ) so damp his spirit , that although he set a good face upon the matter , yet he co•ld not choose but have a presage fear that the date o• hi• day be not far from expire . the earl of Richmond on the other side , have a clear consci ? ence in himself , and speak to man that follow he for love• have the easy mean •o give they encouragement : which he do with so cheerful a countenance ; as though already he have get the victory . after their military exhor•ations end , king Richard command to give the onset . between both army , there be a ? great marsh ; which the earl leave on his right-hand , that it may be a defence for his soldier on that side ; and beside by so do , he have the sun at his back , and in the face of the enemy . when king Richard see that the earl company wa• pa••ed this marish , he command with all speed to set upon they . then be the arrow let fly on both side , and those spend , they come to hand-stroke ; at which encounter come in the the lord Stanley , and join with the earl . the earl of Oxford in the mean time , fear lest his company shall be compass in with the multitude of his enemy , give charge in every rank , that no man shall go a ? above ten foot from the standard : whereupon they knit themselves together , and cease a while from fight : which the enemy see , and mistrust some fraud , they also pause and leave strike . but then the e•rle of Oxford , have bring all his band together , set on the enemy afresh ; which the enemy perceive , they place their man slender and thin before , but thick and broad behind ; and resolute again begin •he fight . while these two va•ntgu•rds be thus con ? tend , king Richard be inform , that the earl of Richmond with a small ••• ? ber be not far off : whereupon he present make towards he ; and be of a invincible courage , whereof he be now to give the last proof , he make so fu ? rious a assault , that first with his own hand he slay sir William Brandon , who bear the earl standard ; next , he unhorsed and overthrow sir John cheyny , a strong and stout man at arm ; and then assault the earl of Richmond himself , who ( •hough no man will have think it , yet ) for all the king fury , hold he off at his Laun ? ces point , till sir William Stanley come in with three thousand freshman ; and then oppress with multitude , king Richard be there slay . it be say , that when the battle be at the point to be lose , a swift horse be b•ought unto he , with which he may have save himself by flight : but out of his undaunted courage he refuse it , say he will that day make a end of all battle , or else lose his life . in this battle , he•ry earl of Northumberland , who lead king Richard rearward , never strike stroke ; as likewise many other , who follow king Richard more for fear than love : and so king Richard who have deceive many in his time , be at this time deceive by many : which be not unforeseen by some , who cause a rhyme to be set upon the duke of Norfolk gate the night before the battle ; which be this : Jack of Norfolk be not too bold , for Dickon thy master be buy and sell . yet notwithstanding this warning , the noble duke continue firm to king Richard ; and more consider what he be towards he , then what towards o ? there|be ; follow he to the last , and in his quarrel lose his life . This John Howard be the son of sir Robert Howard knight , and Margaret old daughter of Thomas •••bray duke of Norfolk , in who•e right he be create duke of Norfolk by king Richard the three , in •he year 1483. have be make a baron before by king Edward the four . the whole number slay in thi• battle on kin•R•ch•rds par• be not above a thousand person ; whereof of the nobility , beside the duke of Norfolk , only Walter lord Ferrer of Chartley , sir Richard Rat•liffe , and sir Robert •rakenbury lieutenant of the tower , and not many gentleman more . sir William page 136 Catesby , one of the chief counselor of king Richard , with diverse other , be two day after behead at Leicester . among those that run away , be Franci• Viscount Lovel , Hu•fry Stafford , and Thomas Stafford his brother , who take San ? ctuary in saint John at Gloucester . of captive and prisoner there be great num ? ber . Henry earl of Northumberland , who though on king Richard side , intermi•ted not in the battle ; be incontinent take into favour , and make of the counsel ; but Thomas Howard earl of S•rry , though he submit himself , yet as have be special familiar with king Richard , be commit to the tower ; where he re ? maim a long time : but at last be deliver and high promote . on the earl of Richmond part be slay scarce a hundred person ; ( some say , but ten ) of who the principal be sir William Brandon , the Earles standard-bearer . this battle be fight at Rodmer , near Bosworth in Leicestershire , the two and twenty day of August , in the year 1485. have continue little above two hour . Pre ? sent after the battle , the earl knight in the field , sir Gilbert Talbot , sir John Mortimer , sir William Willoughby , sir Rice ap Thomas , sir Robert point , sir Humphrey Stanley , sir John Turbervile , sir Hugh Pershall , sir R. Edgecombe , sir John bykenill , and sir Edmund Carew : and then kneel down , he render to almighty God his hearty thank for the victory he have obtain ; and command all the hurt and maim person to be cure : whereat the people rejoice , clap their hand and cry , king Henry , king Henry : which good will and gladness of the people when the lord Sta•ley see , he take the crown of king Richard , which be find among the spoil in the field , and set it on the earl head , as though he have be elect king by the voice of the people . it may not be forget , that when king Richard be come to Bosworth , he send to the lord Stanley to come present to his presence ; which if he refuse to do , he swear by Christ passion , that he will strike off his son head before he dine : whereto the lord Stanley answer , that if he do so , he have more son alive , and he may do his pleasure ; but to come to he , he be not then determine . which answer when king Richard hear , he command the lord strange immediate to be behead ; but be at the ve ? ry time when both army be in sight of each other ; his lord persuade he , it be now time to fight , and not to put to execution : and so the lord Strang• escape . of his taxation . we must not look for taxation in kind , in this king reign ; for he draw from his subject not money so much as blood ; and the money he draw be most by blood , which draw on confiscation : whereof , let never any prince make a precedent : for where taxation proper do but tondere , the•e do de ? glu•ere . yet in his second year , he call a parliament , wherein beside the great confiscation of those that be then attaint , he impose upon the people a great tax , which what it be , be not record . of his law and ordinance . have get the crown by pestilent course , he seek to establish i• by wholesome law : for in no king reign be better law make , then in the reign of this man . among other of his law , it be enact , that from thence forth , the commonalty of the realm shall in no wise be charge by any imposition call a benevolence , nor any such like charge ; and that such exaction call he be ? nevolence , before this time take , shall be take for no example to make any such like charge hereafter ; but shall be damn and annul for ever . many other good law be by he make ; that we may say , he take the way of be a good king , if he have come to be king by way that have be good . page 137 affair of the church in his time . in his time , the trouble of the temporalty keep the clergy at quiet ; and though there be complain in the street , there be none in the church . on ? lie •hores wife may complain , why she shall do penance for offend light against only the seven commandment ; and king Richard do none for offend heavy against all the ten ; but that perhaps he have get some good fall ? low to be his confessor . work of piety do by he . as bad as this king be , yet some good work he do : he found a college at Middleham beyond York ; and a collegiate Chauntry in London , near unto the tower , call our lady of Barking : he endow the queen college in cam ? ••••ge , with five hundred mark of yearly revenue ; and disforest the great field of Whitchwood , which king Edward his brother have enclose for deer . of casualty happen in his time . in his second year , at the time when the duke of Buckingham mean to pass with his army over Severn ; so great a inundation be of wa•er , that man be drown in their bed , house be overturn , child be carry about the field swim in cradle , beast be drown on hill : which rage of water con ? ti••ed ten day ; and be to this day in the country thereabouts , call the great water , or the duke of Buckingham• water . of his wife and issue . he marry Anne the second daughter of Richard Nevil the great earl of Warwick , be the widow of Edward prince of Wales , the son of king he••y the six : she live his wife to the last year of his reign ; and then to make way for another , be bring to her end , and lay a• rest in the abbey of Westmin ? star : by she he have only one son , bear at Middleham near Richmond in the coun ? ty of York ; at four year old , create earl of Salisbury by his uncle king Edward the four ; at ten year old , create prince of wale by his father king Richard , but die soon after . of his personage and condition . there never be in any man a great uniformity of body and mind then be in he ; both of they equal deform . of body he be but low , crookbacked , hook-shouldered , splay-footed , and goggle-eyed , his face little and round , his complexion swarsie , his left arm from his birth dry and wither : bear a monster in nature , with all his tooth , with hair on his head , and nail on his finger and toe . and just such be the qua••ties of his mind : one quality he have in ordinary , which be , to look faw••ngly when he plot , stern when he execute . those vice which in other man be passion , in he be habit : and his cruelty be not upon occasion , but natural . if at any time he show any virtue , it be but pre ? tense ; the truth of his mind be only lie and falsehood . he be full of cou ? rage and yet not valiant ; valour consist not only in do , but as well in suffer ? king , which he can not abide . he be politic and yet not wise , policy look but to the middle , wisdom to the end : which he do , and do not . and it be not so much ambition that make he desire the crown , as cruelty , that it may be in his power to kill at his pleasure : and to say the truth , he be scarce of the num ? ber of man who consist of flesh and blood , be nothing but blood . one miracle page 138 we may say he do ; which be , that he make the truth of history to exceed the fiction of poetry , be a great harpy than those that be feign . he will fain have be account a good king , but for his life he can not be a good man ; and it be a impossible thing to be one without the other . he leave no is•ue behind he : and it have be pity he shall , at least in his own image ; one such monster be enough for many age . of his death and burial . be slay in the battle at Bosworth , as before be relate ; his body be leave naked and des•oyled to the very skin , not so much as a c•out leave about he to cover his privy part : and take up , be truss behind a pursuivant at arm , one bla•ch senglyer or white-boar ; his head and arm hang on one side of the horse , and his leg on the other ; and all besprinkle with mire and dirt , he be bring to the gray-frier church within the town of Leicester , and there for some time lie a miserable spectacle ; and afterward , with small funeral-pomp , be there inter . but after this , king He•ry the seven cause a tomb to be make , and set up over the place where he be bury , with a picture of alabaster represent his person ; which at the suppression of that monastery be utter deface : since when , his grave overgrow with nettle and weed , be not to be find ; only the stone ? chest wherein his corpse lie , be now make a drinking-trough for horse , at a common inn in Leicester , and retain the only memory of this monarch greatness . but his body ( as be report ) be carry out of the city , and contemptuous bestow under the end of bow-bridge , which give passage over a branch of stour , upon the west side of the town . upon this bridge ( the like report run ) stand a stone of some heighth ; against which king Richard , as he pass •owards Bosworth , by chance strike his spur : and against the same stone , as he be bring back , hang ? ing by the horse side , his head be dash and break ; as a wise-woman ( forsooth ) have foretold ; who before his go to battle , be ask of his success , say , that where his spur strike , his head shall be break . but these be but Repo••• he have live seven and thirty year , reign two , and two month . of man of note in his time . of man of note for wickedness and villainy , enough have be mention i• the body of the story : and for man of valour and learning , they will fitte• be place in a better king reign . page 139 the reign of king Henry the seven . Henry earl of Richmond , bear in pembrooke-castle , son to Edmund earl of Richmond , by his wife Margaret , sole daughter of John duke of Somerset , which John be son of John earl of Somerset , son of John of gaunt duke of Lancaster , by his three wife Katherine Swinford ; and by this descent , heir of the house of Lancaster : have win the battle at Bosworth , against king Richard ; be by public acclamation salute king of England , on the 22 day of August , in the year 1485. and this be his first title . and now to take away a root of danger ; before his departure from Leicester , he send sir Robert Willoug•by to the castle of Sheriffehaton in the county of York , for Edward Planta ? ge•et earl of Warwick , son and heir to George duke of Clarence , be then of the age of fifteen year , who king Richard have there keep a prisoner all his time ; who be thence convey to London , and shut up in the tower to be keep in safe custody . in the same castle also , king Richard have leave reside the lady Elizabeth elder daughter to king Edward the four : and she now king Henry appoint honorable attend to be bring up to London , and to be deliver to the queen her mother . this do , he take his journey towards London ; where at his ap ? proach near the city , Thomas hill the major , Thomas Britain and Richard Chester sheriff , with other principal citizen , meet he at shoreditch , and in great state bring he to the cathedral church of saint Paul , where he offer three Stan ? dard : in the one be the image of saint George ; in another be a red fiery dragon , beat upon white and green sarsenet ; in the three be paint a dun cow , upon yellow tarterne . after prayer say , he depart to the bishop palace , and there sojourn a season : and in the time of his stay here , he advise with his council , and appoint a day for solemnize his marriage with the lady Elizabeth : before which time notwithstanding , he go by water to Westminster , and be there with great solemnity anoint and crown king of England , by the whole consent as well of the commons as of the nobility , by the name of Henry the se ? venth , on the thirty day of October , in the year 1485 : and this be his second title . and even this be reveal to Cadwalloder last king of the Britain , seven •u•dred ninety and seven year past ; that his offspring shall reign and b•a•e dominion in this realm again . page 140 on the seventeenth day of November follow , he call his high court of Par ? liament ; where , at the first sit , two scruple appea•ed : one concern t•e burgess ; for that many have be return burgess and knight of shire , who by a parliament in king Richard time , stand attaint still : and it be think in ? cong•uous , for man to make Law•• , who be themselves outlawed : for remedy whereof , a act be present pass for their restore ; and than they be add ? mit to sit in the house . the other concern the king himself , who have be attaint by king Richard : but for this , it be resolv•d by all the judge in the ch•quer chamber , that the possession of the crown take away all defect ; yet for honour sake , all record of hi• attainder be take off the file . and so these scruple thus remove , the parliament b•ga• ; wherein be attaint , first Richard late duke of Gloucester , call himself Richard the three : then , his assistant at the battle of Bosworth : John late duke of Norfolk , Thomas earl of Surrey , Francis Viscount Lovel , Walter Devereux late lord Ferrer , John lord zouch , Rober• ha ? rington , Richard Cha•leto•• Richar• Rat•liffe• William ber•ley of Weley , Robert middle ? tun , Iames Haringto•••obert br•c•enb••y , T•omas Pilkington , wal•er Ho•ton , Willi ? be Catesby , Roger w•ke , William sapco•e , Humphrey Stafford , William clerk of wen ? lock , Geoffry saint Germaine , Richard Watkins , herald at arm , Richard Revell , tho ? mass pul•er , John welsh , John ken•all l•te secretary to the late king Richard , John buck , Andrew rat , and William Brampton of Burford . but notwithstanding this attainder , diverse of the person aforesaid , be afterward not only by king hen•y pardon , but restore also to their land and live . as likewise he cause Pro ? clamation to be make , that whosoever will submit themselves , and take oath to be true subject , shall have their pardon : whereupon many come out of sanctu ? ary and other place ; who submit themselves , be receive to mercy . and now king Henry con•idering that •aena and Praemio Respublica contine•uy ; after punish for Offence• , he proceed to reward for service : and first , Jasper earl of Pembroke his uncle , he create duke of Bedford : Thomas lord Stanley he create earl of Darb• : the lord chendow of Britain , his special friend , he make earl of bath : sir Giles dauben•y be make lord Dawbeney : sir Robert Willoughby be make lord brook : and Edward Stafford elder son to Henry late duke of Buckingham , he restore to his dignity and possession . beside , in this parliament , a act be make , for se••ing the crown upon the person of king Henry and the heir of his body successive for ever . and then with all speed he send and redeem the marquess Dorset , and sir John Bourchier , who he have leave hostage in France for money : and call home Morton bishop of Ely , and Richard fox ; make Morton archbishop of Canterbury , and fox lord keeper of the privy s•ole , and bishop of Winchester . beside these , he make also of his privy counsel , Jasper duke of Bedford , John earl of Oxford , Thomas Stanley earl of Derby , John bishop of Ely , sir William Stanley lord chamberlain of his household ; sir Robert Willoughby lord brook , lord steward of his household ; Giles lord Dawbeny ; John lord dyn••m , after make lord treasurer of England ; sir Reginold Bray , sir John cheyny , sir Richard Guildford , sir Richard Tunstall , sir Richard Edgecombe , sir Thomas Lovel , sir Edmund P•ynings , sir John Risley , with some other . Theise thing thus do : as well in performance of his oath , as to make his crown sit the sure on his head ; on the eighteenth day of January , he proceed to the solemnize his marriage with the lady Elizabeth ; which give he a three title : and indeed this conjunction make a wreath of three so indissoluble , that no age since have ever question it : and it be fix upon a tree plant so happy by the water side , and have at this day so many flourish branch , that there be good hope it will continue as long as the world continue . and now whether king Henry doubt any sudden attempt upon his person , or whether he do it to follow the example of France : in the very beginning of his reign , he ordain a band of tall personable man to be attend upon he , which be call the king guard ; which not king before , and all king since , have always use : but though he provide a guard for defence of his own body ; yet for the bo ? d••• page 141 of his people he can provide none ; for at this time a sickness ( of the symp ? •••e call the sweat sickness ) seize so violent upon they , that within a ••ort time many thousand perish ; particular in London , two major successive ? •y and six alderman within eight day die : and for this : sickness no physic of ? f••ded any cure ; till at last , this remedy be find : if a man be take with the sweat in the day time , that than he shall present lie down in his clothes , and so lie still the whole four and twenty hour : if he be take in the night , than •e shall not rise out of his bed for the space of four and twenty hour ; not pro ? voke sweat , nor yet eat or drink at all , at least but very moderate . in ? ? ? sickness there be one good circumstance ; that though it be violent , yet it last not long : for beginning about the one and twenty of September , it clear •p before the end of October follow . and now all thing be set in good order in the south part there arise a little s•o•me in the north , but be soon disperse . for king Henry make a journey in•o the north part , to show himself there where he have not yet be ; and where ? ? ? respect to king Richard may have leave some opposite : at his come to Li•colne be certify that the lord Lovel and Humphrey Stafford be go out of s•nctuary in Colchester ; but whither , no man know . the king therefore not much regard it , go forward to York ; and be come thither , it be then plain tell he , that the lord Lovel with a strong power be at hand , and will present in ? vade the city . This make the king in a great straight ; for neither have he any army r••dy ; no• if he have man , have he any weapon or munition •or they . yet in this strait , he command the duke of Bedford with three thousand man to •et out a ? g••nst he , but so ill arm , that their armour for the most part be but of tan l••ther ; who be come near the camp of the rebel , cause proclamation to be make , that whosoever will submit themselves as loyal subject , shall have their pardon , and be receive into grace : which proclamation so prevail , that i• make the lord Lovel secret in the night to fly away ; and then the army leave without a head , submit themselves to the king mercy . the lord Lovel flee into Lancashire ; and there for a time lurk with sir Thomas Broughton , a man powerful in those part . Humphrey Stafford take sanctuary in a village call Culnh•m two mile from Abington : but the sanctuary be judge by the justice of the king bench , to be no lawful defence for traitor ; he be take from thence by force , and convey to the tower , afterward to Tyburn , and there hang . his brother Thomas be pardo•ed , because it be think , he be draw in by his bro ? ther Humphrey . in this year , John persivall the major of London carver , wait at his table , be choose one of the sheriff of London , only by sir John collet , then major , drink ? ing to he in a cup of wine , ( as the custom be , to drink to he who he li•t to name sheriff ) and forthwith the say persivall sit down at the major table , •nd cover his head , and be afterward major himself . at this time a mean instrument attempt a great work ; by which we may see , how far imagination may outgo reason : one Richard Symond a priest , a man of base birth though some learning ; have a scholar of base birth , the son of a shoe ? maker , ( some say a baker ) name Lambert Symnell ; but of a pregnant wit , and comely personage : he he give out to be Edward earl of Warwick , late ( as be say ) escape out of prison ; both of they be of like year and stature : with this scholar of he , he sail into Ireland ; and so set forth the matter : that not on ? lie the lord Thomas Fitz-Gerard earl of Kildare , and deputy of Ireland ; but many other of the nobility give credit to his word ; and as those that affect the house of York , be ready to take his part ; and even already salute the young Symnell king . withal they send into Flanders to the lady Margaret , sister to the late king Edward , and widow of •harles duke of Burgoigne , require aid and assistance from she . this lady be of the house of York , bear a inward grudge ag•inst king Henry , be of the house of Lancaster ; and •herefore though she well under ? stand it be but a colour matter , yet be willing to take advantage of it : and page 142 thereupon promise her assistance . king Henry be advertise of these thing , advise with his counsel ; by who it be agree , that two thing present shall be do•e . first , to grant • pardon to any that will submit themselves , for any offence whatsoever , though it be for high treason ; the next , that the earl of Warwick shall be open show abroad in the city , and other public place ; whereby , the report spread abroad of his be in irel•nd , may appear plain to be false . withal , the queen Elizabeth , widow of king Edward the four , and mother to the present queen , be adjudge to forfeit all her land and possession , and to live confine in the abbey of Bermondsey in Southwark ; where in grea• pen ? sivenes , within a few year she die . but for what cause this severity be use a ? against this queen , be not altogether certain : to say , ( as be common say ) that it be for render her self and her daughter into the hand of king rich•rd , be manifest injustice , to punish she for do a thing out of fear , which else she shall have be compel to do by force : and to say ( as some also have say ) that it be for give aid underhand to Perki• , be a manifest unlikelihood , tha• she shall aid a counterfeit against her own son in law : we must therefore content our self with know the bare colourable pretext , and leave the true reason as a secret of state . but this show abroad of the true earl of Warwick , though it satisfy some , yet not all : for some give out that it be but a trick of the king , and not the true Warwick . at least the earl of Lincoln , son to John de l• pool duke of Suffolk , and Elizabeth sister to king Edward the four , will not omit to take the advantage , though he know that Symnell be but a counterfeit . and thereupon , assoon as •he parliament be dissolve , he flee secret into fl•n ? dear , to his aunt the lady Margaret d•tchesse of Burgoigne ; between who it be conclude , that he and the lord l•vell shall go into Ireland , and there attend upon the counterfeit Warwick , and honour he as king• and with the power of the Irishman bring he into England : but it be conclude withal , that if their action succeeded• than the Counterfei•Warwicke shall be depose , and the true be deliver out of prison , and anoint king . and to this purpose , the earl of Lincol• , by the aid of the lady Margaret , have get together two thousand alman , with one Martin swart a valiant and expert captain to be their leader . with this power , the earl sail into Ireland , and at the city of Dublin , cause young Lambert the counterfeit Warwick , in most solemn manner , first to be proclaim , and after to be crown king of E•gland : and then with a great number of beggarly and unar ? med Irishmen , under the conduct of the lord Thomas Gerardine earl of kild•re , they sail into England , and land at a place call the pile of Fowdray , not far from Lancaster ; hope there by the mean of sir Thomas Broughton , a powerful man in that country , to have their army both furnish and increase . king Henry hear that the earl of Lincoln be land at Lancaster , assemble a great army , conduct by the duke of Bedford , and the earl of Oxford ; and with these he march to Nottingham , and there by a little wood call bower , he pitch his field ; whither there come unto he , the lord George Talbot earl of Shrewsbury , •he lord strange , sir John Cheyney , and diverse other knight and gentleman . in which mean time , the earl of Lincoln be enter into Yorkshire , pass quiet on his journey , without do spoil or hurt unto any ; trust thereby to have win the people to come to his aid : but when he perceive few or none to resort unto he , he then determine to venture a battle with the army he have already ; and thereupon take his way from York to newarke upon Trent . king Henry under ? stand which way he take , come the night before the battle to newarke ; and go ? king three mile further , near to a little village call Stoke , there wait the approach of the earl of Lincoln ; so the next day they join battle ; where after a long fight , of at the least three hour ; though the alman , and special their captain Martin swart behave themselves most valiant ; yet their ir•sh , be in a manner but naked man , be at last overthrow , four thousand slay , and the rest put •o fl•ght ; but not one of their cap•aines ; for the earl of Lincoln , the lord L•vell , sir Thomas Broughton , Martin swart , and the lord Gerardine be all find dead in the page 143 very place where they have stand fight ; that though they lose the battle , yet they win the reputation of hardy and stout soldier . only of the lord Lovel , some report , that attempt to save himself by flight ; in pass over the river of Trent , be drown . on the king part , though some be slay , yet not any m•n of note . this battle be fight on a Saturday ( observe as always fortunate to king Henry ) be the sixteenth of June , in the second year of king Henry reign . the young Lambert , and his master Simond the priest , be both take ; and both have their life save : Lambert , because but a child ; S•mond , bec•use a priest : yet symo•d be keep in prison , Lambert be take into the king kitchen , to turn the spit in the turn of his fortune , and at last make one of the king fau•kners . in the begin of his three year , king Henry have be in Yorkshire , to settle the m•ndes of that people : about the midst of August , come to Newcastle upon Tine , and from thence send ambassador into Scotland , Richard fox late before make bishop of Exeter , and sir Richard Edgecombe comptroller of his house , to conclude a peace or truce with Iames king of Scot : a peace , by reason of the people back ? wardnes , can not be obtain : but a truce be conclude for the term of seven year ; with a promise from the king , that it shall be renew before the first seven year shall be expire . at this time , ambassador come from the king of France• to king Henry ; who declare , that their master king Charles be now at war with Francis duke of Bri ? tai•e , for that he succour the duke of Orleans and other rebel against the realm of France ; and therefore request , that for the old familiarity that have be between they , he will either a••ist he , or not assist the duke , but stand ne•ter . king he•ry answer , that have receive courte•ies from they both , he will do his uttermost endeavour to make they friend : and to that end , as soon as the french ambassador be depart , he send Christopher Urswick his chaplain over into France ; who shall first go to the french king , and after to the duke of Britain , to mediate a peace between they . in the time of Vrswicks ambassage , king Henry cause his wife the lady Eliza ? beth to be crown queen , on sai•t Katherine day in November , with all solemni ? ty ; and at the same time deliver the lord Thomas Marquesse Dorset out of the tower , and receive he again into his former favour . Urswick travel between the two prince , to procure a peace ; but they , though make a show to incline to peace , yet prepare for war , and offer on neither side will be accept . in which time , Edward lord wood•ile uncle to the queen , make suit to the king , for leave to go over with a power of man , in aid of the duke of Britain ; which su•e , though the king deny , yet the lord Woodville will venture it ; and with a power of •oure hundred able man , get secret over , and join with the Britain against the french . This the french king take ill at king Henry hand ; but be inform that it be against the king will , he seem sati•fied : and a peace be conclude between fr•••e and England , to endure for twelve month . but in conclusion , king Henry find that the french king deal not r•ally with he , but only hold he on with pretences• he call his high court of Parliamen• , require their advice what be fit to be do : where it be con••uded , that the duke of Britain shall be aid ; and to that end great •ummes of money be by parliament grant . this determination of the parliament , king Henry signify to the french king , hope , it will have wrought he to some term of Peace• but the king of France little regard it , proceed on in his violent cour•es against the Britain ; so as at last , on •he eight and twenty day of July , the Britain|be give battle to the french , near to a town call ? ? ? ; have ap ? parelled seventeen hundred of the Britai•• , in Co•• with •ed •rosse• after the Eng ? lish fashion , to make the Frenchman believe •hey be all english , although in •eed they have no more english than the four hundred of the lord Woodville . but no• ? withstand this device , the victory fall to the french ; so that all the Englishman almost be slay , with the lord Woodville himself ; beside six thousand Britaines• the duke of Orleans and the prince of orange , who be there on the britain•s page 144 part , be take prisoner . the french lose twelve hundred man ; and among other• that valiant italian captain Iames g•le•t . this news be bring into England , cause king h•••y to make haste to send forth his army : and thereupon , the lord brook , with sir John cheyny , sir John Middleton , sir Ralph Hilton , sir Richard Corbet , sir Thomas Leighton , sir Richard Lacon , and sir Edmund Cor••all , be send over with all speed into Britain ; have with they eight thousand man , to aid the duke of Britain against the french . but while this war be thus set forward , the duke of Britain die ; leave in effect , one only daughter , the lady a••e ( for the other be the young , die soon after ) and then the chief ruler of Britain fall at dissension among themselves , light ? tle regard the defence of the country : whereupon the english return home , within five month after their set forth : and the french king get they up ? per hand of the Britain , and marry the lady anne sole daughter of the duke of Britain , incorporate that duchy to the crown of France . in the last parliament , a subsidy be grant , for the furnish out a army into Britain ; and it be agree , that every man shall be tax after the rate of his substance , to pay the ten penny of his good : which tax the most part of Yorkshire and the bishopric of Durh•• refuse to pay : whereof the collector complain to he•ry E. of Northumberland , precedent of the north part . the E. sig ? nify it to the king ; and the king command he to levy the same , by distress or other ? wise ( without spare of any ) as he shall think most meet . the rude multitude , hea ? ring of this command from the king , with great violence set upon the earl , by the exciting of a simple fellow name John a chamber ; and allege all the fault to be in the earl , as chief author of the tax ; they cruel murder both he and diverse of his household servant . and to make good their seditious fact , they assem ? bleed a great number , and make one sir John Egremond their captain : declare , that in defence of their liberty , they will bid the king battle . in this bravery they stand , as long as none oppose they : but when Thomas earl of Surry appea ? red with a army , though they skirmish a while , yet they be soon discomfi ? t , and their ringleader John a chamber be take , and at York on a gibbet set upon a square pair of gallow , like a arch traitor be hang , and many of his complice on a low gallow ; the innocent people for the most part pardon . but sir John Egremond flee into Flanders , to the lady Margaret duchess of burr ? gundy ; the common and sure refuge for all rebel against king Henry . after this , the king appoint sir Richard tu•st•ll to gather the subsidy , and will not spare the payment of a penny . this year , notwithstanding this tax , the king borrow of every alderman of London two hundred pound , and of the chamber nine thou ? sand eighty two pound seventeen shilling and four penny , which be pay again at the time with great thankfulness ; which he do at a time he need no• , to the end perhaps he may do it another time , when he need . at this time , Iames the three , king of Scotland , have by some error of Govern ? ment incur the hatred of his nobility and people ; labour with king Henry , as also with the pope , and the king of France , to make a accord between he and his people , who have compel prince Iames his son , to be the titular head of those arm which they assume against he . the king accord interpose their mediation by ambassador ; but can receive no other but this outrageous answer , that there be no talk of peace , unless he will resign his crown . which answer the king protest against , declare by their ambassador , that they think it a common injury do to themselves , and that the example be not suffer ? able , for subject to lift their hand against their sovereign . hereupon it come to a battle , at b•nnocks-borne by strivelin : where king Iames , rash begin the fight , before his whole force be come , be ( notwithstanding the contrary come ? mandment of the prince his son ) slay in the mill of that field , whither he flee , after the battle end . about this time , a difference fall out which grow to a war , between the Em ? perour Frederick , and some town of he in Flanders , especial gaunt and Bruges : page 145 in this war , the lord Ravenstein a principal person about Maximilian , not only forsake the emperor and his son Maximilian his lord , ( corrupt as be think from France ) but make himself head of the popular party , seize upon the town of Ipre and sluice : and not this only , but forthwith send to the lord de Cordes governor for the french king in Picardy , to aid he against some town in Flanders : to which the lord de Cordes , will of any occasion to set foot in Flanders , be easy draw . but king Henry not like to have the french so near his English pale , send over the lord Morley with a thousand man , who shall join with the lord Dawbeney then deputy of Callice , to resist they . among other act by they perform , this be chief ; that the lord Dawbeney , with the lord Morley , sir Iames Tyrrell captain of guisn•s , sir Henry Willoughby , sir Gilbert Talbot , and sir Humphrey Talbot marshal of Callice , and other to the number of two thousand , issue secret one night out of Callice , and come to Newport , and from thence to dix••e ; where the lord Dawbeney command all man to send back their hors•s : wh•ch the lord Morley only refuse to do , be cause that he only of all the cap ? taine be sl•ine with a gun : for the rest , after their arrow discharge , fall pro ? strate to the ground ; by which mean the enemy ordnance overshoot they , k•lling only the lord Morley that be on horseback . here they slay of the enemy , to the number of eight thousand ; of the english part be slay the lord Morley , and not above a hundred more . this victory so enrich the english , that they who go forth in cloth , come home in silk ; and they who go out on foot , return back on horseback . upon this defeat , the lord de Cordes lie at Ypre with twenty thousand man , and think to be revenge , besiege the town of Newport ; and so strong assault it , that one day his man enter , and set up his banner upon a tower of the town : when sudden a bark arrive with only fourscore •resh english archer , so terrify they , think their number to be far great , that the french be glad to leave their banner behind they , and give over the assault ; and the night follow , the lord de Cordes ( who so much long for Callice , that he will common say , he can be content to lie seven year in hell , so that Callice be in the poss•ssion of the french ) break up his siege , and return to hold with as much shame , as the english to Callice with honour . a little before this t•me , Francis duke of Britain die , leave only one daughter , the lady Anne , affiance to Maximilian king of the roman ; and in so solemn a manner , that she take upon she to be the bride , and be lay in her bed , be content to permit maximilians deputy , in presence of many noble witness , as well man as woman , to put his leg , strip naked to the knee , between the spousal sheet ; account that ceremony to amount to a consummation . the king of France likewise have be contract to the lady Margaret daughter to the foresay Maximilian , and have receive she to that end : yet all this notwithstanding , out of a violent desire to join the duchy of Britain to the crown of fr••ce , he disannul and make void both the contract . but to the end he may do it with ? out opposition of the king of England , he send ambassador , the lord Francis of L••zemburg , Charles Marignane , and Robert gaguine , to king Henry ; partly to con ? clude a peace , but chief to procure king he•ries good will to make void the foresay contract : to which though king Henry be not willing to give consent , yet he consent willing to have a treaty for peace : and to that end , send over tho•as earl of Ormond , and Thomas Goldenston prior of Christ church in canter ? bury , to the french king about it . but during this treaty , and before condition of peace can be agree on , the french king have get into his poss•ssion the lady anne of Britain , and solemn marry she . which underhand deal so incense king Henry , that he present call his high court of parliament , and there de ? clare the just cause he have of war with France , desire their benevolence towards the charge thereof ; which be as ready grant as desire , and great sum of money be soon collect . in the year 1491 , be the six year of the king reign , on the six of April , the nobility of the realm assemble in the cathedral church of saint Paul page 146 in London ; where also be the major and alderman , and principal citizen in their livery : to who D. Morton lord chancellor make a oration ; declare from his own letter , that the king of Spain have win the great and rich city and country of Granado from the moor , which have be in their possession above seven hundred year : and have in place of their superstition , build church to the honour of Christ , be thereupon entitle the catholic king . for joy whereof , to de•m be sing with great solemnity . in the month of May be hold a solemn just , at the king palace of shee•e , now call Richmond , which continue the space of a month ; sometime within the palace , and sometime without , upon the green before the gate ; in which joust , sir Iames Parker run against a gentleman name Hugh Vaughan , by reason of a faulty helmet , be strike into the mouth at the first course ; so that his tongue be bear to the hinder part of his head , in such sort that he die present upon the place . and now Maximilian have receive back his daughter from the king of France , be so displease , that he present send a ambassador , one Iames Contibald to king Henry , require he to take his part in a war against the french king ; towards which he promise to provide ten thousand man , with pay for two year : king Henry consent to it ; and have p•ovided himself of a puissant army , on the six day of October , sail to Callice ; but send his almoner Christopher •rswi•ke , and sir John Resley to Maximilian , require his promise force ; they find he altoge ? the unprovide of either man or money : which bring king Henry into a great straight what he shall do : to proceed in the war with his own force alone , will be •ull of hazard ; to return home without do any thing , will bring a imputation upon he among his subject ; as though he have use the pretence of war , but as a trick to get money : at last , he resolve to do something ; and thereupon , go and besiege Boulogne , have in his army of chief lord , Jasper duke of Bedford , his lieutenant general , Thomas Marquesse Dorset , the earl of Arundel , Oxford , Suffolk , Shrewsbury , Derby , ke•t , Devonshire and Ormond , sundry baron , as D•wbeney , Aburgayny , de la ware , zouch , Hastings , Cobham and other . during his siege of Boulogne , ( in which there be but few slay , and no man of note , but sir John savage , who ride to take view at what place the town may best be assault , be set upon by certain french man , and by they slay ) king Henry be secret deal with by the lord Cordes governor of Heynault , on the king of France behalf , to accept of certain condition of peace . who thereupon send Richard fox by ¦ shop of Exeter , and Giles lord Dawbeney to conclude they ; which among other article be , that king Henry without quit his claim to France , shall for a peace to continue during the two king life , receive in present of Charles king of France , for his charge in that war , seven hundred forty and five thousand Doc ? ket , which in english money amount to one hundred eighty six thousand two hundred and fifty pound ; and five and twenty thousand crown year , towards the expense he have be at before in aid the Britain ; which ( by the english , call tribute ) be due pay , during all the king reign , and also to king hen ? ry his son afterward , long than it can continue upon any computation of charge . there be also assign by the french king unto all king Henry prin ? cipall counselor , great pension , beside rich gift for the present . which when ? there the king do permit , to save his own purse from reward , or to communicate the envy of a business that be displease to his people , be diverse interpret : for certain , the king have no great fancy to own this peace ; and therefore a little before it be conclude , he have underhand procure some of his best captain and man of war , to advise he to a peace under their hand , in a earnest manner , in the nature of a supplication , that he may have it show for justify himself , and to give some allay to the discontentment of many , who have sell and engage their estate , upon the hope of the war . after the peace thus conclude , he go to Callice , where he stay some time , and the seventeenth of December follow come to Westminster , where he keep his Christmas . page 147 soon after his return , he elect into the order of the garter , Alpho•sus duke of Calabri• , son and heir to Ferdinand king of Naples : to who Christopher Ursula ? wick the king almoner , be send to Naples to carry it ; which as soon as Alphonsus have receive , he apparel himself present in the habit , before a great assembly , indeed to show what favour he be in with the king of England . there have be disturbance in the realm before , by a counterfeit son of the duke of Clarence ; but that device have two main imperfection : one , that the true son of the duke be for•h-comming , and to be show open for convince the false ; the other , that though the counterfeit have be the true , yet he can have lay no claim to the crown , as long as any daughter of king Edward the four be live : now therefore a device be find , by which those imperfection be both of they amend : for now a counterfeit be set on foot , who pretend to be Richard the young son of king Edward the four ; so that neither any other can be produce to convince he of be false , nor any daughter of king ed ? ward can hinder his right for claim the crown . this device be first forge by Margaret duchess of Burgundy ; a woman that can never be quiet in her mind , as long as king Henry be quiet in his kingdom ; and by this device she ho ? bed , if not to put he clean out of his seat , yet foul at least to disturb he in it ; and this be the purpose of the pl•t : but by what instrument it be act , by what abe•tours foment , and what issue the device have , be wor•hy all to be relate . the duchess have former give out , that Richard the young son of king Edward , be not murder , but in compassion spare , and send secret a way to seek his fortune ; and have after long search get at last a fit boy to personate a prince ; keep he seret a good time with she ; in which time she so thorough in ? struct he in all circumstance , and he afterward put they so graceful in pra ? ctice , that even those who have see and know the young prince while he live , can hardly perceive but that this be he . it be true , though he be not king Edward son , yet he be his godson ; and may perhaps have in he some base blood of the house of York . This Perkin Warbeck , ( for so be the youth name , call Perkin , as a diminutive of Peter ) when he so perfect have learn his lesson , that he be fit to come upon the stage ; she send he into Portugal , that come from a strange country , it may be think , he have be drive to wander from one country to another , for safeguard of his life , at least that she of all other may not be suspect . from portingal she cause he to pass into Ireland , where the house of York be special respect , in regard of the great love which Richard duke of York , father of king Edward the four , have win among they : by reason whereof , this Perkin as esteem his grandchild , be well entertain by they , and hold in great estimation . he have not be long in Ireland , when the french king send for he ; for be at that time at variance with king Henry , he think he may make good use of Perkin , as a pretender against king Henry for the crown . Perkin be come to Paris , be entertain in a princely fashion ; and for his more honour , have a guard assign he , over which the lord Congreshall be captain . he have not be long at Paris , when there resort to he sir George Nevil bastard , sir John Taylour , Richard Robinson , and about a hundred other english : among the rest , one Stephen Fryon , that have be king Henry secret ? tarry for the french tongue ; but discontent , flee , and become a chief instrument in all Perkins proceed . but this float of Perkins last not long ; for as soon as peace be conclude between the two king ; the king of France dismiss Perkin and will keep he no long . then pass he secret to his first foundress , the lady Margaret ; who at his first come , make a show of suspect he to be a counterfeit . but cause he in great assembly to be bring before she , as though she have never see he before ; and find he to answer direct to all question she put unto he : she open profess , that she be now satisfy , and think he very to be her true nephew ; and thereupon assign a gu•rd of their ? •y person , clothe in murrey and blue , and call•d he the white rose of England . upon report hereof , many in England be incline to take his part ; and sir Robert page 148 Clifford and Robert Bareley be send into Flanders , to acquaint the duchess with the people respect to Perkin : and indeed sir Robert Clifford , upon sight and confe ? rinse with he , write letter into England , wherein he affirm , that he know he to be true son of king Edward , by his face , and other lineament of his body . king Henry hear of these thing , send certain espial into Flanders , that shall feign themselves to have flee to Perkin ; and by that mean the better search out who be of the conspiracy with he . who name be return to the king , he cause they •o be apprehend and bring to his presence ; the chief of who be John R•tcliffe lord Fitzwater , sir Simon Montford , and sir Thomas Th••y•• knight , William Dawbeney , Robert Ratcliff , Thomas Cressenor , and Thomas astwo•d , also certain priest , as William Richford D. of divinity , Thomas Boyns , D. William Sutton , William Worseley dean of Pauls , Robert Layborne , and Richard Lesley , of who , some hear of it , flee to sanctuary , o•hers be take and condemn , as sir Simon Montford , Robert Ratcliff , and William Dawbeney , who be all three behe•ded . the lord Fitzwater pardon of life , be convey to Calais , and there lay in hold ; where seek to make escape by corrupt his keeper , he lose his head . Shortly after , sir Robert Clifford return out o•flanders ( not as some think , send a spy from the beginning ; but rather now at last either discern the fraud , or wo• by reward ) and submit himself to the king mercy : discover unto he , as far as he know , all that be either open or secret abettor of the conspiracy ; ah ? among who he accuse sir William Stanley lord Chamberlaine : his accusation be this that in conference between they , sir William have say , that if he certain ? lie know ; that the young man name Perkin be the son of king Edward the four , he will never fight nor bear arm against he . Theise word be consider of , by the judge , seem to express a tickle hold of loyalty ; for who can tell how soon he may be persuade that he know it ? and upon the mat ? ter , be to be loyal to king Henry , but for want of better ; and withal it strike up ? on a string which have always sound harsh in king Henry ear , as prefer the title of York before that of Lancaster . sir William be hereupon be ? reign ; whether trust to the greatness of his favour , or the smallness of his fault , deny little of that wherewith he be charge , and upon confession be adjudge to dye ; and accord on the sixteenth day of February be bring to the tower-hill , and there behead : after who death , Giles lord Dawbeny be make L. •hamberlaine . this be that sir William Stanley , who come in to rescue the earl of Richmond , when he be in danger of his life ; who set the crown upon his head , and be the cause of his be salute king : and can it enter into his breast , to put he to death , that have save his life , and do he so many great sir ? vice beside ? but it may be say , it be not the earl of Richmond that do it , but the king of England ; for certain , in many case , a king be not at liberty to show mercy , so much as a private man may . though there be that affirm , the cause of his death be not word only , but real act , as give aid to Perkin underhand by money . and yet it seem , there be some conflict in the mind of king Henry , what he shall do in this case ; for he stay six week after his accusation , before before he bring he to his arraignment . howeve it be , the summer follow ? king , the king go in progress to Latham , to the earl of Derby , who have ma•ied his mother , and be brother to sir William Stanley : perhaps to congratulate his own safety ; perhaps to condole with he his brother death ; but certain to keep the earl from conceive any sinister opinion of he : for to think that sir will ? liam sue to be earl of Chester , ( a honour appoint to the king son ) or his great wealth ( for he leave in his castle at Holt , in ready money forty thousand mark , beside• plate and jewel ) be cause that procure or set forward his death ; be consideration very unworthy of so just a prince , against a servant of so great de ? serve . but in this mean while , Perkin have get a power of idle loose fellow , take to sea , intend to l•nd in Kent ; where though he be repel , yet some of his soldier will needs venture to go on land ; of who a hundred and sixty per ? son page 149 be take prisoner , whereof five be captain ; Mortford , Corbet , white ? bolt , Qu••tyn and Gemyne : these hundred and sixty person be bring to London , rail in rope , like horse draw in a cart , who upon their arraign ? mean , confess their offence , be execute , some at London , and some in town adjoin to the sea-coast . Perkin find no entertainment in Kent , sail into ire ? land , and have stay there a while , and find they also , be a naked people , to be no competent assistant for he , from thence he sail into Scotland , where he so move the king of Scot with his fair word and colourable pretext ( make not doubt before by the dutcesse of Burgoigne ) that he receive he in great state , and cause he to be call the duke of York : and to persuade the world that he think he so indeed , he give to he in marriage the lady Katherine Gourdon , da•ghter to Alexander Earle Huntley , his own near kinswoman ; and soon after , in Perkins quarrel , enter with a puissant army into England ; make proclamation , that whosoever will come in and aid the true duke of York , shall be spare ; but none come in , he then use all kind of cruelty , and the whole county of Northu•berland be in a manner waste : whereat Perkin , at his return , express ? sed much grief , say it grieve he to the heart to see such havoc make of his people : to who the king answer , alas , alas , you take care for they , who for any thing that appear be none of you ; for not one of the country come in to his succour . king Henry incense with this bold attempt of the king of Scot , call ? lead his high court of parliament , acquaint they with the necessity he have of a present war to revenge this indignity offer he by the Scot , and thereupon re ? choir their aid by money , have a subsidy of sixscore thousand pound ready grant he ; and then in all haste a puissant army be provide , and under the con ? dust of the lord Dawbeney send into Scotland , but before he arrive there he be sudden call back , by reason of a commotion begin at Cornwall , for payment of the subsidy late grant , which though it be not great , yet they grudge to pay it . the ringleader of this commotion be Thomas Flammock , a gentleman le••ned in the law , and Michael Joseph a smith ; who lay the blame of this exaction upon John Morton archbishop of Canterbury , and sir Reynold Bray , as be chief of the king council , exhort the people to take arm ; and have a•sem ? bleed a army , they go to Taunton , where they slay the provost Pery• , one of the commissioner for the subsidy , and from thence come to well , intend to go to London where the king then lie , who have revoke the lord Dawbeney , appoint ? t Thomas Howard earl of Surrey ( after the death of the lord Dinham , make lord treasurer of England ) to have a eye to the Scot , and if they make invasion , to resist they . in the mean time Iames Twychet lord Audley confederate himself with the rebel of Cornwall , and take upon he to be their leader , who from w•lls go to Salisbury , and from thence to Winchester , and so to Kent , hope there •o have have great aid , but find none ; for the earl of Kent , the lord of abur ? g••• , John brook lord Cobham , sir Edmond Poynings , sir Richard Guildford , sir th••as Bourchier , John Peachy and William Scott be ready in arm to resist they ; whereupon the rebel bring their army to black-heath , four mile distant from l•nd•n , and there in a plain on the top of a hill encamp themselves ; whereof when the king have knowledge , he present send John earl of Oxford , Henry Bou• ? ••ier earl of Essex , Edmond de la pool earl of Suffolk , sir Riceap Thomas and sir H••fry Stanley to environ the hill on all side , that so all hope of flight may he ta ? k•n from they ; and then set forward himself , and encamp in saint George• field , where for encouragement he make diverse bannaret . the next day he send the lord Dawbeney to set upon the rebel early in the morning , who first get the bridge at Deb•ford strand , though strong defend by the rebel archer , who arrow be •eported to be a full cloth-yard in length ; but notwithstanding the lord ? ? ? come in with his company , and the earl assail they on every side , they be soon overcome : in which conflict be slay of the rebel a ? above ? ? ? thousand ; take prisoner a very great number , many of who the king p••doned , but of the chief author none : for the lord Audley be draw from page 150 Newgate to tower-hill , in a coat of his own arm paint upon paper , re ? verse and all tear ; and there , on the four and twenty day of June be behea ? dead . Thomas Flammock and Michael Joseph be hang draw and quarter , and their head and quarter pitch upon stake , set up in London and other place . of the king army be slay not above three hundred . it be memor•ble with what comfort Joseph the blacksmith cheer up himself at his go to execution , say that yet he hope by this that his name and memory shall be everlasting : so dear even to vulgar spirit be perpetuety of name , though join with infamy , what be it then to noble spirit , when it be join with glory ? in the mean time the king of Scots take advantage of these trouble in England , invade the frontier , forage the bishopric of Durham , and at last besiege the castle of Norham , whereof Richard fox than bishop of Durham be owner ; who thereupon send present to the earl of Surrey , acquaint he with this invasion : whereupon the earl , take with he Ralph earl of Westmoreland , Thomas lord barn , Ralph lord Nevil , George lord strange , and many other lord and knight , and a army of little less than twenty thousand man , beside a navy , whereof the lord brook be admiral ; set forward against the Scot , and not only force the Scot to raise their siege of Norham castle , but follow they also into Scotland , where he overthrow and deface , the castle at cawdestrayne , the tower of He•e• ? hall , the tower of Edington , the tower of Fulden , and at last by composition take the strong castle of Hayton , and raze it to the ground . at the earl be at hay ? tun , the king of Scot send to he Marchemont and another herald , require he , at his election , either to fight with he with their whole army , or else they two to fight in single combat ; upon condition , that if the victory fall to the Scotish king , the earl shall deliver for his ransom the town of Barwick : whereunto the earl make answer , that the town of Barwick be the king his master , and there ? fore not for he to dispose of ; but for his offer of single combat , he willing accept ? t it , and think himself high honour by such a match : but king Iames of Scotland have no meaning to perform either one or other , but privy in the night flee back into Scotland ; and then the earl return to Barwick . in the mean time , one Peter hyal•s a man of great learning and policy , be send ambassador to the king of Scot , from the king of Spain , to mediate a peace between the two king of of England and Scotland ; who find the king of Scot conformable to his motion , find after the king of England ( who be never averse from peace upon honourable condition ) no less incline to it : and so a truce be conclude for certain year ; upon condition , that Perkin Warbeck shall be send out of the Scotish dominion . about this time , the lord of Camphyre and other send from Philip archduke of Austria and duke of Burgundy , come to king Henry for a conclusion of amity , and to procure the english merchan•s resort again to his country : for king Henry some time before , upon displeasure with the Fleming , but special with the lady Margaret , for abet Perkin Warbeck ; not only have banish all flemish ware and merchandize out of his dominion , but have also restrain all english mere ? chant from have any traffic in any of their territory , cause the mart for all english commodity to be keep at Callice : but now , upon this invitation , and ha ? ve find it have be a great hindrance to his own merchant-adventurer , and thereupon some insurrection have rise , he willing condescend to their request ; and so the english resort again into the archduke dominion , and be re ? ceive into Antwerp with general procession ; so glad be that town of the Eng ? glish-mens return . in this eleven year of the king reign , die Cicely duchess of York , more ? there to king Edward the four , at her castle of Berkhamstead , be of extreme age ; who have live to see three prince of her body crown , and four murder : she be bury at f•dri•g•am by her husband . Shortly after the truce conclude between England and Scotland , Perkin war ? beck be command to depart out of the Scotish dominion : who thereupon with page 151 his wife and family , sail into Ireland : where understand that the cornish-man be ready to renew the war again , he think best not to let p•sse so fair a occasion ; and thereupon , have with he four small ship , and not above sixscore man , he sail into Cornwall , and there land in the month of September , and come to a town call Bodmyn ; where with fair word and large promise , he so prevail with the people , that he have get to he above three thousand per ? son to take his part ; and then make proclamation in the name of king Richard the four , as son to king Edward the four : and by the advice of his three counselor , John Heron a bankrupt mercer , Richard Skelton a tailor , and John Astley a scrivener , determine to attempt first the win of Exeter ; which with great violence he assault , and the townsman with as great valiantness defend : whereof when the king hear , he send the lord Dawbeny to their rescue : but before he come , the lord Edward Courtney earl of Devonshire , and the valiant lord Will ? liam he son , accompany with sir Edmund Carew , sir Thomas Trenchard , sir William Courtney• sir Thomas Fulford , sir John Hal•well , sir John Croker , Walter court ? •ey , Peter Edgecombe , William saint Maure with other come to their aid : upon who come , Perkin leave the siege , and retire to Taunton ; where he muster his man , as though he mean to prepare for battle : but find his number to be much diminish , ( fo• of six thousand which he have at Exeter , many be flee from he , when they see no great one to take his part ) he begin to distrust his case ; and he••ing withal , that the king with a great power be at hand : about midnight , with threescore horseman in his company , he depart in post from Taunton , and take sanctuary in a town call Beauly near to Southampton . when king Henry he•rd that Perkin be flee , he send after he to the seaside , to stop his passage and apprehend he : but the messenger that be send , when they come to saint Michaels ? ? ? , though they find not Perkin , yet there they find his wife the lady ka ? therine Gourdon , who they present bring to the king ; a beautiful young la ? die : to who , in honour of her birth , and commiseration of her beauty , the king allow a competent maintenance , which she enjoy during the king life , and m•ny year after . king Henry be come to Exeter , stay there a few day , a ? about examination of the rebellion , and execution of the chief offender : of who there be a great multitude , and all of they crave pardon , the king cause ? say they all to be assemble in the churchyard of saint Peter , where they all appear bar•-headed in their shirt , and halter about their neck : who the king view out of a window make for the purpose ; after he have pause a while , make a speech unto they , exhort they to obedience ; and then , in hope they will afterward be dutiful subject , he pardon they all : whereat they make a great shout , cry ? ? ? , God save king Henry ! though some of they afterward , like ungrateful wretch , fall into new rebellion . all this whi•e Perkin be in sanctuary : and the king think himself in danger as long as he be in safety , set a guard about the place , to keep he for escape ; whereby Perkin be so restrain , that at last he submit himself to the king mercy , and be thereupon send to the tower to b• there in s•fe custody . this do•e , king Henry appoint Thomas lord d•rcy , sir amy•s Pawle• , and Robert Sher ? b•••• Deane of Pauls• to be commissioner , for ma•ing enquiry of the offender , ? ? ? for assess their fine ; which they do with great severity to some , with great mildness to other , to all with equity . ? ? ? be now the fourteenth year of the king reign , when one Sebastian ••bato , •Ge•••a's son , bear •t B•iston , persuade the king to man and victua•• a ship at Bristol , •o search for ? ? ? stand , which ( he say ) he know to be replenish with rich commodity ; who set forth with three other small sh•ps of London merchant , return home two yeer• after , when he have make a large discovery westward , and will have go to ? ? ? , if the mariner have not force he to return : a like ? wise si• year before , one christop•er Columbus a Spaniard , make the first discovery of America . Perkin be in the tower and careful guard , yet find i •s to escape ; and page 152 flee to the priory of Sheen near Richmond ; where discover himself to the prior of that monastery , he beg of he for god sake , to get the king pardon fo• his life ; which the prior effect : but then be Perkin bring to the court at Westminster , and be one day set fetter in a pair of stock before Westminster ? hall , and there stand a whole day ; the next day he be set upon a like scaffold in Cheapside , and there stand the whole day also , heathen read open his confessi ? on , wr•tten with his own hand ; wherein he declare his parentage and the place of his birth , and all the passage of his life , and by what mean he be draw to make this attempt . after this , he be commit again to the tower , and care take , he shall be better look to than he be before . but all the care notwithstanding , once again Perkin attempt to escape , and draw into a confederacy with he the young earl of Warwick ; by fair word and large promise so corrupt his keeper , stra•gwish , Bl•wet , Astwood and long Roger , servant to sir John Digbie lieu ? tenant of the tower , that they intend to have slay their master , and set Perki• and the earl of Warwick at liberty . but this practice be soon discover , •o that Perki• and John a water , sometime major of cork in Ireland , one of perki•s chief founder , be on the sixteenth day of November arraign at Westminster and condemn , and both of they on the two and twenty day be draw to tie ? burn and there hang ; where Perki• take it upon his death , that the confession he have former make , be true : soon after also Blewet and Astwood , two of the lieu ? tenant man , be in the same place execute . on the one and twenty day of the same month , Edward Plantagemet earl of Warwick be arraign at Westminster , be ? before the earl of Oxford , then high steward of England ; not for consent to break prison , but for conspire with Perkin to raise sedition and destroy the king ; and upon his confession , have judgement , and on the eight and twenty day of the same month , in the year 1499. be bring to the scaffold on the tower-hill , and there behead . this earl of Warwick be the elder son of the duke of Clarence , and be the last heir male of the name of Plantagenet , and have be keep in the tower from his very in•ancy out of all company of man and fight of beast ; so as he scarce know a hen from a goose , nor one beast from another ; and there ? before can never know how to practice his escape of himself , but by perki•s sub ? tlety : for which cause the king favour he so far , that he be not bury in the tower , but at Bissam by his ancestor . and thus end the design of Perki• Warbeck , which have trouble both the kingdom and the king , the space of seven or eight year , a great part of the king reign . but in the time of Perki•s be in the tower , another like practice be set on foot ; for a augusti•e friar call Patrick , in the county of Suffolk , have a scholar name Ralph Wilford a cordwainer son , he cause he to take upon he to be the earl of Warwick , late by great chance get out of the tower ; and they go together into ? ? ? ; when the friar perceive some light credit to be give to he , he then stick not to declare it open in the pulpit , desire all man to assist he . but this practice be soon discover , and both the mr. and the scholar be apprehend and attaint ; the scholar Wilford be hang on shrovetuesd•y at saint Thomas water , and the friar be condemn to perpetual prison : for at that time so much reverence be attribute to holy order ; that a priest , though •e have commit treason against the king , yet have h•s life spare . and this pract••e be some cause to exasperate the king against the earl of Warwick , who though innocent in himself , yet be nocent in pretender : and beside ; king Ferdinand of Spai•e , with who at this time there be a treaty for marriage of his daughter to prince Arthur , have write to the king in plain term , that he see no assurance of his son succession , as long a• the earl of Warwick live : and thus all thing unacustomated ? fortunate concur to bring this innocent prince to his end . in the fifteen year of his reign , partly to avoid the danger of the plague , then reign in England ; but chief to confer with the duke of Burgoigne about man ? ny important business : the king and queen sail over to Callice ; where at a interview between he and the duke , at saint Peter church without Callice , the page 153 duke offer to hold the king stirrup at his alight , which the king by no mean will permit ; but descend from horseback , they embrace wi•h great affection ? on ; •nd after communication have between they , the king and queen in the end o•iu•• return into England . in his seventeenth year •wo great marriage be solemnize : the lady ? ? ? of Spain be send by her father king ferdi•a•d , with a puissant , army of s••ps into E•gland ; where she arrive at Plymouth , the second day of October ; and on the fourteenth of November after• be espo•sed open to prince Ar•hur , both be•ng clad in white ; he of the age of ••fteen year , she of eighteen : at night they be lay together in one bed , where they lie as man and wife all that night : when •o•ning appear , the prince ( as his servant about he report ) call for drink , which before time he have not use to do ; whereof one of his chamb•rlaines •sking ? ? ? the cause• he answer merry , say , i have be this night in the midst o•spa••• , which be a hot country , and •hat make• i so dry : though some write , tha•• grave matron be lay in bed between they , to hinder actual Consummati ? on•• t•e lady portion be two hundred thousand ducat ; her jointure , then ? ? ? part of the principality of wale , Cornwall and Ch•ster . at this marriage be gr••• solemnity and royal justing ; during which time , there come into London ? ? ? Earle , a bishop , and diverse other noble personage send from the king of Scot ? … ? conclusion of a marriage , ( before treat of , between the lady Margaret then ? ? ? elder daughter , and he ; where the earl by proxy , in the name of king Iames ? ? ? Mas•er , affy and contract the say lady , which contract be publish at ? ? ? Crosse• the day of the conversion of saint Paul ; for joy whereof , te deum ? … ? , and great fire be make through the city of London ; and if such joy we•e make when the match be make , what joy shall be make now at the issue of the match , when by the union of those person be make a union of these king ? dome ; and England and Scotland be but one great Britain ? the lady portion be ten thousand pound , her jointure two thousand pound a year , after king Iames his death ; and in present one thousand . when this match be first propound at the counsel table , some lord oppose it ; object , that by this mean the crown of England may happen to come to the scottish nation . to which king he•ry answer , what if it shall ? it will not be a accession of England to sco•la•d , but of Scotland to England : and this answer of the king pass for a oracle , •nd so the match proceed , and in August follow be consummate at Edi•b•rgh , conduct thither in great state by the earl of Northumberland . prince Arthur after his marriage , be send again into wale , to keep that Coun ? t•y in good order ; to who be appoint for counselor , sir Richard pool , hi••insman and chief chamberlain , sir Henry Vernon , sir Richard crof•s , sir David ? ? ? , sir William Vdall , sir Thomas Englefield , sir Peter Newton , John Walleston , ? ? ? Marton , and doctor William smith precedent of his counsel : but within five month after his marriage , at his castle of Ludlow he decease , and with great sole••ity be bury in the cathedral church at Worcester . his brother Henry du•e of York , be stay from the title of prince of Wales , the space of half a year , till to woman it may appear , whether the lady Katherine , the relict of prince be ? •••• be with child , or no . the towardliness in learning of this prince Arthur be ve•y memorable ; who die before the age of sixteen year , be say to have read oh ? ver al• or most of the latin author , beside many other . and now prince Arthur be dead , and the lady Katherine of Spain leave a young widow ; king Henry loath to part with her dowry , but chief be desirous ? ? ? continue the alliance with Spain : prevail with his other son prince hen ? ry , though with some reluctation , such as can be in those year ( for he be scarce •welv• year of age ) to be contract with the princess Katherine his bro•h•rs with ? dough ; for which marriage , a dispensation by advice of the most learned man at that ? ? ? in Christendom , be by pope Iulius the second grant , and on the five and twenty day of June , in the bishop of Salisbury•s house in Fleetstreet , th• marriage be solemnize . page 154 a little before this time , ? … ? earl of S•ffolke , son to John duke of Suffolk and lady Eliz•b•t• sister •o king Edward the •ourth , have in his fury kill a mean person• and be thereupon i•dighted of murder ; for which , although he have the king pardon , yet because he be bring to th• kings-bench-b•rr• , and there arraign ; he take it for so great ? … ? his honour , that in great rage he flee into Flanders to his Aun• the Lad•M••garet ; where have stay a while , when his p•ssion be over , he return•d again . •ut after the marriage between prince Arthur and the lady ? ? ? , w••ther it be that in that solemnity he have run himself in debt ; or ? ? ? he be •rawn to do so by the lady Margare• , he pass over the second time , with his b•other Richard , into Fl•nder• . This put the king into some doubt of his intention• whereupon he have recourse to his usu ? all course in such case , and sir ? … ? captain of Hamme• castle , to feign himself one of that conspiracy , the••by to learn the depth of their intenti ? of|we : and to take away all susp••ion of his employment ; •he first Sunday of Novem ? ber , he cause the say earl and sir Robert c•rson with five other to be accurse oh ? pen at Paul cross , as enemy to he and his realm . in conclusion , sir Robert Curson acquaint the king with diverse of that faction ; among who , Willia• lord Court•ey , and Willia• de la pool , brother to the foresay earl of Suffolk , who be take but upon suspicion , yet hold long in prison : but sir Iames Tyrrell ( the same that have murder the two young prince in the tower ) and sir Io•• Windham , who be prove to be Traytor• , be accord attaint , and on the six day of may at the tower-hill behead . whereof when the earl hear , despair now of any good success , he wander about all Germany and Fr••c• , where find no succour , he submit himself at last to fillip duke of Austria , by who afterward he be deliver to king Henry , by this occasion : ferdi•a•d king of Aragon , by his wife Isabel queen of C•stile , have only two daughter , the elder whereof name ioa•e , be marry to this fillip duke of Austria ; the youn ? she , name Katherine , to Arthur prince of England : and now queen Isabel be late dead , by who death the kingdom of Castille descend in right of his wife , to this duke fillip ; they be sail out of Germany into sp•ine to take possession of the kingdom ; but by tempest and contrary wind be drive upon the coast of England , and land at VVeymouth in Dorsetshire ; where desire to re ? fresh themselves a little on shore , they be invite by sir Thomas tre•cha•d ( a principal knight of that country ) to his house , who present send word to the king of their arrival . king Henry glad to have his court honour by so great a prince , and perhaps upon hope of a courtesy from he , which afterward he obtain : •ent present the earl of Arundel to wait upon he , till himself may follow ; and the earl go to he in great magnificence , with a gallant troop of three hundred horse , and for more state come to he by torchlight . upon who me•••ge , though king Philip have many re•sons of haste on his journey ; yet not to give king he•ry distaste , and withal to give his queen the comfort of see the lady ka ? therine her sister ; he go upon speed to the king at Windsor , while his queen follow by easy journey . after great magnificence of entertainment , king hen ? •y take a fit opportunity , and draw the king of Castille into a room , where they two only be private ; and lay his hand civil upon his arm , say unto he ; sir , you have be save upon my coast : i hope you will not suffer i to wrack upon you . the king of Castille ask he , what he mean by that speech ? i mean it ( say the king ) by that harebrained fellow the earl of Suffolk ; who be my subject , be protect in your country , and begin to play the fool when all other be weary of it . the king of Cas•ile answer ; i have think , sir , your felicity have be above those thought ; but if it trouble you , i will banish he : king Henry reply , that his desire be to have he deliver to he : with this , the king of Castille a little confuse say , that can i not do with my honour : well then ( say the king ) the matter be at a end : at last the king of Castille , who hold king Henry in great estimation , compose his countenance , say , sir you shall have he ; but upon your honour , you shall not take his life : i promise it upon my honour , page 155 say king Henry : and he keep his promise ; for he be not put to death during all his reign ; but yet he take such order , that in the reign of his son king Henry the eight , he have his head cut off . during the king of castiles be here , a treaty be conclude , and bear date at Windsor ; which the Fleming term Intercursus malus , for that the free fish of the dutch upon the coast and sea of England , grant in the treaty of vndecimo , be not by this treaty confirm , as all other article be . and now , when king Henry have receive the king of Castille into the fraternity of the garter , and have his son prince Henry admit to the order of the golden fleece ; and that the earl of Suffolk be bring over and commit to the tower ; the king of Castille depart home . in this king time be two call of Serjeant• at law : one in his eleven year , in which be call nine sergeant , Mordant , Higham , Kingesmill , Conisby , butler , ••xely , Frowick , Oxenbridge , and constable ; who keep their feast at the bishop of ely place in Holborn , where the king , the queen , and all the chief lord dine . the other call , in his twenty year ; in which be call ten sergeant , Robert Brudnell , William •revill , Thomas marrow , George Edgore , Lewis Pollard , guy palm , and William Fairfax ; who keep their feast at the archbisho•s house in Lambeth . king Henry have get as much honour as the estimation of neighbour prince can give he , begin now to be intentive to get of wealth ; wherein he quick find instrument fit for his purpose , but special two , Empson and Dudley both lawyer ; Dudley of a good family , but Empson the son of a sieve-maker . Theise two person be put in authority , turn law and justice into rapine . for first , their manner be , to cause diverse subject to be indict of crime , and then pre ? sent to commit they ; and not produce they to their answer , but suffer they to languish long in prison ; and by sundry artificial device and terror , extort from they great fine , which they term composition and mitigation . neither do they ( towards the end ) observe so much as the half face of justice , in proceed by indictment ; but send forth their precept to attach man , and convent they before themselves and some other at their private house , and there use to shuffle up a summary proceed by examination , without trial of jury ; as•uming to they ? self , to deal both in plea of the crown , and controversy civil . then do they also use to enthral and charge the subject land with tenor in capite , by find false office ; refuse upon diverse pretext and delay , to admit man to traverse those false office , as by law they may . nay the king ward , after they have accomplish their full age , can not be suffer to have livery of their land , without pay excessive fine , far exceed all reasonable rate . when man be outlaw in personal action , they will not permit they to purchase their charter of pardon , except they pay great and intolerable sum ; stand upon the strict point of law , which upon outlawry give forfeiture of good . nay , contrary to all law and colour , they maintain , the king ought to have the half of man land and rent during the space of full two year , for a pain in case of outlawry . they will also ruffle with juror , and enforce they to find as they will direct ; and if they do not , then convent , imprison , and fine they . Theise and many other cours•s they have of prey upon the people : but their principal work be upon penal statute ; wherein they consider not whether the law be obsolete , or in use ; and have ever a rabble of promoter and lead juror at their command , so as they can have any th•ng find , either for fact or valuation . there remain to this day a report , that king Henry be on a time entertain very sumptuous by the earl of Oxford , at his castle of Heningham : and at the king go away , the earl servant stand in their livery-coat with cognisance , range on both side , to make the king a lane : whereupon the king call the earl to he , and say : my lord , i have hear much of your hospitality , but i see it be great than be speak ; these handsome gentleman and yeoman who i see on both side of i , be sure your menial servant . at which the earl smile , and say : it may please your grace , that be not for my ease ; they be most of they my retainer , and be come to do i s•rvice at such a time as this , and chi•fly to page 156 see your grace . whereat the king start a little , and say : by my faith ( my lord ) i thank you for my good cheer ; but i may not endure to have my law break in my sight : my attorney must speak with you about it . and it be part of the re ? port , that it cost the earl for a composition , fifteen thousand mark . and to show further the king extreme diligence : i remember ( say Sir Francis bacon lord of Virula• in his history ) to have see long since a book of account of Empsons , that have the king hand almost to every leaf , by way of sign ; and be in some place postil in the margin with the king own hand likewise , where be this remembrance : item , receive of such a one five mark ; for the pardon to be procure ; and if the pardon do not pass , the money to be repay , except the party be some other way satisfy . and over against this memorand•m ( of the king own hand , ) otherwise satisfy . this ( say he ) i do the rather mention , because it show in the king a nearness , but yet with a kind of justness . in his three and twenty year , there be a sharp prosecution against sir will ? liam Gapell now the second time , for misgovernment in his majoralty : the great matter be , that in some payment he have take notice of false money , and do not his diligence to examine who be the offender : for which and some other thing •aid to his charge , he be condemn to pay two thousand pound ; whereof , be a man of stomach , he refuse to pay a farthing ; and thereupon be send to the tower , where he remain till the king death . Knesworth likewise , that have be late major of London , and both his sheriff , be for abuse in their office question and imprison , and not deliver but upon payment of one thousand four hun ? dread pound . sir Laurence Ailmer , who have likewise be major of London , and his two sheriff , be put to the fine of one thousand pound ; and sir Laurence , for refuse to pay it , be commit to prison , where he stay till Empson himself be commit in his place . by these course he accumulate so great store of treasure , that he leave at his death , most of it in secret place , under his own key and keep at Richmond , ( as be report ) the sum of near eighteen hundred thousand pound sterling . but though by this course he get great store of treasure , yet by it he lose the best treasure ( the people heart ) but that he something qualify it by his last testament , command that restitution shall be make of all such money as have unjust be levy by his officer . it seem king Henry , after the death of his queen the lady Elizabeth , have a inclination to marry again ; and hear of the great beauty and virtue of the young queen of Naples , the widow of Ferdinando the young ; he send three confident person , Francis Marsyn , Iames Braybrooke , and John stile , to make two inquiry ; one of her person and condition , the other of her estate : who return he a ? swer , that they find she beauty and virtue to be great , but her estate to be only a certain pension or exhibition , and not the kingdom of Naples as he expect , he then give over any further meddle in that matter . after this , another treaty of marriage be propound to the king , between he and the lady Margaret duchess dowager of Savoy , only daughter to Maximilian , and sister to the king of Castille ; a lady wise and of great good fame : in which business be employ , for his first piece , the king then chaplain , and after the great prelate , Thomas wool ? say . it be in the end conclude , with ample condition for the king , but with pro ? mouse de futuro only . which marriage be protract from time to time , in respect of the infirmity of the king ; which hold he by •its till he die . he leave executor , Richard fox bishop of Winchester , Richard Fitz Iames bishop of London , Thomas bishop of Durham , John bishop of Rochester , Thomas duke of nor ? folk and treasurer of England , Edward earl of Worcester and lord Chamberlaine , John F. knight , chief justice of the king bench , and Robert R. knight chief justice of the common plea . a little before his death , he have conclude a marriage ( in which negotiation fox bishop of Winchester be employ ) between his young daughter the lady mary , of the age of ten year ; and Charles king of Castille , not page 157 much elder : but though conclude , yet not solemnize ; and she be afterward mar ? ried to Lewis the french king . of his taxation . in his three year , there be by parliament grant towards the maintain a army in Britain ; that every man shall pay the ten penny of his good : which tax though at first withstand in Yorkshire and Durham ; yet be afterward levy to the uttermost . in his seven year , towards his war in France , a bene ? volence be by parliament grant ; by which great sum of money be collect of the rich sort only . in his eleven year , a subsidy of sixscore thousand pound be grant he by parliament , towards his wa•s with Scotland , which cause after ? ward the insurrection in Cornwall . in his nineteenth year a subsidy be grant he by parliament . in his one and twenty year , •e raise great sum of money from offender against penal statute : the great , but the unjust way for raise of money , that every any king of England use : and not content with this , he require and have at the same time a benevolence both from the clergy and Laity . to the clergy be employ Richard fox , than bishop of Winchester ; who assemble the clergy before he , exhort they to be liberal in their contribution ; but the clergy be of two sort , rich and poor , make each of they their several excuse : the rich and such as have great live , say , they be at great charge in keep hospi ? tality and maintain their family , and therefore desire to be spa•ed : the poor sort allege , that their mean be small , and scarce able to find they ne ? cessaries , and therefore desire to be forbear . but the bishop answer they both with a pretty dilemma , say to the rich , it be true , you live at great charge in hospitality , in apparel and other demonstration of your wealth ; and see you have store to spend in such order , there be no reason but for your prince service you shall do it much more , and therefore you must pay . to the poor sort he say , though your live be small , yet your frugality be great , and you spend not in house ? keep and apparel as other doe ; therefore be content , for you shall pay . of his law and ordinance . this king be the first that ordain a company of tall strong man , ( na ? ming they yeoman of the guard ) to be attend about the person of the king ; to who he appoint a livery by which to be know , and a c•ptaine by who to be choose . in his time , the authority of the star-chamber , which subsist ? ed before by the common law of the realm , be confirm in certain case by act of parliament . in his time be make these excellent general law : one , that from thenceforth sines shall be final , and conclude all stranger right : Ano ? there for admission of poor suitor , in forma pa•peris , without pay fee to con ? sellour , attorney or clerk . another , that no person that do assist by arm or otherwise the king for the time be , shall after be impeach therefore or at ? taint , either by course of the law , or by act of parliament ; and that if any such act of attainder do happen to be make , it shall be void and of none effect . an ? other for the benevolence , to make the sum which any have agree to pay , and be not bring in , to be leviable by course of law . another , that murderer shall be burn on the brawn of the left hand , with the letter m. and thief with the letter T. so that if they offend the second time , they shall have no mercy , but •e put to death ; and this to •each also to clerk convict . in his five year , it be ordain by parliament , that the major of London shall have conservation of the river of Thames , from the bridge of Stanes , to the water of Yendal• and M•d ? way . in his seventeenth John shaw major of London , cause his brethren the alder ? man to ride from the Guildhall to the waters-side , when he go to Westminster to be present in the exchequer : •e also cause the kitchen and other house of office •o be build at the Guildhall ; where since that time , the major feast ha•h be page 158 keep , which before , have be in the grocer or tailors-hall . in his eighteenth year king Henry be himself a brother of the tailor company , as diverse king be ? fore have be , namely , Richard the three , Edward the four , Henry the six , hen ? ry the five , Henry the four , and Richard the second ; also of duke 11. Earles 28. Lords 48. he now give to they the name and title of merchant tailor ; as a name of worship to endure for ever . Affaires of the church in his time . in the ten year of his reign , Joan Boughton widow , be burn in smith ? field , for hold certain opinion of John VVickliffe . in his seven year , king Henry find great inconvenience by the privilege of sanctuary ; write to pope Alexander , desire he by his authority , to adjudge all english man be flee to sanctuary for the offence of treason , to be enemy to the christian faith ; and to prohibit the privilege of sanctuary to all such as once have enjoy it before : which request the pope grant , to the great contentment of the king , and quiet of the realm . in his sixteenth year be the year 1500. of jubilee in Rome be cele ? brate ; whereof Alexander the then pope , by his messenger Gaspar Pons a Spaniard , give notice to the king : offer withal , that those who can not come to roam , shall notwithstanding at a certain price have pardon , and as full a benefit of the jubilee , as if they come ; and to the end the king shall not hinder his purpose , both offer part of his gain to the king , and also promise to bestow it upon a war against the Turk ; by which course he gather great sum , for which he have other use , than to spend it so idle . in the two and twenty year of this king• pope Alexander the six die of poison , by this accident : he go to supper in a vineyard near the Vatican , where his son valentionis meaning to poison Adria• cardinal of Cornetta , send thither certain flagon of wine , infect with poison , and deliver they to a servant of he , who know nothing of the matter ; common ? ding he , that none shall touch they , but by his appointment : it happen , the pope come in something before supper , and be very dry through the immo ? derate heat of the season , call for drink , his own provision be not yet come : the servant that have the poison wine in keep ; think it to be commit to he as a special wine , bring of it to the pope ; and while he be drink , his son Valentinois come in , and drink also of the same ; whereby they be both poison , but the pope only overcome of the poison , die ; his son by the strength of youth bear it out , though with long languish . work of piety and other structure by him• and other . this king magnificent enlarge Greenwich , which Humphrey duke of glow ? cester have former build , call it Placentia . in his sixteenth year , •e new build his manor of Shee• , and name it Richmond : he also new build Baynard castle in London . in his two and twenty year , he finish the goodly hospital of the Savoy near to Charing-cross , to which he give land for the rely ? ve of two hundred poor people : this be first call Savoy place , build by Peter earl of Savoy father to Boniface archbishop of Canterbury , about the nine and twenty year of Henry the three , who make the say Peter earl of Richmond . the house belong since to the duke of L••caster ; and at this time be convert to a hospital , retain still the first name of the Savoy . in this king time , John Morton be bishop of Ely , bestow great cost upon his house at Hatfield in hart ? fordshire , now the house of the right honourable the earl of Salisbury ; and at Wesbich castle in Cambridgeshire , a house belong to that see ; all the brick build ? ing be of his charge : be afterward bishop of Canterbury , he bestow great sum in repair and a•gmenting his house at M•idstone , alington-parke , Charing , ford , L•mbeth , and special at Knoll in Kent , where he die . king Henry also build three house of franciscan friar , which be call observant ; one at Richmond , page 159 •n other at Greenwich , a three at Newark ; and three other of franciscan friar , which be call conventual , one at Canterbury , another at Newcastle , and a three at south ? •amp•on . And draw near his end , he do these work of charity : he grant a general pardon to all man , for any offence commit against any of his law , thief and murderer only except : he pay also all fee of all prisoner in all goal in and about London , abide there for that cause only : he pay also the debt of all such person as lie in the counter or Ludgate for forty shilling or under , and some also for ten pound . in his eighteenth year , the chapel of our lady , a ¦ bo•e the east-side of the high altar at Westminster church , with a tavern call the white-rose near adjoin , be take down ; in which place a most beautiful chap ? pell be then present begin to be build , by king Henry ; the charge whereof a ? mount to the sum of fourteen thousand pound ( as Stow witness . ) in his second year , the great conduit in Cheapside , at the charge of Thomas Il•m alder ? man of London , be new make ; and the cross also in cheap be new build , to ? ward the charge whereof , Thomas fisher mercer give five hundred mark . in his seven year , the conduit in grace-street be begin to be build by the Exe ? cutor of sir Thomas hill grocer , late major of London . also this year , huge Cl•pton major of London build the great bridge of Stratford upon A•o• , as likewise a fair chapel towards the south end of that town ; and near unto the same , a pretty house of b•rick and timber , where he lie and end his life : he glaze also then ? ? ? of the parish church in that town ; and make a way of four mile long , ? ? ? mile from Alisbury towards London , and one mile beyond Ali•bury . in his ••nth year , John t•le major of London , build the church of saint antho••es , with a free-school , and certain almshouse for poor man . in his time , his mother the lady Margaret countess of Richmond , build two college in Cambridge , one call Christ college , the other saint John ; and endow they with large possessi•ns , for the maintenance of learning . Richard fox bishop of Winchester found corpus chirsti college in Oxford ; and William smith bishop of Lincoln , brazen-nose Col ? l••ge : he also build at Lichfield a hospital , for a master , two priest , and ten poor man , as likewise a free-school , with a shoole-master and a usher . Anne a•eling give a hundred mark towards the build of the church in Cicester . in his time also John Alcock bishop of Ely , build Jesus college in Cambridge : and in his two and twenty year , Thomas Knesworth major of London , build the con ? duite at Bishopsgate at his own charge ; and give to the fishmonger certain tene ? ment ; for which they be bind to allow to four scholar , two at Oxford , and two at Cambridge , to each of they four pound a year : also to poor people and prisoner in Ludgate something yee•ly . in his twenty year , sir William Capell major of London , cause all Hounseditch to be pave over ; which till that time , have ? ? ? very noyous to all traveller that way . in his fourteenth year , all the garden without mooregate ( which have continue time out of mind ) be destroy ; and of they be make a plain field , for archer to shoot in . in this king time also , ? ? ? savege archbishop of York , repair the castle of Cawood , and the manor of ? ? ? , and found the chapel at Maclesfield in Cheshire , where he be bear . also in his time , Stephen graning major of London , found a free gramm•r school ? ? ? VVolverhampton in Staffordshire where he be bear ; and give land sufficient for a master and a usher , leave the oversight to the merchant-taylours in London . Thi• town of VVolverhampton , common so call , be original and right call ???-hampton , upon this occasion : the town be ancient call Hampton , to which a noble woman name VVilfrune , a widow , sometime wise of Athel•s duke of Northampton ; obtain of king Ethelred , to give land to the church there , wh•ch she have found ; and thereupon the town take the addition of the say Will ? frune . in this king time also , John coll•t Deane of Pauls , found Paul school in the churchyard there . page 160 casualty happen in his time . in his first year happen the sickness call the sweating-sickness , which though it continue not long , yet take away many thousand : and in his two and twenty year , the like sweating-sickness happen again ; but by reason of remedy find in the former , take away few . in his second year , wheat be sell for three shilling the quarter , bay-salt at the like price : in his seven year , wheat be sell at London for twenty penny the bushel ; which be count a great dearth . in his ten year , wheat be sell at London for six penny the bushel , bay-salt for three penny half penny , nantwich•salt for sixpence , white herring nine shilling the barrel , red herring three shilling the cade , red sprat six penny the cade , and Gascoigne wine for six pound the T•• . in his fifteen year , Gascoigne wine be sell at London for forty shilling the tun , a quarter of wheat four shilling , and bay-salt four penny the bushel . the two and twenty of August 1485. the very day that king Henry get the vi ? ctory of king Richard ; a great fire be in bread-street in London , in which be burn the parson of saint Mildred , and one other man in the parsonage there . in his ten year , in dig to lay a new foundation in the church of saint mary hill in London , the body of Alice Hackney , which have be bury in the church a hundred seventy five year before , be find whole of skin , and the joint of her arm pliable ; which corpse be keep above ground four day without an ? noyance , and then again bury . in his twelve year , on Bartholomew day , at the town of saint ne•des in Bedfordshire , there fall hailstone that be measure eighteen inch a ? bout . in his thirteenth year , on the one and twenty of December ; sudden in the night break out a fire in the king lodging , be then at his manor of Shee• ; by violence whereof , a great part of the old build be burn , with hang , bed , apparel , plate and m•ny jewel . in his fifteen year , the town of Babra• in Norfolk be burn : also this year , a great plague happen ; whereof many peo ? ple die in many place , but special in London , where there die in that year their ? ty thousand . in his twenty year , alum which for many year have be sell for six shilling a hundred , rise to five noble a hundred , and after to four mark . in his two and twenty year , the city of Norwich be well near consume with fire . also in the same year in July , a gallery new build at Richmond , wherein the king and the prince his son have walk not a hour before , fall sudden down , yet no man hurt . the great tempest which drive king Philip into England , blow down the golden eagle from the spire of Pauls ; and in the fall , it fall upon a sign of the black-eagle , which be in Paul churchyard , in the place where the School-house now stand ? eth ; and batter it , and break it down . This the people interpret to be a o ? minous prognostic upon the imperial house , as indeed it prove ; for this king Philip be the emperor son , arrive in Spain , sicken soon after ; and be ? king but thirty year of age , decease : upon who decease , his wife queen John out of her tender love to he , fall distract of her wit . of his wife and child . he marry Elizabeth elder daughter of king Edward the four , be of the age of nineteen year ; who two year after his marriage he cause to be page 161 crown : she live his wife eighteen year , and die in childbed in the tower of London , the eleven of February , the very day on which she be bear ; and be bury at Westminster , in the magnificent chapel and rich monument of copper and gild , which her husband have erect . he have issue by she , three son and four daughter : his old son Arthur be bear at Winchester , the twenty day of September in the second year of his reign ; and die at Ludlow , at fifteen year old and a half : and of this short life some cause may be attribute to his nativity , be bear in the eight month after conception : he be bury in the cathe ? drall church of saint Maries in Worcester , where in the south side of the choir he lie en•ombed in touch or jet , without any remembrance of he by picture . his se ? cond son Henry be bear at Greenwich in •ent , on the two and twenty day of June , in the seven year of his father reign ; and succe•ded he in the king ? dome . his three son Edmund be bear in the ten year of his father reign , and die at five year of age , at bishop Hatfield , and lie bury at saint Peter in Westminster . his elder daughter Margaret be bear the nine and twenty day of November , the five year of her father reign ; and at fourteen year of age be mar ? ried to Iames the four king of Scotland ; unto who she bear three son , Iames the five , Arthur and Alexander , and one daughter , which three last die all of they young ; and after the death of her husband king Iames , ( slay at Flodden field in ? ? ? against the english ) she be remarry to archib•ld dowgl•sse earl of Augus , in the year 1514. to who she bear Margaret , espouse to Matthew earl of Lenox , father of the lord Henry , who die at the age of nine month , and lie inter in the upper end of the chancel in the parish church of Stepney near London : her second son be Henry lord D••nley , repute for personage the goodly Gentle ? man of Europe ; who marry mary queen of Scotland , the royal parent of the most royal monarch Iames the first , king of great Britain : her three son be Charles earl of Lenox , father to the lady Arbella . king Henry second daughter the lady Eliz•beth be bear in the year 1492. at three year of age , die ; and be bury at Westminster : his three daughter the lady mary , have be promise to Charles king of Castille ; but be marry to Lewis the twelve , king of France ; who die three month after , she be then marry to Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk : his four daughter , the lady Katherine , be bear in the year 1503. in the eighteenth year of her father reign , and die •n infant . of his personage and condition . he be of body lean and spare , yet of great strength ; of statu•e somewhat high than the common sort , his eye grey , his tooth single , his hair thin , of a fair complexion and please countenance . concern his condition , •e have in he the virtue of a prince , and of a private man ; affable , yet reserve . we may say he be politic ; if not rather , that he be wise : for though he use ? ? ? of cunning sometime , yet solid circumspection more . he love not war , but in case of necessity ; always peace , but with condition of honour . never ••y prince be less addict to bodily pleasure of any kind , than he . three plea ? sure he have , but in three care ; one for safety ; another for honour ; and the three for wealth : in all which he attain his end . his great respect of the church , be see by his great employment of churchman ; for through the hand of bishop Morton , bishop fox , and his chaplain Urswick , the great part of all his great negotiation pass . he be frugal from his youth , not covetous till an ? cient and sickly ; and therefore what defect he have in that kind , must be attribute to age and weakness . this city of London be his paradise , for what good fortune ? ? ? befall he , he think he enjoy it not , till he acquaint they with it . his parliament be his oracle ; for in all matter of importance he will ask their page 162 advice ; and he put his very prerogative sometime into their hand . he be no great lover of woman ; yet all his great fortune both precedent and subsequent come by woman : his own title to the crown , be by a woman ; his confirmati ? on in the crown , be by a woman ; his transmission of the crown to his post ? rity , be by a woman : the first by the lady Margaret , descend from Ioh• of Gaunt ; the second by the lady Elizabeth , elder daughter of king Edward the four ; the three by the lady Margaret , elder daughter of himself king of England , and marry to Iames the four , king of Scotland ; by mean whereof , as he be the prince that join the two rose in one , so he be the founder of join the two kingdom in one . and last , it may be say of he , as be say by one of August•• Caesar , — hic •ir hic est ti•i quem promitti saepius audis : for Cadwal ? loder last king of the Britain , seven hundred year before , have prophesy of he ; and of late time , king He•ry the six plain foreshowed he . of his death and burial . in the two and twenty year of his reign , he begin to be trouble with the gout ; but a defluction also take into his breast , waste his lung , so that thrice in a year , and special in the spring , he have great fit and labour of the phthisic , which bring he to his end , at his palace of Richmond , on the two and twenty day of April in the year of 1508. when he have live two and fifty year , reign three and twenty and eight month : be dead , and all thing necessary for his funeral prepare ; his corpse be bring out of his privy cham ? ber , into the great chamber , where it rest three day ; and every day , have there a dirge and mass sing by a plelate , mitre : and from thence it be convey in ? to the hall , wherein it remain also three day , and have a like service there ; and so three day in the chapel : upon Wednesday the nine of May , the corpse be put into a chariot , and over the corpse be a picture of the late king , lay on cu ? shion of gold ; and the picture be apparel in the king rich robe , with a crown on the head , and a ball and sceptre in the hand : when the chariot be thus order , the king chapel and a great number of prelate set forward , pray ? ing ; then follow all the king servant in black ; then follow the chariot , and after the chariot nine mourner , and on every side be carry torch , to the number of six hundred , and in this order they come from Richmond to saint George field ; where there meet with it all the priest and religious man within the city and without ; the major and alderman , with many commoner , all clothe in black , meet with the corpse at London-bridge ; and so the chariot be bring bring the city to the cathedral of saint Paul , where the body be take out and carry into the choir , and set under a goodly hearse of wax ; where after a solemn mass , be make a sermon by the bishop of Rochester : the next day , the corpse in like manner be remove to Westminster ; sir Edward haword bear the king banner . in Westminster be a curious hearse full of light , which be light at the come of the corpse ; and then be the corpse take out of the chariot by six lord , and set under the hearse , which be double rail : when the mourner be set , gart•r king at arm , cry , for the soul of the noble prince king Henry the seven , late king of this realm : the next day be three mass solemn sing by bishop , and after the mass be offer the king banner and courser , his coat of arm , his sword , his target and his helm , and at the end of the mass , the mourner offer up rich pall of choath of gold and bodkin ; and when the choir sing Liber• i , the body be put into the earth ; then the lord treasurer , lord steward , lord Chamberlaine , the treasurer and comptroller of the king household , break their staff and cast they into the grave : then Gartar cry with a loud voice ; vive le •oy , Henry le ••itiesme ; roy d'angleterre and de France , sire d' Irlande : and thus end the funeral . page 163 of man of note in his time . of man of valour and arm , they be to be see in the history of this king reign . for man of letter in his time , of foreigner be Sancts Pagui ? ••s a great hebrician ; Leonicenus , Gattinaria , Cabellus and Optatus physician ; augu ? stinus Niphus , Jacobus Faber , Stapulensis and Pighius philosopher ; Petrus Bembus• and the famous clerk Rheudin , who restore again the knowledge of the hebrew tongue . of our own country , there live in his time , George Rippley a Carmelite friar of Boston , who write diverse treatise in the mathematics ; and after his death be account a necromancer . John Erghom bear in York , a black-frier , studi ? ous in prophecy , as by the title of the work he write , may appear . Thomas Mallorie a Welshman , who write of king Arthur , and of the round table . John Rouse bear in Warwickshire , a diligent searcher of antiquity , and write diverse treatise of historical argument . Thomas Scroop surname Bradley , of the noble family of the Scroope , enter into diverse order of religion , and after withdraw himself to his house , where for twenty year he live the life of a anchorite ; and after , come abroad again , be make a bishop in Ireland , and go to the Rhodes in ambassage ; from whence be return , he go barefooted up and down in N•rfolk , teach the ten commandment ; and live till near a hundred year old . John ton•eys a Augustine friar in Norwich , who write certain rule of grammar , and other thing print by Richard Pinson . Robert Fabian a sheriff of London , and a historiographer . Edmund Dudley , the same man who king Henry use to take the forfeiture of penal statu•es ; who write a book entitle Arbor re•-publicae . John Bockingham a excellent schoolman : and William Blackeney a Carmelite friar , a doctor of divinity , and a necromancer . page [ unnumbered ] page 1 the reign of king Henry the eight . king Henry the seven be decease , his only son prince Henry , heir by his father of the house of Lan ? caster , and by his mother of the house of York : by unquem ? stionable right succeed in the crown , at the age of eighteen year , on the two and twenty of April , in the year 1509. who have be train up in the study of good letter all his father time• he govern at first , as a man new come from contemplation to action , as it be by the Booke• in so regular and fair a man•er , that as of Nero government , there be say to be Quinquennium Neronis ; so of this king , there may as just be say , de ? cennium henrici ; and perhaps double so long a time , comparable with so much time of any king reign , that have be before he . how he come to alter , and to alter to such a degree of change as he do , we shall then have a fit place to show , when we come to the time of his alteration . king Henry have lear ? ned by book , that the weight of a kingdom be too heavy to lie upon one man shoulder , if it be not support by able counsellor ; make it his first care , to make choice of a able council ; to which he call William war ? ham archbishop of Canterbury , and chancellor of England , Richard fox bishop of Winchester , Thomas Howard earl of Surry , and treasurer of Eng ? land , George Talbot earl of Shrewsbury , and lord steward of his household , Charles Summerset lord Chamberlaine , sir Thomas Lovell• sir Henry Wyatt , doctor Thomas Ruthall , and sir Edward Poynings ; by advise of these council ? lour , his first act after the care of his father funeral ; be the care to per ? form his father will , in marry the lady Katherine of Spain , the re ? lict of his brother prince Arthur ; to which perhaps but in respect of filial pierie , he have not the great devotion ; and for relinquish whereof , he may ( no doubt ) more easy have obtain a despensation from the pope , than his father have do , for get it to be allow : but obsequiousness to his father desire , and respect to his counsel advice , so far prevail with he , that he will not be crown , till that be perform , that one counterfeit ? ronation may serve they both : and so on the three day of June follow , he marry the say lady , at the bishop of salisburies house in Fleetstreet ; where of many great solemnity , i will remember but this one ; that though the bride be a widow , yet to show she be a virgin widow , she be at ? tire all in white , and have the hair of her head hanging-down behind at the full length : and then ( have make in the tower four and twenty knight of the bath ) two day after be midsummer day , he be crown at westmin ? star , page 2 together with his queen , by the hand of William VVarham archbishop of Canterbury ; with all circumstance of state , in such case usual ; and than all the nobility spiritual and temporal , do he homage ; and the people be ask whether they will receive he for their king , they all with one voice , cry , yea , yea . this do , his next act be another part of perform his father will , which be to proclaim pardon for all offence , ( treason , murder , and fe ? lonie only except ) and to have restitution make of all good unjust take from any ; and because the instrument of such injustice , be always most odious , and nothing give the people so much contentment , as to see their persecutor punish ; he therefore cause Empson and Dudley the two chief actor of the late unjust proceed , to be commit to the tower , and diverse of their inferior agent , call promoter , as Canby , page , smith , Derby , Wright , Simpson , and Stockton , to be set on the pillory in Cornhill , with paper on their head , and then to ride through the city , with their face to the horse tail ; with the shame whereof within seven day after , they all di ? ed in Newgate . Shortly after a parliament be call ; whereof sir Thomas Ingleby be choose speaker ; and therein Empson and Dudley be attaint of high treason , and after arraign ; Edmund Dudley in the Guildhall , on the seventeenth of July , and sir Richard Empson at Northampton in October fol ? low , and on the seventeenth of August the year follow , they be both of they behead on the tower hill ; and their body and head bury , the one at the white friar , the other at the black . on midsummer eave at night , king Henry come privy into VVestchester , clothe in one of the coat of his guard , to behold the same : and this first year king Henry spend in joust and mask , which be almost perpetual , perform with great magnificence always ; and sometime with great act of valour , on the king part special . in February the same year , ambassador come from the king father in law , the king of Aragon ; require aid against the moor ; in which service , the lord Thomas Darcy , a knight of the garter , make suit to be employ ; he be send thither , and with he the lord Anthony grey , brother to the marquess Dorset , Henry Guilford , Wolstan brown , and William Sidney esquire of the king house , sir Robert Constable• sir Roger Hastings , sir Ralph Elderton and other ; who on the mund•y in the rogation week , depart out of Plimot• haven , with four ship royal , and on the first of June , arrive at the port of cadis in south Spain ; of who come the king of Aragon hearing• send to bid they welcome , but advertise they withal , that he have now by reason of new trouble with France , take truce with the moor ; and therefore they may return again into their own country , to who yet he allow wage for all his soldier . w•ereupon the lord Darcy and all his man go aboard their ship , but Henry Guilford , Wol•tan br•wne , and William Sidney , desirous to see the court of Spain , go thither and be honourable entertain . Henry Guilford , and Wolstan Browne be make knight by the king ; who give to sir Henry guil•ord a canton of Granado ; and to sir Wolstan Browne a eagle of Sicily on a chief , to the augmentation of their arm : William Sidney so excuse himself , that he be not make knight . after this they return to their ship , and their ship into England . during the time that the lord Darcy be in Spain , the lady Margaret Dutch ? esse of sa•oy , daughter unto Maximilian the emperor ; and governess of flande•s and other the low-country , pertain to Charles the young prince of ca•tile , send to king Henry for fifteen hundred archer , to aid she against the duke of gelder , which the king grant ; and thereupon sir Edward Poynings knight of the garter , and comptroller of the king house appoint to go , accompani•d with his son in law the lord Clinton , sir Matthew brown , sir John dig•y , John Werton , Richard Wetherill , and other , to the number of fifteen page 5 hundred , take ship at Sandwich , and pass over to the say lady regent , do she there great service ; for which John Norton , John fog , John Scott , and Thomas Lynde be knight ; and then with many thank and reward , re ? turn , not have lose in all the journey , by war or sickness , above a hun ? dread man . in the three year of king Henry reign , one Andrew Barton a scottish pirate , be grow so bold , that he rob Englishman no less than other Nations• till the king send his admiral , sir Edward Howard to repress he , who in a fight , so wound the say Barton , that he die ; and then take two of his ship , bring the man prisoner to London ; and though their offence deserve no less than death , yet the king be so mecifull as to pardon they all ; provide , they depart the realm within twenty day . the king of Scotts hear the death of Barton , and take of his ship ; send to king Henry , require restitution ; but king Henry answer his herald , that he rather look for thank for spar ? king their life , who so just have deserve death . in the three year also of king Henry reign , the french king make sharp war against pope Iulius the second ; whereupon king Henry write to the french king , require he to desist from his war against the pope be his friend and confederate ; but when the king of France little regard his request , he then send he word , to deliver he his inheritance of the duchy of nor ? mandie and Guyen , and the country of angiou and main ; as also his crown of France , or else he will recover it by the sword . but when the king of France be not move with this threaten neither ; king Henry then join in league with the emperor Maximilian , with Ferdinand king of Spain , and with diverse other prince ; resolve by advice of his council to make war on the king of France , and to that end make preparation both by sea and land this year the king keep his Christmas at Greenwich in a most magnificent manner . on newyear day be present one of his jovial devise , which one ? lie for a pattern what his show at other time be , i think fit to set down at large . in the hall be make a castle , garnish with artillery and weapon in a most warlike fashion , and on the front of the castle be write , la fort ? resse Dangerense : within the castle be six lady , clothe in russet satin , lay all over with leaf of gold : on their head coif and cap of gold . of ? ter this castle have be carry about the hall , and the queen have behold it ; in come the king with five other , apparel in coat , one half of russet-satten , with spangle of fi•e gold ; the other half of rich cloth of gold : on their head cap of russet satin , embroider with work of fine gold . Theise six assault the castle , who the lady see so lusty and courageous , they be content to solace with they ; and upon further communication , to yield the castle ; and so they come down , and dance a long space : after that the lady lead the knight into the castle , and then the castle sudden vanish out of their sight . on twelve day at night , the king with eleven moor be disguise , after the manner of Italy , call a mask ; a thing not see before in England . they be apparel in garment long and broad , wrought all with gold , with Vysors and cap of gold . and after the banquet do , these masker come in , with six gentleman disguise in silk , bear staff torch ; and de ? sire the lady to dance , and after they have dance and commune together ; take their leave and depart . the five and twenty of January begin the parliament , of which be spea ? ker sir Robert Sheffield knight , where the archbishop of Canterbury show the wrong which the king of France do to the king of England , in withholding his inheritance from he ; and thereupon the parliament conclude that war shall be make on the french king and his dominion . at this time king Ferdinand of Spain , have war with the french king , write to his son in law king Henry , that if he will send over a army in ? to Biskey , and invade France on that side ; he will aid they with ordnance , page 4 horse , and all other thing necessary ; whereupon thom•s grey , Marquesse Dorset be appoint to go , and with he the lord Howard son and hei•e to the earl of S•rry , the lord brook , the lord Willoughby , the lord Ferrer , the lord John , Anthony , and Leonard grey , all brother , to the marquess ; sir griss ap rice , sir Maurice Barkeley , sir William sand , the baron of b•r ? •ord , and sir Richard Cornwall his brother , William Hussey , John Melton , Willi ? be kingst•n esquire , and sir Henry Willoughby , with diverse other , to the num ? ber of ten thousand , who take ship at Southampton , o• the sixteenth of Ma•• the three of June they land on the coast of Biskey , whither within three day after their arrival , come from the king a marquess and a earl to welcome they ; but of such necessary as be promise , there come •one ; so as the english be in some want of victual , the king of Navarre offer to supply they , which they accept ; and promise thereupon not to molest his terri ? tory . after the army have lie thirty day , look for aid and provision from the king of Spain , at last a bishop come from the king , desire the• to have patience a while , and very short he will give they full contentme•t . in the mean time , the Englishman force to feed much upon garlic , and ? ? ? drink of ho•t wine ; fall into such sickness , that many of they die , at least eighteen hundred person ; which the lord Marquesse see , he send to the king to know his pleasure , who send he answer , that very short the duke of Alv• shall come with a great power , and join with he ; and indeed the duke of Alva come forward with a great army , as if he mean to join with he as be promise ; but be come within a day journey , he sudden tur ? ned towards the realm of Navarre ; and enter the same , chase out the king , and conquer the kingdom to the king of Spain use . this spanish policy please not the english , who find nothing but word from the king of Spain , and be weary of lie so long idle ; they fall upon some small town in the border of Guyen , but for want of horse as well for service as draught ; be unacustomated ? able to perform any great matter ; at which time , be now October , the lord Marques fall sick , and the lord Howard supply his place of general , to who the king of Spain once again send , excuse his present come , and require he , see the time of year be now past , that he will be please to break up his army , and disperse his company into town thereabou• , till the nex• spring , when he will not fail to make good all his promise : hereupon the lord Howard and his company go to render , the lord Willoughby to Gors ? cha•g , and sir William sand with many other captain to fontare . king Henry in the mean time , hear what the king of Spain intention be ; sen• his herald Windsor with letter to the army , will they to tarry there•for that very short he mean to send they a new supply of force , under the conduct of the lord Herbert his chamberlain ; but this message so incense• the soldier , that in a great fury they have slay the lord Howard if he have •o• yield present to return home ; who thereupon be force to hire shippe•• and in the begin of December they land in England ; be teach ••y this experience what trust be to be give to spanish promise . about the same time that the marquess go into Spain , sir Edward H•• ? ard lord admiral of England , with twenty great ship make forth toward•br•ttaine ; where set his man on land , he burn and waste diverse Town• and village , and be threaten by the lord of Britain to be encounter , to encourage his gentleman , he make diverse of they knight ; as sir Edwa•• brook brother to the lord Cobham , sir grif•eth down , sir Thomas Windham , sir Thomas Lucy , sir John Burdet , sir William Pirton , sir Henry Sherburne , and sir Stephen bull . the Britain be ten thousand , the english but five and twenty hundred ; yet the Briton not content with this advantage of num ? ber , will ne•ds use policy beside , for by the advice of a old experience cap ? take , their general command his man that a•soone as battle be joyned• they shall retire a little , mean thereby to draw the english into some this ? advantage ; page 5 but the common soldier not know their general purpose , and suppose he have see some present danger , instead of retire take their heal and flee ; so give the english by their british policy , if not a victory , at least a safety to return to their ship . after which the briton sue for truce , and can not obtain it ; for the english admiral pursue his forage the country , till fear there be many french ship abroad at sea , he come and lie before the isle of wight . king Henry in the mean time follow his pleasure ; and in June keep a solemn just at Greenwich , where he and sir Charles Brandon take up all comer ; and the king show himself not less a king at arm , then in estate . after this , king Henry have prepare man and ship ready to go to sea ; under the governance of sir Anthony out•read , sir Edmund Ichingham , Will ? liam Sidney and diverse other gentleman ; appoint they take the sea , and to come before the isle of wight , there to join with the admiral ; which all ? together make a fleet of five and twenty fair ship : and to Portesmouth he we•t himself to see they , where he appoint captain ; for one of his chief ? est ship call the regent , sir Thomas Knevet master of his horse , and sir John Carew of Devonshire , and to another principal ship call the sovereign , he appoint for captain sir Charles Brandon , and sir Henry Guildford ; and then make they a banke• , send they go . the french king likewise have prepare a navy of nine and thirty ship in the haven of breast , whereof the chief be a great Carrick , call the cordely , pertain to the queen his wife . Theise two fleet meet at the bay of Britain , and there enter a terrible fight ; the lord admiral make with the great ship of deep , and chase she ; sir Charles Brandon and sir Henry Guildford be in the sovereign , make with the great Carrick of breast , and lay stem to stem to she but whether by negligence of the master , or by reason of the smoke from the ordnance , the sovereign be cast at the ster•e of the Carrick ; whereat the Frenchman shower ? ed for joy ; which sir Thomas Knevet see , sudden he cause the regent in which he be , to make to the Carrick , and to grapple with she a long board ; and when they of the Carrick perceive they can not get a sunder , they let slip a anchor , and so with the stream the ship turn , and the Carrick be on the weather side , and the regent on the lee side ; at which time a cruel fight pass between these two ship : but in conclusion the Englishman enter the Carrick , which when a gunner see , he desperate set fire on the Gunpow ? there ( as some say ) though other affirm , that sir Anthony outhread follow the regent at the stern , bowge she in diverse place , and set her powder on fire ; but howsoever it chance , the Carrick and the regent both be consume by fire . in the Carrick be sir Piers Morgan , and with he nine hundred man : in the regent be sir Thomas Knevett , and sir John Carew , and with they seven hundred man , all drown and burn . king Henry to repair the loss of the regent , cause a great ship to be make , such a one as have never be see in England ; and name it Henry grace de dieu . though king Henry have hitherto follow his pleasure , as well agree with his youth and constitution ; yet he neglect not in the mean time severe stu ? die ; for he frequent daily his council table , and no matter of importance be resolve on , till he have hear it first mature discuss : as be now a war wi•h France , which he will not enter into upon his own head , nor yet upon advice of his private council , till he have it d•b•ted and conclude in Parlia ? mean ; whereupon he call his high court of parliament , wherein it be re ? solve ; that himself in person with a royal army , shall invade France ; and towards the charge thereof , a extraordinary subsidy be willing grant . on may even this year , Edmund de la pool , earl of Suffolk , be behead on the tower hill : this be that earl of Suffolk who king Phillip duke of Austria , have deliver up into the hand of king Henry the seven , upon his promise that he will not put he to death ; which indeed he perform , but page 6 his son king Henry the eight be not bind by that promise , and by he he be ; and short after , to bring another lord in his place , sir Charles Brandon be create Viscount Lisle . for all the great preparation for France , king Henry forbear not his course of revel , but keep his Christmas at Greenwich , with diverse cu•ious devise , in most magnificent manner . in march follow , the king navy royal , to the number of two and forty ship be set forth , under the conduct of sir ed ? ward Howard lord admiral , accompany with sir Walter Deveraux lord Ferrer , sir Wolston brown , sir Edward Ichingham , sir Anthony Poynings , sir John wallop , sir Thomas Windham , sir Stephen bull , William fit William , Arthur Plantagenet , William Sidney esquire ; and diverse other gentleman , who sail to Brittane , come into Bertram bay , and there lay at anchor in sight of the french navy , whereof one prior John be admiral , who keep himself close in the haven of breast ; the english admiral intend to assail he in the haven , but because his ship be to great to enter the bay ; he cause cer ? taine boa•es to be man forth , think thereby to toule out the french ; but when this neither will draw they to come abroad , he then call a council , where it be determine , that first they shall assail prior John and his gall ? lie , lie in blankesable bay , and after set upon the rest of the french flee•e in the haven of breast ; and it be further appoint , that the lord Ferrer , sir Stephen bull , and other shall go on land , with a convenient number , to as ? salt the bulwark , which the french have there make ; while the admi•all with row b•rges and little galley enter into the bay , that so the Frenchman may at once be assail both by sea and land . but though this be determi ? ned by the council of war •et , the lord admiral have a trick by himself , for by the advice of a spanish knight call sir Alphonso charunt , affirm that he may enter the bay with little danger ; he call to he William Fi•s-VVilliams , William cook , John Colley , and sir VVolston brown , as his most trusty friend , make they privy to his intent , which be to take on he the whole enterprise with their assistance only ; and so confident he be of success , that he write to the king to come thither in person , to have the honour of the enterprise himself ; but it seem the king have better fate , at least went not ; and thereupon , on saint mark day the admiral put himself in a small row B•rge ; and appoint three other small row ship , and his own ship ? boat to attend he : and therewith on a sudden row into the Ba• , where Pryor John have moor up his galley just to the ground ; which galley with the bulwark on the land shoot most cruel ; yet the admiral go on , and come to the galley , drive out the Frenchman . the bay be shallow , and the other ship by reason the tide be spend , can not enter ; which the Frenchman perceive , they enter the galley again with morris pike , and begin a new fight ; whereupon the admiral attempt to return back into his row B•rge ; which by violence of the tide , be drive down the stream ; with a pike be throw over board , and drown ; the just issue of his head ? strong enterprise ; the forename Alphonso be also there slay : upon which sorrowful accident , the lord Ferrer with the rest , return into England . after who departure , prior John come forth with his galley ; and coast over the border of Sussex , burn certain poor Cottages• but the king make sudden a new admiral , the lord Thomas Howard , elder brother to he that be drown ; son and heir of the earl of Surrey : who so skowrd the sea , that the french be no more to be see on any coast of England . king Henry have hitherto perform act of arm , though in jest , yet with great magnificence ; he will not perform they with less , be now in earnest and especial to deal with so potent aa adversary : and therefore when it be conclude by parliament , that he shall make a war in France himself in p•rson ; he send before to prepare the way for he , George Talbot , earl of Sh•ewsbury , high steward of his household ; accompany with the lord tho ? mass page 7 Stanley earl of Derby , the lord Dowckeroy prior of saint John , sir Robert Ratcliff , lord Fitswater , the lord Hastings , the lord Cobham , sir Riceap Thomas , sir Thomas blunt , sir Richad sacheverell , sir John Digby , sir John askew , sir Lewis Bagot , sir Thomas Cornwall and other , to the number of eight thousand ; who arrive at Callice about the middle of may ; after he in the end of may , follow sir Charles Somerset , lord Herbert , lord Cham ? berline , accompany with the lord Percy earl of Northumberland , the lord grey earl of Kent , the lord Stafford earl of Wiltshire , the lord Dudley , the lord Delaware , sir Edward Hussey , sir Edward Dimmock , sir David Owen , with other , to the number of six thousand : these general join together , issue out of Callice , and on the two and twenty day of June , sit down be ? before the strong town of Terwin , which city be strong fortify ; and in it be governor the lord Poultreny , who have with he six hundred horse ? man , and five and twenty hundred almain , beside the inhabitant . here at the very first happen two disaster to the english ; one , that the baron ca ? rue be slay with a shot from the town ; the other , that sir Nicholas Va•x , and sir Edward belknappe come from guys•es with four and twenty cart of provision , be set upon by the duke of Vendosme , lieutenant of Picardy , and many of the english slay , and the provision take . in this state be the english camp at Terwin ; when king Henry the last day of June come he ? self to Callice , and on the one and twenty of July take the field , have in his army of fight man , not above nine thousand , but with pioneer , and other that attend the carriage , eleven thousand and three hundred man : his foreward be lead by Charles Brandon Viscount Lisle , his main battle by himself , and sir Henry Guildford carry his standard ; and in this order he march forward to the siege of Terwin , enter upon the french ground , the five and twenty of July . on the morrow after , by negligence of the carter , that mistake the way , a great gun call the John Evangelist , be over ? throw in a deep pond of water , and can not at that time be recover ; but a few day after , the master Carpenter take with he a hundred labourer , go and weigh it up ; but have cart it ready to bring away , be set upon by eight hundred french ; and the most of his company slay : the gun be take by the french , and carry to Bulloyne . in the french army be to the number of eleven thousand footman , and four thousand horse ; whereof be captain , the lord de la palace , the lord de Priennes , the duke de Lon ? guevyle , the earl of saint Paul , the lord of floringe , the lord of Clermont , and Richard de la pool a english man , son to John duke of Suffolk . the army be come within two mile one of another , and some light skirmish pass between they , special one ; on a day call the dry Wednesday , for the day be wonderful hot , and the king with his army stand in order of battle , from six a clock in the morning , till three in the afternoon : after this , the king remove towards Terwyn ; and as the army march , another of the king bombard of iron , call the red gun , be overthrow in a lane , and there leave ; which the french understanding , go with a great power to fetch it away , as they have do the other ; but the lord Berners , captain of the english pioneer , prevent they ; and though set upon by the french , to the number of nine or ten thousand , yet by the valour of the earl of Essex , and sir riceap Thomas , with the bold adventure of sir William Tyler , and sir John sharp , they recover it and bring it safe to the camp . on the four of August king Henry come before the city of Terwyn , where he strong fortify his tent with ord•ance , and other warlike defence . in which mean time , the captain of Boulogne , know that many of the garrison of Callice be go with the king , think to take advantage of •heir absence , and do some great exploit upon Callice ; and thereupon with a thousand man , come to New• ? ha• bridge , and kill the watchman , take it ; but afterward some of his company go to fetch booty , and come so near the wall of Callice , that page 8 they be descry ; about sixscore Cooper and other artificer issue forth , and drive they back , recover again Newnham bridge , and take diverse of they prisoner ; especial when the gate of Callice , call bulloign gate be open ? ned , and that Colepepper then under marshal , with two hundred archer issue forth , and join with they . the french prisoner be bring to Callice , and there sell in open market ; among other , a Cooper of the town of Callice , buy a prisoner that dwell in Boulogne , and have of the prisoner for his ra•some , a hun ? dread crown ; when the money be pay , the french man pray the Cooper to see he safe deliver , and to conduct he out of danger ; the Cooper be content , and go himself alone with the french man , till he come beyond the causeway , and there will have depart ; but the french man perceive that the Cooper be age , and that no rescue be nigh• by force take the Cooper prisoner , ••d carry he to Boulogne ; make he pay two hundred crown , before h• be deliver . while king Henry lie thus at the siege of Terwyn , on the eleven of au ? •••• , the emperor Maximilian be come to air ; which king Henry under ? stand , go and meet he between air and the camp ; where with great compliment they salute each other ; but their compliment be break off , by ••e extreme foul weather which happen that day : the morrow after , the emperor Maximilian come from air to the king camp , wear a cross of saint George , as the king soldier , and receive wage of he for service ; a honour never do to any king of England before ; and yet be no disparagement to the emperor , for he be royal receive , and lodge in a tent of cloth of gold ; that as no emperor before , have ever be soldier to a king ; so no soldier before be ever lodge in such a tent at this time the city of Terwyn , be in some distress for want of victual ; the french king appoint all his horseman to the number of eight thousand , to see victu ? all|be by any mean convoy into it ; the charge of which convoy be commit ? t to monsieur de Priennes : but king Henry by advice of the emperor Maximilian , have make bridge to pass his man over the river , to the other side of the town , where be easy access ; in such sort , that when the french convoy come with their victual , and think to have enter the town , they find the english army there ready to resist they ; whereupon a fierce battle be fight between they : but in conclusion the french be put to flight , and flee so fast , that from thence it be call the battle of spur , for that they use more their spur in run away , than theit lance in fight . in this battle , the duke of longuevyle , the lord of Clermont , captain Bayard , and other to the number of twelve score be take prisoner , and all bring to the king presence ; with six standard that be likewise take . after the battle , the king make sir John Pechye Banneret , and John Carre knight , who have both of they do great service in this encounter . king Henry have ob ? tain this victory against the french horseman , and hinder the town of Ter ? win from relief of victual , and withal ply his battery more fierce than before ; make the townsman soon fall to desire composition , and upon con ? dition that the soldier may depart with horse and armour , they yield up the town into the king hand . this be do on the eighteenth of au ? gust , and the earl of Shrewsbury enter the town the same night ; and set up the banner of saint George in the high place of it , in sign of victory , and swear all the townsman to be true subject to the king of England . the four and twen•eth of August , the king himself enter the town , and dine in the bishop palace , where it be resolve , that the wall and fortification of Terwyn shall be raze , and the town burn all but the cathedral church and the palace , all the ordnance be send to air , to be keep there to the king use . after this it be conclude , that the king shall lay siege to the city of tourney ; whereupon he set forward in three battle , the eeale of Shrewsbury page 9 lead they vanguard ; the king and the emperor , the battle ; and the lord Chamberlaine the re•eward . in this order the king army march forward towards tourney ; by the way , he go and visit the young prince of Castille , and the lady Margaret , governess of the prince , in the town of Lisle , where with all mag•ificence ; or rather indeed reverence , he be entertain ; and of ? ter he have stay there three day , he take his leave , and be go a mile and somewhat more out of the town , he ask where his camp lie , and no man there can tell the way , and guide they have none ; the night be so dark and misty , by chance at last they meet with a victualer come from the camp , who be their guide and conduct they to it . by which we may see , to what distress a great prince may be bring by a little oversight . on the one and twenty day of September , the king remove his camp to ? ward tourney ; and be come within three mile of the town , he send garter king of arm to summon the town ; but they , though they have but few man of war among they , yet stand upon their guard ; whereupon the king be ? gin it on all side , and make such fierce battery upon it , that though it be write on the gate of the town , grave in stone , iamais tu ne as perdu ton pu ? cellege ; thou have never lose thy maidenhead ; yet now they be glad to loose it : and in conclusion , they send a trumpet to require a parley , and then sue for mercy , and yield it up , and pay ten thousand pound sterling beside , for redemption of their liberty : and then master Thomas VVoolsey the king all ? moner , call before he all the citizen young and old , swear they to the king of England ; the number of who be fourscore thousand . this do , the king enter into tourney , and call into his presence Edward Guildford , William Fitzwilliams , John Dansie , William Tyler , John sharp , William Hussey , John savage , Christopher garnish , and some other valiant gentleman ; he give to they the order of knighthood ; and then remember the great en ? tertainment the prince of Castille and the lady Margaret have give he at Lisle , he will not be behind they in such courtesy ; and thereupon in•ited they solemn to his city of tourney , who at their come he bring into the town in great triumph : during their abode in tourney , among other compliment of entertainment , there be have a joust , where the king and the lord Lisle answer all comer : after the joust , be a sumptuous banquet ; after the banquet , the lady dance , and then come in the king , and eleven other in a mask , all rich apparel with bonnet of gold : and when the• have pass the time at their pleasure , the garment of the masker be cast off ; among the lady take they that can . this be king Henry dispo ? sition , that he can not forbear revel in the midst of his arm ; and la ? die must be entertain as well as soldier . after this , find the french not will to come to a battle , and the winter draw on , he leave sir Edward Poynings governor of tourney , and then return to Callice , and from thence pass into England , and ride in post to Richmond to the queen . while king Herry be thus busy in his war with France , the king of Scot , though his brother in law , yet instigate by the french king , and take advantage of king Henry absence , assemble his people to invade England ; but before his whole power can come together , the lord Humes his cham ? berlin , with seven or eight thousand man enter the border ; but as he be re ? turn with a great booty of cattle , in a field overgrow with broom , call ? lead Milfield , he be encounter by sir Edward Bulmer , have with he not above a thousand man ; who lie in that field in ambush , break out upon he , and put he to flight , with the slaughter of five or six hundred of his come ? pany , and four hundred take prisoner , the lord Humes himself escape by •light , but his banner be take ; and this , by the Scot be call , the ill ride . in the mean time the whole power of Scotland be assemble , no few than one hundred thousand man ; though Buchanan in favour of his country , •aith , not the five part of that number ; and with these , king Iames approach page 10 the border , and come to Norham castle , lay siege unto it , which for want of powder , be soon deliver up unto he . but by this time the earl of Surrey , lieutenant of the north part , have assemble a army of six and twen ? ty thousand man ; to who also soon after , his son the lord admiral , with one thousand expert soldier come and joyned• and now have many great lord and knight in his army , he appoint to every one their station ; and then be inform , that king Iames be remove six mile from Norha• , lie embattle upon a great mountain call Floddon , where it be impossible to come near he , but with great disadvantage ; for at the foot of the hill , o• the left hand , be a great ma•ish ground full of reed and water , on the right hand be a river call till , so swift any deep that it be not possible ; on the backside be such craggy rock and thick wood , that there be no assail he on that part ; the forepart of his camp he have fence with his great Ord ? nance . be in such a hold , the earl of Surry find there be no possibility of a battle , unless he can draw he from the hill ; whereupon he call a con ? •ell , by which it be determine to s•nd roug-cross• pu•suivant at arm with a trumpet , to the king of Scot , to let he know , that he be ready on Friday follow ? ing to give he battle , if he will abide it ; whereunto the king of Scot by his pursuivant ilay , make answer , that at the day prefix he shall find he rea ? die for battle as he desire , that he will willing have come to such a ma•ch if he have be at Edinburgh ; but though he make this answer , yet he will not leave the strong hold he be in , but keep himself still upon the hill ; at last , Thomas lord Howard , son and hei•e to the earl of Surrey , have view the country round about , declare to his father , that if he will but fetch a small compass , and come with his army on the back of his enemy , he shall en ? force the scottish king to come down out of his strength , or else stop he from receive of victual o• any other thing out of Scotland . this council of the lord Howard his father follow , and king Iames perceive what their mean ? ing be , think it stand not with his honour to be forestall out of his own realm , and thereupon immediate raise his camp , and get to another hill , but not so steep as the other ; which the earl of Surrey perceive , he deter ? mine to mou•t it , and to fight with the Scot , before they shall have leisure to fortify their camp ; and herewith make a short speech , for encourage ? mean of his soldier , he divide his army into battle ; the van•guard be lead by the lord Howard , to who be join as a wing , sir Edward Howard ; the middleward be lead by the earl himself , and the rearward by sir Edward Stanley ; the lord Dacres with a number of horseman be set apart by himself , to succour where need shall be ; the ordnance be place in the front , and in other place , as be think most convenient : and in this order they march for ? ward , towerd the Scot . on the other side , king Iames reckon upon they be ? nefit of the hill , think the english half mad , to venture a battle upon such disadvantage ; and thereupon make a speech to encourage his soldier , who be of themselves so forward , that they need no encourage . he divide his battle in this manner ; the main battle he lead himself , to which he ap ? point two wing ; the right lead by the earl of Huntley , Cr•wford and mount ? rise ; the left by the earl of Lenox and Argyle , together with the lord h•mes lord camberlain : and so confident they be of victory , that the king first , and after all the lord and meane• me• , put away their horse , as think they shall not need they ; which confidence be afterward their undo ; for when the battle be join , sir Edward Howard in get up the hill , be so assault by the earl of Lenox and Argyle , that he be leave almost alone , and in manifest peril to be slay ; in come the lord Dacres with his horse ? man , and tread under foot the scottish battle of speere on foot , which he can not have do , if they have keep their horse . and this part of the scot ? it|be a•my be lead by the earl of Crawford and Mountrosse , they be both of they slay , and the whole battle but to flight . in another part page 11 also sir Edward Stanley do the like , upon the battle lead by the earl of Lenox and Argyle , put it to flight , with the slaughter also of these two earl . king Iames notwithstanding , maintain the fight still , with great resolution , till sir Adam Forman his standard-bearer be beat down ; and than not faint , though despair of success , he rush into the thick of his enemy , among who he be beat down and slay ; and to make his death the more honourable , there die with he three bishop ( whereof one be Alexander , archbishop of saint Andrew , the king base son ) two abbot , twelve earl , and seventeen lord , of knight and gentleman very many , in all about eight thousand , and almost as many take prisoner ( as Pau ? lu• Iovius say ) among who be sir William Scot , chancellor to the say king , and sir George Forman his sergiant porter ; the lord Hume and the earl Huntley get horse and escape . neither be the battle without blood to the english , for there be slay at lest a thousand , and ( that which in a de ? feat be strange ) many also take prisoner ; for many in pursue the Scot , go rash so farre• that they know not which way •o return , and by band of Scot that have not fight that day , be set upon and •aken . when the field be do , the lord general call to he certain lord and gentleman , and make they knight , as sir Edward Howard his son , the lord Scroop , sir Willi ? be Percy , sir Edward gorge , and other . this battle be fight on Friday the nine of September , in the year 1513. call by some Bramston , by some , •lodden field . king Iames here slay be the same that have marry the lady Margaret elder daughter of king Henry the seven ; and sister to the pre ? send king Henry ; and may have enjoy many happy day , if he have keep himself firm to his alliance , but be carry away with the inveterate spleen between the two nation , and propension to France ; he end his life , though honorable , yet miserable under many wound . it be a very memorable , but s•arce credable thing ; which , ( from the mouth of a very credible person who see it ) George Buchanan relate concern this king ; that intend to make a war with England ; a certain old man of venerable aspect , and clad in a long blow garment , come unto he , and lean familiar upon the chair where the king sit , say , i be send unto thou oh king , to give thou warning , that thou proceed not in the war thou be about ; for if thou do , it will be thy ruin : and have so say , he press through the company , and vanish out of sight ; for by no inquiry it can be know what become of he . but the king be too resolute to be fright with phantosme , and no warning can divert his destiny , which have not be destiny if it can have be divert . the day after the battle , his body , though disfigure with wound , be know by the lord Dacres and other , to be he ; and thereupon bowele , embalm and wrap in lead , be bring to the monastery of sheen in Surrey , and there inter ; but at the dissolution of that house , be take up and throw into a waste room among timber and stone ; which John Stow say , he so see ; and further relate , that the servant of Lancelot young , glazier to queen Eli ? zabeth be at sheen , in new glaze the window , either upon a foolish pleasure , or desire of the lead , cut the head from the rest ; but smell the sweet perfum of the balm , give it to their master ; who open the lead , find therein the head of a man , retain favour , though the moisture be clean dry up , who hair both of head and beard be read : which afterward , he cause to be bury , at saint Michael church in Woodstreet , where he dwell . but not ? withstand this relation of Stow ; John Lesly bishop of Rosse affirm , that it be hold for certain , the body thus find , be the body of the lord Bouchard slay in that b•ttaile . Buchanan say , of Alexander Elfinston , who in countenance and statu•e be like the king ; and that king Iames be see alive the same night at Kelso , whence he pass to Jerusalem , and there spend the rest of his day in holy contemplation : but howsoever it be , he be never see any more in Scotland . page 12 king Henry be now return from tourney into England , and find the great service do in his absence against the Scot ; on the day of the Purifi ? cation of our lady , at Lambeth he create the earl of Surrey duke of nor ? folk , with a augmentation of the arm of Scotland ; sir Charles Brandon Viscount Lisle , he create duke of Suffolk , the lord Howard high admiral , he make earl of Surry , sir Charles Somerset lord Herbert his chief cham ? berlaine earl of Worcester , and short after sir Edward Stanley he make lord Monteagle ; and in march follow , master Thomas Woolsey his almoner , be make bishop of Lincoln . here before we go further , it will be fit •o •ay something of this man , that he be not a rub afterward in the way of the story : he be bear at Ipswich in Suffolk , the son of a butcher , send to Oxford by reason of his pregnancy of wit , so soon , that take there the first degree of art , he be call the boy bachelor ; proceed in learning , he be make fellow of Magdalen college in Oxford , and afterward schoolmaster of the school there , at which time the marquess Dorset commit three of his son to be instruct by he ; and have a benefice fall in his gift , send for he one Christmas , and bestow it upon he ; whereof Woolsey go to take possession , at his be there , for what misdemeanour be not deliver , he be by sir Amias Pawlet set by the heal , which afterward he remember to sir iam•s his not small trouble , for he make he attend his pleasure five or six year ; all which time lie in the middle-temple , where he re-edify the gatehouse next the street very sumptuous , set the cardinal arm up ? on it , to appease he . after this disgrace he go oversea , where he fall in acquaintance with sir John naphant treasurer of Callice , and by he be pre ? fer to be king Henry the sevenths chaplain : and now be by this mean in the king eye , he so diligent carry himself , that he soon get into the king heart . one time it happen , the king have occasion to send a messenger to the emperor Maximilian , about a business that require haste ; for which employment no man be think more fit than woolsey ; whereupon , the king call he , give he his errand , and bid he make all the speed he can ; woolsey depart from the king at Richmond about noon , and by the next mor ? ning be get to Dover , and from thence by noon that day be come to Callice , and by night be with the emperor ; to who declare his Message• and have a present dispatch , he ride that night back to Callice , and the night follow come to the court at Richmond . the next morning he present himself before the king , who blame he for not be yet go , the ma•ter require haste ; to who Woolsey answer , that he have be with the empe ? rour , and have dispatch the business , and for proof show the emperor line ; the king wonder much at his speed , but then ask he if he meet not his pursuivant , who he send after to advertise he of a special matter he have forget ; whereto Woolsey answer , may it please your grace i meet he yesterday upon the way , but that business i have dispatch before , take the boldness so to do without commission , as know it to be of special consequence ; for which boldness i humble entreat •our grace pardon . the king not only pardon he , but bestow present upon he the deanery of Lincoln , and soon after make he his almoner . in this state king hen ? •y the eight find he , with who also he grow into such favour , that he make he of his council ; and have win tourney , make he bishop of that ci ? tie ; and return into England , ( the bishopric of Lincoln fall void by the death of doctor smith ) make he bishop of that diocese . and thus far the story have now bring he , but soon after he be raise high ; for do ? ctor Bambridge archbishop of York die , he be translate from Lincoln to that see ; and that he may not be inferior to the archbishop of canter ? •ury , he procure of the pope to be make cardinal , and Legat a late ; and after , by the king be make lord chancellor of England : and be come to this height of dignity , he so carry himself in expense of household , in page 13 number of retinve , and in all circumstance of state , that no subject before or since , have in any degree come near he . and if we may say it , he be the first debaucher of king Henry ; for to the end he may have the manage of all matter himself , he persuade the king that he shall not need trouble he ? self with frequent the council table as he do , but take his pleasure , and leave those thing to his council , whereof himself will alwa•es give he •nie information . this be plausible council , and no marvel if it be embrace of a young king , come from the mouth of so great a prelate . in this five year of the king , the citizen of London find themselves grie ? ve with the enclosure of the common field about Islington , Hogsdon and Sh•rdich , and other place adjoin ; go one morning , and throw down all the hedge , and fill up all the ditch ; whereat though the king council be at first offend , yet the mayor and city show they such reaso•s , that they rest satisfy , and the field be never since hedge . on the nineteenth of May , this year pope Iulius the second send to king Henry a cap of maintenance and a sword ; and be angry with the king of France , transfer by authority of the Lateran council , the title of Christi ? anissimo from he , upon king Henry , which with great solemnity be publish ? ed the Sunday follow , in the cathedral church of saint Paul ; but this so ? lemnity must not pass without revel , mask , and joust ; wherein the king and the duke of Suffolk be defendant against all comer ; who ha ? ve the duke of longuevyle , and the lord of Clermont to be spect•tours , spread the fame of their chivalry into foreign nation . and now the great love that have be long between king Henry and the Fleming , begin to abate ; upon this occasion , king Henry the seven have con ? clude a match between his daughter marry , and Charles prince of Spain : but by reason of her young year , and for want of assurance of jointure , the match be defer during his time ; but now king Henry the eight see his sister of convenient year , begin to call upon it , and signify so much to the council of Flanders ; but they , whether have other end , or out of spanish delay , put he off with excuse , and at last send he word plain , they can do no ? thing in it that year . the king of France have soon intelligence how much king Henry distaste these spanish deal , and mean to make some good use of it , for the end he begin to propose to himself , which be , to get the lady marry for himself , and thereby procure peace with England , be now old , and weary of the war and for this purpose he get the new pope Leo the ten to be his mediator , and both of they send ambassador to king Henry , the pope to persuade he to have peace with France , the french king to treat about a marriage with the lady mary : upon who embassage , king Henry partly to satisfy the pope , and partly to advance his sister ; do not unwilling hearken to the motion : but while this be in work , prior John ( who know nothing of these intention ) begin again to play his pra•ks ; and come with his galley on the coast of Sussex , burn bhighthem-steed , and take away the good he find in the village , whereupon the lord admiral send sir John wallop to sea , with diverse ship and eight hundred man , who for one village that Pryor John burn in England , burn one and twenty village and town in France , to the great honour of himself , and his country . and now king Henry by advice of his council , and special of Woolsey bishop of Lincoln , conclude both the peace with France , and the marriage of his sister the lady mary , with the french king ; but yet it stick a while up ? on some difference , king Henry demand Boulogne , and the king of France tourney : in conclusion these demand be wave , and the principal condition were• first concern the lady jointure , that she shall have two and thirty thousand crown of yearly revenue if she survive the king ; and then con ? cern this peace , that the french king shall pay year to king Henry for five year one hundred thousand crown , and the peace to continue between page 14 they during their life , and a year after , and bind reciprocal to assist each other with ten thousand foot , if the war be by land , with six thousand if by sea . all thing thus conclude , the lady Mary be bring to Dover by king Henry and his queen : and on the second of October take shippi•g , be conduct by the duke of Norfolk , the marquess Dorset , the bishop of Dur ? ham• the earl of Surry , the lord de la ware , the lo•d Berners , the lord Mont ? eagle , sir Maurice Berkely , sir John Pechye , sir William sand , sir Thomas bull ? leyne• sir John Carre , and many other knight and lady ; but be not past half way over the sea , their ship by tempest be disperse , and the lady with some jeoperdy land at Bullen , where sir Christopher garnish be fain to stand in the water and take she in his arm , and so set she on shore , and there the duke of Vendosme with a cardinal and many other great state receive she . from Bullen the eight of October , she come to abbevyle where the dolphin receive she : on the morrow be saint Dennis day , she come to saint Dennis , where the marriage between the king of France and she , be solem•ized ( though some write it have be solemnize before at abbevyle . ) the five of November she be crown queen of France , at which time the dolphin hold the crown over her head , as be too massy for she to wear ; and the day follow she be receive into Paris in most magnificent manner . in ho ? nou_r_ of who marriage and coronation , the dolphin have cause a solemn joust to be proclaim , which shall be keep in Paris the seven of Novem ? ber . upon report of this proclamation in England , the duke of Suffolk , the marquess Dorset and his four brother , the lord Clinton , sir Edward ne••ll , sir Giles Capell , Thomas Cheiney and other , obtain leave of the king to be at the challenge , where they all behave themselves with great valour , but spe ? cial the duke of Suffolk ; who glory the dolphin so much envy , that he get a Dutchman the tall and strong man in all the court of France , se ? cret as another person to encounter he , with a purp•e to have the duke foy ? lead ; but indeed it turn to his great honour , for he foil the Dutchman in such sort , that when they come to the barrier , the duke by main strength take he about the neck , and so prommele he about the head , that he make the blood issue out at his nose : many other prince and lord do brave ; and after three day the joust end . king Henry be not long behind to solemnize it in England also ; for at Greenwich the Christmas follow , on newyeers night , and twelve night ; he present such strange and magnificent device , as have seldom be see ; and the three of February follow he hold a solemn joust , where he and the marquess Dorset answer all comer , at which time the king break three and twenty spear , and throw to the ground one that encounter he both man and horse . at this time preparation be make for king Henry in person to go to call ? lice , there to meet with the french king and queen , but death hinder the design ; for before the next spring , the first of January the french king die at the city of Paris , fourscore and two day after his marriage ; teach other by his example , what it be for a old man to marry a young lady . king Henry hear of the french king death , send the duke of Suffolk , sir rich ? ard Winkefield , and doctor west , to bring over the queen dowager , accord ? ing to the covenant of the marriage . whereupon the queen be deliver to the duke by indenture , who obtain her good will to be her husband , ( which be no hard matter , that have be her first love : ) write to the king her brother for his consent ; whereat the king seem to stick a while , but at last consent ; so as he bring she into England unmarried , and then marry at his return ; but the duke for more surety marry she secret in Paris , and after have receive her dower , apparel and jewel ; come with she to Callice , and there open marry she with great solemnity . at their come into England , king Henry to show his conten•ment with the marriage , in the come ? pany page 15 of the duke of Suffolk , the marquess Dorset , and the earl of Essex , all rich apparel ; hold a new kind of joust , run course on horseback in manner volant , as fast as one can follow another , to the great delight of the beholder . this year the king at his manor of ok ; Woolsey archbishop of York come and show he letter , that he be elect cardinal ; for which dignity he disable himself , till the king will he to take it upon he , and from thenceforth call he lord cardinal , but his hat and bull be not yet come : after which doctor Warham archbishop of Canterbury , and lord chancellor of England ; find Woolsey be now cardinal , to meddle more in his office of chancelourship , than he can well suffer• resign up the seal , which the king present give to Woolsey . about this time , cardinal Campejus be send by pope Leo to king Henry , to solicit he to a war against the Turk , with who cardinal Woolsey be join in commission , who hear of the ragged retinue of his fellow Cardinell ; send store of red cloth to Callice to make they fit follower of so great a lord : and when Cam ? pejus be land at Dover , cardinal Woolsey cause the gentry of Kent to wait upon to black-heath , where he be meet and receive by the duke of Norfolk and many prelate , and there in a tent of cloth of gold shift himself into his car ? dinals robe . eight mule he have lade with necessary ; but Woolsey not think ? ing they enough for his honour , send he twelve more . but now see the shame of pride , for in Cheapside his mule by some mischance overthrow their Carri ? age and coffer on the ground , who lyd fly open , show the world what treasure it be they carry , old breeches , boot , and break shoe , break meat , marrowbone and crust of bread ; expose he to the laughter of all the people : yet the cardinal go joge on afore with his cross , guilt axe and mace , unto Paul church ; and by the way have a oration make he by sir Thomas Moore , in name of the city , and then wait on with many bishop , be conduct to bathe place , where he be lodge for his own particular : he get well by the journey , for the king give he the bishopric of Salisbury ; but the errand he come about , which be to have aid by money , for a war against the Turk , he can not obtain , for it be well know to be but a de ? advise to get money , without any intention of what be pretend . in his seven year , king Henry keep his Christmas at his manor of el ? tham ; where on twelve night accord to his custom , be a stately mask of knight and lady , with solemn dance and a most magnificent banquet . it be now the eight year of king Henry reign , when the new league be ? tween he and the french king be proclaim in the city of London : and this year Mageret queen of Scots elder sister to king Henry , have before marry Archibald Douglas earl of Angus ; by reason of dissension among the lord of Scotland , be glad with her husband to fly into England , and to seek succour at her brother hand ; who assign to she the castle of Harbot ? tell in Northumberland to reside in ; where she be deliver of a daughter na ? m Margaret . from thence the king send for she and her husband to come to his court ; and thereupon the three of May , queen Margaret ride on a white palfrye ( which the queen of England have send she ) behind sir Thomas Parr• , come through London to Baynard castle , and from thence go to Greenwich : but her husband the earl of Angus , be secret before depart into Scotland ; which when king Henry hear , he only •aid it be do like a scot . and now in honour of his sister come , king Henry the nine and twen ? ti of may , appoint two solemn day of joust ; where the king , the duke of S•ffolke , the earl of Essex , and Nicholas Carew esquire : take upon they to answer all comer , among other , the king and sir William Kinston run together , which sir William though a strong and valorous knight , yet the king overthrow he to the ground : all the rest be perform with no less page 16 valour then magnificence . this year die the king of Aragon , father to the queen of England , for who be keep a solemn obsequy in the cathedral church of Pauls ; and queen Margaret after she have be a year in England , return into Scotland . in this year be send twelve hundred carpenter and mason , with three hundred labourer , to the city of tourney in France , to build a castle there , to keep the city in awe . and now the cardinal be weary of hear so many cause himself , as be daily bring before he ; ordain by the king commission ( aftet the pattern of Mases , diverse under court to hear co•mplaints of suitor : whereof one be keep in the Whitehall , another be ? before the king almoner doctor Stokesley , a three in the lord treasurer lodge ? ing near the star-chamber , and the four at the roll in the afternoon : these court for a time be much frequneted ; but at last , the people percei ? ve that much delay be use in they , and that sentence give by they bind no man by law : they thereupon grow weary of they , and resort to the come ? mon law . by occasion of this government of the cardinal , who under counterfeit ? lour of justice , do what he please : many great man withdraw themselves from the court ; as first the archbishop of Canterbury , and the bishop of Winchester , who go and live in their diocese ; then the duke of Norfolk , and at length the duke of Suffolk , who be run deep into the king debt , by reason of his many employment into France , and his great housekeep since his marriage with the king sister , hope the king will have forgive it , and will no doubt have do it , but that the cardinal oppose it , to the end the duke shall be the more at his command . in October this year , Matthew bishop of Zion common call the Cardi ? nall of the swizzer come into England from the emperor Maximilian ; by who solicit , and cardinal woolsey persuasion , the king lend the emperor a great some of money , for Woolsey be angry with the king of France , for detain the revenue of his bishopric of tourney , persuade king Henry that the best way to abate the french king power , be to furnish the Em ? perour money , the better to maintain war against he : and what woolsey say , be in those day to king Henry a oracle . this year the king keep his Christmas at his manner of Greenwich ; where on twelve night accord to his custom , rare device with great magnifi ? cence be present ; after which time the king exercise himself much in hawk , which be like to have prove no good sport to he ; for one time follow his hawk , and leap over a ditch with a pole , the pole break , so that if one Edmund Mody a footman have not leap into the water and lift up his head which be fast in the clay , he have be drown . in this year also there happen in the city of London , a insurrection a ? against stranger , special of artificer , complain that stranger be per ? mit to resort hither with their ware , and to exercise handicraft , to the great hindrance and impoverish the king own subject ; and not only so , but that they be bear out in many great insolence , and wrong they offer ? ed to the english , as one time it happen , a carpenter in London call Willi ? amson , have buy two pigeon in Cheapside and be about to pay for they , when a Frenchman take they out of his hand , say , they be no meat for a carpenter : well ( say Williamson ) i have buy they , and i will have they ; nay ( say the Frenchman ) i will have they for my lord ambassador ; here ? upon they grow to word , and complaint be make to the french ambassador , who so aggravate the matter to the major , that the carpenter be send to prison , and when sir John Baker sue to the ambassador for he , he an ? swer , by the body of God , the english knave be worthy to loose his life for deny any thing to a Frenchman , and other answer he can have none . ma ? try like and worse insolence be offer by change ; which one John Lincoln a broker draw into a bill , and prevail with doctor Beale , preacher on easter page 17 Tuesday at the spittle to read it open in the pulpit , which so stir up many , that stranger can hardly pass the street , but be strike , and sometime beat down . at last , one evening , many prentice and other assemble , rifle some stranger house , and much mischief be like to be do : but by the tear of the mayor and alderman and by the ind•stry of Robert brook Recor ? der , and sir Thomas Moore , •hat have be under shriefe of London ; they be get to be quiet and many of the disturber be send to prison , whereof Lincoln and twelve other be hang , four hundred more in their shirt , bind in rope and halter about their neck ( and thereupon call the black wagon ) be bring to Westminster , where the king himself sit that day ; and when the cardinal have charge they with the greatness of their offence ; they all cry , mercy , mercy : and then the king by the mouth of the Cardi ? nall , pardon they all which clemency purchase the ki•g no small love a ? among the people . in this nine year , in June king Henry have diverse ambassador at his court ; for who entertainment he prepare a costly joust ; himself and twelve more against the duke of Suffolk and other twelve . the king have on his head a lady sleeve full of diamond , and perhaps something else of the lady in his heart , which make he perform his course with the applause of all be ? holde•s . this year by reason of a sweat sickness , michaelm•s term be adjourn ; and the year follow , Trinity term be hold one day at ox ? ford , and then adjourn again to Westminster . about this time cardinal Woolsey obtain of pope Leo , authority to dispense with all offence against the spiritual law ; by virtue whereof he set up a court , and call it , the court of the legate ; in the which he prove testament , and hear cause , to the great hindrance of all the bishop of the realm ; and to the debauch of priest and religious person , who rely upon his greatness , take •uch a liberty of licentiousness , to themselves , that none be more disorderly , than those that be in order : and supposii•g per ? hap , they may lawful commit such sin themselves , as they forgive to other . and indeed the cardinal carriage exceed all bound of moderation ; for when he say mass , he make duke and earl to serve he of wine , with a say take , and to hold the basin at the lavatory : and when the archbishop of Canterbury , write a letter to he , subscribe , your brother William of can ? terbury , he take it in great dudgeon , to be term his brother . it be now the ten year of king Henry reign , when the Kin• of France , long much , to have Turney restore to he : by great gift and great promises• win •he cardinal Woolsey , to move the king in it ; who upon his persuasion , be content to be treat withal about it : to which the king of France send the lord Bonquet high admiral of France : and the bishop of Paris , who in there attendance , have above fourscore gentle ? man , and with their servant and all above twelve hundred , arrive in England ; and on Monday the seven and twenty of September , be meet at black-heath by the ea•le of Surrey high admiral of England , attend likewise with above five hundred gentleman and other , who conduct they to London , where they be lodge at marchantailors hall : the last of September , the Embassa ? dour go to the king at Greenwich , where after long communication , a agreement be at last conclude under pretence of a marriage to be have , between the dolphin of France , and the lady mary daughter to the king of England , that in name of her marriage money , tourney shall be delivete to the french king : he pay to the king of England , for the castle he have make in that city , six hundred thousand c•ownes in twelve year , by fifty thousand crown year : and if the marriage shall chance not to take effect , than that tourney shall be again restore to the king of England ; for performance of which article , hrstage shotld be deliver : namely , monsi•ur de memorancye , monsieur de Monpesac , monsieur de moy , and monsieur Morett , page 18 and moreover the french king shall pay to the cardinal of England a thou ? sand mark yearly , in recompense of his revenue , receive before of his bishopric of tourney : all thing thus conclude , the cardinal make to the ambassador a solemn banquet , and after present they with a stately mummery . the eight of October , the king feast they at Greenwich , and at night present a stately mask of knight and lady , with rear devise and great magnificence : the next day , sir Thomas Exmew major of London , feast ? ed they at goldsmiths-hall , and then deliver their four hostage , they take their leave . at who departure , the king give to the admiral of France , a garnish of guilt vessel , a pair of cover basin , gilt , twelve great guilt bowl , four pair of great guilt pot , a stand cup of gold , garni ? shed with great pearl , and to some other he give plate , to some other chein of gold , to some rich apparel : to the great commendation of his liberality . Shortly after their departure , the earl of Worcester lord Chamberlaine , the bishop of Ely , the lord of saint John , sir Nicholas Vaux , sir John pechy , and sir Thomas Bullen , as ambassador from the king of England , accompany with knight , gentleman , and other , to the number of above four hundred , pass over to Callice , and from thence go to Paris ; where after royal en ? tertainment by the king , with di•erse mask and stately show , they take their leaf and ride to tourney to see the city deliver to the french man , on the eight of February to the great grief of the english garrison . after the english ambassador be return , king Henry to cheer up the four french hostage , leave here for performance of covenant , on the seven of May , present a solemn and stately mask , wherein himself , the duke of Suffolk and the french queen be actor , and on the eight of march fol ? low be a solemn just hold , and with great magnificence perform . in the eleven year of king Henry reign die the emperor maximi ? lian , for who , the king cause a solemn obsequy to be keep in Paul church . after who death the french king and the king of Spain , endeavour by sundry plot , each of they to get the empire , but in conclusion , Charles king of Castille , ( afterward call Charles the five ) be elect emperor ; for joy whereof , a solemn mass be sing at Pauls , the seven of July , at which be present the cardinal Campeius , the cardinal of York , the duke of Buckingham , Norfolk and Suffolk , with the ambassador of Spain , France , Venice , and Scotland ; and this year the king keep saint George feast at Windsor , with great solemnity . at this time , diverse young gentleman that have be in France , after the manner of that country , carry themselves so familiar with the king ; that the lord of his counsel think it a disparagement to he : and thereupon , with his leave first obtain , they banish they the court : and in their place , bring in more stay and grave man : namely , sir Richard Winkefield , sir Richard Jerningham , sir Richard Weston and sir William Kingston . in the summer of this year , the queen lie at her manor of Havering in Essex , desire the king to bring thither the four hostage of France to who she make a royal banquet and in September follow the king lie at his manor of Newhall in Essex , otherwise call Beaulieu ; where he have new build a stately mansion , invite the queen and the french hostage thy ? there , where after a sumptuous banquet , he present they with a extraordinary mask , for the masker be the duke of Suffolk , the earl of Essex , the marquess Dorset , the lord Aburgaveny , sir Richard VVinkfield , sir Richard VVeston and sir William Kingston , the young of who be fifty year old at least , that the lady may see , what force they have to make age young again . at this time , the french king be very desirous to see the king of England with who he have enter into such a league of alliance , and to that end make mean to the cardinal , that there may be a interview between they at some convenient place : to which the cardinal , no• so much to satisfy the page 19 french king as to show his own greatness in France ; e•sily condescend , and thereupon persuade king Henry , how necessary it be , that such a interview shall be : and then be send unto guysnes , under the rule of sir Edward Belknap three thousand artificer , who build on the plain before the castle of guysnes , a most stately palace of timber , curious garnish without and within : whither both the king in June next follow , agree •o come and to answer all comer at the tilt , tourney and barrier , whereof proclama ? cion be make in the court of England , by Orleans king of arm of France and in the court of France by Clarentius , king of arm of England : while these thing be prepare on Candlemas even , as the king and queen be come from evensong at their manor of Greenwich ; sudden there blow a trumpet , and then enter into the queen chamber , four gentleman , who bring with they a waggon , in which sit a lady rich apparel ; which lady , acquaint the king , that the four gentleman there present , be come for the love of their lady , to answer all comer at the tilt on a day by the king to be appoint ; which day be thereupon appoint on Shrove-tuesday next •nsuing , where they all behave themselves with great valour , to the great delight of the king and queen . by this time king Henry be ready for his journey into France , and so remo ? ve from his manor of Greenwich , on Friday the five and twenty of May he with his queen arrive at Canterbury , where he mean to keep his whit ? sontide . at which time , the emperor Charles return ou• of Spain arrive on the coast of Kent , where by the vice admiral of England , sir William fitz-williams , he be conduct to land , and there meet and receive by the lord cardinal in great state . after which the king himself ride to Dover , to welcome he : and on Whitsunday early in the morning conduct he to Canterbury , where they spend all the Whitsuntide in great joy and solace . the chief cause that move the emperor at this time , to come on land , be to have dissuade the king from any interview with the french king : but when he see he •o forward in that jour•ey , he then only endeavour to perswad• he , that he shall put no trust in the french king word , and with great gui•ts and promise , prevail with the cardinal to join with he in this persuasion . the last of may , the emperor take his leave , and the same day , the king make sail from Dover and land at Callice , together with the queen and many lord and lady . the four of June the king and queen remove from Callice to his princely lodging beside the town of guysnes , the most royal building that be e•er see ; likewise Francis the french king have his lodging prepare close to the town of Ard , in a strange but most magnificent fashion . both king have give authority and power to the cardinal to affirm and confirm , •o bind or unbind , whatsoever shall be in difference between they ; no less a honour to the cardinal then a confidence in the king . on Thursday the seaven•h of June , the king meet in the vale of Andren so magnifi ? cent attire , both themselves , and all their follower , that from thence it be call •he camp of cloth of gold . here they spend that day in love come ? plement ; and at night depart , the one to guysnes , the other to Ard. on satureday the nine of June be set up in a place , within the english pale two tree of honour , with stately room and stage for the queen , and thither the two king come , most royal accompan•ed ; wherein most magnificent man ? ner , they perform act of valour , both on foo•e and horseback ; and after they all the great lord both of France and England do the like : this solemn ? nity of joust and mask be continue to the four and twenty day of June ; at which time , the king and queen take leave of each other , the french king and q•eene remove to Ard ; the king and queen of England to Callice , where he remain till the ten of July , and then tiding •oward gravel , be by the way meet by the emperor , and by he conduct thithet , and there in most royal manner ente•tained ; whereof when the french king hear , he be ? begin page 20 from that day forward , to have king Henry in a kind of jealousy , as though to love he and the emperor both be inconsistent , and can not stand together . on Wednesday the eleven of July , the emperor and his aunt the lady Marga ? rest , duchess of Savoy , come with the king of England to the town of Callice , and there continue with feast , dance and mask , till the fourteenth of July . in which time , all the article of the league tripartito , between the emperor and the king of England and France be review ; to which the king of France have so full condescend , that he have send monsieur de Roche to the emperor with let•ers of credence ; that in the word of a prince , he will inviolable observe and keep they all : all which notwithstanding , he dispense with his conscience of ? terward , in break they all . on Saturday , July 14. the emperor take his leave and go to gravel ; the king with his queen return into England . it be now the twelve year of king Henry reign ; when be return from Callice , he keep his Christmas at Greenwich with great magnificence ; and on twelve day he and the earl of Devonshire maintain a solemn joust against all comer . the cardinal have long bear a grudge against the duke of Buckingham , for spea ? king certain word in his disgrace , and now have make his way for revenge : for the earl of Surrey , lord admiral , who have marry the duke daughter , the Cardi ? nall have cause to be send deputy into Ireland , and the earl of Northumberland , the duke special friend he have cause upon certain suggest crime to be in ? prison ; so as the duke have his friend sequester from he , he lie now open to accusation , and accusation shall not long be want ; for the duke have some time before put from he in displeasure , one Charles Knevet , that have be his surveyar , and inward with he ; he the cardinal get to he , to see what he can get out of he against the duke . and whether it be out of desire of re ? venge , or out of hope of reward , or that the matter be so indeed , this Knevet con ? fess to the cardinal , that the duke have once full determine to make away the king ; be bring into a hope to be king himself by a vain prophesy , which one Nicholas Hopkins ( a monk of a house of the chartnar order , beside Bristol , call Henton ) sometime his confessor , have open to he ; and as for the cardinal , that he have often hear the duke swear , he will punish he sound for his manifold misdoing . and now have the cardinal matter enough for Accu ? sation , which he so aggravate to the king , that the king bid he do with he ac ? cord to law . hereupon the duke be apprehend and bring to the tower by sir Henry Marney , captain of the guard , the fifteen of April , and short after in guild-hal before sir John brugge , than lord Major , be indict of diverse point of high-treason ; the substance whereof be , that in the second year of the king reign , and at diverse time before and after , he have imagine and compass the king death at London and at Thornbery in glocestershi•e ; and that in the six year of the king reign , he go in person to the priory of Henton , and there have conference with the foresay Nicholas Hopkins , who tell he he shall be king ; and that he have often say to the lord aburgayne who have marry his daughter , that if king Henry die without issue , he will look to have the crown himself . upon these point he be arraign in Westminster-hall , before the duke of Norfolk , sit then as high steward of engla•d , the duke of Suffolk , the marquess Dorset , the earl of VVorcester , Devonshire , Essex , Shrewsbury , Kent , Oxford and Derby , the lord of saint John de la ware , fitzwater , Willoughby , brook , Cobha• Herbert and Morley . the duke plead for himself till he sweat again , but all boot •ot , for by these peer he be find guilty and condemn , and so on Friday the seventeenth of May be lead by John keyme and John Skevington sheriff of Lon ? don to the scaffold on tower-hill , and there behead . the Augustine friar take his body and head and bury they . This Edward Bohun duke of Buckingham be the last high constable of England ( the great place , next the high steward in the kingdom ) who power extend to restrain some action of the king . he be also earl of Hereford , Stafford and Northampton , he marry Elinor the daughter of Henry earl of Northumberland , and have issue Henry lord Stafford ( father to Henry lord Stafford la•e live ) and three daughter , Elizabeth marry to Thomas page 21 h•ward earl of Surrey , Katherine marry to Ralph Nevil earl of Wes•merland , and marry marry to George Nevil lord of Abu•ga•enie . in this mean while , a new war be begin between the emperor and the king of France ; for compose whereof , the cardinal of York be send attend with the earl of worce•ter , lord Chamberline , the lord of saint John , the lord Ferrer , the lord Herbert , the bishop of Du•ham , the bishop of Ely , the primate of Armagh , sir Thomas Bullen , sir John Pechye , sir John Hussey , sir Richard Winkfield , sir Henry guild•ord , and many other knight , gentleman and doctor . on the twelve of July he arrive at Callice , whether come to he the cha•cellour of France , and the count de palace attend with four hundred horse , as ambassador from the french king ; and from the Em ? perour the like , with commission to treat and conclude of peace . there be also ambassador from the pope , who the cardinal move to have the pope be a party also in their league , but they want commission . Letters be present send to roam about it , and in the time till answer may be have , the cardinal go to Bruges , to speak with the emperor , with who have stay thirteen day , after most royal entertainment , he return back to c•llice , and then fall present to the treaty of peace , with the french come ? missioner , but be cold in the matter than he be before , as have have his edge take off , by some deal with the emperor , so as nothing be conclu ? dead ; but that fisherman of both the prince may free fish on the sea without disturbance , till the end of February follow ; whereof he send add ? vertisement to both the prince ; to the emperor by the lord of saint John and sir Thomas Bullen ; to the french king by the earl of Worcester and the by ? shop of Ely . during all which time of the cardinal stay in Callice , all writ and pa•ents be there by he seal , and no sheriff can be choose for lack of his presence , have the great seal there with he , and full power in thing , as if the king have be there in person . before he return he make a new league with the emperor , and intimate to the french king , that he doubt the king of England will not hereafter be so much his friend , as heretofore he have be ; whereat , though the king of France be much offend , yet he signify by his letter ( perhaps dissemble ) that he will continue the king of England friend as as ever : only he enveigh against the car ? dinall , as a man of no truth , and withdraw many pension which he have before gi ? when to some english . present upon this , be tourney besiege , by the lord Hugh de Moncada a Spaniard ; and though the french king send great force to succour it ; yet it be render up to the emperor the last of November , in the thirteenth year of king Henry reign . this year pope Leo die the first of December , suspect to be poison by Barnabie Malespina his chamberlain , who office be always to give he drink . after who death , doctor pace be send to roam , to make friend in behalf of the cardinal of York ; who be bring into a hope through the king favour to be elect pope , but that hope be soon quail ; for before do ? ctor pace can get to roam , Adrian the six be choose pope . This Doct. pace be a very learned and religious man , yet through cross in his employment , fall mad and dye ; in who place of employment succeed Doct. Stephen gardener . on the second of February , king Henry be then at Greenwich , receive a bull from the pope , whereby he have the title give he to be defender of the christian faith , for he and his successor for ever ; which title be ascribe •o he , for write a book against Luther , of which book ( say Holing ? s•eard ) i will only say •hus much , that king Henry in his book , be report to rage against the devil and Antichrist , to cast out his foam against Luther , to raze out the name of the pope , and yet to allow his law ; which book Luther a•swered with as little respect to the king , as the king have do to he . in this mean time , many displeasure grow between the two king of Eng ? land and France , special two : one that Frenchman seize upon english ship page 22 as they pass : for remedy whereof , one Christopher Cee a expert seaman , be send with six ship to safeguard the merchant . another , that the duke of Albanye be return into Scotland , contrary to that which be covenant by the league , which though the king of France deny to be do with his privity , yet king Henry know the duke of Albanye have commission from the french king to return , which do the more exasperate he ; and hereupon be must ? ers make in England , and a note take of what substance all man be . this year die the lord brook , sir Edwad Poynings knight of the gar•er , sir John pechy , and sir Edward belknappe , all valiant captain , suspect to have poison at a banquet make at Ard , when the two king meet last . at this time , Owen Dowglas biship of Dunkell , flee out of Sco•lnad into Eng ? land , because the duke of Albanye be come thither , have take upon he the whole government of the king and kingdom ; whereupon Clarentiaux the herald be send into Scotland , to command the duke of Albany to avoid that realm ; which he refuse , the herald be •ommanded to defy he . thereupon then , french king seize all englishmen good in Bordeaux , and impison their person ; and retain not only the money to be pay for the restitution of tourney ; but also withhold the french queen dower : whereof when king Henry understand ; he call the french ambassador reside in England , to give account thereof ; who though he give the best reason he •ould to excuse it , yet be command to keep his house , and the french hostage remain here , for the money to be pay for the delivery of tourney , be restrain of their liberty , and commit to the custody of the lord of sa•t John , sir Thomas Lovel , sir Andrew Windsor , and sir Thomas nevyle ; each of they to keep one ; and withal , all Frenchman in London be commit to prison , and put to their fine ; and all scots-man much more . there be then also send to sea under the conduct of sir William fitz-williams vice-admiral , eight and twenty great ship , and seven more towards Scotland ; who set fire on man ? nigh scottish-ship in the haven , and at length take many prisoner , and return . king Henry hear that the emperor will come to Callice , so to pass into England , as he go into Spain ; appoint the lord Marquesse Dorsett , to go to c•llice , there to receive him• and the cardinal to receive he at dam ? ver• the cardinal take his journey thither on the ten of May , ride through London accompany with two earl , six and thirty knight , and a hundred gentleman , eight bishop , ten abbot , thirty chaplain , all in velvet and satin ; and yeoman seven hundred . the five and twenty of May be Sunday , the marquess Dorset with the bishop of Chichester , the lord de la ? w•re and diverse other , at the water of gravel , receive the emperor , and with all honour bring he to Callice , where he be receive with procession , by the lord Berners lieutenant of the town . on Monday he take ship at Callice , and land at Dover , where the cardinal with three hundred lord , knight and gentleman receive he , and in great state bring he to the castle , where he be lodge . on Wednesday be ascension even , the king come to Dover , and there with great joy and gladness , the emperor and he meet . on Friday in the afternoon they depart from Dover , and come that night to Canterbury , and from thence next day to Greenwich , where the queen receive her nephew with all the joy that may be . here to honour the Em ? perours presence , royal joust and turney be appoint ; where the king , the earl of D•vonshire and ten aid , keep the place against the duke of Suf ? folk , the marquess Dorset and other ten aid , on their part . on Friday the six of June , the emperor and the king with all their company go to London , where the city receive they with pageant , and other as rare device• , as at a coronation , and the emperor be lodge at the blackf•yers , and all his lord in the new palace of Bridewell . on VVhitsunday , the king and the emperor ride to the cathedral church of saint Paul , where the cardinal page 23 sing m•sse , and have his traverse and his cupboard . before mass , two ba ? ron give he water , and after the gospel , two earl , and at the last lavato ? ry two duke , which pride the Spaniards much disdain . after many feast ? ing in other place , at last they ride to Windsor , where they stay a whole week ; and there on corpus chris•i day , the emperor wear his mantle of the Garte• , and sit in his own stall . on the same day , both the prince re ? ceive the sacrament , and take their oath to observe the league conclude between they . on the morrow after , they come to Winchester : before who come thither there be come to Hampton , the earl of Surrey admiral of England , with all the king navy , and with he the lord fitz-water , the baron Curson , sir Nicholas Carew , sir Richard wink••eld sir Richard iern ? •am , Francis Brian , sir William Barentine , sir Adrian foskew , sir Edward Donne , sir Edward Chamberlaine , sir Richard Cornwall , sir Antony poyne , sir Henry Shirborn , and the vice-admiral , sir William fitz-williams , sir Edmund Bray , sir Giles Capell , sir William Pirton , John Cornwallis , sir John wallop , sir Edward Ichingham , sir William Sidney , Anthony browme , Giles Hus•ey , Thomas Moore , John Rus•el , Edward Bray , Henry Owen , George Cobham , Thomas old•all , Thomas Lovel , Robert Ichingham , Anthony Knevet , sir John tremaile , sir William Skevington , master of the ordinance , and John Fabian sergeant at arm , by who chief a diss•gne be move , though now noise only that it be but to scour the sea for the safe conduct of the emperor . for the earl of Surrey have waft the emperor over to the co•st of Biskay ; upon his return , make to the coast of Britain ; and there land seven thousand of his man , march to the town of morley , and by assault take it : have •onne this town , the e•rle call to he certain gentleman and make they knight ; as sir Francis Brian , sir Anthony brown , sir Richard Cornwall , sir Thomas Moore , sir Giles Hus•ey , sir John Russell , sir John Rainsford , sir George Cobham , si•iohn Cornwallis , sir Edward Ridgley , and some other ; and after the earl have lie a while on the coast of Britain , he be command home by the king letter : who thereupon bring back his whole fleet , to a place ca•led the cow under the isle of wight , and then go on land , leave diverse of of his ship , under the governa•ce of the viceadmiral sir William fitz-vvilliams . in this mean time , diverse exploit be achieve between they of the garrison in the march of Callice , and the french man of Boulogne , where the french common have the worst : but be of no great moment , may well be pass over without relate . likewise at the same time the lord Rosse , and the lord Dacres of the north , appoint to keep the border against scot ? land , burn the town of Kelsie , and fourscore village , and overthrow eigh ? ten tower of stone , withal their bulwark . king Henry intend now to go serious on with his war in France , levy a army , which under the conduct of the earl of Surrey , he send over to c•llice ; whither the earl be come , he divide his army into three bat ? tail ; the first be lead by sir Robert Ratcliff lord fitzwater , the middleward by himself and his brother the lord Edmund Howard , the rearward by sir William sand and sir Richard VVinkfield , both of they knight of the ga•ter : and sir Edward Guildford be captain of the horseman . in this or ? there the earl enter the french ground the second of September , and take his journey •owards hedr . by the way there come to he a great power of ••rgognias , send by the lady Margaret , accord to the article of the league . all the town , village and castle , in the country through which they pass , they burn and sack ; as the town and castle of Selloys , the town of Brun•rigge , Senekerke , Botington and Manstier , with diverse other . on the sixteenth of September , they come before the castle of hede , and lay siege unto it ; but the castle be well fortify , and the earl have not batter ordnance , which by reason of the foul weather , he can not bring with he : page 24 after eleven day he raise his siege , and pass from thence to dorlen , burn the town and raze the castle , as also the town of dortyer , and then the year be far spend , come back to Callic• the sixteenth of October . at this time , the duke of Albany be establish governor of Scotland , raise a army of fourscore thousand man , with which he approach the b•• ? dear , but make no invasion , as think perhaps that the only report of his great army , will fright the english ; but yet this stay not the lord mar ? quesse Dorset , warden of the east and middle march ; to enter into Tividale , and so forward ten mile into Gallaway , burn all town and village on eve ? ry side as he pass . all that night he tarry within the scottish ground , and the next day be good-Friday , withdraw back into England , with a head of four thousand cattle ; have burn Grimseley , mowhowse , Donford , Myles , Ackforth , crowl , and many other town and village . in king Henry fourteenth year , on the fifteen of April begin a Parlia ? mean , which be hold at the Blackfriar , whither the king come , and there sit down in his royal seat ; at his foot on the right side sit the cardinal of York , and the archbishop of Canterbury ; and at the rail behind , stand do ? ctor Tunstall bishop of London , who make a oration , tell there the cause of call this parliament ; which be ( as he say ) for remedy of mischief by the common law , as recovery , foreign voucher and corrupt Trialls• and for make new law for the good of the commonwealth : whereof not ? withstand , no one word be speak all the time of the parliament , nor any other thing do , but a subsidy grant ; but howsoever , be command to choose their speaker , they choose sir Thomas Moore , who at first disable he ? self , at last make two petition to the king ; one for himself , that if he shall be send by the commons to the king on a message , and mistake their inten• , he may then with the king pleasure resort again to the commons to know their meaning . the other , for the house of commons , that if in communica ? cion and reason , any man shall speak more large then of duty he ought to do , yet all such offence shall be pardon , and that to be enter of record . which petition be grant , and then the parliament begin ; where at first a subsidy be demand , but as there be much ado in the house of Com ? mons about it , so there be no less among the Clergey in the convocation house ; for Richard bishop of Winchester , and John bishop of Rochester be much against it , but most of all , one Rowland Philips , vicar of Croyden , and a canon of Pauls , but the cardinal take he aside , deal so with he , that he take he off , so as he come no more to the House• and then the bellweather ( as one say ) give over his hold , the rest soon yield ; and so be grant the half of all their spiritual yearly revenue , to be pay in five year follow . the Clergey be thus bring on , on the nine and twenty of April , the car ? dinall come into the house of commons , to work they also ; and there show ? ing the great charge the king be necessary to be at in his present war : de ? mand the sum of eight hundred thousand pound , to be raise of the five part of every man good and land , which be four shilling of every pound . this demand be enforce the day after by the speaker sir Thomas moor ; but the burgess be all against it , show that it be not possible to have it give ? red in money ; for that man of land have not the five part thereof in coin . and further allege , that there be not many parish in England one with another , able to spare a hundred mark , except city and town ; and see there be not above thirteen thousand parish in the kingdom , ( at this day there be but 9285. ) how can such a sum be raise ? hereupon certai•e of the house be send to move the cardinal , to be a mean to the king to accept of a lesser sum , but the cardinal answer , he will rather have his tongue pluck out of his mouth with a pair of pincer , then make to the king any such motion . whereupon the cardinal come again in•o the house , and desire that he may reason with they that be against the demand ; to page 25 which it be answer , that the order of that house be to hear , and not to reason , except among themselves . when the cardinal be go , the come ? mons after long debate the m•tter ; at last , agree of two shilling in the pound , from twenty pound upward , and from forty shilling , to twenty pound ; of every twenty shilling , twelve penny , and under forty shilling , of every head of sixteen year and upward , four penny , to be pay in two year : when this be tell to the cardinal , he be much offend ; so that to please he , the gentleman of fifty pound land and upward , by the motion of sir John hus ? say , a knight of Lincolnshire , be charge with twelve penny more in the pound , to be pay in three year . the cardinal to move they to it , bear they in hand , that the lord have agree to four shilling of the pound ; which be untrue , for the lord have grant nothing , but stay to see what the commons will do ; whereof when the king hear , he reprove the cardinal for it ; say withal , that ere it be long he will look to thing himself , without any substitute . which speech of the king , though it da•ted the cardinal for a while , yet he soon recover his spirit , and now as peremptory after ? ward as he have be before . after this , the parliament be prorogue till the ten of June ; during with prorogation , the common people say to the burr ? guess , we hear say , you will grant four shilling of the pound , we advise you •o do so , that you may go home ; with many like threaten . at this time , the cardinal by his power legant i , dissolve the convocation at Pauls , con ? voke by the archbishop of Canterbury , call he and all the clergy , to his convocation at Westminster : which be never see before in England ( say Hall . ) the one and thirty of July , the parliament be adjourn to west ? minster , and there continue till the thirteenth of August , be that day at nine of the clock at night dissolve . about this time , the bishop of Durham die , and the king give that by ? shoprick to the cardinal ; who resign the bishopric of bath to doctor John Clerke , master of the roll , and sir Henry Marney , that be vicechamberlain , be make lord privy seal , and short after , be create lord Marney : also during this parliament , sir Arthur Plantagenet , bastard son to king Edward the four at Bridewell , be create viscount Lisle ; in right of his wife who be wise before to Edmund Dudley , behead . the fifteen of June ; in the fifteen year of the king reign , Christian king of Denmark with his queen ; drive out of his own country , come into England , and be lodge at bath place ; who after , he have be feast by the king and by the city of London , and receive great gift of both , return again into Flanders , where he remain as a banish man : some year after , king Henry send doctor Henry Standish , bishop of saint Assaph , and sir John Baker knight , into Denmark , to persuade the people to receive he again into his kingdom ; but they can not prevail , he be so much hate for his cruelty . about this time , the earl of Kildare have recover again the favour of the cardinal , be send deputy into Ireland , as he have be before , where he reduce the wild irish to indifferent conformity . all this while have Eng ? land war both with the french and with the Scot . in Scotland the mar ? quesse of Dorset throw down the castle of wederborne , of Nesgate , of Blacka ? ter , of mackwal , and burn to the number of seven and thirty village , yet ne ? ver come to skirmish . in France , the lord sand , treasurer of Callice , with twelve hundred man go before Boulogne , where he skirmish with the ene ? mie ; and after take diverse church and castle in the enemy con ? tre• , return back to Callice , with the loss only of a dozen man . king hen ? ry be advertise that the duke of Albany be provide of force in France , with which to return into Scotland , send forth his viceadmiral sir William fitzwilliams , with diverse great ship to intercept he ; but when he can not meet with he , he then land in the haven of Trepor• ; where with seven hundred man , he beat six thousand french that seek page 26 to impeach his land , take their bulwark and much ordnance in them• burr ? ned the suburb of the town of treport , and all in five hour , and then return . all this while king Henry have but play with the french , but •ow he mean to be in earnest , and therefore send over the duke of Suffolk with a army , the four and twenty of August ; attend with the lord Montacute and his b•o ? the sir Arthur pool , the lord Herbert , son to the earl of worces•er , the lord Ferrer , the lord Marney , the lord sand , the lord Barkley , the lord •owis , and the baron Curson , sir Richard wink••eld , chancellor of the Du ? chy of Lancaster , sir John Vere , sir Edward Nevile , sir William Kings•on , sir Richard Weston , sir Andrew winsore , sir Robert Winkfield , sir Anthony , wink ? field , sir Edward Guildford , sir Edw : Grevile , sir Edw : Chamberlaine , sir Thomas Lucy , sir Everard Digby , sir Adrian foskew , sir Richard Cornwall , sir William Courtney , sir William Sidney , sir Henry Owin , sand many other knight and gentleman . in the whole army be six hundred demylaunce , two hundred archer on horseback , three thousand archer on foo• , and five thousand bill ? man . also seventeen hundred take out of the garrison of ham , guysnes , and Callice , in all , ten thousand and five hnndred , beside two thousand six hun ? dread labourer and pioner . with this army the duke of Suffolk take the field , his vanguard be lead by the lord sand ; cap•aine of the right wing , be sir William Kingston ; of the left , sir Everard Digby , captain of all the horseman be sir Edward Guildford , martial of Callice ; the duke himself lead the battle , and sir Richard Winkfield the rearward . the duke first enterprise be the win of bell castle , which the lord sand and the lord Ferres assault , and have it yield to they : and then sir William Skevington be place captain in it . at this time , the duke of Bourbon , high constable of France , begin to have his mind aliena•ed from the king of France , and •o draw he the more on , the duke of Suffolk send sir John Russel ( afterward create duke of Bedford ) to he , who pass in disguise apparel , so prevail with he , that he profess to take part with the emperor , and the king of England , who have ten thousand almain in his pay : it be think fit ( for encourag• ? mean of the english ) to proclaim in the army , the access of so powerful a assistant : and thereupon the duke of Suffolk remove to Ard , and so forward into Picardy . at Cordes between Terwyn and saint Omers , there come to he the lord of Isilst•yn , and with he of Spaniards , almain and other , three thousand footman , and five hundred horse . with these force , the duke march on , take first the rich town of anchor , than the castle of bounguard , and then by assault the town of Bray , though two thousand good man of war be in it . after this , the tower of cap and Roy , lihome and Davenker , and then come before •he town of mount-dedy , in which be a thousand foot and five hundred horse ; yet upon sir William skevingtons battery , be yeel ? dead to he . from hence he remove to Roy , where he rest a while with hi• whole army : and there on alholland-day , in the chief church of Roy , make knight , the lord Herbert , the lord Powis , Oliver manner , Arthur Poole , Richard sand , Robert Jerningham , Robert Salisbury , Edward Beningfield , Richard Corbet , Thomas Wentworth , William Storton , Walter mantel , George Warram and Edward Seymour ( that be after duke of Somerset . ) the day after , the army remove to a place call needle , from thence to veane , and then •o Beauford , where the duke make John Dudley , and Robert utreight knight , and from thence on the eight of November to a place call mount saint Martin ; here the Welshman begin to murmur , that they may not return home , the winter be so far spend ; but there be to the number of a thousand per ? son , under the lead of sir John wallop , who have no wage , but what they can get by booty , and be therefore call adventurer , and by some kreeker , and these have more desire to stay , than the Welshman have to be go ; for the great gain they make , by the spoil of so many town that be take . the thirteenth of November , the duke remove to a place within two page 27 mile of Boghan castle , defend by great marsh , that lie before it , but the frost be at that time so great that many lose their finger and toe with cold , and some die ; sir Edward Guildford acquaint the duke , that he think the marsh be hard enough freeze to bear great ordnance ; whereupon , the duke bid he venture it then and go on , which he resolute do , and have the castle present deliver up to he . in this mean time , the king hear in what state the army stand , have prepare six thousand man to be send to the duke for a relief , under the lead of the lord Montjoy ; but before they can be put in order to pass the sea , the duke , partly by extremity of the weather , and partly by the murmur of the soldier , be constrain to break up his army , and return to c•llice . in this mean time , the Scot know that the strength of England be go into France , take boldness to invade the marsh ; but than the earl of Surrey , treasurer and high admiral of England , with six thou ? sand man , be send against they , take diverse of their castle and hold ; and at Yedworth , skirmish with a great garrison of Scot , overthrow they , and take and burn both the town and castle . and now the french king find that the Scot do not work any great trouble to the english , whereby to keep they from molest of France , and think it to be for want of the duke of albanies presence , who they accoun ? t their governor ; he therefore prepare a navy of ship to trans ? po•t he into Scotland ; but when the duke of Albany hear that sir will ? liam fitzwilliams be send with a great fleet to stop his passage , he bring his ship into the haven of breast , and give it out that he will not go into Scotland that year ; which be tell to the king of England , he command that his ship also shall be lay up in haven , till the next spring . and now see the cunning of the scot ; for when he see the king ship discharge , he then bold take ship himself , and sail into Sc•tland ; whither be come , he present levy a great army , and ap ? proach the english border ; but when he hear the earl of Surrey be come against he with a mighty power , he then send a her•uld to him• promise of his honour , to give he battle ; and if he take he pri ? soon , to give he good quarter . to who the earl answer , that he will not fail to abide his battle ; but if he take he prisoner , the quar ? ter he will give he , shall be to cut off hi• head , and send it for a pre ? send to his master the king of England . at this time , to the earl of Sur ? rey be at Alnewicke , come the earl of Northumberland and VVestmer ? land , the lord Clifford , Dacres , Lumley , Ogle and Darcye , with many knight , gentleman and other soldier , to the number of forty •housand ; and from the court , come the master of the horse , sir Ni•holas ca ? rue , sir Francis Bryan , sir Edward Baynton , and other . the last of October , the duke of albonye send two or three thousand man over the wa ? ter to bes•edge the castle of vvarke ; who by battery of their ordnance win the ou•ermost ward , call the Barnekins ; and continue their bat ? tery , win the second ward ; but than sir William Lisle , that be cap ? taine of the castle , issue forth with those few he have leave , drive the fr•nch-m•n from the place , and slay of they to the number of three hun ? dread : a memorable service , and for which the earl of Surrey afterward give he great thanks . the earl will glad have follow his enemy in•o their own border , but that his commission be only to defend England , and not to invade Scotland . Shortly after the quee•e of Scot , mother to the king , send to her brother the king of England , for a abstinence from war , till a further communication may be have ; which be gra••ed , the english army break up , and the earl of Surrey return to the court . page 28 and now for a while we must be co••ent to hear of pet•y occurrence , be ? cause great do not happen ; which if it make we like the story the worse , it may make we like the time the better ; see they be ever the best time that afford lest matter to be talk of : but this time will las• but a while ; for short ? lie we shall come to hear occurrence , that have be matter of talk to this day , whereof the like have never scarce be see , and will hardly be believe , when they be hear ; a marriage dissolve after twenty year co•summation ; how ? ses build in piety ; under pretence of piety demolish ; a king make a captive• a pope hold a prisoner• queen take out of love , put to death out of loath ? ing ; and the church it self so shake , that it have stand in distraction e ? for since . at this time , the Emperou•Charles send to the king of England two m•ses trap in crimson velvet , rich embrider ; also eleven goodly je•its , trap with russe• velvet , rich wrought ; four spear and two javelin of strange timber , and work rich garnish ; and five brace of Greyho•nd• . to the queen he send two mule rich trap and high chai•es after the spanish fashion : which present be thankful receive both of the king and queen . at this time in the month of October , the cardinal send out commission , that every man be worth forty pound , shall pay the whole subsidy before grant , out of hand ; which he call a anticipation : which fine new word , he think will make they pay their money the more willing ; but they lo ? ve their money better than any word he can devise . in this year the king send the lord Morley , sir William Hussey , knight , and doctor lee his almoner , to F•rdinand archduke of Austria , with the or ? there of the garter ; which he receive in the town of Norimberg , to his great contentment . in this year , through book of prognosticat•ons , foreshow much hurt to come by water and ••oods , many person withdraw themselves to high ground , for fear of drown ; special one Bolton , prior of Sain•Bartho ? l•mewes in Smithfield , build he a house upon harrow on the hill , and thy ? their wen• and make provision for two month . Theise great water shall have fall in February , but no such thi•• happeni•g , the astronomer excuse they ? self , by say , that in the computa•ion they have miscount in their num ? ber a hundred year . in this mean time , many enterpri•es be attempt , between the english ? man of Callice , and guy••es , and the Frenchman of Boulogne , and the Fro•• ? tier of Picard•• , and still sir William Fitz Williams , captain of guysnes , sir Robert I•rningham , captain of Newnham bridge , sir John wallop , and sir John gage , be the man that do the french most hurt . this year , the first of September , be doctor Thomas Hannibell master of the roll , receive into London , by earl , bishop , and diverse lord and gentleman , as ambassador from pope Clement : who bring with he , a rose of gold for a present to the King• and on the day of the nativity of our Lad• after a solemn mass sing by the cardinal of York , the say present be deliver to the king , which be a tree forge of fine gold , and with branch , leaf , and flower resemble rose . about the begin of winter , the advent•rers call kr•ekers , be not above two hundred ; and of they , five and twenty horseman , make a attempt to fetch some booty from a village not far from Mattrell , whereof the earl of D•mmartine have notice , he set upon they with a far great number , and slay most of they , and this be the end of the kreeker , as brave man as ever serve any prince . in December this year , there come to London diverse ambassador , out of Scotland , about a peace to be had• and a marriage to be conclude , between the king of Scot , and the lady mary daughter to the king of England . page 29 at this time , the lord Leonard grey , and the lord John gr•y , brother to the lord Marquesse Dorset , sir George Cobham son to the lord Cobham , VVillia• carry , sir John Dudley , Thomas Wyatt , Francis point , Francis Sid ? ••y , sir Anthony brown , sir Edward Seymor , Oliver manner , percivall hart , Sebasti•• Nudigat• , and Thomas Calen , esquire of the king household ; make a challenge of arm against the feast of Christmas , which be proclaim by Windsor the herald , and perform at the time appoint very noble ; at tilt , t•rneys , barriar , and the assault of a castle erect for that purpose , i• the tiltyard at Greenwich , where the king hold his Christmas that year , with great state and magnificence . about this time , John Iokyn steward of the household to the french king Mothe• , come into England , and be receive in secret man•er into the house of one doctor lark , a prebrendary of saint Stephens ; who oftentimes talk with the cardinal , about a peace to be conclude between the two king of •ngland and France , of who often meeting , monsieur de brate the empe ? rours ambassador , grow very jealous . the four and twenty of January , monsie•r brynion precedent of Roan , come to London as ambassador from the french king , and be lodge with the say John Iokyn , which small thing shall not be relate , but that they be preparative to great matter afterward . on Sunday the five of march , be receive into London monsieur de beaver lo•d of camphor , admiral of Flanders , monsieur John de la cousin precedent of ? ? ? , and master John de la gache , as ambassador from the lady Margaret in the name of the emperor , who require three thing . first they demand the lady marry the king only daughter , to be present deliver , and she to be n••ed empress , and as governess take possession of all the low-countrye . second , that all such sum of money as the king shall give with she in ma•riage , shall be pay incontinent . third , that the king of England shall pass the sea in person , and make war in France the next summer . the ••rst two demand be not agree too for certain cause ; and as to the three , the king say , he will take time to advise . on Thursday the nine of march , a gentleman come in post from the lady Margaret , with letter sig ? nify , that whereas the king of France have long lie at the siege of Pavia ; he have now be force to raise his siege , and be himself take prisoner by th• Imperialests• for joy whereof , bonfire and great triumph be make in ? ? ? , and on the twenty of March be Sunday , the king himself come to Pauls , and there hear a solemn mass . but for all this show of joy , it be think if the king of France have not now be take prisoner ; that the king of England will have join in amity with he , as be angry with the fle ? •••gs , for inhau••ing his coin in Flanders , which cause much money to be con•ayed out of England thither . the king of France be take prisoner , be after some time convey into Spain , and at last bring to Madrill , where he •ell so sick , that the physician have little hope of his life , unless the emperor will be please speedy to visit he ; upon who visitation he re ? cover his health , though not present his strength . in which time , many proposition be make for his delivery , but the emperor will accept of •one , without restitution of the duchy of Burgoigne . at last , the french king weary of imprisonment , and long for liberty , be content to agree to any conditions• the chief whereof be , that the french king by a certain day shall be set at liberty , and within six week after shall resign to the Em ? perour the duchy of Burgoigne , with all member pertain to it ; and at the •ame ••stant , shall put into the emperor hand , the dolphin of France , •nd with he , either the duke of Orleans his second son : or else twelve pri•cipall lord of France , who the emperor shall name ; and that there shall be between they a league and perpet•all co•federation fo• defence of their estate . of who atonement when king Henry hear , as before he have page 30 express gladness , that he be take prisoner , so now he send sir Thomas Chei ? ney to he , to express his joy for be set at liberty ; so sudden be the en ? terchange of love and hate among great prince . the french king be thus deliver , the emperor marry the lady Isabel , daughter to Emanuel king of portingal ; and •ad with she in dower eleven hundred thousand Ducke•s• though three year before be at Windsor , he have covenant to take to wife the lady mary king Henry daughter . at this time cardinal Woolsey obtain licence of the king to erect a col ? ledge at Oxford , and another at Ipswich ; and towards the charge of they , get leave also , to suppress certain small monastery , to the number of forty ; and after , get a confirmation of the pope , that he may employ the good and land belong to those house , to the maintenance of those two Col ? ledge ; a perni•ious precedent , and that which make the king a way afterward , to make a general suppression of all religio•s house , though indeed there be great difference between convert of monastery into college , and utter subvert they . in march king Henry send Cuthert Tunstall bishop of London , and sir rich ? ard Winkfield chancellor of the du•chy of lanc•ster into Spain , to confer with the emperor , about matter of great importance , and particular about war to be make in France , and yet be these two prince at this time in league : but he that shall observe the carriage of these three prince towards one another , and how convertible their league be into war , and their war into peace ; shall find it a strange riddle of ragion di stat• , and their league to have be but mere compliment , where the scale be turn with the least grain of a circumstance ; and though they be bind by oath , yet that oath make the league but little the firm , see the league may be break , and yet the oath keep : for while one give the occasion , and the other take it , though they be both accessary , yet neither be principal ; and where there be not a principal , the oath remain inviolate . and upon those hinge do the friendship of these prince turn , as at this time ; the empe ? rour , though not long before , he have part with the king of England , in the great kindness that can be ; yet give not the english ambassador so kind entertainment now , as he have former do ; but for what cause be not apparent , unless upon some sinister report make to he , by monsieur de prate ; who have be his ligier with the king of England , be without take leave of the king depart , and come to the emperor before the english ambassador ? sadour come . but howsoever , king Henry be determine to make war in France himself in person , his council fall into consideration how the charge of the war shall be maintain : which care the cardinal take upon he ; and thereupon appoint commissioner in all Shiers , to sit and draw the people to pay the six part of every man substance , in plate or money : but the people oppose it , allege that it be against the law of the realm , for any man to be charge with such payment , unless by parliament : and as the Cardi ? nall continue to press it , so the people continue to deny it ; and when some for deny it be commit to prison , the commons in many country , make great assembly for their defence : the report whereof at last come to the king , who thereupon come to Westminster and protest open , that it be do without his knowledge , and that it be never his meaning , to ask any thing of his subject but accord to law : and therefore desire to know by who authority it be do . here the cardinal excuse himself and say , that it be the opinion of all the judge , and of all his council , tha• he may lawful demand any sum , so it be do by commission , and thereupon it be do . but the king like not to take advantage of a distinction to draw money from his subject ; and thereupon give warning for do any such thing hereafter : and signify so much by his letter into all the Shiers of Eng ? land page 31 give also a general pardon to all that have offer to rise upon it ; which though he do of his own free grace , yet the cardinal to win a good opinion in the commons , give out , that it be by his mean the king grant the pardon . king Henry seventeenth year , be honour with the advance of many in honour , for on the eighteenth of June , at his palace of Bridewell , the king son ( which he have by Elizibeth blunt daughter to sir John blunt knight ) call Henry fitzroy , be create first earl of Nottingham , and after on the same day duke of Richmond and Somerset , Henry Courtney earl of Devonshire be create marquis of excetur , the lord Brandon , son to the duke of Suf ? folk and the french queen ( a child of two year old ) be create earl of Lincoln , sir Thomas manner lord Rosse , be create earl of Rutland , sir Henry Clifford , be create earl of Cunberland , sir Robert Ratcliff lord fitz-water , be create Viscount fitz-vvater , and sir Thomas Bullen treasurer of the king household , be create Viscount roch•ord . at this time the french king mother , as than regent of France , procure by her ambassador , at first a truce , and afterward a peace with England , which be proclaim in London , the eight of September . by the covenant of which peace , the king of England shall receive at certain day , twenty hun ? dread thousand crown , which in sterling money amount to the sum of four hundred thousand pound ; whereof fifty thousand be to be pay in hand . sir William fitz-williams and doctor talour , be send to the lady regent , to take her corporal oath , and likewise king Henry the four and twenty of April , at Greenwich , in presence of the ambassador of France , Rome and Venice , take his corporal oath , to observe the peace between he , and his love brother the french king , during his life , and one year after . in this winter be great mortality in London , so as the term be adjourn , and the king keep his Christmas at Eltham , with a small number , and be therefore call the still Christmas . at which time , the cardinal come to the court , take order for alter the state of the king house : many officer and other servant be discharge , and put to their pension , in which number be four score and four yeoman of the guard : who before have have twelve penny the day with check , be now allow but six penny the day without check , and command to go into their country . on Shrove-tuesday this year , a solemn joust be hold at Greenwich , the king and eleven other on the one part , the mark of excetur and eleven other of the other part . in his nineteenth year , king Henry keep a solemn Christmas at Greenwich , with revel , mask , disguise , and banquet , and the thirty of December and three of January be solemn •usts hold , when at night the king and fifteen other with he , come to Bridewell , and there put on mask apparel , take his barge , and row to the cardinal place , where be at supper many lord and lady , who da•ced with the masker , and after the dance be make a great banquet . This Christmas be a play at grayes-inne , make by one master roe a sergiant at law , the effect whereof be , that lord gouvernance be rule by dissipation and negligence , by who evil order lady publick-weale be put from governance . This the cardinal take to be mean by he , and thereupon se•t the say master roe to the fleet , though the play be make long before the cardinal have any authority : by which we may see how inse ? perable a companion suspicion be to a guilty conscience . the fourteenth of January come to the court don Hugo de Mendoza , a Grande of Spain , as ambassador from the emperor to the king , with a large commission , to make king Henry judge ; how just the condition be , which the emperor require of the king of France , and about this negotiation •arried two year in England , so desirous the emperor be to continue good correspondence with the king of England . page 32 on Shrove-tuesday the king and the maquesse of Excester with other , in most sumptuous attire come to the tilt , and run so many course , till two hundred fourscore and six spear be break ; and then disarm themselves go into the queen chamber , where a sumptuous banquet be provide . but this banquet be one of the last of the queen prepare ; for hitherto there have be no exception take to the lawfulness of her marriage , but now come over ambassador from the king of France , require to have the king daughter the lady mary , to be give in marriage to the duke of Orleans see ? cond son to their master the french king , wherein they that be the suitor for it , be the hinderer of it ; for among they be the precedent of Paris , who make a doubt , whither the marriage between king Henry and the lady Katherine of Spain , have be his borthers wife , be lawful or no : but howsoever , the french ambassador at Greenwich on Sunday the five of May , in the name of their master the french king , take their o•thes to observe the league conclude between they during their life . and short after be send sir Thomas Bullen Viscount Rochfort , and sir Anthony brown knight , as ambassador to the king of France , to take his oath in person for perform ? ance of the league . but enough of small occurrence , and indeed there will be occurrence now more worthy to be relate , but more lamentable to be hear ; for now the duke of Bourbon general of the emperor army in Italy , be slay by a shot from the wall of Rome , as he be pass by ; upon who death , the be ? my enter and sack the city , make the pope fly to the castle of saint an ? g•lo , and there coop he up ; abuse the cardinal , and put they to grievous ransom , spare neither sacred place , nor religious person , but commit ? •ed all manner of barbarous and inhuman cruelty . Theise insolence of the emperor army commit against the pope ; •ogether with the hard con ? dition the emperor have impose upon the king of France , for set he at liberty ; and the emperor breach of promise , in not marry the lady ma ? ry king Henries daughter , be the apparent cause of king Henry break league with the emperor Charles : but a more enforce though conceal cause perhaps be the grow greatness of the emperor , by his acquest in Italy and other place ; enough to breed a jealousy in all neighbour prince ; and indeed king Henry have some cause to think the emperor spirit be grow high with his victory , see where before he be wont always to write letter to king Henry with his own hand , and subscribe they , your son and faithful friend , now after his victory in Italy , he cause his secretary to write they , subscribe only Charles . and yet a more press cause though not avow , may be the cardinal spleen against the emperor , for deny ? ing he the bishopric of Toledo in Spain . but which soever of these be the predominant cause , all of they together make a cause sufficient for king he•ry to fall off from amity with the emperor ; and his fall off from the empe•our , cause sufficient •o fall in with the king of France : and thereupon , the two king send their several herald to the emperor : king Henry Cla ? rentiu• , the french king his herald Guyen , to expostulate their grievance with the emperor , and he refuse to return a satisfactory answer , to defi• he as their enemy . the emperor hear the herald with great temper , and answer Clarentius very mild ; that he know his master grievance be ground upon misinformation , wherein he will short rectify he by his letter , as desire nothing more than to continue his friend ; but •uyen he answer rougly , bid he tell his master that he have break his faith , in not perform the covenant agree upon for his liberty ; and with these an ? swer dismiss they , only Guyen not think it fit to deliver his answer , be in such term by word of mouth , obtain to have it send in writing . the he ? rauld be return home , and deliver the answer ; the king of France be so incense , to be charge with breach of faith , that soon after he send page 33 another defiance to the emperor , tell he in plain term , that he lie in his throat ; and thereupon challenge he the combat , require he to appoint the field , and himself will the weapon . the emperor accept the challenge , but other occurrence intervene , hinder the performance . in this mean time , the cardinal be appoint to go ambassador to the king of France ; carry with he twelve score thousand pound , to be they ? ploy by the french king , and other the confederate ; in a war against the emperor , who the eleven of July take ship at Dover , and land that day at Callice ; with who be cut•ert tuns•all bishop of London , the lord sand Chamberlaine to the king , the earl of Derby , sir Henry guild ? •ord , sir Thomas Moore , with other knight and gentleman , in all to the num ? ber of twelve hundred horse . at Amynes he be receive by the french king himself , and by his mother , and by all the chief peer of France . by who it be agree , that article of accord shall be offer to the emperor ; which if he refuse , than the french king shall marry the lady mary king Henry daughter , and they both to be enemy to the emperor . Theise thing conclude , the cardinal return , and on the last of September come to the king at Richmond . in October follow , there come ambassador from the french king , to take king Henry oath , for observe the league with the king of France : and on Sunday the ten of November , king Henry at Greenwich receive the order of saint Michael , by the hand of the lord an ? n•s de memorancye great master of the king household ; and Monsieur hu ? mieres : as likewise the same day at Paris the french king receive the order of the garter by the hand of the lord li•le , doctor Taylor master of the roll , sir Nicholas Carew master of the king horse , sir Anthony brown and sir Thomas wriothslye knight , otherwise call garter king of arm , who be send thither with the whole habit , collar and other habiliment of the order . upon king Henry defiance of the emperor in the french king quarrel , english Merchant• their ship and good be attach in Spain , and in the low country , as likewise all spanish and flemish merchant be attach here ; which be very detrimental to both nation ; at last , by mediation of Hugo de Mendoza , the emperor ambassador Legier , a reconcilement be make , and free traffic between the nation be revive . in this twenty year , on the two and twenty of February : sir Piers but ? let of Ireland , be create earl of oscry . and now king Henry begin to be trou ? bleed in mind about his marriage with queen Katherine , but whether his trouble of mind grow for scruple of conscience , or from desire of change , be by many man doubt ; some think he have set his affection upon the lady Anne Bullen who afterward he marry , and to make way for that marriage , move his scru ? ple , that he may be divorce ; but this be not likely , for he marry not the say lady , till above three year after this doubt have be move ; and three year be a long time to have affection be delay , which common be impatient of any delay : if king Henry own protestation may be take , it be very scruple of conscience that trouble his mind ; but then by what mean this scruple come first into his •ead , be another doubt ; some think it be first move by his confessor , doctor Longland tell he , that the marriage with the relict of his brother , can not be lawful ; but neither be this likely , for doctor Longland be not like to tell he so , who know the marriage have be make by dispensation from the pope , a au ? thority in that time beyond exception ; some think it be a plot of vvoolsei , thereby to make variance between king Henry and the emperor , with who he be at variance himself , and for spleen to the nephew , he revenge upon the aunt ; but neither be this likely• or else the cardinal be much deceive in his plo• ; for though the emperor labour Milan and some other university , to forbear give sentence against the marriage , yet he continue amity with king Henry , as much afterward as before ; if we will believe the king himself , it be the precedent of Paris , come ambassador from the king of France , that •irst page 34 move it , upon a proposition of marriage between the lady mary , king hen ? rise daughter , and the duke of Orleans , second son to the french king : but by what mean his scruple have beginning , king Henry desire be now it shall have a end , and that the matter may be debate with indiffe ? rency ; he allow the queen to make choice of what council she think best ; who thereupon choose William Warham archbishop of Canterbury , and Nicholas west bishop of Elye , doctor of the law ; John fisher bishop of Ro ? chester , and Henry Standish bishop of saint Assaph , doctor of divinity , with many other ; and in the mean time , send to all the university in Italy and France to have their opinion , but special to the court of Rome , desire the pope •o send his legate to hear the cause ; who thereupon send cardinal •ampeius , and join cardinal Woolsey in commission with he . the place appoint for the cardinal to sit and to hear the cause , be at the Blackfriar : where in the great hall preparation be make of seat , and all thing necessary for such a ses ? sion . among other officer of the court , Stephen Gardiner ( afterward by ? shop of Winchester ) •ate as chief scribe . the court be set , the judge come ? m•nded silence , while their commission be read ; which do , the scribe come ? mand the crier to call the king , by the name of king Henry of England , come into the court ; who answer , here : then call he the queen , by the name of Katherine queen of England , come into the court : the queen though present , yet answer not , but rise from her seat , go to the place where the king sit , and kneel down , say in effect ; sir , i humble desire you to take pity upon i , for i be a poor woman and a stranger , and have here no indifferent council , where all be your subject , and less assurance of friendship when they all depend up ? on your favour ; i have be your wife these twenty year , and have bear you di ? vers child , if you can charge i with dishonesty or undutifulness , i be con ? tent to depart from you to my shame ; but if you can , i then desire you to do i justice , and to spare i until i may know what council my friend in Spain will give i ; but if you will not , than your pleasure be fulfil : and have so say , she rise up , and make a low curtsy , depart . the king be advertise that she be go out of the house , command the Cryar to call she again ; who there upon call she , say , Katherine queen of England come into the court , which her gentleman-usher master Griffith hear , tell she , madam , you be call ; well ( say she ) it make no matter , i will not tarry , go your way : and thus she depart , and never after will appear in any court , but appeal from the cardinal to the pope himself . the queen be go , the king say , i confess she have be to i , the most dutiful and love wife , that ever prince have ; and if it be •ot for this scruple of my conscience , i will not leave she for any woman live : and have now refer the judgement of the cause to these commissioner , i shall be most glad they can find the marriage be ? tween we to be in such sort lawful , that with obedience to the law of God , we may continue together ; for i take God to witness , there be nothing i more de ? sire . This say , the king rise , and the court be adjourn to another day ; for notwithstanding the queen appeal ( from which she will by no mean be draw ) the cardinal continue their session weekly , and hear all of both side : the point that be chief stand on , be , whether prince Arthur have ever have carnal knowledge of she , or no ; the king council allege , he have , and prove it ; first , by prince Arthur speech , the nex• morning after his marriage , that •e have be that night in the midst of Spain ; and then by the word of the last Dis ? pensation , vel forsan cognitam : the queen advocate allege the contrary ; appeal to the king own conscience ; who the queen charge that he know she to be a virgin when he marry she ; ( though , to say the truth , i• be strange , prince Arthur and she have lie five month together , and he no less than almost sixteen year old . ) but while argument be thus urge on both side , and no certainty can appear ; the king send the two cardinal to the queen , lie then in Bridewell , to page 35 persuade she , she shall submit her self to the king pleasure , and not stand so peremptory to she appeal . the cardinal come to she find she at work among her maid , with a skain of white thread about her neck : who have hear their message , answer , that in all other thing she will willing sub ? mit she self to the king will , but in this which concern her honesty , and the legitimateness of her child , she dare not , but will rely upon the wisdom and piety of both their father , who ( she know ) will never have assent to the marriage , if there have be the least scruple of unlawfulness in it ; and othe• answer she will not give . upon their return to the king , when he perceive she can not be remove from her opinion ; he command the court to go on ; so that at last it come to judgement , which every man expect shall be the next day . at which day the king come thither ( but in so secret manner that he may hear and not be see ) where the king council at the bar call ? ling for judgement ; cardinal Campeius , as be chief commissioner , stand up and say ; i find the case very doubtful , and the party defendant stand to she appeal , i will therefore give no judgement , till i have confer with the pope ; and therefore i adjour•e the court for this time , accord to the order of the court of Rome , which hear no cause judicial from the last of July till the four of October ; at which protraction of time , king Henry be not a little angry , and the duke of Suffolk be present , in a great rage say ; it be never merry in England , since we have cardinal among we . Soon after this , the cardinal take his leave of the king , and return to roam : he be indeed command so to do by the pope , who will else most willing have gratify king hen•y , that have bestow upon he the bishopric of Salisbu ? ry . while these thing be in act , cardinal Woolsey have a inkling of the king affection to Anne Bullen , daughter of the viscount Rochfort ; and that the divorce once pass , he mean to marry she ; which match , because for many reason , he mislike ; one perhaps , because she be a lutheran , he send privy to the pope , that by no mean he shall give sentence for the divorce , till he have frame the king mind another way ; for his desire be , that the king shall marry the duchess of Alanson , the french king sister . This pack of Woolsey be not so close carry , but that it soon come to the king knowledge ; and the king find he a rub in his way , who he expect to have expedit his proceed , begin to think it necessary to re ? move he , and to take he off from that greatness which have make he so presume ; and indeed he make short work with he ; for soon after he send the duke of Norfolk and Suffolk to he for the seal , which yet he will not deliver to they , till they bring he a warrant under the king own hand . when the seal be bring to the king , he deliver it to sir Thomas Moore , speaker then of the parliament ( the first layman that bear that office in any memory ; ) and in his room be choose speaker Thomas Audley , attorney of the duchy . Woolsey now remove from his Chaun ? cellourship ; be in the parliament then hold , charge with point of treason ; but that charge be so clear take off by his servant Thomas crumb ? well , who be then of the house , that the cardinal be acquit , to the great commendation of Cromwell , both for ability in himself , and faithful ? ness to his master . after this , the king be inform , that all those thing which the car ? dinall have do by his power legantine , be within the case of Praeme ? nire ; he cause his attorney Christopher hale to sue out a praemunire against he ; and thereupon the two duke of Norfolk and Suffolk be send unto he , to let he know , the king pleasure be , he shall go to Asher , a house near to hampton-court , belong to his bishopric of Winchester , and there to reside : whereupon , the cardinal have first deliver up all his movable to the king use ; ( the great store and rich that be ever know of any subject ) go present to Putney by page 36 water , and from thence ride to Asher , where he and his family continue three or •oure week , without either bed , sheet , table-loathes or dish to eat their meat in , or money wherewith to buy any , but what he be force to borrow of the bishop of Carlile . after this , his matter for the praemunire be ? king call upon in the king bench , his two attorney confess the action , and thereupon have judgement to forfeit all his land and good , and to be out of the king protection ; but the king of his clemency , send he a sufficient pro ? tection , and leave he the bishopric of York and Winchester , with plate and stuff convenient for his dignity . his bishopric of duresme be give to doctor Tunstall , bishop of London ; his abbey of saint Alban to the prior of Norwich , and the bishopric of London to doctor Stokestey , ambassador then beyond the sea . in this mean while , Margaret duchess of Savoy , aunt to the emperor , and the lady Loyis duchess of angoulesme , mother to the french king , meet at Cambray to treat of a peace between the emperor , the pope and the king of England and France , where be present doctor Tunstall bishop of London , and sir Thomas Moore , than chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster , Com ? missioner for the king of England : after long debate , through the diligence of the say lady , a peace be conclude ; and be thereof call , the woe ? man peace ; and be indeed as fickle as woman , for it be soon break , and neither of the prince trust the other ere the more for it . king Henry before this time have be whole rule by the cardinal and by the clergy , but now grow sensible of that error , he call his high Cour• of parliament ; in which the commons complain sharp of their grievan ? ces against the clergy , special in six thing . the first , for that they exact unreasonable sum of money , as due fee , for the probate of man last will and testament : in so much , that sir hen ? ry Guildford knight of the garter , and comptroller of the king house declare open , that he and other be executer to sir William Comp ? ton ; pay for the pro•ate of his will to the cardinal , and the archbishop of Canterbury a thousand mark . the second , the extreme exaction , which spiritual man use in take of corpse , or mortuary . the three , that spiritual man become farmour of great grange and farm : to the prejudice of husbandman and grazier . the four , because many abbot , priors , and other spiritual man , keep tan-house , and buy and sell wool , cloth , and other ware , as tempo ? rall merchant . the five , because such clergy man as have the best live , will take the uttermost of their right , and yet live in the court or in noble man or bishop house , where they spend nothing . the six , because diverse ignorant man among they , hold ten or twelve benefice to themselves several , and yet live not upon any one of they , but keep great scholar at small pension . Theise thing before this time may not be touch , because the bishop be chancelour , and have all the rule about the king : but now the king look better into •he matter , give way to these complaint : whereupon the burgess draw up three bill ; one of the probate of testament , another for mortuary : and the three , for nonresidence , plurality , and take of farm by spiritual man . the bill of mortuary , pass first the house of commons , and be send up to the lord : within two day after , be send up the bill of probate of testament , at which the archbishop of Canterbury , and a•l the bishop much frown , but special John fisher bishop of Rochester who rise up and say ; my lord , you see what bill come daily from the common house , and all be to the destruction of the church , for god sake , consider what a realm Bohemia be , and when the church go down , then fall the glory of that kingdom . page 37 now with our commons be nothing but down with the church ; and all this i seem , be for lack of faith only . when these word be report to the house of commons , they take the matter very heinous , and thereupon send their sp•aker Thomas Audeley , with thirty of the house , to the king , come ? plain what a dishonour to the king and to the whole realm it be to say , that they which be elect for the wise man of all shire , shall be charge to lack faith , which be all one as to say , they be infidel and no Chrystians , so as what act or law soever they make shall be take as law make by Paynims and heathen , and not worthy to be keep by christian man . and there ? fore humble beseech his majesty , to call the say bishop of Rochester before he , to give account of the word he have speak . whereupon within few day after , the king send for the bishop , and acquaint he with the commons complaint against he ; who excuse himself , by say he mean the do of the bohemians be for lack of faith , and not the do of the house of Com ? mons ; of which excuse , the king send word to the house by sir William fitz-williams treasurer of his household , but it please the commons nothing at all . after diverse meeting between the lord and the commons , about the bill of probate of testament and mortuary , the temporalty lay to the spiritualty their own law and constitution , and the spiritualty defend they , by pre ? scription and usage ; to who a gentleman of grays-inne make this answer , the usage have ever be of thief , to rob on shooter hill ; be it therefore lawful ? while these bill be in debate , a act be pass , which release to the king all such sum of money as he have borrow at the loan , in the fifteen year of his reign ; which bill at first be much oppose , but the most part of the house be the king servant , it be at last assent to , which once know in the country abroad , make much murmur , and the Parlia ? mean to be ill speak of ; for every man count it as a sure debt , so as some make their will of the money , and some turn it over in satisfaction to their ere ? ditour . to qualify which grievance , the king grant a general pardon for all offence ( certain except ) and be a mean also to have the three bill pass ; one for probate of testament , another for mortuary ; and the three , against plurality of benefice ; nonresidence , buy and take of farm by spiritual person , though this last with some qualify . during this parliament , the king create Viscount Rochfort , earl of will ? shire , the viscount fitz-vvater earl of Sussex , and the lord Hastings earl of Huntington . by this time , the lord of the upper house , have draw certain article a ? against the cardinal , and send they down to the house of commons , the chief whereof be these . first , that without the king assent , he have procure himself to be make a legate , by reason whereof he take away the right of all bishop and spiri ? tuall person . second , that in all his write which he write to roam , or to any foreign prince he write ego et rex meus , i and my king ; so prefer himself before the king . third , that without the king assent , he carry the great seal of England with he into Flanders . four , that have the french-pox , he presume to come and breathe upon the king . five , that he cause the cardinals-hat to be put upon the king coin . sixthly , that he will not suffer the king clerk of the market to sit at saint Albanes . seven , that he have send infinite store of treasure to roam , for purchase of his dignity . Theise article be read in the house , and if not otherwise prove , yet con ? fess page 38 afterward under the cardinal own hand , which add to the former praemunire ; all his land and good be seize on to the king use . this parliament be end , the king remove to Greenwich , and there keep his Christmas with his queen Katherine in great state ; for though this mat ? ter of make void the marriage between they , be hot pursue by the king ; yet abstain only from her bed , he converse with she still , and they keep court together , in as love manner as they have do before . and now king Henry understand that the pope and the emperor be to meet at Bologna , he send ambassador thither , the earl of Wiltshire , doctor Stokesley elect of London , and doctor lee , to declare both to the pope and to the emperor , the opinion of diverse learned man in the matter of his marriage ; who all a ? agree that it be against the law of God ; and thereupon require the pope to do he justice ; and show to the emperor , that the king move this matter for discharge of his conscience only , and to no other end . to which the pope answer , that when he come to roam , he will hear the matter this ? put , and do the king right . the emperor answer , that he will in no case be against the law of God , and if this marriage be judge such by the court of Rome , he will rest content : with these answer the Embassa ? dour return . it be now the two and twenty year of king Henry reign , when the emperor give to the master of saint John of Jerusalem the island of Maltas , in supply of the island of Rodes , which the Turk sometime before have win from that order . in this year , the new testament have be translate into english , by Tindall , joy , and other , be forbid to be read ; and many for read it , be sharp punish by command of the bishop and sir Thomas moor than lord chancellor ; but none be more violent in the matter then the bishop of London , who cause all the book to be bring into Paul churchyard , and there burn . king Henry have hear by good information , that when Campeius be send Legat into England , he have bring with he a bull of di•orce ; but be after ? ward upon change of the pope mind , command to burn it ; see plain by this , that the pope have no meaning of proceed real in the matter , but to keep it a foot for his own end ; neither to displease the empour by grant it , nor king Henry by not grant it , but promise expedition to keep he in expectance ; yet use delay to keep he in dependence ; and therefore resolve now to take such a course , that he shall not need to care whether the pope grant it or no ; and thereupon cause a proclamation to be publish , that no person of what estate or condition soever shall purchase , or at ? tempt to purchase from the court of Rome , any thing prejudicial to the jurisdiction , or prerogative of this his realm , upon pain of imprison ? mean , and other punishment at his grace pleasure ; and short after a act be make , that bishop shall pay no more annat , or money for bull to the pope ; for as much as it be prove , there have be pay for bull of by ? shop , since the four year of king Henry the seven , a hundred and three ? score thousand pound , beside what have be pay for pardon and other this ? pensation . another act be then also make , that no person , shall appeal for any cause , out of this realm to the court of Rome , but from the come ? missary to the bishop , and from the bishop to the archbishop , and from the archbishop to the king : and all cause of the king , to be try in the upper house of the convocation . at this time , the cardinal lie still at Asher , and his adversary doubt l•ast lie so near the king , he may one time or other get access to the king presence , and come again into favour ; they use mean to have he send further off , and thereupon the king appoint he to go to his diocese of York , and not to come southward without special licence , whereupon page 39 in Lent he make great preparation for his journey , and have in his train to the number of a hundred and threescore person : by easy journey come to Pedro ? terborrow , and there keep his easter ; the week after he go to Stamford then to Newark , and so to Southwell , where he continue most part of all that sum ? mer : and then ride to Seroby , where he stay till Michaelmas and then come to Cawood castle , within seven mile of York where he keep a plentiful house for all comer : and repair the castle , be great in decay , have above three hundred artificer in daily wage . at last , he determine to be install at York , the next Monday after alhallan-day ; against which time great pre ? paration be make , and the cardinal send to the king , to lend he the miter and pall , which he use to wear at any great solemnity . at which p•esumption the king marvele not a little ; say to those that be about he , what a thing be this , that pride shall thus reign in a man that be quite under foot ? but before the day of instalment come ; he be arrest in this manner ; sir Walter welsh one of the king privy-chamber , be send down to the Earl• of Northumberland , with who he be join in commission to arrest the car ? dinall ; whereupon they go together to Cawood , where the cardinal lie : and be enter into the house , it be tell the cardinal , that the earl of nor ? thumberland be come , and in the hall ; then ( quoth the cardinal ) i be sorry we have dine , for i doubt our officer be not provide of any good cheer . with that , he go and bring the earl up , welcome he in a come ? plementall manner , as if he have come but only to visit he : but be come into the chamber , the earl with a soft voice , lay his hand upon the car ? dinals arm , say ; my lord , i arrest you of high treason : the cardinal some ? what astonish , ask to see his commission , which the earl deny to show ; then ( say the cardinal ) i will not obey your arrest ; at that instant master Walsh come in , and kneel down to the cardinal ; who ask he if he be join in commission with the earl ; who answer , he was• well then , say the cardinal , i trow you be one of the king privy chamber , your name be Walsh ; i be content to yield to you , but not to my lord of Northumberland , unless i see his commission : the mean of the king privy-chamber be suf ? ficient to arrest the great peer of the realm , by the king command ? mean , without any commission . then the earl take the cardinal key from he , and put he in custody of his gentleman : some few day after , he be convey from Cawood to Pomfret , and after to Sheffield park , where he have kind entertainment , and stay with the earl of Shrewsbury and his lady eigh ? ten day ; till at last sit one day at dinner , his colour be observe to change , and be ask how he do ; not well ( say he ) i have something shall ? den at my stomach , as cold as a whetstone , which i know be wind ; i desire to have something from the apothecary , to break wind ; which be bring , and the earl see the say take , he take it , and thereupon break wind in ? deed ; but whether it be he take it in too great a quantity , or that there be some foul play use , he fall soon after into such a looseness , that the night follow he have above fifty stool ; yet the next day he ride to Nottingham , and the day after to Leicester abbey ; be so sick by the way , that he be ready to fall off his mule ; come to the abbey gate , the abbot with all the covent meet he ; to who he say , father abbot , i be come hither to lay my bone among you ; and then be lead up into his chamber , and go to bed ; where grow sick and sick ; the next morning master Kingston lie•te ? nant of the tower , who have be send to bring he up , come to he , and a•king he how he do ; i do but tarry ( say he ) the pleasure of God , to ren ? der up my poor soul into his hand ; for this be my case , i have a flux with a continual fever , the nature whereof be , that if there be no amendment with ? in eight day , either excoriation of the entrails will ensue , or frenzy , or else present death ; and the best of they be death ; and ( as i suppose ) this be the eight day . sir ( say master Kingston ) you be afraid of that you have no cause ; page 40 for i assure you , the king command i to say unto you , that you shall be of good cheer , for that he bear you as much good will as ever he do ; no , no ( master Kingston ) say the cardinal , i see how it be frame ; but if i have serve God as diligent as i have do the king , he will not have give i over in my grey hair ; but it be a just reward for my study to do he service , not regard the service of God , to do he pleasure ; and have so say , his speech fail , and incontinent the clock strike eight , and then he give up the ghost ; which make some about he to remember , how he have say the day before : that at eight of the clock they shall loose their master . be dead , he be bury in the abbey of Leicester . this man hold at once the bishop ? rick of York , Winchester , and Durhan , the dignity of lord cardinal Lega• and chancellor of England , the abbey of saint Alban , diverse priory , and sundry great benefice in commendum : he have also in his hand , as it be in farm , the bishopric of bath , VVorcester and Here•ord , which have be give by king Henry the seven to stranger , that live out of the realm , they suffer Woolsey to enjoy they , receive of he a pension only . the re•inue of this pre•ate be scarce credible , a thousand person daily in his household , of who many knight and some lord ; all which greatness as it come by the king favou• , so by the withdraw of his favour , it be overthrow : so true be that say of Salomon , the king favour be as due upon the grass ; but his wrath be as the roar of a lion , and as a messenger of death . after this the king remove from hampton-court to Greenwich , where with his queen ka ? therine he keep a solemn Christma• , and on twelve night he sit in state in the hall , where be diverse interlude ; costly masque , and a sumptuous banquet . after Christmas he come to his manor of Westminster , which before be call ? lead York place ; for the cardinal have make a feoffment of it to the king , which the chapter of York confirm , and then it be no more call York place , but the king manor of Westminster , now VVhitehall . at this time the whole clergy of England be charge by the king lear ? ned council , to be in a praemunire , for support and maintain the car ? dinals legatine power ; and be thereupon call by process into the king bench to answer ; but before their day of appearance come , they in their con ? vocation conclude a humble submission in write , and offer the king a hundred thousand pound to have their pardon by parliament ; which offer , of ? ter some labour , be accept , and their pardon promise . in which submission the clergy call the king supreme head of the church . this pardon be sign with the king hand , and send to the lord , who assent to it ; and then send it to the low house : but here , diverse of the house except against the pardon , unless themselves also may be include in it ; who ( they say ) have have something to do with the cardinal , may be bring into the same case as the clergy be . hereupon their speaker Thomas Audeley , with a convenient number of the house , be send to the king about it ; to who the king make answer , that he be their sovereign lord , and will not be come ? pell to show his mercy ; and see they go about to restrain he of his liberty , he will grant a pardon to the clergy , which he may do by his great seal without they ; and for their pardon , he will be advise before he grant it : with this answer the speaker and commons return , much grieve and discontent ; and some say that Thomas Cromwell , who be new ? lie come into the king favour , have disclose the secret of the house , which make the king give this unpleasing answer . but soon after the king of his own accord , cause their pardon also to be draw , and sign it• which easy pass ? sed both house , with great commendation of the king judgement , to deny it at first when it be demand as a right , and to grant it afterward , when it be receive as of grace . in this parliament time , on the thirty of march , sir Thomas Moore lord chancellor , with twelve of the lord , come into the low house , acquain ? ting page 41 they , that though in the matter of the king divorce , he may sufficient rest upon the judgement of learned man in his own university of Oxford and Cambridge , yet to avoid all suspicion of parciality , he have send into France , ita ? lie , the pope dominion , and the venetian , to have their opinion ; and then cause they to be read , sir Bryan Tuke take out of a box certain write seal , which be the determination of the university of Orleans , of pa ? ris , of Anjou , of Burges , of Bolonia , of Padua , and of Thoulouse : all which be peremptory in these two point ; that the brother , by the law of God , may not marry the relict of his brother ; and then , be against the law of God , that it be not in the power of the pope to dispense with it : and now ( say they ) you may know , that the king have not seek this divorce for his pleasure ; but for discharge of his conscience ; and this say , they depart . the king he ? self , when he hear of these determination , be so far from rejoice at it , that he rather mourn , as for the loss of so good a wife ; yet he converse with she as he have do before , in nothing alter but in abstain from her bed . but be willing the queen shall know these determination ; in whitsonweeke after , he send diverse lord to acquaint she with they ; requi ? •ing she thereupon to recall she appeal , and to refer the matter to eight in ? different lord ; which she utter refuse , use her usual answer , that she be his lawful wife , and will abide the determination of the court of Rome , but of no other . after Whitsuntide , the king and queen remove to Windsor , and there continue till the fourteenth of July , on which day the king remove to Woodstock and leave the queen at Windsor , where she remain a while , and after remove to Easthamsted , whither the king send to her diverse lord , first to persuade she to be conformable to the law of God ; which if they can not do , than to let she know , that his pleasure be , she shall be at either of these three place , his manor of ok , or of easthampstead , or the monastery of Bisham , and there to continue without further molest he with her suit . and now come Cranmer in to play his part . it chance that doctor Ste ? phe•s , doctor fox and he meet at Waltham one day at dinner ; where fall into discourse , about the case then in agitation , of the king marriage with queen Katherine ; the other doctor think the marriage may be prove unlawful by the civil law : ( but ( say Cranmor ) • it may better be prove by the law of God , and it be no hard matter to do it ; which word of his be make know to the King•Cranmor be send for , and command to set his reason down in wri ? ting : which have do , and show they to the king ; he be ask whether he will stand to that which he have write : who answer , he will , even be ? before the pope himself , if his majesty please : marry ( say the king ) and to pope you shall go ; and thereupon send he to the court of Rome , and with he Thomas Bullen earl of Witshire , doctor Stokesley elect of London , Doct. Lee the king almoner , and other : who come to Bolonia where the pope be , have a day of audience appoint , but be hinder by a ••diculous accident ; for the pope hold out his foot for they to kiss his toe , as the manner be , a dog of the earl , by chance in the room , run and catch the pope foot in his mouth , and make it for that time unfit to kiss . after this , when Cranmor have make his propositi ? on , he be tell , it shall be answer when the pope come to roam : so the Em ? bassador be dismiss , and Cranmor go to the Emperour• court ; where in private conference he satisfy Cornelius Agrippa , the most learned at that time about the emperor , and bring he to be of his opinion . Cranmor return home , and give the king this satisfaction ; the king marriage with queen ka ? therine be soon after dissolve by parliament , and the bishop of Canterbury ac ? company with doctor Stokesley bishop of London , Stephen Gardiner bishop of Winchester , the bishop of bath and Lincoln , and other learned man , ride to Dunstable where queen Katherine then lie ; where be cite to appear , and make default fifteen day together , for lack of appearance , she be divorce from the king , and the marriage declare to be void and of none effect ; and from page 42 thenceforth it be decree , she shall no more be call queen , but princess dowager : after which time , the king never see she more . at this time , be the four and twenty year of king Henry reign , sir Thomas Moore , after long suit , deliver up the great seal , which be then delive ? read to Thomas Audeley speaker of the parliament ; and he make first lord Kee ? per , and short after chancellor ; in who room of speaker , H•nfrey wing ? •eld of grayes-inne be choose on the first of September this year : the king be ? king at Windsor , create Anne Bullen marchioness of Pembroke , give she a thousand pound land a year : and then be desirous to talk with the king of France in person , on the ten of October , take the say lady with he , and di ? vers lord , as the duke of Norfolk and Suffolk , the marquess of Dorset and Excester , the earl of Arundel , Oxford , Surrey , Essex , Derby , Rutland , Sussex and Huntington , with diverse viscount , baron and knight , he sail over to Callice ; and on the twenty of October me• with the king of France at Bol ? loigne , with who he stay four day ; in which time , to do he honour , the king of France honour the two duke of Norfolk and Suffolk with the order of saint Michael , and then both king go to Callice , where the french king stay certain day ; in which time to do the king of France honour , king Henry honour two of his great lord with the order of the garter , and then after great magnificence in revel and feast , on the twenty of Ostob . the french king depart from Callice , and king Henry return into England , where on the fourteenth of November follow , he marry secret the lady Anne Bulle•• which marriage be not open know till easter after , when it be perceive she be with child ; at which time William Warham archbishop of Canterbury die , Thomas Cranmor be elect archbishop in his room . after that the king perceive his new wi•e to be with child , he cause all officer necessary to be appoint to she ; and so on easter eave she go to her closet open as queen , and then the king appoint her coronation to be keep on Witsunday follow ; and write be send to all sheriff , to certify the nam of man of forty pound , to receive the order of knighthood , or else to mak• fine : the assessment of which •ines be appoint to Thomas Cromwell master of of the jewelhouse , and of the king council ; a man new come in the King• favour , by who industry great sum of money be by such fine gather . in the begin of May , the king cause proclamation to be make , that all man who claim to do any service at the coronation , by the way of tenure , gran• , or prescription , shall put in their claim three week after easter in the star-chamber , before Charles duke of Suffolk , for that time high steward of Eng ? land , the lord chancellor and other commissioner . two day before the coronation be make knight of the bath , the earl of Dorset , the ea•le of der•y , the lord Clifford , the lord Fitzwater , the lord Hastings , the lord Monteagle , the lord Vaux , sir John Mordant , sir Henry Parker ; sir William Windsor , sir Francis Weston , sir Thomas Arundel , sir John Hurlson , sir Thomas Poynings , sir Henry Savill , sir George •itzwilliams , sir John Tindall , and sir tho : I•rmey . on Whitsunday the Coronatio• be keep in as great state and ? ? ? for all circumstance as ever an• be , and the day after a solemn Just• be •olden . in may this year pope Clement send a messenger to king Henry , require he personal to appear at the general council , which he have appoint to be keep the year follow ; but when his commission be show , there be nei ? the time nor place specify for keep of the say council ; and so with a uncertain answer to a uncertain demand , the messenger depart . it be now the five and twenty year of the king reign , when on midso ? mer day , mary the french queen , and then wife to Charles duke of suff•lke , die ; and be bury at saint edmund-berry ; and on the seven of September follow , between three and four a clock in the afternoon , the queen be deliver of a daughter that be name Elizabeth ; the godfather at the Christ ? ning be the archbishop of Canterbury ; the godmother the old duchess of page 43 Norfolk , and the old marchioness Dorset widow ; and at the confirmation , the lady marchioness of Excester : the christen be perform with ex ? ceed great state , and great gift be give by the gossip . this year , one Pavier the townclerk of London hang himself , ( who Hollinshead say ) he hear once swear a great oath ; that if he think the thought the king will set forth the scripture in English , rather than he will live to see that day , he will cut his own throat : which i there ? before relate , that the judgement of God may be see upon such unhallow ? ed oath . a little before this time one Elizabeth Barton , name the holy maid of Kent , come to be discover ; who abettor be Richard master a priest , parson of Aldington in Kent , Edward Bocking doctor of divinity , a monk of Canterbury , Richard Deering a monk , Edward thwayt gentleman , Henry gold parson of aldermary , huge rich a friar observant , Richard Risby and Thomas gold , gentleman . this maid have learn to counterfeit fall in ? to trance ; in which she will deliver many strange thing , and among other , say , that by revelation from God and his saint she be inform ; that if king Henry proceed to the divorce , and marry another , he shall not be king of England one month after . and here we may see how credu ? love oftentimes great scholar be in believe imposture , when VVarham archbishop of Canterbury , and fisher bishop of Rochester be think to give credit to this counterfeit , that we need not wonder at saint Austin ; who though he give credit to many lie miracle , yet they be such as have moor pro ? bability in they then this ; which consist in nothing but make of face , as upon examination of the maid and her abettor be confess ; and thereupon she and most of they be condemn , draw to Tyburn and there hang . in this mean time the Scot have be troublesome , and make inroad upon the border ; till at last , Commissioners be send to treat of agreement ; a peace be conclude , to continue both the king life ; which on the twenty of May this year , be open proclaim . about this time , at the suit of the lady Katherine dowager , a bull be send from the pope , which curse both the king and the realm ; which bull be set up in the town of Dunkirk in Flanders , the messenger not dare to come near : and because it be know that the lady Dowager have procure this curse to be send , the duke of Suffolk be send to she , lie then at Bugden beside Huntington , to discharge a great part of her household servant ; yet leave she a convenient number , like a princess . it be now the six and twenty year of king Henry reign , when in a par ? liament hold , a act be make for establish the succession in the crown , upon the lady Elizabeth ; to which , first all the lord , knight and burgess be swear ; and after commissioner be send into all part of the realm , to take the oath of all man and woman to the say act another act be also make , which authorize the king to be supreme head of the church of Eng ? land , and the pope authority to be utter abolish . but doctor John fish ? er , bishop of Rochester , sir Thomas Moore knight , and doctor Wilson parson of saint Thomas Apostles in London , express deny at Lam•eth , before the archbishop of Canterbury , to take the oath ; of who doctor Wilson recan ? t , but the other two persist in their opinion , be both of they behead . of these two bishop fisher be much lament , as repute a man both of great learning and good life . the pope have elect he cardinal , and his hat be come as farr• as Callice , but before it can come into England his head be off . sir Thomas Moore be both learned and very wise , but so give to a vain of jest ? ing and merry scoff , that he can not refrain it at the very time of his death : as when he be carry to the tower , be demand his upper garment ( measure ? ning his gown ) you shall have it , say he , and give they his cap ; say , it page 44 be the uppermost garment he have : also , when be upon the scaffold , the hangman kneel down and ask he forgiveness ; i forgive thou ( say he ) but i promise thou , thou will never have credit by cut off my head , my neck be so short : and when he be to lay his head down upon the block , have a great grey beard , he stroke it out , and say to the hangman , i pray you let i lay my beard over the block , lest you shall cut it ; for though you have warrant to cut off my head , you have none to cut my beard . but his devotion be no jest matter , for he use to wear a shirt of hair next his skin , for a perpetual pen•ance ; and oftentimes in the church he will put on a surplice , and help the priest to say mass ; which he forbear not to do even when he be lord chancellor of England ; as one time the duke of nor ? folk come to the church find he do it . two memorable thing be record of he ; one , which show his great integrity , and the small recko ? ning he make of riches ; that have pass through so many great employ ? ment , and bear so many great office ; yet in all his time , •e never purchase above one hundred pound land a year , nor leave any great stock of money be ? hind he , when he die . the other , which show his filial piety , that be ? king lord chancellor of England , at the same time that his father wa• a judge of the king bench , he will always at his go to Westminster , go first to the king bench and ask his father blessing , before he go to sit in the chancery . the nine of July , this year , the lord Dacres of the north be arraign at Westminster of high treason , before the duke of Norfolk , as high steward of England ; his indictment be read , he so answer every part and matter therein contain , that by his peer he be find not guilty ; a rare thing to stop a currant that run with such violence . the one and twenty of September doctor Taylour master of the roll , be discharge of that office ; and the nin ? teenth of October follow , Thomas Cromwell be swear in his place . this year the king of Scots be install knight of garter , by his deputy the lord Erskin and Stephen Gardiner , who after the cardinal death , be make bishop of Winchester , be send ambassador Legier , into France , where he remain three year . also in January , of this year , Katherine Princesse Dowage• , fall into her last sickness ; to who the king send the emperor ambassador Legier , desire she to be of good comfort ; but she find her death to approach , cause only one of her gentlewoman to write a letter to the king ; commend to he her daughter and he , and beseech he to be a good father to she ; and then desire he further , to have some conside ? ration of her servant . on the eight of January , at Kimbolton , she depart this life , and be bury at Peterborough . a woman of so virtuous a life , and of so great obsequiousness to her husband , that from her only merit , be grow a reputation to all spanish wife . also the nine and twenty of January , this year , queen Anne be deliver of a child before her time , which be bear dead . and now king Henry begin to fall into tho•e great disorder , which have be the blemish of his life , and have make he be blot out of the Cata ? logue of our best prince ; for first , in October this year , he send d•ctor lee and other , to •isit the abbey , priory , and nunnery in England ; who set at liberty all those religious person , that will forsake their habit , and all that be under th• age of four and twenty year ; and in December follow , a survey be take of all chantry , and the name of such , as have the gift of they . after which , in a parliament hold the four of February , a act be make , which give to the king all religious house , with all their land and good , that be of the value of three hundred mark a year and under : the ••mber of which house , be three hundred seventy and six : the value of their land year , above two and thirty thousand pound , their movable good , one hundred thousand , the religious person put out of the same house page 45 above ten tho•sand . this year , William Tindall , be burn at a town in Flanders , between Brussels and Mechlyn , call Villefort , for translate into English the new testament , and diverse part of the old ; who have be long imprison , be upon the lord cromwell' write for his deliverance , in all haste , bring to the fire , and burn . it be now the eight and twenty year of king Henry reign , when on Monday , there be solemn joust hold at Geeenwich , from whence the king sudden depart , and come to Westminster , who sudden departure strike great amazement into many , but to the queen especial , and not without cause ; for the next day , the lord Rochfort her brother , and Henry Norris be bring to the tower of London , prisoner , whither also the same day at five a clock in the afternoon , be bring queen anne she self , by sir Thomas Audeley lord chancellor , the duke of Norfolk , Thomas Cromwell secretary , and sir William Kingston lieutenant of the tower , who at the tower-gate , fall on her knee before the say lord , beseech God to help she , as she be innocent of that whereof she be accuse : on the •ifteenth of May , she be be ? reign in the tower , before the duke of Norfolk , sit as high steward of England . when her indictment be read , she make unto it so wise and this ? creet answer , that she seem full to clear her self of all matter lay to her charge : but be try by her peer , whereof the duke of Suffolk be chief ; she be by they find guilty , and have judgement pronounce by the duke of Nor•olke ; immeadiat the lord Rochfort her brother , be likewise arraign and condemn : who on the seaventeenth of May , together with Henry Norris , mark Smeton , William Briorton , and Francis VVeston , all of the king privy-chamber , about martyr touch the queen , be behe•de• on the tower-hill , queen Anne her self on the nineteenth of May , on a Sca• ? fold upon the green within the tower , be behead with the sword of Callice by the hangman of that town ; her body with the head , be bury in the choir of the chapel there . this queen anne , be the daughter of Thomas Bullen earl of VViltshire , and of lady Elizabeth daughter of Thomas Howard duke of Nor•olke ; the Earles father be the son of sir William Bullen , who wife be Margaret the second daughter and coheir of Thomas butler ealre of Ormond , and the say sir William , be the son of sir Godfrey Bullen , lord major of London , who lie bury in saint Leonards church in the jewelry , who wife be anne elder daughter and coheir to Thomas lord Hoo and Hastings : and his descent be out of the house of the Bullen in the county of Norfolk ; thus much for her parentage : for her religion , she be a •arnest professor , and one of the first countenancer of the gospel : in almsdeed so liberal , that in nine month space ; it it be say , she distribute among the poor , to the value of fifteen thousand pound : now for the crime for which she die , ( adultery and incest : ) proof of her guiltiness there be none record : of her innocency , many ; first , her own clear of all objection , at the time of her arraignment : then cromwell write to the king , after full ex ? amination of the matter ; that many thing have be object , but none con ? fess , only some circumstance have be acknowledge by mark Smeton : ( and what be mark Smeton , but a mean fellow , one that upon promise of life , will say any thing ; and have say something , which they take hold of be soon after execute lest he shall retract it : ) last , they that be ac ? cuse with she , they all deny it to the death : even Henry Norris , who the king special favour , and promise he pardon if he will but confess it . it be a poor proof of incest with her brother , that come one morning into her chamber before she be up , he lean down upon her bed , to say some ? thing in her ear ; yet this be take hold of for a proof : and it need be no mar ? veil if we consider the many adversary she have ; as be a protestant , and perhaps in that respect , the king himself not great her friend : ( for though he have exclude the pope , yet he continue a papist still : and then who know page 46 not , that nature be not more able of a acorn to make a oak , than authority be able of the least surmise , to make a certainty . but howsoever it be , that her death be contrive : certain it be , that it cast upon king Henry a dishonourable imputation ; in so much , that where the protestant prince of Germany have resolve to choose he for head of their league ; after they hear of this queen death , in such a manner , they utter refuse he as unworthy of the honour : and it be memorable what conceit queen anne she self have of her death ; for at the time , when she be lead to be behead in the Tower• she call one of the king privy-chamber to she , and say unto he , commend i to the king , and tell he ; he be constant in his course of advance i , for from a private gentlewoman , he make i a marquess , from a marquess , a queen ; and now , that he have leave no high degree of worldly honour for i , he have make i a martyr . immediate after her death , in the week before whi••on•ide , the king marry Jane Seymour , daughter to sir John Seymour , who at Whitsuntide be open show as queen : and on the Tuesday in the whitsonweeke her brother sir Edmund Seymour , be create Viscount Beauchamp , and sir Walter Hangerford , be make lord Hangerford . the eight of June , the parliament begin ; during the which , the lord tho ? mass Howard , without the king assent , have affiance the lady Margaret thou ? glass , daughter to the queen of Scot , and niece to the king : for which he be attaint of treason , and a act be make for like offender hereafter ; and so he die in the tower , and she long time remain there a prisoner ; yet afterward be set at liberty , and marry Matthew earl of Lenox , who by he have Henry , father of Iames the first king of great Britain . in the time of this parliament , the bishop and all the clergy have a solemn convocation at Paul church in London ; where after much disputation and debate of matter , they publish a book of religion ; entitle , article devise by the king highness : in which book be special mention but three sacrament : namely baptism , eucharist , and penance ; also certain injunction be set forth , whereby many of the old holiday be abro ? gated , special those that fall in harvest time . the two and twenty of July , Henry duke of Richmond and Somerset , base son of king Henry by Elizibeth blunt , die at saint Iames , and be bury at thets•one in Norfolk . the nine and twenty of June the king hold a great joust and triumph at Westminster , but a disastrous sea-fight on the water ; where one gate a gentl•man be drown in his harness , and by the break of a gun two mariner be sore maim : in July follow , Thomas Cromwell , secretary to the king , and master of the roll , be make lord keeper of the privy-seal : and the ninteenth of July the lord fitz-warren be create earl of bath ; and the day after , the say Cromwell be make lord Cromwell ; and on the eighteenth of July , vic•r general under the king over the spiritualty ; who sit diverse time in the convocation house , among the bishop as head over they : and now be the state of religion in England come to a strange pass ; because always in pass , and have no consistence ; for at first , the authority of the pope be exclude in some case only , a while alter in all ; but yet his do ? ctrine be whole retain . afterwards , his doctrine come to be impugn , but in some few point only : a while after , in many more : that the fable of Proteu• may no long be a fable , when the religion in England may be his true Morral• : and indeed , it can be no otherwise ; the distance between the two religious be not possible to be pass per saltum ; but must be do by thou ? agree , which degree may be observe in the progress of the story : for where at first , it be permit only to read the bible in English , now it come to be permit , to pray in english ; for now in September , the lord Cromwell set forth injunction , to have the lord prayer , the have , the creed , the ten common ? dement , page 47 and all article of the christian-faith translate into english , and to be teach by all parson and curate to their parishioner : which innovation so stir up the people , that in Lincol•shire they assemble to the number of twenty thousand ; against who the king himself go in person , who win ? ••ng by persuasion their chief leader , bring the rest upon pardon to submit themselves : but when he have himself do the work of mercy ; he afterward send the duke of Suffolk , with sir Francis Brian , and sir John Russell to do the work of justice ; who cause Nicholas Melton , and a monk name he ? self captain cobbler , and thirteen other ( ringleader of the sedition , ) to be apprehend , and most of they to be execute . but this commotion be scarce appease , when present there rise another in the north-part , where forty thousand be assemble , give themselves out for a holy pilgrimage , where on one side of their ensign , they have Christ hang on the cross , on the other side , the cup and bread of the sacrament , as take arm only for maintenance of the faith of Christ , and deliverance of the holy church now oppress : but these be oppose by George earl of Shrewsbury , who have raise a army without commission , though to resist the rebel , yet begin to be much trouble , whither in so do he have not commit treason , and be never quiet till he have se•t to the king for pardon and commission to proceed : at which time a rumour be raise among his soldier , that the earl so well like the rebel cause , that what show soever he make , yet when it shall come to the trial , he will not stick to join with they and take their part : to remove which opinion out of their mind• , he cause all his soldier to come before he , and make his chaplain give he a oath ; by which he swear in their hear , to be true to the crown , and never to be assist to any re ? bell : to his aid be send the duke of Norfolk , with the marquis of Excetur• the earl of Huntington and Rutland : who with a mighty army approachi•g the rebel , beyond Doncaster , in the way towards York , attempt first to have pacify they without bloodshed ; but when no persuasion will serve , it be resolve of both side to come to a battle ; but see here the great goodness of God , for the night before the day appoint for battle , it happen that a little brook call Dun , run between the two army , upon a small rain grow to such a height , that it be not passable by either foot or horse ; so as the be ? mie have time to consider , and consider perhaps this miracle as send of God , they come to agreement , and upon pardon disband and return to their house : but in the mean time they have besiege the castle of Scarborough where the resolute carriage of sir Ralph Evens be memorable ; who hold the castle by only his own servant and tenant , and that , when for twenty day together , he have no other sustenance but bread and water : but all counterfeit ? motion be not yet appease , for at this very time , there be another great army assemble out of Cumberland , Westmoreland , and the north-part of Lan ? cashier , march southward ; but by the diligence of the earl of Derby , to who also the earl of Sussex be send , they be suppress , and their chief Leader• , as the abbo•s of Wally , Sauly , and other , apprehend and hang : but neither be there yet a end of commotion , for now in February Nicholas Mus ? grave , Thomas til•y , with o•hers to the number of twelve thousand , begin a rebellion , and be siege Carlile , but by the power of the city be first beat back , and then be encounter by the duke of Norfolk , who cause seventy four of they , by martiall-law •o be hang on the wall of Carlile : but nei ? there be there yet a end of commotion , for now in Setrington , Pickering , l•igh and Scarborough , begin a new rebellion , by procurement of Francis Bigot ; who have r•ised a great power , and mean to have take Hull , but by the industry of sir Ralph Ellarker , and the major of the town , threescore a• the rebel be take and hang , and the rest put to flight , and glad to be quiet : but neither yet be there a end of commotion , for in the latter end of this eight and twenty year , the lord Darcy , the lord Hussey , sir Robert constable sir John page 48 Bulmer and his wife , sir Thomas Percy brother to the earl of Northumberland , sir Stephen Hamilton , Nicholas tempest esquire , and other begin to conspire , although each of they before have be pardon by the king : but this as be but the fag end of commotion ; be soon suppress , the lord Darcy be behead on the tower-hill , the lord Hussey at lincol•e , sir Robert c•nstable be hang in chein at Hull , sir John Balmers paramout be burn in smith ? field , and most of the other be execute at Tyburn : Tantae molis erat , so great a matter it was• to make the realm be quiet , in so great innovation of religion . this year on saint georges-feast , the lord Cromwell be make knight of the garter , and on the twelve of October , which be saint edwards-eve• , at ha• ? ton-court , the queen be deliver of a son ; ( but with so hard a labour that she be fain to be rip ) the child be name Edward , who godfather at the christen be the archbishop of Canterbury and the duke of Norfolk , his godmother be his sister the lady mary : at his bishop , his godfather be the duke of Suffolk : on the eighteenth of October , he be make prince of Wales , duke of Cornwall and earl of Chester : but the birth of his son bring not so much joy to the king , as the death of his queen bring he sorrow ; for within two day after she die , and be bury at Windsor , and •o much be the king grief for her death , that he continue a widdawer two year after . it be not unworthy the relate , what a miserable dissolation befall the fa ? mily of the geraldynes or fitz-garret , ( earl of Kildare in Ireland ) about this time ; for Gerald fitz-garret , who have be ten year deputy in Ireland ; upon complaint of some fault , be send for over into England , where not make a satisfy answer , he be commit to the tower ; but before his commi•g over , have with the king leave , leave deputy there his own son , a youngman of not above twenty year of age , but yet ripe of understanding and fit for the pla•e : this young lord , hear that his father be commit prisoner to the tower ; and soon after , as the rumour increase , that he be put to death ; in rage to be revenge , rise up in arm ; and have five uncle in the cou•try ( man of great estimatio• ) draw they ( though some of they unwilling ) to take his part ; among other outrage he commit , the archbishop of dub ? lin be slay in his presence• the father in the tower hear hereof , with very grief die ; the son and his uncle , upon the king send a• army , be all either take or submit ; and be send for over into England , those of his uncle , that against their will have be draw into the action , have good hope of their life , till enter the ship of passage , which be call the cow ; they then present despair , because of a prophesy , that five son of a cer ? take earl shall be carry into England in the belly of a cow , and never after return : and indeed it fall out true , for through the malice of their adversary , ( exasperate the king against they and saying , there will never be quietness in Ireland , as long as any of the Geraldine be leave alive , ) they be all put to death : one only son of the family remain , a youth of thirteen year of age , who though at that time sick of the smallpox , yet make shift to save he ? self by flight ; flee first into France , and fright from thence , afterward into Flanders , and drive from thence , at last into Italy , where pr•oected by regin•ld pool , be that time make cardinal , by pope July the three , he be afterward , by this meane• , restore to his dignity and his patrimony . this year Edward Seymour , Viscount Beauchamp the queen brother , be create earl of Hartford , and sir William fitz-vvilliams lord admiral , be create earl of Southamton , master Paulet be make vice treasurer , sir John Russell be make controller of the king house , and diverse gentleman be make knight . in February diverse rood be take down by the king commandment , as the rood of Boxeley , call the rood of grace , which be make with vice to move the eye and lip , also the rood call saint saviour at Bermondsey page 49 abbey in Southwark , a•d diverse other : in may a friar observant , call Frier forest , who have take the oath of supremacy himself , yet private per ? swade other , that the king be not supreme head of the church ; be there ? upon examine , and for his defence say , that he take the oath with his outward man , but his inward man never consent to it ; but this answer serve not his turn from be condemn ; and on a pair of gallow prepare for he , in smith ? ••eld , he be hang by the middle , and armhole , all quick , and under the gallow be make a fire wherewith he be consume : a little before his exe ? cutio• , a huge great image be bring to the gallow , fetch out of wale , which the Welshman have in great reverence , call Darvell gatheren , of which there go a prophesy , that thi• image shall set a whole forest on fire , which be think to take effect , in •erring this friar forest on fire , and con ? sume he to nothing . in September , by the special motion of the lord Cromwell , all the notable image , unto which be make any special pilgrimage and offering , be take down and burn ; as the image of Walsingham , Ipswic• , VVorcester , the lady of VVilsdon , with many other , and forthwith by mean of the say crumb ? well all the order of friar and nun , with they cloister and house be suppress and put down : also the shrine of counterfeit saint ; among oh ? there|be , the shrine of Thomas Becket in the priory of christchurch be take to the king use , and his bone , scull and all which be there find , with a piece •roken out by the wound of his death , be all burn in the same church by command of the lord Cromwell : and the one and twenty of October , the church of Thomas Becket in London , call the hospital of saint Thomas of Acres be suppress : the sixteenth of November the Blackfriar in London be suppress ; the next day the vvhite-frier , the grayfriar , and the monk of the charterhouse , and so all the other immediate after , ? ? ? three ab ? bot resist , the abbot of Colechester , the Abbo• of Reding , and the abbot of Glastenbury , who therefore be all take and execute . the four and twenty of November the bishop of Rochester preach at paul's-cross , and there show the blood of Hales , affirm it to be no blood , but honey clarifi ? ed and colour with sa••ron , as it have be evident prove before the king and council . the number of monastery suppress , be six hundred forty five , beside fourscore and ten college , one hundred and ten hospital , and of chantry and free chapel two thousand three hundred seventy four . but now to make amends for the suppress of so many monastery , the king in ? stitute certain new bishopric , as at Westminster Oxford , Peter ? borough , Bristol , Chester and Gloster ; and assign certain canon and Prebends to each of they . the three of November Henry Courtney marquess of Exeter , and earl of Devonshire , Henry Poole lord Montacute , sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington , knight of the garter , and master of the king horse , and sir Edward Nevil , brother to the lord of Aburgeiney , be send to the tower , be accuse by sir Geoffry pool , the lord montacute brother , of high treason ; the• be in ? di•ed for devise to promote and advance one Reinold Poole to the crown , and put down king Henry . this pool be a near kinsman of the king ( be ? king the son of the lady Margaret countess of Salisbury , daughter and heir to George duke of Clarence ) he have be bring up by the king in learning , and make deane of excetur ; but be send after , to learn experience by travail , he grow so great a friend of the pope , that he become a enemy to king Henry , and for his enmity to the king , be by pope Iulius the three make cardinal ; for this man cause , the lord aforesaid be condemn , be all execute , the lord marquis , the lord Montacute , and sir Edward ne•ill , be ? head on the tower-hill , the nine of January , sir Nicholas Carew the three of march , two priest condemn with they be hang at Tyburn , sir Ieoffry pool though condemn also yet have his pardon . page 50 about thi• time one Nicholson alias Lambert , be accuse for deny the real presence in the sacrament , appeal to the king , and the king be co• ? tent to hear he ; whereupon a Thron• be set up in the hall of the king palace at Westminster , for the king to si• : and when t•e bishop have urge their argument , and can not prevail , than the king take he in hand , ho ? ping perhaps to have the honour of con•erting a heretic , when the bishop can not do it , and withal promise he pardon if he will recant ; but all will not do , Nicholso• remain obstin•te , the king miss his honour , the de ? linquent mist his pardon ; and short after be draw to Smithfield and there burn . about this time king Henry be inform that the pope , by instigation of cardinal pool , have earnest move diverse great prince to invade Eng ? land ; he as a provident prince , endea•oured a••arn•stly to provide •or de ? fence ; a•d to that end , ride himself to the s•a-coast• ? ? ? they fortifi•• , and in needful place bulwark to be erect : he c•used hi• Na••e•• be rig , and to be in readiness at any short warning : he c••sed muster •• be raken in all shee•es ; and list of all , able man in e•ery Count• , in l•••don special ; where sir William forman the •hen m•jor , ••••ified the number of fifteen thousand ; not that they be ? … ? , but that so many be ready prepare ; and these on the eight of may , the king himself see muster in Iames park ; where the citize•s •••ove in such sort to exceed each other in bravary of arm , and forwardness of service , a• if the city have be a camp , and they not man of the gown• , but all profess soldier ; which they perform to their great cost , but great comend••ion . it be now the one and thirty year of king henri•s reign , and the nine and forty of his age ; when have continue a widower two year , he begin to think of marry again ; and be need not be a sui•our for a wife , for he be sue unto take one . the emperor solicit he to marry the duchess of Milan ; but to marry she he must first obtain a licence from the pope , and king Henry be resolve rather to have no wife , than to have any more to do with the pope . then the duke of Cleve make suit unto he , to marry the lady Anne hi• sister , and he be a protestant prince ; and so , though differ in point of doctrine , yet in the main point of exclude •he pope , both of one min•e . ma ? ny about the king be forward for thi• ma•ch , but the lord cro•well special ; and indeed it concern he more than any other , that the king shall take a protestant wife , see ? ? ? action h•d be such as none but • protestant queen will ever like ; and if the queen shall not like they ; the king , though do by his leave , will •ot like they long . here ? upon such mean be use , that emb•ssa•ours come from the duke of Cleve to conclude the march ; and the• , the elev•nth of December , the la ? die she self in gr•at state be bring , first to Callice , and then over to do ? for ; and be come to Rochester , the king secret come to see she , after ? ward she be conduct to London , me• by the way in several place , by all the great lord and lady of the kingdom . the three of January she be recei ? ve into London by sir William Hollice , than lord Major , with Oration• , pa ? giant , an• all compliment of sta•e , the great that ever have be see . on twelve day the marriage be •olemnized , the archbishop of Canterbury do the office , the earl of Oversteine , a germane lord ga•e she . in April fol ? low the lord Cromwell , as though he have win the king heart for ever by make this march , be make earl of Essex ; for in march before , Henry Rourchie• earl of Essex• and the ancient earl of England , have break his neck by seek to break a young horse , leave only one daughter , and the die without issue , the earldom come to the family of Devereux , which yet enjoy not the honour , till afterward in queen Elizabeth time , and then make but not restore . page 51 the nine of march , the king create sir William Paulet treasurer of his house , lord saint John , sir John Russell controlour , lord Russell , and short after sir William Par be create lord Par. the eight and twenty of April begin a parliament at Westminster , in the which Margaret countess of Salis ? bury , Gertrude wife to the marquess of Exeter , Reynold Poole cardinal , bro ? •her to the lord Montacute , sir Adrian foskew , Thomas Dingley knight of saint John ; and diverse other be attain•ed of high treason ; of who foskew and Dingley the ten of July be behead , the countess of Salisbury two year after : and in this parliament the act of the six article be establish ? ed , and sir Nicholas hare be restore to his place of speaker in the Parli ? ament . it be now five month after the king marriage with the lady anne of Cleve ; and though the king at the first sight of the lady , do not like her per ? son ; yet , whether as respect the honour of lady , he will not disgrace she at the first meeting ; or whether he mean to try how time may work he to a better like ; or indeed , that he will not give distaste to the germane Prin ? ces at that time , for sole end he have a work , he dissemble the matter , and all thing go on in a show of contentment on all hand . but for all these show ; the crafty bishop of London Stephen Gardiner , find how the world go with the king affection towards his queen ; and for her sake with crumb ? well ; to neither of who he be great affect ( not to the queen , as mi ? slike her religion ; not to Cromwell , as envy his greatness ; ) he so wrought upon the king inclination ; what by suggest , and what by aggravate , that the lord Cromwell the nine of July , sit in the council chamber , be sudden apprehend and commit to the tower ; and the ninteenth of the same month be attaint by parliament , and never come to his answer ; by a law , which ( as some report ) he himself have cause to be make ; and the eight and twenty of July be behead on the tower-hill ; for crime ( as ap ? pear in record ) of heresy and treason . this lord Cromwell be bear at P•tney , a village in Surrey near the Thames side ; son to a smith , after who decease , his mother be marry to a sheereman ; for the pregnancy of his wit he be first entertain by cardinal Woolsey , and by he employ ? ed in many great affair ; the cardinal fall , the king take he into his service ; and find his great ability , first advance he for his worth , and then for his pleasure overthrow he . but the great part of Stephen gar ? diverse practice have be do before ; for at midsummer before , the king cause ? sed the queen to remove to Richmond , as for her health and pleasure ; and and in the time of her absence , on the sixth of July , send certain lord to the low house of parliament , who there declare certain cause , for which the king marriage with the lady anne of Cleve , be not to be count law ? full ; and so carry the matter , that the convocation clear determine , the king may marry any other ; and so may she . be thus divorce ; it be further enact , she shall no more be call queen , but the lady anne of Cleve . the fault for which this divorce be decree , be not express thou ? livered• some say , a precontract of the say lady with a lord of Germany be pretend ; but it seem to have be for some womanish defect in her body ; as she spare not to a•firme that she have never be carnal know by the king in all the time of their lie together : and as it be say , when her lady , one time say unto she , that they look now every day to hear of her great belly ; she shall answer , they may look long enough , unless , say , how do thou sweerest , God morrow sweetheart , and suc• like word , can make a great belly ; for ( say she ) more than this , there never pass between the king and i . how ever it be , she willing submit to the decree , whether out of fear , or perhaps as little like the king as the king do she ; and afterward lead a private life here in England , well respect of the king , and die sixteen year after , in the four year of quee•mary , be bury at Westminster . page 52 about this time Leonard grey deputy of Ireland , be on the tower-hill behead , for suffer his nephew Gerald fitz-garret to escape , who have be declare a enemy to the state , and then also be Thomas Fines lord dam ? cres , a young m•n of four and twenty year of age , hang at Tyburn , •or kill ? ing a mean peson upon a sudden affray ; also the four of A•gust , Thomas Epson a monk of Westminster , for deny to take his oath , to be true to the king , have his monk garment pluck from his back , the last monk that be see in such habit in England till queen Maryes day . the sixth of July in the two and thirty year of his reign , king Henry have be divorc•d from the lady anne of Cleve , and now the eight of August fol ? low , the lady Katherine Howard , niece to the duke of Norfolk and daugh ? ter to the lord Edward Howard be show open as queen at hampton-court . on the ten of June the year follow , sir Edmund Knevet of Norfolk , knight , be arraign before th• officer of the greencloth , for strike one master clear of Norfolk , within the tennis-court of the king House• be find guilty , he have judgement to loose his right hand , and to forfeit all his land and good ; whereupon there be call to do execution , first , the sergeant surgeon , with his instrument pertain to his office , than the sergeant of the woodyard , with a mallet and a block to lay the hand upon , than the king master-cook with the knife •o cut off the hand , than the sergeant of the larder to set the knife right on the joint , than the sergeant Farrier with searing•irons to sear the vein , than the sergeant of the •oultry with a cock , which cock , shall have his head smite off upon the same block , and with the same knife ; then the yeoman of the chandry with sear-clothe , than the yeoman of the scullery , with a pan of fire to hear the iron , a chaffer of water to cool the end of the iron , and two form for all officer to set their stuff on , than the sergeant of the cellar with wine , ale and beer , than the sergeant of the ewery , with basin , ewer , and towel : all thing be thus prepare sir William Pickering knight martial , be command to bring in his prisoner , sir Edmund Knevet , to who the chief justice declare his offence , which the say Knevet confess , and humble submit himself to the king mercy , only he desire , that the king will spare his right hand and take his left , because ( say he ) if my right hand be spare , i may live to do the king good service : of who submission , and reason of his suit , when the king be inform , he grant he to loose neither of his hand , and pardon he also of his land and good . the summer of his three and thirty yeer• king Henry with his queen Katherine , make a progress into the north-part , and ret•rning at alhallan ? tide to hampton-court he be there inform , of the queen dessolute life first before her marriage with one Francis Deerham , a gentleman of N•rfolke , who employ afterward in Ireland ; she have late again at Pomfret receive into her service , and now since her marriage with one Thomas Colepepper , of the king privy-chamber ; whereupon the thirteenth of November , sir Thomas VVriothsley knight secretary to the king , be send to the queen at hampton-court , to charge he• with these crime , and discharge her household , to cause she to be convey to Zion , there to remain , till the king pleasure shall be further know : the deli•quents be examine , Deerham confess , that be ? before the King• marriage with the lady Katherine , there have be a precontract between himself and she ; but when he once understand of the king like towards she , he then wave and conseal it for her preforment : so the first of December , the• gentleman be arraign at the Guildhall , they confess the indictment , a•• have judgement to die , as in case of treason : the ten of December , they we•e draw from the tower to Tyburn , where Colepepper be behead , and Deerham be hang and dismember ; colepepper body be bury in sepulcher church in London , but both their head be set on London-bridge : page 53 the two and twenty of December , there be arraign at the kings-bench , the lord William Howard and the lady Margaret his wife , Katherine till ? ney and Alice Restwold gentlewoman , Joan Bulmer , wife to Anthony Bulmer Gentliman , Anne Howard wife to Henry Howard esquire , and brother to the queen , with diverse other , who be all condemn for misprision of treason , for conceal the queen misdemeanour , and adjudge to forfeit all their land and good during life , and to remain in perpetual prison . the sixteenth of January the parliament begin at Westminster , where the lord and commons p••itioned the king , that he wo•ld not vex himself with the queen offence , and that both she and the lady Rochfort may be attaint by parliament ; and that to avoid protract of time , he will give his royal assent un•o it , un ? there the great seal , without stay for the end of the parliament . also , that Derham and Colepepper have be attain before by the common-law , may be attaint likewise by parliament : all which be assent to by the king ; and after , on the thirteenth of February , the queen and the lady Roch ? •ord be behead on the-greene within the tower , where they confess their offence , and die penitent : yet something to take off the offence of this queen ; it be certain say , that after her condemnation , she protest to do ? ctor white bishop of Winchester , her last confessor , that as for the act for which she be condemn , she take God and his holy angel to witness , upon her soul salvation , that she die guiltless . before this , on the three and twenty of January , king Henry be proclai ? med king of Ireland ; where as before this •ime , the king of England be only entitle lord of Ireland : and this title be give he both by the par ? liament here , and by the parliament hold in Ireland , before sir Anthony Seintleger knight , the king deputy there . about this time Arthur Plantagenet visconnt Lisle , base son to king ed ? ward tha four ; have be imprison upon suspicion of a practice , for be ? traying of Callice to the french , while he be the king lieutenant there , be now find to be innocent of the fact : and thereupon , the king to make he some reparation for his disgrace , send he a ring and a very gracious message , by sir Thomas VVriothsley his secretary ; whereat the say viscount take so great joy , that the night follow , of that very joy he die : so deadly a thing be any passion , even joy it self , if it be extreme . after his death sir John Dudley , his wife son , be crea•ed Viscount Lisle . this sir John Dudley be son to Edmund Dudley , behead in the first year of this king reign , and be make Viscount Lisle in right of his mother . during this parliament , one George Ferrer gentleman , servant to the king and burgess for the town of Plymouth in Devonshire , in go to the Parlia ? mean house , be arrest in London by a process out of the king bench , for a debt wherein he be late afore condemn , as surety for one Welden , at the suit of one white ; which arrest be signify to sir Thomas Moyle knight , •peaker then of the parliament , and to the knight and burgess there ; order be •aken , that the sergeant of the parliament , call saint John , shall be send to the counter in Bredstreet ( whither the say Ferrer be carry ) and there demand to have he deliver : but the officer of the counter not one ? lie refuse to deliver he , but give the sergeant such language , that they fall at last to a affray ; at which time the sheriff come , they also take their officer part ; so as the sergeant be fain to return without the prison ? ner ; which be signify to the speaker and the burgess , they take the matter in so ill part , that they will sit •o more without their burgess ; and thereupon rise up , repair to the upper house , where the whole case be declare by the speaker , before sir Thomas Audeley lord chancellor , and the lord and judge there assemble : who judge the contempt to be very grea• , refer the punishment thereof to the house of commons it self : whereupon return to their place againe• upon new debate of the case , they page 54 take order that t•eir serje•nt shou•d once more rep•ire to the sheriff of London , and demand ••e prisoner , wit•out carryi•g any write or warrant for the matter . it be tru•• the lord chancellor offer to grant a write , but the house of Common• refuse it ; be of a cle•re opinion , that all common ? dement from the nether house be to be execute by their sergeant with ? out write , only by show his mace , which be his warrant : but before the sergeant return into London , the sheriff better advise , become more mild , and upon the second demand , deliver the prisoner without any denial , but then the sergeant have further in charge , to command the sheriff and clerk of the counter , to appear personal the next morning before the house of commons : where appear , they be charge by the speaker , with their contempt , and compel to make immediate answer , without be admit•ed •o any counsel , sir Roger Chomley recorder of London , offer to speak in the cause , but w•s not suffer , nor any other but the p•rties they ? self : in conclusion , the sheriff and white who have cause the arrest , be commit to the tower , the officer that do the arrest , with four other of ? ficer to Newgate ; but after two or three day , upon the •umble sui•e of the major , be set at liberty ; and because the say Ferrer be in execution upon a condemnation of debt , and set at large by privilege of parlaiment , be not by law to be bring again into execution ; and so the creditor without remedy for his debt , against he as his princip•ll debtor ; therefore after long debate , by the space of nine or ten day together , they at last resolve to make a act of purpose , to revive the execution of the say debt , against well ? den who be principal debtor , and to discharge Ferrer that be but surer• : wherein notwithstanding , the house be divide , and the act pass but by fourteen voice : the king be adver•ised of this proceed , call before he the lord chancellor and the •udges , the speaker and diverse of the low house , to who he decla•ed his opinion to this effect : first commend their wi•dome , in maintain the privilege of t•eir house , ( which he will •o• have to be infringe in any point ) he allege , that •e be head of the Parlia ? mean , and attend in his own person upon the business t•ereof , ought in reason , to have privilege for himself and all his servant attend upon he , so as if the say Ferrer have be no burgess , but only hi• servant ; yet in that respect , he be to have the privilege as well as any other : for i understand ( say he ) that you , not only for your own person , but also for your necess•ry servant , even to your cook and horsekeeper enjoy the s•me p•i•iledge• i• so much , as my lord chancellor here present , have inform u• , that while he be speaker of the parliament , the cook of the temple be arrest i•London , and in execution upon a statute of the s•aple , and for so much , as the say cook during all the parliament serve the spe•ker in t•at office ; he be take out of execution by privilege of parliament ; the prerogative of which court , ( as our learned counsel inform we ) be so great , that all act and process come ou• of any other court , must for the time ce•se and give place to it : and touch the party himself , though for his presumption he be worthy to have lose his debt , yet i commend your equity , that have re ? store he to hi• debt against he that be the principal : when the king have say this , sir Edward Mountacute lord chief justice , rise up , and confirm by many reason , all that the king have say , as likewise do all the other Lord• , none speak any thing to the contrary . it be now the four and thirty year of king Henry reign , when in may he take a loan of money of all such as be value at fifty pound and upward• in the subsidy book , the lord privy-seal , the bishop of Winchester , sir John baker , and sir Thomas Wriothsley be commissioner , that the loan in London , who so handle the matter , that of some chief citizen they obtain a thousand ma•kes in press to the king use : for which privy seal be de ? liver to repay it again within two year . page 55 at this time , be many complaint make by the ••gli•h , against the Scot , partly for receive and maintain diverse english reb•ls , ? ? ? into Scotland , and partly for invade •he engli•h border ; but still w•en the king of Eng ? lan• be prepare to oppose they , the scottish king will send Embassa ? dour to tre•t of reconcilement , till at last , •fter m•n• delusory prank of the Scot ; the king of England , no long •nduri•g such abuse , send the duke of Norfolk his Leivtena•• general , accompany with the earl of Shrewsbury , Derby , Cumberland , Surrey , hart•o•d , a••us , Rutland , the lord of the north part , sir Anthony brown master of the king horse , and sir John gage con ? troller of the King• house , with other , to the number of twenty thousand man ; who on the one and twenty of Oc•ober enter Scotland , where stay but eig•t daye• only he burn above eighteen Towne• , abbey , and castle , and then without •aving bat•aile offer , for want of victual return to Barwick ; •• soon as •e be return , come abro•d the king of Scot , raise a power of fifteen thous•nd man , and use great threaten what he will do , invade the west border , but the edge of his threaten be soon take off , for the ba ? stare da••es , with Jack of Musgrave set upon they with only a hundred light•horse , and sir Thomas Wharton with three hundred , put they to flight ; upon a concei• , th•• the duke of Norfolk with all his army have be come i•to those part• ; where be take prisoner• of the Scot , the earl of Cassill and Glenc••ne , the lord Maxwell admir•ll of Scotland , the lord Fleming , the lord So•erwell , the lord oli•ha•t , the lord grey , sir Oliver sinclee•e , the king minion , John rise lord of gragy , Robert Erskin son to the lord er ? kin , car lord of Gredon , the lord maxwell two brother , John Lesloy bastard son to the earl of Rothus , George hame lord of Hemetton , with diverse other man of account , to the number of above two hundred , and more than eight hun ? dread of mean calling ; so as some one english m•n , and some woman also , have three or four prisoner• in their hand : at which over•hrow , the king of Scot take such grief , that he fall into a burn ague , and thereof die , leave be ? hind he one only daughter ; and here king Henry begin to apprehend a great matter than the victory , for he and his couns•ile conceive , that •hi• daughter , will be a fit match for his son prince Edward , thereby to make • perpetual union of the two kingdom ; and to •his purpose they confer•ed with the lord who they have take prisoner , who exceed glad of the pro ? position , and promise to further it by all the possible mean they can , be •hereupon s•t at liberty , and suffer •o return home . come into Scotland ? ? ? acquaint the earl of arraine wi•h the motion , who be choose Gover ? •our of the young queen and of the realm ; t•e matter with great like be entertain , and in parliament of the three est•tes in Scotland , the marriage be confirme• , and • peace between the two re•lms , for ten yeer• wa• proclai ? m , and embass•dours send into England , for seal the condition . but Beton archbishop of s•int Andrews be cardinal , and at the pope devotion , and therefore a utter enemy to king Henry , so cross the business that it come to nothing , but end in a war between the two kingdom ; so as in march the year follow , the lord Seymour earl of Hartford , with a army by land and sir John Dudley lord Lisle , with a flee•e by sea , me• at Newcastle , and there join together , for invade of Scotland ; with the earl of Hartford , be the earl of Shrewsbury , the lord Cobham , Clinton , Conyers , Stinton , the lord William Howard , with knight and other , to the number of ten thousand , with sir John Dudley the admiral , be two hu•dred s•ile of ship : on the four of May , the whole army be land two mile from the town of lie , at a place call granther Crag ; and there the lord lieutenant put his man in order , ma•ched towards the town of lie : the lord admiral lead the foreward , the lieutenant the battle , and the earl of Shrewsbury the rear ? ward . before they come to the town of lie , the cardinal with six hundred •orse , beside foot , lay in the way to impeach their passage ; but they be so page 56 assail by they , harqu•butars , that they be glad to fly , and the first man that flee be the cardinal himself , and then the earl of Huntley , Murrey and Bothwel ; hereupon the english make forward to lie , and enter it without any great resistance : the six of May they march towards Edenbrough , and as they ap ? proach the town , the provost with some of the burgher , come and offer the key of the towen , to the lord lieutenant , upon condition they may depart with bag and baggage , and the town to be preserve from fire ; but the lord livetennant tell they , their falsehood have be such , as deserve •o fa•our , and therefore unless they will deliver the town absolute with ? out any condition , he will pro•eed in his enterprise , and burn the town . here we may see , what it be to make man desperate , for to this the prove answer , they be better than to stand upon defence , and so indeed they do , and make the english glad to retire , for the castle shoot so fierce upon they , that have burn only a part of the town , they return to lie ; but while they lie there , they so waste the country , that within seven mile• every way of Edenbrough , there be not a town , nor village , nor house t•at be leave unacustomated ? burn : at lie , the eleve day of May , the lord general make knight , the lord Clinton , the lord Conyers , sir William Wroughton , sir Thomas Holecraft , sir Edward Dorrell , sir Francis Hothome , and other• , to the number of at least threescore : in lie haven , they seize upon all the scottish ship ; whereof two be of notable fairness , the one call the salamander , give by the french king , at the marriage of his daughter into Scotland , the other call the unicorn , make by the late scottish king ; the ballast of which two ship be canonshot , whereof they find in the town , to the number of fourscore thousand . on the fiftee•th of may , their army and their Flee• depart from lie , both in one hour , have first set the town on fire and burn it to the ground : from lie the english army march to Seaton , from thence to Haddington , from thence to Dunbar , from thence to Ranton , all which town and castle with diverse other they burn and utter deface ; and on the eighteenth of May come to Barwick , not have lose in all the journey above fourteen men• in the mean time , in king Henry five and thirty year , on Trinity Sunday a new league be enter into and swear , between the king and the emperor at hampton-court , to be both offensive and defensive . in this year , proclamation be make , whereby the people be license to eat white meat in le•t , but straight forbid the eat of flesh ; where ? upon short after , the earl of Surrey with diverse other lord and knight , be imprison for eat of flesh contrary to the proclamation . the three of June this year , there come ou• of Ireland three Lord• , of who obrine be here create earl of thonmo•d , ( which ho•our his posterity in ? joy to this day ) mack William a Bary , be create ea•le of Clanrinckford , and Mack Gilparick , be make baron of Ebranky . king Henry have already have five wife all of they maid , and no good luck with any of they , he will now therefore try his fortune with a widow , a•d thereupon the twelve of June , in the five and thirty year of his reign he take to wife the lady Katherine Par , widow of the lord Latimer late decea ? sed , who be then proclaim queen ; but how lucky will this ma•ch have prove , if the king have long live , God know , see in the short time of three year they live together , it be no small danger she escape , which though it hapenned not till a year or •wo after this time , yet will not unfit be speak of in this place , that so her story may come together ; this queen as be a •arnest protestant , have many great adversary , by who she be accuse to the king , to have heretical book find in her closet ; and this be so agra ? vat against she , that they prevail with the king , to sign a warrant to come ? mit her to the tower , with a purpose to have she burn for heresy ; this war ? rant be deliver to Wriothsley lord chancellor , and he by chance , or rather page 57 indeed by god providence , let it fall from he , it be take up and carry to the queen ; who have read it , go soon after to visit the king , at that time keep his chamber , by reason of a sore leg ; be come to the king , he present ? lie fall into talk with she , •bout some point of religion , demand her resolution ? on therein ; but she know that his nature be not to be cross , special conside ? ring the case she be in , make he answer , that she be a woman accompany with many imperfection , but his majesty be wise and judicious , of who she must learn as of her lord and head ; not so by saint mary ( say the king ) for you be a doctor Kate to instruct we , and not to be instruct by we , as often we have see heretofore : indeed sir ( say she ) if your majesty have so conceive , i have be mistake , for if heretofore i have hold talk with you touch Reli ? gion , it have be to learn of your majesty some point , whereof i stand in doubt , and sometime that with my talk , i may make you forget your present infir ? mity : a•d be it even so sweet heart ( quoth the king ) why than we be friend , and so kiss she , give her leave to depart . but soon after , the day be appoint by the king warrant , for apprehend she ; on which day , the king be this ? pose to walk i• the garden , have the queen with he , when sudden the lord chancellor with forty of the Guard• c•me into the garden , with a purpose to apprehend she : when as soon as the king see , he step to he , and call he knave and fool , bid he avaunt out of his presence : the queen see the king so angry with he , begin to entreat for he , to who the king say ; ah poor soul , thou little know what it be he come about , of my word sweet heart , he have be to thou a very knave ; and thus by God• providen•• be this queen pre ? serve , who else have taste of as bitter a c•p , as any of his former wife have do . about this time king Henry and the emperor send garter and toyson d•or , king at arm , to demand performance of certain article of the french king : which if he deny , they be then command to defy he : but the french king will not suffer they to come within his land , and so they return : whereupon king Henry cause the s•id demand• to be declare to the french ambassador at Westminster ; and in July send over six thousand man , under the lead of sir John wallop accompany with diverse knight and gentleman , sir Thomas say ? mour be marshal of the army , sir Robert Bowes treasurer , sir Richard Cronwal captain of the horse , and sir George Carew his lieutenant . there be likewise sir Thomas palmer , sir John Rainsford , sir John saint John , and sir John Gascoigne knight , that be captain of the foot . their commission be to join with the emperor , and together to m•ke war upon France . the three of August open wa• be proclaim in London , between the emperor and the king of England on the one part , and the f•e•ch king on the other , as mortal enemy to they both ; and to all other christian prince beside , as he that have confederate himself with the Turk . sir John wallop march forth of Callice with his army , join with ••e emperor force , who together go and besiege Landersey a town late fortify by the french , lie within the border of the emperor dominion : to raise this siege , the french king have raise a mighty army ; with which he come on , as if he mean to give the emperor battle ; and thereupon the emperor rai ? sing his siege , with a purpose to encounter he , the french king take the open ? portunity to put man and victual into the town , which be the thing he inten ? dead : and have do this , the night follow depart with his army ; and then the emperor see he go , and find the winter come on , and no hope of sudden ge•ting the town , be now new supply , he also break up his be ? my|night , and return home . this year , the Sunday before Christmas , the lord William Parre , brother to the queen , who have marry the daughter and heir of Henry Bourchier earl of Essex , be at Hampton court create earl of Essex , and sir William Parre knight uncle to they both , be make lord Parre of Horton and lord chamberlain to the queen ; and on new-yeers-day sir Thomas Wriothsley , the king secretary , be make lord Wriothsley of Tichfield . page 58 in June this year , Matthew earl of Lenox flee out of Scotland and come into England , who king Henry receive kind , and give he in marriage the lady Margaret his sister daughter , by who he have Henry , father of our late king Iames of bless memory . Thomas Audley lord chancellor , be late dead , Thomas lord Wriothsley succeed he in the place ; and now be a army levy to go for France ; the duke of Norfolk and the lord privy seal , accompany with the earl of Sur ? rey the duke son , the lord grey of Wilton , the lord Ferrer of C•artley and his son sir Robert Devereux , sir Thomas Chainey lord warden of the cinque port , the lord Montjoy , sir Francis Byran , sir Thomas Poynings captain of guysnes , with many other knight and gentleman , about Whitsuntide pass over to Callice ; and march towards Muttrel , join with the emperor for ? ces , under the lead of the count de Buren ; which two army lay siege to Muttrel , whereof Monsseur de Bies , one of the marshal of France be captain , but be then at bulloign , and hear of the siedg of Muttrel , he leave Boulogne and with his force come thither , which be the thing that be desire , to draw he from bnlloign ; and thereupon be the duke of Suffolk appoint to pass over with the king army , accompany with the earl of Arundel . martial of the field , the lord saint John , the bishop of Winchester , sir John gage controlor of the king house , sir Anthony brown master of the king horse , with diverse other ; who the ninteenth of July come and encamp before Boulogne ; the four and twenty of July the king in person , accompany with diverse of the nobility , come to Callice ; and the six and twenty encamp before bulloign on the north side ; many battery and assault be make , so long , till at last the town upon composition yield , and the duke of Suffolk enter and take possession , suffer six thousand french , as be agree , with bag and baggage to depart . the eight of September king Henry enter the town himself , and then leave the lord Lisle lord admiral , his deputy there , he return into Eng ? land , land at Dover the first of O•tober . many enterprise after this be make by the dolphin of France , and by monsieur de Bies for recovery of bull ? loigne , but they be still repulse , and the english keep the town in spite of all they can do ; although at one time there come a army of eighteen thousand foot , at another time a army , wherein be reckon twelve thou ? sand lance-knight , twelve thousand french footman , six thousand ita ? lian , four thousand of legionary soldier of France , a thousand man of arm , beside eight thousand light horse ; great force certain to come and do nothing . while these thing be do about bulloign , the ship of the west country and other place wa•ted abroad on the sea , and take above three hundred french ship ; so that the grayfriar church in London be lay full of wine , the au ? stin-frier and Blackfriar full of herring and other fish , which shall have be convey in France . about this time the king demand a benevolence of his subject , towards his war in France and Scotland , to which purpose , the lord chancellor , the duke of Suffolk , and other of the king counsel sit at Baynard castle , where they first call before they the major and alderman , and because rich ? ard read alderman , will not agree to pay as they set he , he be command to serve the king in his war in Scotland , which the obstinate man rather choose to do , than he will pay the rate he be require , but be there , he be take prisoner by the Scot , to his far great damage , than if he have agree to the benevolence require . for at this time , sir Ralph Evers lord warden of the march , after many fortunate road into Scotland , assemble four thousand man , and enter Scotland now again , be encounter by the earl of arraign by who he and the lord Oagle , and many other gentleman be slay , and diverse be take prisoner , of who alderman read be one . it be now the seven and thirty year of king Henry reign , when on page 57 saint George day sir Th•mas Wriothsley lord-chancelour , be make knight of the garter , also Trinity term be adjourn , by reason of the war but the exchequer and the court of the te•thes be open . at this time , the english fleet go before New-haven , but be there en ? country by a far great fleet of french , they ret•rned ; with who retreat , the french admiral embolden , come upon the coast of Sussex , where he land soldier , but upon fire of the beacon be drive back , after which he land two thousand man in the isle of wight , but be there repel , though report to have in his ship threescore thousand man . in Angust this year , die the valiant captain , the lord Poynings , the king lieutenant of his town of Boulogne , and the same month also , die at guild ? ford , the noble duke of Suffolk , Charles Brandon , lord great master of the king house , who body be honourable bury at Windsor at the king cost . about this time , the Scot have receive aid out of France , approach the english border , but dare attempt nothing , whereupon the earl of hert ? ford , lieutenant of the north part , raise a army of twelve thovsand man , en ? glish and stranger , enter Scotland and burn a great part of Mers and Tivi ? dale , as Kelsay abbey and the town , the abbey of Medrosse , Driborne , and Yedworth , with a hundred town and village more ; when on the sixteenth of September , a army of Scot and french attempt to enter into England on the east border , but in a strait be set upon by the english , who slay and take of they to the number of seven score , among who be the lord Humes son , and a principal french captain ; in another road , which they make into the west border , the lord maxwell son , and diverse other be take , but then at another time ( such be the chance of war ) five hundred English enter the west border of Scotland be discomfit , and the great part of they either take or slay . and now to revenge the presumptuous attempt of the french upon the isle of wight , the lord admiral with his fleet approach the coast of Normandy land six thousand man at treport , burn the suburb of that town with the abbey , destory thirty ship there in the haven , and then return , not have lose above fourteen person in the whole voyage . at this time the earl of Hartford lie at Boulogne , have in his army a ? above fourscore thousand man , and many skirmish pass between he and the french , till at last , by mediation of the emperor and diverse other prince a meeting be appoint to treat of a peace , between the two king of England and France ; hereupon there come to Guisnes for the king of England , the earl of Hertford , the bishop of Winchester , sir John Dudley Viscount Lisle , baron of Mawpas and high admiral of England , sir William Paget the king secret ? tarry and doctor Nicholas Wootton dean of Canterbury . for the french king , there come to Ard , Claude Danebolt admiral of France , the bishop of eureux , monsieur Reymond chief precedent of Roan , and the secretary bouchetell . di ? verse time they meet betwixt Ard and Guisnes , and after long debate of mat ? ter , and diverse break off• at length , the seven of June , a peace be con ? clude , and proclaim in the city of London on Whitsunday the thirteenth of June , by sound of trumpet ; and the same day in like manner at Paris and roan ; the chief article of which peace be this ; that the french king pay ? ing to the king of England eight hundred thousand crown , within the term of eight year , shall have Boulogne again restore to he , which in the mean time shall remain in possession of the king of England , as a pledge for assu ? rance of the say money ; and now for a full establishment of this peace , the viscount Lisle lord admiral , with the bishop of duresme and diverse other lord , be send into France to take oath of the french king and of the Dol ? phin ; as likewise at the same time , diverse lord come from the french king to take oath of king Henry ; who by the way be meet by the young prince and many lord , and conduct to the king at hampton-court . page 60 in his seven and thirty year , the three and twenty of November , a par ? liament begin at vvestmins•er , wherein be grant to the king , a subsidy both of spiritualty and temporalty , and all college , chantry and hos ? pitall be give to he to dispose of : the four and twenty of December the parliament be prorogue , on which day the king come to the Parlia ? mean house , the speaker make to he a oration , which the lord chance ? lour be use to answer , but at this time the king will answer himself , the effect whereof be , that where master Speaker have commend he for many excellent quality that be in he , he thank he for it , not that he have they , but for put he in mind , how necessary it be , he shall have they ; than he thank the whole house for their subsidy , and for give he the college and chantry , which he promise to see bestow , to the glory of God and good of the realm ; last , he acknowledge their love to himself , but find fault with want of love to one another ; for what love , where there be not con ? cord ? and what concord , when one call another heretic and Anabaptist , and he again call he papist and hypocrite : and this not only among those of the temporalty , but even the clergy man themselves preach one a ? against another , inveigh one against another , without charity or discretion ; some be so stiff in their old mumpsimus , and other so curious in their new sumpsimus , that few or none preach true and sincere the word of God ; now therefore let this be amend , fear and serve God , be in charity among your self , to the which i as your supreme head and sovereign lord , exhort and require you : and this say , the act be open read , to some he give his royal assent , and to diverse assent not . while oath for the peace be thus take by both king , Boulogne remain still in king Henry possession , monsieur de Chatillon captain of mont-pleasy begin to make a new bastillion at the very mouth of the haven of Boulogne name it chatillous garden : hereof the lord grey of VVilton as then Depu ? ty of Boulogne advertise the king by sir Thomas Palmour , require to know his pleasure whither he shall raze it , as a thing very incommodious to the town , or let it stand ; the king ask advice of his counsel , who all agree , that the condition of the peace ought in no wise to be infringe , and therefore to let the bastillian stand ; whereupon the king cause his secretary the lord Paget , to write a letter to the lord grey , to that purpose , but then call sir Thomas Palmour secret to he , bid he tell the lord grey , that whatsoe ? ver he have write in his letter , yet with all speed possible , he shall raze they for ? tification to the ground ; sir Thomas Palmour reply that a message by word of mouth be contrary to his letter , will never be believe , well ( say the king ) do you tell he as i bid you , and leave the do it to his choice ; upon the come back of sir Thomas Palmour , the lord grey call a counsel , show they th• King• letter , and withal sir Thomas palmour message , and then ask their advise , what in this case he shall do ? who all agree without any question , that the letter be to be follow , and not the message , to which the lord Gray himself say nothing , but cause the message to be wtitten verbatim from sir Thomas palmour mouth , and those of the counsel , to set their hand to it : this do , the night follow he issue forth with a company of arm man and pioner , and overthrow the fortification to the ground , a•d then send sir Thomas Palmour with letter to the king , who as soon as he see he , ask a ? loud , what , will he do it or no ? sir Thomas Palmour deliver his letter say , your majesty shall know by these , but then the king half angry , nay tell i ( say he ) will he do it or no ? be then tell it be do , and the fortification clean raze , he turn to his lord and say , what say you my lord to this , chatillous garden be raze to the •loore ; whereto one present answer , that he that have do it , be worthy to loose his head , to which the king streightl• reply , that he will rather lose a dozen such head as he be , that so j•dged , than one such servant as have do it , and therewith command the lord Grays page 61 pardon shall present be draw , the which he send with letter of great thank , and promise of reward ; the cause why the king take this course be this , lest if he write the race of the fortification , in his letter it may have come t• the Frenchman knowledge , before it can have be do , and so have be prevent , and by this may be take a scantling of king Henry great ca ? pacitie . it be now the eight and thirty year of his reign , when about Michaelmas Thomas duke of Norfolk , and Henry earl of Surrey his son and heir , up ? on certain surmise of treason , be commit to the tower of London ; and the thirteenth of January , the king then lie at the point of death , the say earl be arraign in the Guildhall , before the lord major , the lord Chaun ? cellour , and other lord there in commission ; the special matter wherewith he be charge , be the bear of certain arm that be say to belong to the king and to the prince ; though the earl justify the bear of they , as belong to diverse of his ancestor ; affirm withal , that he have the opi ? nion of herald therein : but this notwithstanding , be no lord of the par ? liament , he be try by a common jury , and by they be find guilty , and thereupon have judgement of death ; and the nineteenth of January be be ? head on the tower-hill . the duke be attaint by parliament and keep in prison , •ill in the first year of queen marry the attaindour be reverse . the death of this earl may lay a imputation of cruelty upon king Henry , if a just jealousy grow from the many circumstance of the earl greatness , in the tender age of his own son do not excuse he . soon after the death of this earl , the king himself die ; have make his last will , in which he take order , that his son Edward shall succeed he in the crown , and he die without issue , his daughter marry , and she die without issue , his daughter Elizabeth ; although another order of success ? sion have pass before by act of parliament . the executor of his last will be these sixteen ; Thomas Cranmor archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Wri ? othsley lord chancellor , sir William Pawlet lord saint John , and great ma ? star of the household , sir Edward Seymor earl of Hartford and high cham ? berlin of England , sir John Russell lord privy seal , sir John Dudley vis ? count Lisle , lord Admirall•Cutbert Tunstall bishop of Durham , sir Antho ? nigh Browne master of the horse , sir Edmund Montacute , lord chief justice of the common-plea , sir Thomas Bromley one of the justice of the king bench , sir Edward north chancellor of the augmentation , sir William pa ? get knight of the order , sir Anthony Dennie , sir William Herbert , sir Edward Wootton treasurer of Callice , and Nicholas VVootton Deane of Canterbury and Yooke . to who be adjoin as assistance these twelve , Henry Fitz Allan earl of Arundel , William par earl of Essex , sir Thomas Cheyney Treasu ? rour of the household , sir John gage controlour , sir Anthony VVingfield vicechamberlain , sir William Peter principal secretary , sir Richard rich , sir John baker of Sissingherst in Kent , chancellor of the exchequer , sir Ralph Sadler , sir Thomas Seymour , sir Richard Southwell and sir Edward Peckham . and it be not without need to leave a full council table , consider in what term he leave the kingdom when he die . abroad , in league with the emperor , at peace with the king of France ; but whether these be not per ? sonall only , and no long bind than king Henry live , may be doubt ; with the Scot at deadly send ; with the pope at utter defiance ; from both which coast there can be expect but little fair weather : at home , the frame of religion extreme disjoint ; and the clergy that shall set it in frame , out of frame themselves : the mind of the people extreme distract ; and the nobility that shall cement they , scarce hold themselves together : and in this stare be the kingdom when king Henry the eight die , in the year 1547. the fifty six of his life , and of his reign the eight and thirty . page 62 of his taxation . in his four year , in a parliament at Westminster , be grant to the king , two fifteen of the temporalty , and two ten of the clergy , and head-money ; of every duke ten mark , a earl five pound , a baron •oure pound , a knight four mark , and every man value at eight hundred pound in good , to pay •oure mark , and so after that rate till he that be value at forty shil ? ling , and he pay twelve penny , and every man and woman of fifteen year and up ? ward four penny . in his six year , a parliament be hold , wherein diverse sub ? sidy be grant to the king , towards the charge of his war in France : in his fourteenth year , order be take by the cardinal , that the true value of all man substance may be know , and he will have have every man swim , to tell what they be worth , and require a •enth part thereof , towards the king charge in his present war , as the spiritualty have grant a four part : this the Londoner think very hard , and thereupon be excuse for take oath , and be allow to bring in their bill upon their honesty ; but when all be do , after much labour by the cardinal , the clergy grant one half of all their yearly spiritual revenue , for five year , and the temporalty two shilling in the pound , from twenty pound upward , and from forty shilling to twenty pound , of every twenty shilling twelve penny ; and under forty shil ? ling , of every head of sixteen year and upward four penny , to be pay in every two year : in his sixteenth year , the cardinal of his own head , attempt by commission , to draw the people to pay the six part of every man substance in plate or money ; but this be general oppose , and the people in many con ? try rise upon it , so as come to the king knowledge , •e utter disavow it , and blame the cardinal exceed for attempt it . in his four and twen ? ti year in a parliament then hold , a fifteen be grant to the king , to ? ward his charge of make fortification against Scotland . in his one and thir•ieth year , a subsidy of two shilling in the pound of land , and twelve of good , with four fifteen be grant to the king , towards his charge of make bulwark . in his five and thirty year , a subsidy be grant to be pay in three year , every Englishman be worth in good twenty shilling and upward to five pound , to pay four penny of every pound , and from five pound to ten pound eight penny , from ten pound to twenty pound six pence• from twenty pound and upward , of every pound two shilling ; stranger as well denizen as other , be inhabitant to pay double , and for land , every Englishman pay eight penny o• the pound , from twenty shilling to five pound , and from five pound to ten pound sixteen penny , and from ten pound to twenty pou•d• two shilling , and from twenty pound and upward , of every pound three shil ? ling , stranger double ; the clergy six shilling in the pound of benefice , and e ? very priest have no benefice , but a annual stipend , six shilling eight penny year , during three year . of law and ordinance in his time . in a parliament hold in his six year , diverse law be make , but two most speak of ; one for apparel , another for labourer . in his twelvth year , he cause the statute against enclosure to be revive , and command that decay house shall be build up again , and that enclose ground shall be lay open ; which though it do some good , yet not so much as it may have do , if the cardinal for his own benefit , have not procure livre ? berty for great man , to keep up their enclosure , to the oppression of poor man . in his seventeenth year , the king lie at Eltham , diverse ordinance be make b• the cardinal touch the governance of the king house , and be long after call the statute of Eltham . in his eighteenth year , in the month of page 63 may , proclamation be make against all unlawful game , so that in all place table , dice , card and bowl , be take and burn ; but this order continue not long , for young man be restrain from these game , fall some to drink , some to steal of cony and deer , and such other misdemeanour : also in this year , be a inhance of coin , for prevent the carry it over to place where it go at high rate , so that the angel which go before but for seven shilling , shall now go for seven and six penny , and every ounce of gold shall be five a•d forty shilling , which be before but forty , and other coin accord . in his twenty year sir Iames Spencer be major of London , the watch use on midsummer night be lay down . in his three and thirty year , in a parliament then hold , a act be make , that whosoevet shall poison any person shall be boil to death , by which statute one Richard Roose , who have poison diver•e person in the bishop of Rochester place , be boil to death in Smithfield , to the terrible example of all other . in his two and twenty year , three act be make , one fo• probate of Testa ? ment , another for mortuary , the three against plurality of benefice , non-residence , buy and take of farm by spiritual person . in his thirty year , it be ordain by Cromwel the king vicar general , that in all church a register shall be keep of every weddng , christen , and burial within the same parish for ever . in his one and thirty year , the king first institute and appoint fifty gentleman call pensioner , to weight upon his person , as ? sighning to each of they fifty pound a year , for the maintenance of th•mselvs and two horse , in his six and thirty year , proclamation be make for the inn ? hance of gold , to eight and fort• shilling , and silver to four shilling the ounce , also he cause to be coin base money , mingle it with brass which be since that time call down the five year of Edward the six , and call in the second year of queen Elizibeth . in his seven and thirty year , then bro ? thell house , call the stew on the bankside in Southwark , be p•t down by the king commandment , and be do by proclamation and sound of trumpet . in his three and twenty year , it be enact , that butcher shall sell their meat by weight , beef for a halfpenny the pound , and mutton for three farthing , also at this time foreign butcher be permit , their flesh in leadenhall-market , which before be not allow ; in his time also , the go ? vernment of the precedent in the north be first institute , and the first Presi ? dent there , be Tunstall bishop of Durham . Affaires of the church in his time . in the year 1517. the eight year of this king reign , Martin Luther of VVittemberg in Germany a friar of the order of the hermiss , take occa ? sion from the abuse• of indulgence , begin to preach against the authority of the pope , and to bring in a reformation of religion ; for repress of who the counsel of Trent be call by pope Paul the three , in the year 1542. which continue above forty year , but be never receive in the kingdom of France• which counsel , by decree many thing to be poin of faith , which be not so account before , have make no small distraction among p•pists themselves : against this Luther , king Henry write a book with great bitter ? ness , and with as great bitterness be answer ; at the same time with Luther , there arise also in the same country other reformer of religion , as Zuin ? gliu• , occloampadious , Melancthon , who differ from Luther in some few point , make the difference which be at this day of lutheran and protestant , so call at first Auspurg , for make a protestation in defence of their doctrine , which soon after spread all Christendom over : king Henry in the six and twenty year of his reign , have exclude the pope authority ou• of his realm ; but think the work not sufficient do , as long as abbey and prio•ies keep their station , which be , as it be his fortress and pillar ; page 64 there w•s not long after me•nes find to have they suppress , for aspersio•s be l•id upon they ( and perhaps no more than truth ) of adultery and mur ? ther• , they by act of parli•ment , in his eight and twenty year , at lest near four hundred of they suppress , and all their land and good confer upon the king . in his one and thi•tieth year all the rest ; and last , in his five and thirtinth year , all Colledge• , chantry and hospital ; so as the hive be now all remove , there have never since any bee or drone be see in the coun ? try : in this king time , the city of Rome be take and sack by the imp ? rial army , force the pope to fly to his castle saint Angelo , and there keep a prisoner , till he agree to such condition as his adversary propound . in the two and twenty year of this king reign , a proclamation be set forth that no person shall purchase any thing from the court of Rome , and this be the first blow give to the pope in England . in his three and twenty year the clergy submit themselves to the king , for be find guilty of a Praemu ? nire , be the first that call he supreme head of the church . in his four and twenty year a parliament be hold , wherein one act be make , that bishop shall pay no more annat or money for their bull to the pope , and another that no person shall appeal for any cause out of this realm , to the court of Rome , but from the commissary to the bishop , and from the bishop to the archbishop , and from the archbishop to the king , and all cause of the king to be try in the upper ho•se of the convocation . in his six and twenty year in July , John Frith be burn in Smithfield , a•d with he at the same stake one Andrew howet a tailor , both for deny the real presence in the sacra ? mean ; and in a parliament hold t•is year , a act be make which Authori ? z the king highness , to be supreme head of the church of England , and the authority of the pope to be abolish , and then also be give to the king the first fruit and ten of all spiritual live ; and this year be many put to dea•h , papist for deny the king supremecy , protestant for deny the real presence in the sacrament ; and it be incredible what number for thes• two cause be put to death , in the last ten year of this king reign , of who if we shall make particular mention , i• will reach a great way in the book of martyr : in his eight and twenty year , the lord Cromwell be make Vi•a• general under the king , over the spiritualty , and sit diverse time in the con ? vocation house among the bishop as head over they ; and in September thi• year , he set forth injunction , commandi•g all parson and curate to •each their parishioner the pa•er noster , the a•e , and creed , with the ten come ? mandment and article of the christian f•ith in the english tongue . I• his one and thirty year , be set forth by the bishop , the book of the six Arti ? cles , condemn all for heretic and to be burn that shall hold , 1. that the body of Christ be not real present in the sacrament after consecration . 2. that the sacrament may not true •e administer under one kind . 3. that priest enter into holy order may marry . 4. that vow of chastity enter into upon mature deliberation , be not to be keep . 5. that private mass be not to be use . 6. that auricular confession be not necessary in the church . t•is year also the religion of saint John in England , common call they or ? there of knight of the Rhodes be dissolve ; and on ascension day , sir William we ? ston knight , prior of saint John depart this life , for thought ( as be report ) after he hear of the dissolution of his order , for the king take all the land that belong to that order into his own hand ; in his six and thirty •eere , the litany or precession be set forth in english , with commandment by the king , to be general use in parish church . page 65 work of piety do by he or other in his time . upon the suppress of abbey , king Henry institute six new bishopric •nd six cathedral church , endow they with convenient mainte ? •ance , he also give competent pension during their life , to such religious person as be turn out of their cloister ; he also insti•uted in both the university , professor of the hebrew and greek tongue , of divinity , civil-law and physic , allow to each of they forty pound a year : he also found a college at Cambridge ; he give at his death a thousand mark to the poor , and to twelve poor knight of Windsor , each of they twelve penny a day for ever , and every year a long gown of white cloth : in the five year of this king reign , George monor major of London , re-edify the decay steeple of the church of waltham-stow in Essex , add thereunto a side isle with a chap ? pel where he lie bury ; on the north side of the churchyard there he foum ? dead a fair almshouse , for a priest and thirteen poor man and woman , give they a weekly maintenance ; he also for the commodity of travelour make a causeway of timber over the marsh , from waltham-stow to lock-bridge towards Lon ? don . in this king eight year Richard Foxe bishop of Winchester found corpus christi college in Oxford , mind to have make it a house for monk , but huge Oldham bishop of Exeter , persuade he to make it rather a college for scholar , and join with he in it , contribute great sum of money to ? ward it , content himself with the name only of a benefactor . in his se ? venth ye•r king Henry build the town of Greenwich . in this king time , Cardi ? nall Woolsey found two college , one at Oxford , another at Ipswich ; to his college at Oxford he have give four thousand pound land a year , but his land be all confiscate to the king , the king take the land , but yet give to the college a competent maintenance for a deane , eight Prebends , and a hundred fellow ; which college be now call christ-church , and account king Henry for their founder . his college at Ipswich be demolish . this cardinal also build hampton-court , the chief at this day of all the king house , and build or enlarge Whitehall , call then yorke-place . king Henry in his four and twenty year , build his Mansio• house of saint Iames , where also he make a fair park . this place before have •eene a hospital of sister , with who the king compound , give they pension during their life . in his thirty year , Nicholas Gibson gro•er , than sheriff of London , build • free-school at Ratcliff near London with maintenance for a master and a usher ; •e also build a almshouse there for fourteen poor and age people . in his one and thirty year , Thomas Huntlow the then sheriff of Lon ? don , give certain tenement to the haberdasher , for find of ten almsman of the same company . in his six and thirty year , sir John all•n who have be twice major •London , and of the king counsel , give at his death , to the city of London , a rich collar of gold , to be wear by the major : which Col ? lor be first wor•e by s•r William Laxton on saint Edward day , at the electi ? on of the new major , who give to every ward in London twenty pound , to be distribute among poor householder , beside to sixscore person , whereof threescore man to every one a gown of broadcloth and a black cap ; and three ? score woman , to every one a gown of the like cloth •nd a white kerchief . in his eight and thirty year , king Henry give to the city of London , for relief of poor people saint barthalomew hospital , the church of the gray-frier , and two parish church , the one at saint Nicholas in the •hambles , the other saint Ewins in newgate-marke• , all to be make one parish church of the gray-fryer ; and in land he give for the maintenance of the same five hun ? dread mark a year for ever : and this church to be name christ-church ; foum ? dead by king Henry the eight . page 66 casualty in his time . in his nine year happen a swea•ing-sicknesse , whereof infinite multi ? tude in many part of England die , special in London ; and be so Vio ? lend , that in three and sometime two hour , it take away man life , and spare neither rich nor poor ; for in the king court the lord Clinton , the lord grey of Wilton , and many knight , gentleman and officer dye of it . it begin in July , and continue to the midst of December . in his thirteenth year , be a great mortality in London , and other place of the realm , and many man of honour and worship die ; among other , doctor Fitz-Iames bishop of London , in who place doctor Tunstall succeed . in his nineteenth year , by extremity of rain in seedtime , there follow a great dearth of corn , which will have cause great calamity , but that it be re ? lieu in London by merchant of the styliard out of Germany , and a thousand quarter supply out of the king own provision . in his twenty year , in the end of may , begin in London another sweating-sickness , which after ? ward infect all place of the realm ; by reason whereof the term be adjourn , and the cicuit of the assize also ; many die in the court , as sir Fra•cis point , sir William Compton knight , and William Carew esquire of the king privie-chamber ; the king himself for a space , remove almost e ? very day , till he come to Tittinhanger , a place of the abbot of saint Alban , where he with the queen and a small number remain , till the sickness be pass . in his thirty year , the manner of cast pipe of lead , for con ? veyance of water underground , without use of solder , be first invent by Robert Brock Clerke , one of the king chaplain : a profitable inven ? cion , for by this , two man and a boy will do more in one day , then can have be do before by many man in many day : Robert Cooper gold ? smith , be the first that make the instrument , and put this invention in pra ? ctice . in a rebellion in the north , in this king time , when the duke of nor ? •olke , be send with a army against the rebel , and that a day o• battle be ? between they be appoint , it happen , that the night before a small brook call Dun , run between the two army , upon the fall of a small rai•e , swell to such a height , that it be not passable by either foot or horse ; a thing which have never happen before upon a great rain , and be then account ( as indeed it be ) no less than a miracle . in his three and their ? ti year , be a great mortality in the realm , by reason of hot ague and flux ; and withal so great a drought , that small river be clean dry , much cattle die for lack of water , and the Thames be grow so shallow , that the salt-water flow above London-bridge , till the rain have increase the fresh water . in his five and thirty year , the first cast-peece of Iro• that ever be make in England , be make at Buckstead in Sussex by Ralph h•ge and Peter bawd . in his six and thirty year , be a great plague in London , so as Michaelm•s term be adjourn to saint Alban , and there keep . in his seven and thirty year , on Tuesday in easter-week , Will ? liam Foxley pot-maker for the mint of the tower of London , fall asleep , and can not b• wake with pinch or burn , till the first day of the next term , which be full fourteen day ; and when he avua ? ked , be find in all point , as if he have sleep but one night , and live forty year after . about ••is fifteen year , it happen that diverse thing be new bring int•England , whereupon this rhyme be make : tur••s , carp , hop , piccarell and beer , ca••e into England all in one year . page 67 of his wife and child . king Henry have six wife , his first be Katherine , daughter of Ferdinand king of Spain , the relict of his brother Arthur , she live his wife above twenty yee•s , and then be divorce from he ; after which she live three year by the name of Katherine Dowager , she decease at Kimbolton in the county of Huntington , the eight of January in the year 1535. and lie inter in the cathedral church of Peterborough , under a hearse of black say , have a white cross in the midst . his second wife be Anne second da•ghter of sir Thomas Bullen , earl of VViltshire and Ormond ; she be marry to he the five and twenty day of January , in the year 1533. live his wife three year , three month and five and twenty day , and then be behead , and her body bury in the choir of the chapel in the tower : his three wife be Jane daughter of sir John Seymour and sister to the lord Edward Seymour , earl of Hartford and duke of Somerset , she be marry to he the next day after the behead of queen Anne , live his wife one year five month and four and twenty day , and then die in childbed , and be bury in the midst of the choir of the church within the castle of Windsor . his four wife be Anne , sister to the duke of Cleve , she live his wife six month , and then be divorce ; she remain in England long after the king death , and accompany the la ? die Elizabeth through London , at the solemnize of queen Mary counterfeit ? ronation . his five wife be Katherine , daughter of Edmund , and niece of Thomas Howard his brother duke of Norfolk ; she be marry to he in the two and thirty year of his reign ; live his wife one year six month and four day , and then be behead in the tower of London , and bury in the chancel of the chapel by queen Anne Bullen . his sixth wife be Katherine , daughter of sir Thomas Parre of Kendal , and si ? star to the lord William Parre , marquess of Northampton ; she be first marry to John Nevil lord Latimer , and after his decease to the king at hampton-court , in the five and thirty year of his reign : she be his wife three year six month and five day ; and then survive he , be again marry to Thomas Seymour lord admiral of England , unto who she bear a daughter , but die in her childbed , in the year 1548. he have child by his first wife queen Katherine , Henry bear at Richmond , who live not full two month , and be bury at Westminster ; also another son , who name be not mention , live but a short time neither : then a daughter name marry , bear at Greenwich , in the eight year of his reign , and come af•erward to be queen of England . by his second wife , queen Anne Bullen , he have a daughter name Elizabeth , bear at Greenwich , in the five and twenty year of his reign ; who succeed her sister marry in the crown : he have also by she a son , but bear dead . by his three wife queen Jane , he have a son name Edward , bear at hampton-court in the nine and twenty year of his reign , who succeed he in the king ? dome . beside these , he have a base son , name Henry fitzroy , beget ? ten of the lady talboyse , call Elizabeth blunt , bear at blackamoor in Essex , in the ten year of his reign ; who be make duke of Richmond and Somerset ; marry Mary daughter of Thomas Howard duke of nor ? folk ; with who he live not long , but die at saint Iames by Westmin ? star , and be bury at Framingham in Suffolk . of his personage and condition . he be exceed tall of statu•e , and very strong ; fair of complexi ? on , in his latter day corpulent and burley : concern his condition• , page 68 he be a prince of so many good part , that one will wonder he can have any ill ; and indeed he have no• many ill , till flattery and ill council in his lat ? ter time get the upper hand of he . his cruelty to his wife may not only be excuse , but defend ; for if they be incontinent , he do but justice ; if they be not so , yet it be sufficient to satisfy his conscience , that he think he have c•use to think they so ; and if the marriage bed be honourable in all ? in prince it be sacred . in suppress of abbey he show not little piety , but great providence ; for though they be excellent thing be right use , ye• most pestilent , be abuse ; and then may the use be just suppress , when the abuse scarce possible can be restrain . to think he suppress abbey out of covetousness and desire of gain , be to make he extreme deceive in his reckon ; for if we compare the profit with the charge that follow , we shall find he certain a great loser by the bargain . he be so far from pride , that he be rather too humble , at lest he converse with his subject in a more familiar manner then be usual with prince . so valiant , that his whole li•e almost , be nothing but exercise of valour ; and though perform among his friend in jest , yet they prepare he against his enemy in earnest , and they that dare be his enemy find it . it may be say , the complexion of his govern ? mean for the first twenty year , be sanguine and jovial ; for the rest , choleric and bloody : and it may be doubt , whether in the former , he be more pro ? digall of his own treasure , or in the latter of his subject blood ; for as he spend more in fiction , than any other king do in reality , so in any distemper of his people , he have no other physic , but to open a vein : but we shall do he extreme wrong , to think that all the blood shed in his time , be of his shed ? ding ; they be the bishop that be the Draco to make the bloody law ; the bishop that be the Phalaris , to put they in execution : the king of•entimes scarce know what be do . certain it be , when a great lord put a gentle ? woman the second time on the rack , the king hear of it , exceed condemn ? ned he for such extreme cruelty . as for religion , though he bring it not to a full reformation ; yet he give it so great a beginning , that we may true say of that he do , Dimidium plus toto . they who charge he with the vice of lust , let they show such another example of continence as be see in he to lie six month by a young lady , and not to touch she ; for so do he with the lady anne of Cleve : but this be to make nosegay , i like better to leave every flow ? ere grow upon its stalk , that it may be gather fresh ; which will be do by read the story of his life . of his death and burial . it be record of he , that in his late time he grow so fat and slothful , that engine be make to lift and remove he up and down ; but howsoever in the six and fifty year of his age , whither a dropsy , or by reason of a ulcer in his leg , he fall into a lang•ishing fever , which bring he into such extrea ? mity , that his physician utter despair of his life , whereof yet none dare speak a word to he , till master Denny one of his privy-chamber take they the boldness to go to he , tell he of the danger he be in , and withal put ? thing he in mind to think of his soul health ; to which he answer , that he confess his sin•es to be exceed great , yet have such confidence in the mercy of God through Christ , that he doubt not of forgiveness though they have be much great ; and be then ask by master Denny , if he will have any divine bring to he with who to confer , he answer he will willing have the archbishop Cranmer , but not yet a while , till he have take a little rest : whereupon the archbishop be then at Croydon , be present send •or , but before he can come , the king be grow speechless , only seem to retain a little memory , so as put out his hand , and the archbishop desire he to show some sign of his faith in Christ , he then wring the archbishop hard page 69 by the hand , and immediate give up the ghost , the eight and twenty of January , in the year 1547. the six and fifty of his age , and of his reign the eight and thirty : he body with great solemnity be bury at Windsor under a most costly and stately tomb , begin in copper and guilt , but never fi•ished . man of note in his time . man famous for the sword be many in his time , and in a manner all , that it be hard make choice , without be partial , unless we shall prefer duke of equal valour , before other of mean calling , and then will the duke of Norfolk and Suffolk hold worthy the place first , and next to they the young earl of Surrey , who have be more fortunate if he have be less valiant . of man of letter in his time , there be whole army in foreign part , the most •amous , be Budaeus , Ludovicus vine , John Revolin , Erasmus Roteradamu• , Vrsinus , Cornarius , Sadolet , Martin Bucer ; in England be John Collet Deane of Pauls and founder of the school there , William Lilly bear a•Odiham in Hamshire , first scholmaster of pauls-schoole , Thomas Linaker a learned physician , John Skelton a pleasant poet , William Horman vice prove of eat , who write diverse work , sir Thomas Moore , William Tindall , John Rastal• a citizen and stationer of London , Christopher saint-germane a excellent lawyer , sir Thomas elyot , John Leland , a diligent searcher of antiquity , sir John Bourchier knight , lord Berners , who translate •he Chronocles of froy ? sard out of french into english , Henry Standish bishop of saint Assaph , who w•ote a book against Erasmus translation of the new testament ; Arnold of Lon ? don , who write certain collection touch historical matter , Thomas Lup ? set a Londoner , who write sundry virtuous treatise , Henry Bradshaw a black monk , who write the life of saint VVerborough , and also a certain Chronocle , John palsgrave a Londoner , who write instruction for the perfect understanding of the french tongue , John s•vish a cornishman , who write certain abbre ? viation of chronicle , with a treatise of the war of Troy , Anthony fitz-h ? bert a judge , who write a abridgment of the law , Wilfride Holme who write a treatise of the rebellion in Lincolnshire , Thom•s lanquet who write a e ? pitomy of chronicle , and also of the win of Boulogne , Thomas Soulman of Gernsey , who write diverse note of history , Cuthbert Tunstall bishop of Durham , Robert VVhittington who write diverse treatise for the instruction of grammarian , John Russell , who write a treatise entitle super jure caesaris et papae , also commentary in Cantica , Simon fish a kentishman , who write a book call the supplication of beggar , George Bullen lord Rochfort brother to queen anne who write diverse song and sonnet , Francis bigod knight bear in Yorkshire , who write a book against the clergy , entitle de impropriationibus , Henry lord Morley , who write diverse treatise , as comody and tragedy , as the life of sectary , and certain rhyme , William Botevile alias thin , who re ? store the work of chawcer , Richard Turpin , who ser•ing in the garrison of Callice , write a chronicle of his time , and die in the •eer 1541. sir Thomas VViat knight , who write diverse matter in english-meet , and transl•ted the seven penitential psalm , and ( as some say ) the whole psalter , he die of the pestilence , as he be go ambassador to the emperor , in the year 1541. Henry Howard earl of Surrey , who write diverse treatise in english-meet , John field a Londoner , who write a treatise of man freewill , de Servo ho ? mi•is arbitrio , and collection of the common law of England , Robert shin ? gleton bear in Lancashire , who write a treatise of the seven church , and certain prophecy , William Parry a Welshman , who write a book entitle speculum iuvenam . page 70 the reign of king Edward the six . it be now the year 1547. when on the eight and twenty of January king Henry die ; prince ed ? ward his son by his three wife , the lady Jane say ? mour , and the only son he leave behind he , as well by right of inheritance , as by his last will , succeed he in the kingdom ; to who as be but nine year old , and therefore unripe for government ; he have assign eight and twenty counsellor ; a fit num ? ber , if agree among themselves ; too many , if at variance : and at variance they will soon fall , if there be not a moderator to keep they in concord ; the first work therefore ne ? cessary to be do in this new world , be to make choice of such a man , as may be to the counsellor a moderator , a protector to the king , and in his minority , to the kingdom . to this place , by common consent of the king and counsel , Edward Seymour earl of Hartford the king uncle , be choose to hold the place , until the king shall accomplish the age of eighteen year . in which office the first thing he do , be to make the young king knight , who present thereupon , make Henry Hobblethorne major of London knight , and then king Henry obsequy be solemn perform ; on the seaventeenth of February , be raise in honour the earl of Hartford protector , to be duke of Somerset , William par earl of Essex , to be marquis of Northampton , Dudley Viscount Lisle , to be earl of Warwick ; Wriothsley lord chancellor , to be earl of Southampton , sir Thomas Seymour the protector brother , be make lord of Sudeley , and admiral of England , sir Richard rich be make lord rich , sir William Willoughby be make lord Willoughby , and sir Edmund Sheffield be make lord Sheffield of Butterwick : on the nineteenth of Febru ? ary , the king in great state ride from the tower to the palace of westmin ? star , where the day follow , he be crown by the archbishop of canter ? bury , with all rite accustom , in great solemnity . at which time a general pardon be proclaim for all offender , six only except , namely the duke of Norfolk , cardinal Poole , Edward Courtney elder son to the marquis of excetur , master Fortescue , master Throgmorton , and doctor pa•es bishop of VVorcester , who be flee to roam , to avoid take the oath of suprem•cy , all which six continue unpardo•ed , till the first year of queen mary , and then be restore . a few day after , the earl of Southampton lord chancellor for be•ng contumacious to the rest of the lord in matter of counsel , be remove both from his office of be chancellor , and from his place in page 71 counsel , and the great seal be deliver to sir William Pawlet , lord Saint-Iohn , and lord great master of the king huoshold . within two month after the death of king Henry , die Francis king of France also , for who solemn obsequy be keep in Paul church , as he likewise have keep before at Paris for king Henry : these two king be of so consent nature , that they have certain be great friend while they live , if they have not be king , and that jealousy of state have not make they often ? time not to be themselves . king Henry before his death , have leave in charge with the lord of his con ? sail , by all mean possible , to procure a proceed in the marriage with the young queen of Scot ; and now in discharge thereof the lord protector he ? self , with a army of twelve thousand foot , and six thousand horse , beside labourer and pioner thirteen hundred , enter Scotland the three of September , at which time also Edward lord Clinton with a fleet of threescore sail assist by sea , but before he will do any hostile act , he cause proclamation to be make , that his come be only to have performance of the article hereto ? fore agree on fo• the marriage , tend to the good of both kingdom , if they will yield unto , he will then return in peaceable manner , and the more to draw they on , w•ere before it be demand to have the queen bring into England , and there to be bring up , the protector be content , she shall remain in Scotland till year of consent• this demand , the more moderate sort of the Scot accou•ted very reasonable , but those of the french and Papal facti ? on , who be the great person , and the great number strong oppose ; whereupon , the lord protector , present put his army into array , the lord grey and sir Francis Brian , with eight hundred light-horse , be send before to provide lodging for the army , and to give advertisement of the enemy ap ? proache ; then follow the avant-guard , in number between three and four thousand foot , one hundred man at arm , and six hundred light-horse , lead by the earl of Warwick ; then follow the main battle , consist of above six thousand foot , six hundred man at arm , and one thousand light-horse lead by the protecter himself last follow the arrear , wherein be between three and four thousand foot , one hundred man at arm , and six hundred light-horse , u•der the conduct of the lord Dacres , upon one wing the Artil ? lery be draw , be sixteen piece of great ordinance ; the other wing be make by man at arm and demilance ; for the avant-guard and half the battle , ridi•g about two flight shoot from their side , the other half of the battle , and th• whole flank of the arrear be close by the carraige , be nine hundred •arts beside wagon ; •he rest of the man at arm , and the demilance march behind . in this order they march two day , take in three castle •s they go , with little resistance ; where it be memorable , what a sudden device the defendant of one of they use to save themselves ; for find they w•re no long able to defend themselves , and that their obstinacy have exclude a•• hope of pardon ; they make suit , they may not present be slay , but have some time to commend their soul to God , and afterward be hang : which respite be obtain , thei• pardon afterward do more easy ensue ; so much do the win of time oftentimes prevail , more than any other policy . t•e governor of Scotland , hear of the protector approach and have no sufficient army ready to resist he , send his herald abroad , into all part of the r•alm , and command the fire-cross to be carry ( a ancient custom in case of importance ) which , be two firebrand set in fashion of a cross , and pitch upon the point of a spear , and therewith proclamation to be make , that all above sixteen year of age , and under sixty , shall resort forthwith to Musselborough and bring convenient provision of victual with they . by this mean , have get a sufficient army , he set forward towards the english who be now come to a river call Linne , and here the earl of Warwick be too •enterous , be like to have be entrap , but by his valour page 72 come off brave ; and now the scottish horseman begin to hover about the english army , and to come prick towards they , sometime within length of their staff , use provoke word , to draw the english from their strength , but the protector , not move with their provocation , maintain a close march till he come to salt-presion by the Frith , where he encamp within two mile of the scottish army : and here the Scot have get the advantage of a hill come upon the english with the number of twelve hundred horse , beside five hundred foot that lie in ambush behind the hill ; at which time the lord grey and sir Francis Brian , impatient of such bravary , obtain leave of the Gene• to encounter they , and so as they come scatter upon the spur , within a stone cast of the english , and be begin to wheel about , the lord grey with some troop of light horseman , charge they home , and be forthwith second by certain number of demilance , and both of they back with a thousand man at arm ; yet the Scot resolute maintain the fight three hour and more , but in the end , overlay with number , they be put to flight and chase almost to the edge of their camp . in this fight the chief force of the scottish horseman be defeat , the lord Hume , by a fall from his horse lose his life , his son and heir with two priest and six gentleman be take prisoner , and about fifteen hundred slay : the next day , the protector and the earl of Warwick , ride towards the place where the scottish army lie , to view the manner of their encamp . as they return , a herald and a trumpeter from the Scot overtake they ; who have obtain audience , the trumpeter say , that the lord Huntley his master , to spare effusion of Chri ? stian blood , will fight upon the whole quarrel , either with twenty against twen ? ty , or with ten against ten , or else try it between the lord general and he ? self : the protector answer , that for number of combatant , it be not in his power to conclude any bargain ; and as for himself , that be in public charge , it be not fit he shall hazard himself against a man of private Con ? dition , which otherwise he will most willing accept : here the earl of Warwick entreat the lord general , that he may accept the challenge , and trumpeter ( say he ) bring i word , that thy master will perform the come ? bat with i , and thou shall have a hundred crown for thy pain ; nay ra ? the ( say the lord general ) bring i word that thy master will abide and give we battle , and thou shall have a thousand crown for thy pain : and thereupon , when no other agreement can be make , a general battle be resolve on : in the army of the Scot , be five or six and thirty thousand man ; in the avant-guard , command by the earl of Angus , about fifteen thousand ; in the battle , over who be the lord governor , about te• thousand ; and in the arrear as many , lead by the valiant Gourdon earl of Huntley ; hack ? butters•hey have none nor man at arm , burr about two thousand horseman ( pricker as they term they ) the rest be all on foot we'•l furnish with jack and scull , pike , dagger , buckler make of board , a•d slice sword broad and thin ; every man have a long kirchiffe , fold twic• or thrice about his neck , and many of they have chain of latin , draw th•ee or four time along their hose and doublet-sleeve : they have also to affright the enemy horse , great •attles cover with parchment or paper , and small stone within put upon staff three ell long . and now both army join in battle , where a long fight and much variety of fortune on both side ; at length , the victory fall to the english : in this fight , diverse of the nobility of Scotland be slay ; of the inferior sort about ten , or as some say , fo•rteen thousand : of the english be slay , only one and fifty horseman a•d on footman , but many hurt ; the lord grey be dangerous thrust with a pike in the mouth which strike two inch into his neck ; the scottish prisoner account by the marshal book , be about fifteen hundred , the chief whereof be , the earl of Huntley , the lord yester , Hobley and Hamilton , the master of san•-poole and the lord of wimme ; the earl of Huntley be ask while he page 73 be a prisoner , how he stand affect to the marriage ; make this answer , that he like the marriage well enough , but he like not this kind of woo . this victory of Muskelborough against the Scot , be on the ten of December , the very same day on which thirty year before a victory have be have against they at Flodden field ; so as it seem this day be fatal to the Scot , and confirm the opinion of astologer , that there be day to some man fortunate and unfortunate to other if they can be know . this victory strike such a terror into many of the Scot , that the earl Bothwel and diverse chief gentleman of Tividale and Meers sub ? mit themselves to the king of England , and be receive by the prorectour into his protection : after this , the english army take many town and castle , and then for want of provision , return into England , have not stay above five and twenty day in Scotland , and not lose above threescore man . but not ? withstand this great overthrow at Muskelborough , the governor of Scotland will not yet be quiet ; but assemble the people , make unto they a long Ora ? cion , exhort they to defend the liberty of their country , and not to be daun ? t with any event of war . in this mean time many distraction and trouble happen in England ; partly in matter of religion , and partly about enclosure : •nd first for enclosure , the lord protector cause proclamation to be set forth , command they who have enclose any land , accustom to lie open , shall upon a certain pain , before a day assign , lie they open again : and then in mat ? ter of religion , certain injunction be set forth , for remove of image out of church ; and diverse preacher be send with instruction to dissuade the people from pray to saint or for the dead ; from use of bead , ash and pro ? cession ; from mass , durge , pray in any unknown tongue ; and for defect of preacher , homily be appoint public to be read in church : and many for offer to maintain these ceremony , be either punish or force to recant . Edmund Bonner bishop of London , be commit to the fleet , for refum ? sing to receive these injunction ; Stephen Gardiner bishop of Winchester , be like ? wise commit first to the fleet and after to the tower , for that he have preach ? ed ; it be well , these change in religion shall be stay until the king be of year to govern by himself : for the like cause Tunstall bishop of Durham , heath bishop of Rochester , and day bishop of Chichester , be in like manner commit to prison , and all of they dispossess of their bishopric ; and that which be worse , the bishopric themselves be dispossess of their Reve ? nues , in such sort , that a very small pa•t remain to the bishop that come after . and now a parliament be hold , in the first year of the king , and by Prorogati ? on in the second ; wherein diverse chantry , college , free chapel , fraterni ? tie and guild , with all their land and good be give to the king ; which be sell at a low rate , enrich many and ennoble some , and thereby make they firm in maintain the change : also it be then order , that no man shall speak against receive the eucharist in both kind , and that bishop shall be place by collation of the king under his letter patent , without any election precede , or confirmation ensue ; and that all processes eccle ? siasticall shall be make in the king name , as in writ at the common-law ; and that all person exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction , shall have the king arm in the seal of their office : and further , the statute of the six article and other statute concern punishment of Lollards be repeal , and the king supremacy over the church of England be confirm . all this while the war in Scotland continue , and be manage by the lord grey of Wilton with variable success ; and now about this time be send to he in aid , the earl of Shrewsbury with fifteen thousand man ; ah ? against he , in aid of the Scot be send the Rhinegrave with ten thousand french ; who enter into consul•ation , how to remove the young queen out of the reach of the english ; provide a fleet , and sail round about Scotland , not ? withstand the english fleet lie in wait to impeach their passage , yet con ? vey she safe into France , be then but six year old ; accompany in the page 74 journey with Iames her base brother , John Erskin and William Leviston ; and in April follow be marry to Francis the dolphin of France . you hear before the alteration , now hear the trouble ; for when the inn ? junction be send abroad into the country , and commissioner appoint to see they execute ; one master body a commissioner , as he be pull down image in Cornwall , be sudden by a priest stab into the body with a knife . hereupon the people flock together in diverse part of the sheer , take ? ing arm , and begin to commit outrage ; and although the chief of ? fendour be hang and quarter in Smithfield , and many of his complice execute in diverse part of the realm ; and withal a pardon proclaim to all that will lay down arm , yet neither can that severity , nor this le ? nity restrain they from their insolence ; but in diverse country , as sus ? sex , Hampshire , Kent , Glostershire , Warwickshire , Worcestershire , but special in Semersetshire and Devonshire , great assembly of people gather to a head ; who chief leader be Humphrey Arundel , and about six other of inferior note , but many priest . some of these ( we may say ) be commonwealth muti ? ners ; and some mutine for religion : they who be for the commonwealth can agree upon nothing ; some will have no justice , some no gentleman , some no lawyer , nor ordinary court of justice , but above all enclosure must down ; but whether all , or which , or how to be employ , none can tell . the re ? ligious mutineer be not altogether so various in their voice , as have some few among they by who they be guide : these in name of the people ha ? mere up these ar•icles follow ; upon grant of which , they pro•essed that both their body and good shall be at the king devotion . 1. that curate shall administer baptism at all time of necessity , a• well o• weekday as on holy-day . 2. that their child may be confirm by the bishop . 3. that the mass may be celebrate , no man communicate with the priest . 4. that they may have reservation of the lord body in their church . 5. that they may have holy-bread and holy-water in remembrance of Christ precious body and blood . 6. that priest may live unmarried . 7. that the six article set forth by king Henry the eight may be continue ? ed , at lest till the king shall come to full age . upon these demand , the king , although he know that reason will little prevail with unreasonable man ; yet to discharge the place he hold , he send they in write answer to they all , and withal a general pardon , if they will desist and lay down arm . but the seditious grow the more outra ? gious , the fair they be entreat ; and find themselves able to subsist with their own estate , begin to think upon the spoil of city ; and first they come to excetour , and demand entrance , which the citizen refuse , they fall to set fire on the ga•es ; but the citizen prevent this , by cast in wood and maintain the fire , till they have cast up a half moon within ; up ? on which when the seditious attempt to enter , they be present hew and cut in piece . after this they mine the wall , lay powder , and ram the mouth ; but the citizen prevent this also , by make a countermine , where ? into they pour such plenty of water , that the wet powder can not be fi ? red . all this while , the lord Russell lord privy seal , who have be send down to suppress the commotion , lay at Huntington , expect more for ? ces ; while these citizen of excetour , for twelve day together endure so great famine , that they be fain to eat horse , and make bread of course bran mould in clothes , for that otherwise it will not cleave together . at last the lord grey come to the lord Russell with supply of force ; who after many conflict with the rebel , force they to raise their siege at excetour ; and thereby free the city from many misery : to who the king afterward , give the manor of Evyland , in reward for their loyalty . after this , the rebel rally their Force• , be again set upon by the king army , and the great page 75 part of they slay , the rest flee ; many be take and execute by martial law ; the chief leader be send to London and there execute . the sedition be thus suppress ; it be memorable what sport sir William Kingston the provost Marshall make , by virtue of his office , upon man in misery . one Boyer major of Godmin in Cornwall , have be among the rebel , not willing but en ? force ; to he the provost send word he will come and dine with he , for who the major make great provision ; a little before dinner , the provost take the major aside , and whisper he in the ear , that a execution must that day be do in the town , and therefore require to have a pair of gallow set up a ? against dinner shall be do ; the major fail not of his charge , present after dinner the provost take the major by the hand , entreat he to lead he to the place where the gallow be , which when he behold he ask the major if he think they to be strong enough ; yes ( say the major ) doubtless they be ; well then ( say the provost ) get you up speedy , for they be provide for you . i hope ( answer the major ) you mean not as you speak : in faith ( say the pro ? vost ) there be no remedy , for you have be a busy rebel ; and so without respite or defence he be hang to death : ) a most uncurreous part , for a guest to offer his host . near the say place dwell a miller , who have be a busy actor in that rebellion ; who fear the approach of the martial , tell a sturdy fellow his servant , that he have occasion to go from home , and therefore bid he , that if any man come to inquire after the miller , he shall not speak of he , but say that himself be the miller , and have be so for three year before . So the provost come and call for the miller , when out come the servant , and say , he be the man : the provost demand how long he have keep the mill ; these three year answer the servant : then the provost command his man to lay hold on he , and hang he on the next tree . at this the fellow cry out , that he be not the miller but the millar man : nay sir ( say the provost ) i will take you at your word , and if thou be the miller thou be a busy knave ; if thou be nor , thou be a false lie knave , and howsoever thou can never do thy master better service than to hang for he ; and so without more ado he be dispatch . when this sedition in Devonshire be appease , there rise another in nor ? folk , and that special upon a grievance for enclosure ; the rebel have get one Robert Ket a tanner of Wimondham to be their leader , and be grow to a body of twenty thousand , seat themselves at monshold , near mount-sur ? rey , where they carry a face as it be of justice and religion ; for they have one Conyers a idle fellow to be their chapleyne , who morning and evening read solemn prayer , also sermon they have often , and as for justice they have a bench under a tree where Ket usual sit , and with he two of every hund•ed whence their company have be raise , to hear complint and to give judge ? mean , and from hence be warrant send in the king name , to bring in powder , shot , victual , and all thing necessary : which tree have ever since be call the tree of reformation ; and now be grow to a height , they present cer ? tain complaint to the king , require , he will send a herald to they , to give they satisfaction ; the king though he take it for a great indignity , to have such base fellow to capitulate with he , yet frame himself to the time , he return this answer ; that in October follow he will call a parliament where ? in their complaint shall be hear , and all their grievance shall be redress , require they in the mean time , to lay down arm and return to their house , and thereupon grant they a general pardon : but this be so far from satisfy the seditious , that hereupon first , they assault the town of Norwich take it , and make the major attend they as their servant , and then retur ? ned again to their station at Manshold• not long after William Parre marquess of Northampton , with the lord Sheffield , the lord Wentworth , diverse knight , and fifteen hundred horse , with a small band of Italians be send against they ; who the seditious so stout oppos•d , that much mischief be do on both page 76 side , the lord Sheffield fall with his horse in a ditch be take prisoner , and as he pull off his helmet to show who he be , he be by a butcher strike ? en down with a club and slay ; so as the marquess with his force not pre ? vail , there be afterward send the earl of Warwick with six thousand •oot , and fifteen hundred horse , with who be the lord Willoughby , Powis and bray his two son Ambrose and Robert , and many knight and gentleman of name . when the earl be come near to the camp of the seditious , he send a herald to they , offer they the king pardon , if they will desist , but they be so far from accept it , that a lewd boy turn up his naked breech towards the herald and bid he kiss it ; upon this , many skirmish pass between the earl and they , with loss sometime to one side , and sometime to another ; at last they come to a battle , where the rebel place in the fro•t , all the gentleman they have take prisoner , mean they shall be the first slay , of who yet very few be hurt , but of the rebel be slay above two thou ? sand , and now once again the earl offer they pardon , if they will desist ; but for all their loss , they continue obstinate still , at last the ea•le send to know if they will entertain their pardon , in case he shall come in person and assure they of it ; this move they much , and then they answer , they know he to be so honourable , that from himself they will embrace it ; where ? upon the earl ride to they , and cause their pardon to be read , they thre• away their weapon , wish all joy and prosperity to the king : nine of •he principal rebel be hang upon the tree of reformation ; Ket himself fly away be take and hang in chain upon Norwich castle ; the day of this defeat of the seditious , be a long time after observe for a festival day by the inhabitant of Norwich , and thus end the sedition in Nor•olke ; whe• at the same time another arise in Yorkshire , whereof the chief mover be William ombler a gentleman , Thomas Dale a parish clerk , and Stephenson a post , to who be assemble four or five thousand , who take their encou ? ragement from a certain prophesy , which do foretell , that the time shall come , when there shall be no king , when the nobility and gen•ry shall be destroy , when the realm shall be rule by four governor elect by the commons , hold a parliament in commotion , which shall begin at the south and north sea of England , and that time they understand to be the present , and that the rebel of Devonshire , Norfolk and Yorkshire shall draw together to accomplish this prophesy ; but as soon as they hear that the tu ? mult of Devonshire and Norfolk be quiet , they find that they be the ? ceive in the understanding of the prophesy , and thereupon present upon the king pardon , they fall off and disperse , their chief leader ombler , dale and four other be execute at York ; and with this , the spirit of sedition be quite lay in all place of the kingdom . but the king of France , take advantage of these sedicio•s , though he have be in treaty before of peace with England , yet now he break off the treaty , proclaim war , and denounce it by his ambassador to the king : hereupon all Frenchman in England , not denizen , be take prisoner , and all their good seize for the king , which the french king understanding , he send a fleet of ship to surprise Gernsey and Iarnsey , but be repel with the loss of a thousand man : after this , he levy a army by land , and go himself in per ? son against Boulogne , defend by the valiant sir Nicholas Arnold , but be weary of the work , he leave his lieutenant Chatillon to pursue the siege , who have make many fierce battery , and at last assault and no• prevail , he then attempt to hinder the town from supply of victual ; and to this end , charge a galley with gravel and stone , mean to sink it in the haven , but the english take the galley before it be sink , and make use of the stone for their own defence : after this , they make faggo•s of light matter , mix with pi•ch , tar , tallow , rosi•• powder and wildfire , with intention to fire the ship in the haven , but that enterprise be defeat by the Bulloignes , and the fag ? get page 77 take from the french ; and more than this , there be little do in those part at this time . but in England in the mean time , a unfortunate accident happen , which begin upon a very light occasion , produce afterward very heavy effect ; whereof , though there be many concurrant circumstance , yet the original cause be the pride of a woman , upon a point indeed , wherein the nature of woman be common most tender , precedency of place : the protector have marry Anne Stanhope , a woman of a haughty stomach , and the lord admiral his brother the queen dowager , a lady of great mildness : the nearness of the husband , give occasion to the lady often meet , where the duchess will inward murmur , why she be the wife of the elder brother and the better man , shall give place to she , who be the wife of the young brother , and the mean man ; this envy of she towards the queen , breed a malice in she towards the admiral , as think the mischief she do to the husband , to be a part of revenge upon the wife , and though the queen short after die in childbed , yet the malice of the duchess towards the admiral live still ; ( so hard a thing it be , for malice once settle in a woman heart , to be remo ? ve ) out of this malice , she put diverse surmise into her husband the protector head against his brother the admiral , as though he go about to procure his death , to the end he may aspire to the place he hold ; but certain as mislike his government be a protestant , who be himself a papist ; in this case cause of jealousy against the admiral be obvious enough , for it be know that in king Henry time , he have aim at the marriage of the lady Elizabeth king Henry second daughter ; and now his wife the queen Dowager be dead ( and not without suspicion of poison ) he fall upon that marriage a fresh , which can not be think to tend , but to some very high aspire end : the protector a plain man , and one that have not the clear insight into practise ; whether too importunate provoke by his wife , or whither out of a honest mind , not will to patronize fault though in a brother , give way to accusati ? o•s bring against he , so as in a parliament then hold , he be accuse , for attempt to get into his custody the person of the king , and government of the realm , for endeavour to marry the lady Elizabeth the king sister , for per ? swade the king in his tender year , to take upon he the rule and order of himself ; upon which point ( though perhaps prove , yet not sufficient a ? against he , who be never call to his answer ) he be by act of parliament condemn , and within few day after condemnation , a warrant be send unacustomated ? there the hand of his brother the protector to cut off his head ; wherein ( as after it prove ) he do as much , as if he have lay his own head down upon the block ; for while these brother live and hold together , they be as a strong for ? tress one to the other ; the admiral courage support the protector au ? thority , and the protector authority maintain the admiral stoutness ; but the admiral once go , the protector authority as want support begin to totter , and fall at last to utter ruin : beside there be at this time , among the nobility a kind of faction ; protestant who favour the protector for his own sake , and other of papal inclination , who favour he for his brother sake , but his brother be go , both side forsake he , even his own side ; as think they can expect little assistance from he , who give no more as ? sistance to his own brothe• ; and perhaps more than all this , the earl of Warwick at this time , be the most powerful man both in courage and counsel a ? among all the nobility , and none so near to match he as the admiral while he live , but he be go , there be none leave that either be able and dare , or dare and be able to stand against he : however it be , not long after the admiral death , the protector be invade with sundry accusation , wherein •h• earl of Warwick make not always the great show , but yet have always the great hand ; one thing the protector have do , which though a private act , yet give a public distaste . to make he a mansion house in the strand ( the same page 78 which be now call somersethouse ) he pull down a church , and two by ? shop house by the strand bridge ; in dig the foundation whereof , the bone of many who have be there bury , be cast out and carry into the field ; and because the stone of those house and the church suffice not for his work , the steeple a•d most part of the church of saint John of Jerusalem near smith ? field , be mine and overthrow with powder , and the stone apply to this sparious build ; and more than this , the cloister of Paul on the north side of the church , in a place call pardon Church-yard , and the dance of death ve ? ry curious wrought about the cloister , and a chapel that stand in the midst of the churchyard ; also the charnal house , that stand upon the south side of Pauls ( now a carpenter yard ) with the chapel , timber and monument therein be beat down , the bone of the dead carry into Finsbury-field , and the stone convert to this build . this act of the protector , do something alienate the people mind from he ; which the earl of Warwick perceive think it now a fit time to be fall upon he ; and thereupon draw eighteen of the privy counsel to join with he , who withdraw themselves from the court , hold secret consultation together , and walk in the city with many servant weapon , and in new livery ; whereof when the lord pro ? tectour hear , he send secretary Peter to they , to know the cause of their as ? sembly , require they to resort unto he peaceable , that they may common together as friend ; but in the mean time , he arm five hundred man , and remove the king by night from hampton-court to Windsor : on the other side , the lord at London have first take possession of the tower , send for the Majo• and alderman of the city , to the earl of Warwick lodging at ely-house in Holburn ; to who the lord rich then lord chancellor make a long oration wherein he show the ill government of the lord protector , and the many miss ? chife that by it be come upon the kingdom ; and therup•n require they to join with the lord there assemble to remove he ; and present that day , a proclamation be make in diverse part of the city to that purpose ; to which the lord and counsellor that subscribe their name be these ; the lord rich chancellor , the lord Saint-Iohn lord great master , the marquess of Northampton , the earl of Warwick lord great chamberlain , the earl of Arundel lord Chamberlaine , the earl of Shrewsbury , the earl of south ? ampton , sir Thomas Cheyney treasurer of the household , sir John Gag• con ? staple of the tower , sir William Peter secretary , sir Edward north knight , sir Edward Montague chief justice of the common-plea , sir John Baker Chan ? celour of the exchequer , sir Ralph Sadler , sir Edward Wootton , sir Richard Southwell knight : and doctor Wootton Deane of Canterbury . in the afternoon of the same day , the lord Major assemble a common counsel in the Guildhall where two letter arrive almost in one instant from the king and the lord protector , for a thousand man to be arm for defence of the king person ; another from the lord at London for two thousand man to aid they in defence of the king person also ; both pretend alike , and therefore hard how to please they both . the recorder set forth the complaint of the lord against the protector , in such sort , that he make many inclinable to fa ? your that side , but one name George Stadlow better advise , step up , and in a long speech show , what mischief have come to the city by oppose the king ; and therefore give his opinion to suspend give aid to the lord , at lest for a time . his advice be hearken to , and thereupon the court resolve only to arm a hundred horseman and four hundred foot , in defence of the city ; and to the letter , return submissive but dilatory answer . after some other passage between the protector and the lord , sir Edward Winkfield captain of the guard , be send from the lord to Windsor ; who so well persuade the king of the lord loyal affection towards he , and of their moderate intention towards the protector , that the king be content to have he present remvoe from he , and suffer he within two day of ? ter page 79 to be carry to the tower . in who absence , seven lord of the council and four knight be appoint by turn to attend the king person ; and for affair of state , the government of they be refer to the whole body of the council : soon after be send to the protector in the tower , certain lord of the council , with article against he , require his present answer , when ? there he will acknowledge they to be true , or else stand upon his justifica•i ? on . the chief article be this ; that he take upon he the office of Pro ? tectour , with express condition , that he shall do nothing in the king of ? fair , but by assent of the late king executor , or the grea•est part of they ; and that contrary to this condition , he have hinder justice , and subvert law of his own authority , as well by letter as by other command ; and many other article , but all much to this purpose . the protector , whether think to speed better by submission then by contest ; or perhaps find himself not altogether innocent , ( for indeed in so great a place , who can bear himself with such sincerity , but he will commit error , with which he may be tax ; ) subscribe a acknowledgement with his own hand ; humble submit he ? self to the king mercy , and desire their lordship favour •owards he . upon this submission , three month after he have be imprison , he be relea ? sed , entertain and feast by the king , and swor•e again to be a privy Coun ? cellour , but no more protector : at which time , between he and the lord , a show at least of perfect amity be make ; and to make it the more firm , the duke daughter be afterward marry to the lord Lisle , son and heir to the earl of Warwick ; at which marriage the king himself be present ; and perhaps to honour their reconcilement and this marri•ge , the earl of war ? wick be make lord admiral of England , sir John Russell lord privy seal be create earl of Bedford , the lord Saint-Iohn be create earl of Wilt ? shire , and soon after make lord treasurer , sir William Paget controlour of the king house , be make lord Paget , sir Anthony VVinkfield captain of the guard , be make controlour , and sir Thomas Darcye be make captain of the guard . but of the other side , the earl of Arundel , the earl of south ? ampton , be put off from the council ; of who , the earl of Southampton die short after at lincolne-place in Holborn , and be bury in saint an ? drewes church there . about this time a parliament be hold at Westminster , wherein one act be make against spread of prophecy ; another against unlawful assem ? bly : but for fear of new tumult , the parliament be untimely dissolve , and gentleman be command to retire to their count•ey-habitations ; and •or the same cause also Trinity term do not hold . about this time also , pope Paul the three die ; after who death the car ? dinal be divide about the election of a new pope ; the imperial part , which be the great , give their voice for cardinal pool ; which be tell he , •e disable himself , and wish they to choose one that may be m●st for the glory of God , and good of the church : upon •his stop , some that be no friend to pool , and perhaps look for the place themselves , if he be put off , lay m•ny thing to his charge ; among other , that he be no• withou• suspi ? cion of lutharisme , as have be very conversant with Immanuell Tremellius and Antonius Flaminius , great lutheran , and not altogether without blemish of incontinency ; there be a young nun that be think to be his daugh ? ter . but of these crimination pool so clear himself , that he be afterward more importune to take the place than he be before ; and thereupon one night the cardinal come unto he , be in bed ; and send he word they come to adore he ( which be one special kind of elect the pope ) but he be awak ? ed out of his sleep , and acquaint with it ; make answer , that this be not a work of darkness , and therefore require they to forbear till the next day , and then to do as God shall put in their mind . but the italian cardinal attribute this put off , to a kind of stupidity and sloth in pool ; look page 80 not more after he , but the next day choose cardinal Montanus pope , who be afterward name Iulius the three . and now the king of France , upon many just consideration , be grow de ? sirous to have a peace with England ; and thereupon send one Guidol•i a Floren ? tine in•o England , to make some overture of his desire to the lord of the council ; who address himself to the earl of Warwick , who he know to be most prevalent ; so prevail , that it be conclude four ambassador shall be send from the king of England into Franee• and four from the french king , to treat with they . the commissioner for the english be John Earl of Bedford , William lord Paget , sir William Peter and sir John Mason , secret ? tarry of state . for the french be Monsieur Rochpot , monsieur Chatillon , guyl ? lart de martyer and Rochetelle de Dassie : much time be spend to agree about a place of meeting ; till at last the english to satisfy the french , be conten ? t it shall be before Boulogne ; where be many meeting and m•ny diff• ? rence about condition ; but in conclusion , a peace be conclude upon cer ? taine article ; the chief whereof be , that Boulogne and the place adjacent shall be deliver up to the french within six week after the peace Proclai ? m ; and that the french shall pay for the same two hundred thousand crown , within three day after delivery of the town ; and other two hu• ? dread thousand crow upon the five day of August follow : hostage be on both side give for performance ; and to those article the french king be swear at Amiens , and the king of England in London : the lord Clinton who have be deputy of Boulogne be make lord admiral of England . present after this agreement , the duke of Brunswick send to the king of England , to offer his service in the king war , with ten thousand man , and to entreat a marriage with the lady mary , the king elder sister . to his offer of aid , answer be make , that the king war be end ; and touch the marriage with the lady mary , •hat the king be in speech for her marriage with the infanta of Portugal , which if it succeed not , he shall then be fa ? vourable hear . upon this , the emperor ambassador demand of the king , that the lady mary may have free exercise of the mass , which the king not only constant deny , but thereupon sermon be exercise at court , and order take , that no man shall have any benefice from the king , but first he shall preach before he ; and short after , under pretence of prepare for sea-matter , five thou•and pound be send to relieve Prote ? stant beyond the sea . at this time also , a ambassador come from Gustanu• king of Sweden , to enter league with the king for intercourse of merchant ; and charge be then also give , that the law of England shall be admini ? stre in Ireland . about this time the queen dowager of Scotland , go from France to her country , pass through England , have first obtain a safe conduct , she arrive at Portesmouth , and be there meet by diverse of the english Nobili ? ty ; conduct to London , she be lodge in the bishops-pallace : after four day stay , have be feast by the king at Whitehall , she depart ; be wait on by the sheriff of Counries to the border of Scotland . and now be one steward a scot apprehend in England , and imprison in the tower , for intend to poison the young queen of Scot , who the king deliver to the french king upon the frontier of Callice , to be by he justi ? ce at his pleasure . at •his time certain ship be appoint by the emperor , to transport the lady mary either by violence or by stealth out of England to Antwerp ; whereupon sir John gate be send with force into Essex , where the lady lie ; and beside , the duke of Somerset be send with two hundred man , the lord privy seal with other two hundred , and master Sentleger with four hundred more , to several coast upon the sea , and the lord chancellor and secretary Peter be send to the lady marry ; who after some conference , page 81 bring she to the lord chancellor house at lie in Essex , and from thence to the king at Westminster . here the council declare unto she , how long the king have permit she the use of the mass , and consider her obstinacy , be resolve now no long to permit it , unless she will put he in hope of some conformity in short time . to which she answer , that her soul be God ; and touch her faith , as she can not change , so she will not dissemble it . Reply be make , that the king intend not to constrain her faith , but to restrain the outward profession of it , in regard of the danger the example may draw . after some like interchange of speech , the lady be appoint to remain with the king , when there arrive a ambassador from the emperor , with a threaten message of war , in case his cousin the lady mary , shall be deny the free exercise of the mass : hereupon the king present advise with the archbi ? shop of Canterbury , and with the bishop of London and Rochester , who give their opinion , that to give licence to sin be sin , but to connive at sin may be •llowed so it be not too long , nor without hope of reformation : then answer be give to the ambassador , that the king will send to the Em ? perour within a month or two , and give he such satisfaction as shall be fit . and now the king be uncertain of the faith , both of his subject and of his confederate , intend by alliance to strengthen himself ; and thereupon send one Bartwicke , to the king of Denmark with private instruction , to treat of a marriage , between the lady Elizabeth the king young sister , and the king of Denmarks elder son ; but when it come to the point , this lady can not be induce to entertain marriage with any . after this , the marquess of Northampton be send ambassador to the french king , as well to present he with the order of the garter , as to treat with he of other secret affair : with he be join in commission the bishop of Elye , sir Philip Hobbie , sir William Pickering , sir John Mason , and master smith secritary of state ; also the earl of Worcester , Rutland , and Ormond be appoint to accompany they ; as likewise the lord Lisle , Fitzwater , Bray , aburgavenny and Evers , with other knight and gentleman of note , to the number of six and twenty ; and for avoid of immoderate train , order be give that every earl shall have but four attendant , eve ? ry baron but three , every knight and gentlem•n but two , only the come ? missioner be not limit to any number . be come to the court of France , they be forthwith bring to the king , be then in his Bedcham ? ber ; to who the marquess present the order of the garter , wherewith he be present invest : then the bishop of Elye in a short speech , declare , how the king of England , out of his love and desire of amity , have send this order to his majesty ; desire with all , that some person may be autho ? rize to treat with they , about some other m•tters of importance ; where ? upon a commission go forth to the cardinal of lorraigne , chastillion the constable , the duke of Guysae , and other . at the first , the english de ? mand , that the young queen of Scots may be s•nt into England for perfect ? ing of marriage between king Edward and she . but to this the french answer ? red , that conclusion have be make long before for her marriage with the dolphin of France . then the english propose a marriage between king ed ? ward and the lady eliza•eth the french king elder daughter : to this the french do cheerful incline ; but when they come to talk of portion , the english demand at first fifteen hundred thousand crown , then fall to four ? ten , and a• last to eight hundred thousand : the french offer at first , one hundred thousand crown , then rise to two hundred thousand , and high they will not be draw ; say , it be more than ever have be give with a daugh ? •er of France . Shortly after Monsieur the martial and other commissioner be send by the french king , to deliver to the king of England the order of saint Michael ; and then be further treaty about the marriage ; and because the french can be s•rued no high than two hundred thousand crown , it be at page 82 last accept , and the agreement be reduce into writing , and deliver under seal on both side . and now king Edward suppose his state to be most safe , when indeed it be most unsure ; in testimo•y both of his joy and love , advance many to new title of honou• ; the lord Marquesse Dorset , who have marry the elder daugh ? ter of Charles Brandon be create duke of Suffolk , the earl of Warwick duke of Northumberland , the earl of Wiltshire be create marquess of Win ? chester , sir William Herbert lord of cardisse and master of the horse , be ere ? ated earl of Pembroke ; also William Cecill the king secretary , John cheek one of his schoolmaster , Henry Dudley and Henry Nevil be make knight , and ( that which perhaps it have be happy , if it have never be ) sir Robert Dud ? ley one of the duke of Northumberland son ( the same who be afterward the great earl of Leicester ) be swear one of the six orninary gentleman of the king chamber ; for after his come into a place so near about he , the king enjoy his health but a while . the aspire thought of the duke of Northumberland , be now grow up to be put in execution : he be advance in title of honour equal with the high ; in authority and power above the high ; he have place his po ? liticke son near about the king person ; the next thing be to remove the duke of Somerset out of the way ; and for this also he have prepare instru ? ment ; sir Thomas palmer , crane , Hamond , Cecill , and other ; who bring several accusation against the duke ; some trench upon the king and kingdom , but one special against the duke of Northumberland person ; who practise when the duke of Somerset find , and have cause to fear ; he go one day arm into the duke of Northumberland chamber , with a purpose to kill he ; but find he in his bed , and be receive with much kind compliment by he , his heart relen•ed , and thereupon come a ? way without any thing do : at his come out , one of his company ask he if he have do the deed ? who answer , no : then say he , you be your self undo : and indeed it so fall out ; for when all other accusation be refel ? lead , this only stick by he , and can not be deny ; and so on the first of December he be arraign at Westminster ; where the lord William Pa•let marquess of Winchester and lord treasurer , sit as high steward of Eng ? land , and with he peer to the number of seven and twenty ; the duke of Suffolk and Northumberland , the marquess of Northampton , the earl of Der ? by , Bedford , Huntington , Rutland , bath , Sussex , Worcester , Pembroke and hert ? •ord ; the baron , aburgaveuy , Audeley , Wharton , Evers , La•ymer , borough , zouth , Stafford , Wentworth , Darcye , Sturton , Windsor , Cromwell , Cobham and Bray . the lord be set , the indit•ments be read , in number five , contai ? ning a charge , for raise man in the north part of the realm ; and at his house , for assemble man to kill the duke of Northumberland ; for resist his attac•ment , for raise London , for assault the lord , and devise their death . to all which he plead , not guilty , and make a satisfactory answer to every point , though the king learned council p•essed they hard against he . this do , the lord go together , where exception be take by some , •s a thing unfit , that the duke of Northumberland , the marquess of Northampton , and the earl of Pembroke shall be of the jury ; see the prisoner be chief charge with practise against they . but to this , the lawyer make answ•r , that a peer of the realm may not be challenge ; so after much variation of opinion , the prisoner be acqui•t of Treasor , but by most voyee find guilty of felony ; and that by a statute , late by his own p•ocureme•t make ; that if any shall attempt to kill a privy counsellor , although the fact be not do , yet it shall be felony , and be punish with death . but upon his be acquit of treason , t•e axe of the tower be present lay down , which m•de people conceive he have be acquit of all ; who thereupon for joy , give so great a page 83 shout , that it be hear as far as charingcross : but the duke be little the better for be acquit of treason , see he be find guilty of felony ; and have judgement to dye . it be think by some , he may have save his life , if he have demand his clergy ; but it be rather think , that in that statute clergy w•s deny . two month after his condemn ? nation ; ( much against the king will ) he be bring to the tower-hill to execution ; wher• b•ing •scended the scaffold , he enter into a speech , wherein though he justify himself , for any matter tend to the hurt of the king or kingdom ; yet he confess , he be just by the law bring to th•• d•••h ; and thank God , that have give he so large a time of repentance , spe•ially that he have open his eye , to see clear the light of the gospel ; and go on in his speech , a sudden noise a ? rose , of some cry , away , •way ; which make some think a pardon have be come ; but be indeed the voice of some that have be warn to be at the execution , and be come somewhat late : but the tumult be appease , the duke go on with his speech , and at last commend his soul to God , with a coun•enance not show a sign of fear or perturba ? cion , only his cheek a little red than they use •o be ; he peaceable lay down his head upon the block , and in a moment with one stroke of the axe , have it strike off . the death of this duke , make the duke of nor ? thumberland more odious to the people than he be before ; and there be some that dip h•ndkerchiffes in his blood , and keep they to upbraid the duke of Northumberland withal , when he come himself afterward to the like end . after execution of the duke , sir Ralph vane and sir mile partridge be hang at the tower-hill , sir Michael Stanhope and sir Thomas Arundel be there behead . after the duke condemnation , it be think fit to have something do for avert the king mind , from take thought ; and to that end , one George Ferrer , a gentleman of Lincolns-inn , be appoint in the Christmas ? time , to be lord of misrule ; who so carry himself , that he give great delight to many , and some to the king , but not in proportion to his hea ? vinesse . about this time be a call of seven sergeant at law , who keep their feast at grayes-inne ; of who , master Robert brook recorder of London , be the first ; and the next master dyer , who be choose speaker the next Par ? li•ment . about this time also , the lord Paget be commit to the tower , •or what cause be not certain ; and be a knight of the order , his Garder be take from he by garter king at arm , upon this pretence , that he be say to be no gentleman , either by father or mother ; and the garter be then bestow on the earl of Warwick , the duke of Nor•hum•erlands elder son , and the lord rich lord chancellor , be put off from his place , and the seal than de ? liver to doctor Thomas Goodricke bishop of Elye . about this time also three great ship be set forth at the king charge , for discovery of a passage to the east Indies by the north sea ; the chief pilot and director in this voyage , be one Sebastian gabato a Englishman , bear at Bristol , but the son of a genoese : these ship at the last arrive in the coun ? trey of Muscovia , but not without loss of their captain sir Hugh Willoughby , who be toss and drive by tempest , be afterward find in his ship freeze to death , and all his people . at this time al•o the duke of suffolk three daughter , which he have by Frances , daughter of Charles Brandon and marry queen of France , be marry at durham-house ; the elder Jane to the lord Guildford Dud ? ley• , four soon of the duke of Northumberland : the second Katherine , to Henry son and heir to the earl of Pembroke ; the yo•gest marry , be somewhat deform , to Martyn key the king gentleman-porter . and then also page 84 Katherine the duke of Northumberland young daughter , to the lord ha ? sting , elder son of the earl of Huntington . and now have the duke of nor ? thumberland go a great way in his design ; it remain to persuade king ed ? ward to exclude his two sister from succession in the crown ; for that do•e , his daughter in law the lady Ian• , will come to have a right ; for as for pre ? tender out of Scotland , or any other , he make no great matter . and now to work the king to this persuasion , ( be in a languish sickness , not far from death ) he inculcate to he , how much it concern he to have a care of religion , that it may be preserve in purity , not only in his own life , but as well after his death ; which will not be , if his sister the lady mary shall succeed , and she can not be put by unless her other sister the lady Elizabeth be put by also , see their right depend one upon another ; but if he plea ? sed to appoint the lady Jane , the duke of Suffolk elder daughter , and his own next kinswoman to his sister , to be his successor , he may then be sure that the true religion shall be maintain , to God great glory , and be a wor ? thy act of his own religious providence . this be to strike upon the right string of the young king affection , with who nothing be so dear as preser ? vation of religion ; and thereupon his last will be appoint to be draw ( contrive chief by the lord chief justice Montague , and secretary Cecill : ) by which will , as far as in he lie , he exclude his two sister from the suc ? session , and all other , but the duke of Suffolk daughter ; and then cause it to be read before his council , he require they all to assent unto it , and to subscribe their hand ; which they all , both nobility , and bishop and judge do ; only the archbishop Cranmer refuse at first , sir Iames hale a judge of the common-plea to the last , and with he also sir John Baker chancellor of the exchequer . and now remain nothing for the duke of Northumberland purpose , but that the king shall dye ; which soon after he do at Greenwich the six of July , in the year 1553. one point of the duke policy must not be forget , that fear what trouble the lady mary may raise after the king decease , if she shall be at liberty ; he therefore , see the king draw on , use all mean possible to get she within his power ; to which end letter be direct to she in the king name from the council , will she forthwith to repair to the king , as well to be a comfort to he in his sickness , as to see all matter well order about his person : whereupon , the lady suspect nothing , address her self with all speed to the journey ; till be upon the way , she be advertise of the duke design ; and than she return to her house at Hoveden , and so escape the snare ; by who escape , the whole design of the duke of Northumberland be disappoint ; as soon after will be see . of his taxation . in no king reign be ever moor parliament for the time , nor few sub ? sidy ; the great be in his last year , when yet there be but one subsi ? die , with two fifteen and ten grant by the temporalty , and a Subside by the clergy . and indeed to show how loath this king be to lay imposition upon his people , this may be a sufficient argument ; that though he be much in debt , yet he choose rather to deal with the foulker in the Low-countries for money upon loan , at the interest of fourteen pound for a hundred , for a year . but his way for raise of money , be by sell of Chantrie land and house , give he by parliament ; and by inquire after all church ? good , either remain in cathedral and parish-churche , or embezzle a ? way , as jewel , gold and silver , chalice , ready money , Copes , and other Vest ? ment ; reserve to every church one chalice , and one cover for the come ? munion-table , the rest to be apply to his benefit . he also raise money by inquire after offence of officer in great place ; in which inquiry , one bea ? mont page 85 master of the roll , be convince of many crime , surrender all his office , land and good into the king hand : also one Whalley receiver of Yorkshire , be find a delinquent , surrender his office , and pay a great fine beside : also the lord Paget , chancellor of the duchy , convince , that he have sell the king land and timber-wood without commission , and have apply the king fine to his own use ; for these and other offence , sur ? render his office , and be fine at four thousand pound , which he pay in hand . one thing more be do in his time for raise of money ; twenty thousand pound weight of bullion , be appoint to be make so much ba ? ser , that the king may gain thereby a hundred and forty thousand pound . of his law and ordinance . in his three year a parliament be hold ; wherein one act be make a ? against spread of prophecy ; another against unlawful assembly . in his four year a parliament be hold , wherein priest child be make legitimate ; and usury for the loan of money be forbid . in his five year , it be ordain that the law of England shall be administer in Ireland ; and a king at arm name Ulser , be new institute for Ireland ; who province be all Ireland ; and he be the first four king of arm , and first herald appoint for Ireland . also in his five year , base money former ? lie coin , be cry down ; so as the shilling go but for nine penny , and short after but for six penny , the g•oat but for three penny , and short after but for two penny . Affaires of the church in his time . in the first yee•e of this king reign , injunction be set forth , for pull down a•d remove all image out of church ; also certain homily be appoint to be make by learned man , to be read in church , for the peo ? ples instruction : and at easter this year , it be order , that the sacrament of the lord supper shall be minister to the lay-people in both kind ; also marriage be allow to clergy man ; auricular confession and prayer for the dead be forbid : and it be observable , that the very same day that i ? mage be pull down at London , the great overthrow be give to the Scot at Mu•kleborough . also at this time , by the archbishop cranmers mean , diverse learned protestant come over into England , and have here ente•tainment , as Peter martyr , Martin Bucer , and Paulus Fagius ; of who Peter martyr be send to read a divinity lecture in Oxford , Bucer and Fagius in Cambridge . in this king foutth year , all altar in church be comma•ded to be take down , and table place in their room . in his five year the book of Com ? mon Prayer be establish . casualty happen in his time . in his second year , saint arm church within Aldesgate be burn . in his •ifth year , a sweat sickness infest first Shrewesbury , and then the north part , and after grow most extreme in London , so as the first week there die eight hundred person , and be so violent that it take man away in four and twenty hour , sometime in twelve , and sometime in less : among other of account that die of this sickness , be the two son of Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk , who die within a hour after one another , in such order that both of they die duke . this disease be proper to the english Nati ? on , for it follow the english wheresoever they be in foreign part ; but seize upon none of any other country . in this year , one master Arden of page 86 Kent , by procurement of his wife be murder in his own house ; be dead , his body be carry out and lay upon the ground , in a close hard by ; where this be memorable , that for two year after , the ground where his body lie , bear no grass , but represent still as it be a picture of his body , only in the space between his leg and arm there grow grass , but where any part of his body touch , none at all . yet this miraculous accident be not so much for the murder , as for the curse of a widow-woman , out of who hand the say master Arden have uncharitable buy the say close , to her undo . and thus the divine justice even in this world oftentimes work miracle upon offender , for a merciful warn to man , if they will be so wise to take it . in his six year , the three of August , at middletonstoney , eleven mile from Oxford , a woman bring forth a child which have two perfect body from the navel upward , the leg for both the body grow out at the midst where the body join , and have but one issue for the excrement of they both : they li ? ve eighteen day , and be woman child . this year also be take at Quinborow three dolphin , and at black-wall six more , the least of which be big than any horse . work of piety by he or other in his time . this king give three house to the relief of the poor ; first for the father ? less and beggar child , he give the late gray-fryer in London , which i• now call Christ hospital : then for lame and disease person he give the hospital of saint Thomas in Southwark , and saint barthalomew in west smith ? field : third , for riotous and idle person , he give his house of brid•well ; and for their maintenance , he take six hundred pound a year land from the house of the Savoy ( which have be long abuse ) and bestow it upon these house ; to which he add four thousand mark a year more . by his example sir William Chester alderman of London , and John calthroppe draper , at their own cost make the brickwall and way on the backside that lead to the hospital of saint barthalomew ; and also cover and vault the town ditch , which be ? fore be very noisome . in the second year of this king , sir John Gresham then major of London , found a free school at host in Norfolk ; also at his de ? cease , he give to every ward in London ten pound , to be distribute among the poor , and to maid marriage two hundred pound . in his three year , sir Rowland hill the •hen lord major of London , cause to be make a cawsway common call overlane pavement , in the high way from stone to nant ? which , in length four mile , for the ease of horse and man . he cause also a cawsway to be make from Dunchurch to Bransen in Warwickshiere , more than two mile in length ; and give twenty pound towards the make of Roitton bridge three mile from Coventry . he make likewise the high way to Kilborne near to London . also four bridge , two of they of stone , contain eigh ? teen arch in they both ; the one over the river of Severne call Acham bridge , the other tear bridge ; and two other of timber at Stoke , where he build also a good part of the church . a free school likewise he build at •rayton in Shropshiere , with master and usher , and give sufficient stipend to they both . also he purchase a free fair to the say town , with a free Mar ? ket weekly ; and every fourteen day a free market for cartel . beside all thi• , he give to the hospital of christ-church in London in his life time , five hundred pound , and at his death , a hundred . in this king four year , sir a ? draw jud major of London , found a notable free school at Tunbridge in Kent ; he build also a almshouse for six poor people , nigh to the parish church of saint Helen in bishopsgate-streete ; and give threescore pound land a year to the skinner of London , for which be bind to pay twenty pound to the schoolmaster , and eight pound to the usher of his free school at tun ? bridge year for ever ; and four shilling weekly to the six poor almspeople , page 87 and something more yearly . in his six year , sir George barn major of Lon ? don , give a windmill in finsbury-field to the haberdasher of London , the pro ? fit thereof to be distribute to the poor of that company ; also to saint bar ? tholamew the little , certain tenement to the like use . of his personage and condition . concern his personage , it be say , he be in body beautiful , of a sweet aspect , and special in his eye , which seem to have a starry liveliness and lustre in they . concern his condition , in matter of fact , there be not much to be say ; but in matter of disposition and inclination very much , even to admiration . for though his tree be not yet come to the maturity of bea ? ring fruit , yet it be come to the forwardness to bear plenty of bud and blo ? sum . for proof of his merciful disposition this one example may be suf ? ficient ; when one Joan Butcher be to be burn for blasphemy and heresy , all the counsel can not get he to sign the warrant , till the archbishop Cranmer with much importunity persuade he , and then he do it , but not without weep . for his pregnancy of wit , and knowledge in all kind of learning ; we shall need but to hear what Cardan ( who come into England , have often conference with he ) report of he : that he be extraordinary skilful in language , and in the politic ; well see in philosophy and in di ? vinity , and general indeed a very miracle of art and nature . he will a ? swer ambassador somerime upon the sudden , either in french or latin ; he know the state of foreign prince perfect , and his own more . he can call all gentleman of account through his kingdom by their name ; and all this when he have scarce yet attain to the age of fifteen year ; and die before sixteen ; that from hence we may gather , it be a sign of no long life , when the faculty of the mind be ripe so early . of his death and burial . in the six year of his reign , which be the year before he die , he fall sick of the measles , and be well recover of they , he fall after soon into the small pox , and of they also be so well recover , that the summer follow he ride a progress , with a great magnificence than ever he have do before ; have in his train no few than four thousand horse . in January follow , ( when ? there procure by sinister practice , or grow upon he by natural infirmity ) he fall into a indisposition of body , which soon after grow to a cough of the lung . whereupon a rumour be spread abroad by some , that a nosegay have be give he at Newyeerstide , which bring he into this slow but deadly consumption ; by other that it be do by a glister : how ever it be , he be bring at last to so great extremity , that his physician despair of his life ; and when physician can do he no good , a gentlewoman ( think to be prepare for the purpose ) take he in hand , and do he hurt ; for with her application his leg swell , his pulse fail , his skin change colour , and many other symptom of approach death appear . the hour before his death , he be overhear to pray thus by himself , oh lord God , deliver i out of this miserable and wretched life ; oh lord , thou know how happy it be for i to be with thou ; yet for thy choose sake , if it be thy will send i life and health that i ma• true serve thou : oh lord God , save thy choose people of England , and defend this realm from papistry , and maintain thy true religion , that i and my people may praise thy holy name , for thy son je ? sus Christ sake . So •urning his face and see some by he , he say ; i think you have nor be so nigh : yes , say doctor Owens we hear you speak to your self ; then say the king , i be pray to God : oh , i be faint ; lord have mere ? cy upon i , and receive my spirit ; and in so say give up the ghost , the six page 88 day of July , in the year 1553. and in the sixteenth year of his age when he have reign six year , five month , and nine day . it be note by some , that he die the same month , and the same day of the month that his father king hen ? ry the eight have put sir Thomas moor to death . his body be bury upon the nine of August in the chapel of saint Peter church in Westminster ; and lay near to the body of king Henry the seven his grandfather . at his fune ? rall which be on the ten of August follow , his sister queen Mary show this respect to he , that though doctor day a popish bishop preach , yet all the service with a communion be in english . man of note in his time . this king reign be short , and have but small war , have not many swordman famous for any act they do ; gown man there be some , as Edward Holl a counsellor in the law , who write a notable chronicle of the union of the two house of York and Lancaster ; William Hugh a Yorkshire ? man , who write a notable treatise call the trouble man medicine ; Thomas sternehold , bear in Southampton , who turn into english Meete• seven and thirty of David psalm . the interregnum between the death of king Edward and the proclaim at London of queen mary . king Edward be dead , the duke of Northumberland take upon he to sit at the stern , and order all thing at his pleasure : so two day after he with other of the council , send to the lord major that he with six alder ? man and twelve principal commons , shall repair present to the court ; to who when they come , it be secret signify that king Edward be dead ; and that by his last will , to which all the nobility and judge have give as ? send , he have appoint the lady Jane , daughter to the duke of Suffolk , to suc ? ceede he ; his letter patent whereof be show they , and thereupon they be require , to take their oath of allegiance to the lady Jane , and to secure the city in her behalf ; which whether dissemble , or sincere ; when ? there for love or fear , yet they do , and then depart . the next day the lady Jane in great state , be bring to the tower of London , and there declare queen ; and by edect with the sound of trumpet proclaim so through Lon ? don ; at which time , for some word seem to be speak against it , one Gil ? bert Pot a vint•ers servant , be set in the pilory , and lose both his ear . before this time , the lady Mary have hear of her brother death , and of the duke of Northumberland design ; remove from Hovesdon to her manor of ke ? ninghall in Norfolk , and under pretence of fear infection , ( have late lose one of her household servant of the plague ) in one day she ride forty mile , and from thence afterward to her castle of Framingham in Suffolk ; where take upon she the name of queen , there resort to she the most part of all the gentleman both of Norfolk and Suffolk , offer their assistance ; but upon con ? dition she will make no alteration in religion , to which she condescend ; and thereupon soon after come to she , the earl of Oxford , bath and Sussex , the lord Wentworth , Thomas Wharton , and John Mordant baron elder son ; and of knight Cornwallis , Drury , Walgrave , Shelton , Beningfield , Jerningham , Suliard , Freston and many other . the lady Mary be thus assist , write her letter sign the nine of July to the lord of the council , wherein she claim the crown , as of right belong to she ; and require they to pro ? claim she queen of England in the city of London , as they tender she this ? pleasure . to this letter of she , the lord answer , that for what they do , they have good warrant ; not only by king Edward last will , but by the law of the land , consider her mother divorce , and her own Illegitima ? cion ; page 89 and therefore require she to submit her self to queen Jane , be now her sovereign . this letter be write from the tower of London , under the hand of these that follow , Thomas archbishop of Canterbury , tho ? m•s Elye chancellor , William marquess of Winchester , John earl of bed ? ford , Henry duke of Suffolk , Francis earl of Shrewsbury , John duke of nor ? th•mberland , William earl of Pembroke , Thomas lord Darcey lord cham ? berlin , Cobham , rich , Huntington , Cheyney , John gate , William Peter , William ce•ill , John Clerke , John Mason , Edward north and Robert bow . the qua ? rell on both side be thus begin by letter , be prosecute by arm ; and the lord for their general make choice of the duke of Suffolk , as a man most likely to be firm and sure in the employment ; but the queen his daugh ? ter can miss his presence ; and beside , be not willing to hazard his per ? son ; and thereupon , she by entreaty and the lord by persuasion prevail with the duke of Northumb•rland to undertake the charge ; who before his go have conference with the lord , let they know how sensible he be of the double danger he underwent in this enterprise ; both in respect of the la ? die against who he go , and in respect of they who he leave behind he ; for if they in his absence shall by any accident be draw to waver in their resolution , they may work their own safety with his destruction , and make themselves seem innocent in his guiltiness . to which one of the lord re ? ply and say ; your grace make a doubt of that which can be , for which of we all can wash his hand clean of this business ? and therefore it behoove we to be as resolute as your self ; and the earl of Arundel , to testify his re ? solution in the matter , say , he be sorry it be not his chance to go with he , at who foot he can find in his heart to spend his blood . So the duke with the marquess of Northampton , the lord grey , and diverse other of account , on the fourteenth of July set forward on the journey with eight thousand foot and two thousand horse ; and pass through Shoreditch , the duke say to the lord grey , see how the people press to see we , but not one of they say , God speed you . the duke have every day march how far he shall go , appoint he by commission ; which be very slow , whether it be do of pur ? pose , by some that favour the lady Mary side , be certain a great help to her proceed ; for by this mean she have the long time to make her preparation ; and indeed in this time two accident happen , of great be ? fit to she ; one , that Edward Hastings the earl of Huntington brother , have ? king a army of four thousand foot commit to he by the earl of nor ? thumberland , he now leave his party , and go to the lady mary : the other , that six great ship which lie before Yarmouth to intercept the lady mary , if she shou attempt to fly , now at the persuasion of master Jerningham , come in to her aid : which two revolt so terrify the Londoner , that though doctor Ridley bishop of London , on the sixteenth of July , at Paul cross preach a sermon , wherein he invite the people to stand firm to queen Jane , who cause he affirm to be most just , ye• few or none be persuade by he ; so as the lord themselves fall off from the side , who assemble at beynards-castle , first the earl of Arundel , than the earl of Pembroke fall to inve ? ctive against the earl of Northumberland ; and than all the lord join in opinion with they , they call for the major , and in London proclaim the lady mary queen ; as likewise the lord Windsor , sir Edmund Peckham , sir Robert Drurie and sir Edward Hastings do in Buckinghamshire ; sir John Williams of tame , and sir Leonard Chamberlaine in Oxfordshire , and sir tho ? mass Tresham in the county of Northampton . all this come soon to the know ? ledge of the duke of Northumberland , be then at bury ; who thereby see ? king how the world go , think it his best course to turn with the stream , and thereupon return to Cambridge , he take the major of the town with he into the marketplace , and there himself for want of a herald , pro ? claim the lady mary queen , and in sign of joy throw up his cap ; which page 90 yet serve not his turn , for the next morning Henry Fitzallen earl of Arun ? dell , come into Cambridge from queen marry , who enter his chamber , the duke at his foot fall on his knee ; desire he for god love to consider his case , that have do nothing but by the warrant of he and the council : my lord ( say the earl ) i be send hither by the queen to arrest you ; and i ( say the duke ) obey your arrest ; yet i beseech your lordship , to use mercy to ? ward he who act have be no other then be enjoin by commission : you shall have think of that soon ( say the earl ) and thereupon come ? mit he to a guard , and leave he to the queen mercy . thus end all this great duke design , in his own destruction , and bring he to fall on his knee to they , who have often before bow their knee to he ; and the earl , who at the duke go ou• , can have be content to spend his blood at his foot , be now content to be make a instrument of his fall : so sudden be the turn of man affection , and so unstable be the building upon their asseveration ; at lest no man must look to have his case be of any weight against he , who have his own case put in the balance . together with the duke his three son John , Ambrose and Henry , the earl of Huntington , sir Andrew Dudley , the two gate , John and Henry , sir Thomas palmer and do ? ctor sand be convey towards London , and bring to the tower ; and the next day the marquess of Northampton , the lord Robert Dudley and sir Robert Corbet . before which time , the duke of Suffolk enter his daughter the lady Jane chamber , tell she , she must now put off her royal robe , and be content with a private life : to which she answer , she will much more willing put they off , than she have put they on ; and will never have do it , but in obedience to he and her mother . and this be the end of the lady Jane ten day reign . page 91 the reign of queen MARY . the lady Mary have be proclaim queen in Lon ? don and other part of the realm ; remove from her castle of Framingham towards London ; and be come to Wanstead in Essex , on the thirty of July , the lady Elizabeth her sister , with a train of a thousand horse , ride from her place in the strand to meet she : on the three of August the queen ride through Lon ? don to the tower , where at her entrance be present to she Thomas duke of Norfolk , Edward lord court ? ney , Stephen Gardiner late bishop of Winchester , and the du•chesse of summer ? set ; who all kneel downe• she kiss they , and say , these be my prisoner , and then cause they present to be set at liberty : the next day she restore the lord Courtney to his marchisate of Exeter ; and the same day also she not only restore Stephen Gardiner to his bishopric of Winchester , but a few da•es after make he chancellor of England ; yet this be the man that have subscribe to her mother Divorce• and have write book against the law ? fullness of her marriage . the five of August Edmund Bonner late bishop of Lon ? don prisoner in the Marshalsey , and Cuthbert Tunstall the old bishop of Durham prisoner in the king bench , have their pardon and be restore to their see . sortly aft•r , all the bishop which have be deprive in the time of king ed ? ward the six , be restore to their Bishopricks• and the new remove , as rid ? ley be remove from London and Bonner place , Skory from Chichester and day place , Miles Coverdale from Exeter and west place , John Hooper from wor ? cester and heath place . also all benefice man that be marry , or will not renounce their religion , be put out of their live , and other of a con ? trary opinion put in their room . on the thirteenth of August one master Bourne a canon of Pauls , preach ? ing at Paul cross , not only pray for the dead , but also declare that doctor Bonner bishop of London , ( late restore , and there in presence ) for a sermon by he make four year before , in the same place , and upon the same text , have unjust be cast into the vile prison of the Marshalsey ; which speech so offend some of the auditory , that they cry , pull he down , pull he down ; and have certain do he violence ( for a dagger be throw at he ) if master Bradford a protestant preacher , have not step into his place and appease the tumult , and master Roger another protestant minister ( who be both afterward burn for religion ) have not shift away Bourne into Paul school . page 92 hitherto queen Mary reign have be without blood , but now the ca ? taract of seventy will be open , that will make it rain blood : for now on the eighteenth of August , John Dudley duke of Northumberland , William Parre marquess of Northampt•n , and John earl of Warwick , so•ne and heir to the duke , be arraign at vvestminster-hall , before Thomas duke of N•• ? folk as high steward of England ; where the duke of Northumberland , after his indictment read , require the opinion of the court in two point ; first , whither a man do any act by authority of the prince couns••le , and by warrant of the great seal of England , may for any such act be charge with treason : second , whither any such person as be equal culpable , and by who commandment he be direct , may be his judge and pass upon his trial : whereunto be answer , that concern the first ; the great seal which he allege for his warrant , be not the seal of the lawful queen of the realm , but of a usurper , and therefore can be no warrant for he : and as to the second , it be resolve , that if any be as deep to be touch in the case as himself , yet so long as no attainder be of record against they , they be person able in law to pass •pon his trial , and not to be challenge but at the prince pleasure . after which answer , the duke use few word , but con ? fess the indictment , and accord have judgement to dye . by who example the other prisoner arraign with he , confess the indictment , and thereupon have judgement : the ninteenth of August , sir Andrew Dudley , sir John , and sir Henry gate brethren , and sir Thomas palmer knight , be arraign at west ? minster , who c•nfessing their indictment , have judgement , which be pronoun ? ce by the marquess of Winchester , lord high treasu•er , sit that day as chief justice : after these condemnation , follow the execution ; for on the two and twenty of August John duke of Northum•erland be bring to the tower-hill , and there behead ; be upon the scaffold in a gown of green colour damask , he put it off and then make a long speech , wherein he ask the queen forgiveness , who he acknowledge to have grievous offend ; and then make profession of his faith , that he die a true catholic ( mean a papist ) he say the psalm of miserere and de profundis , the pater noster , and six of the first verse of the psalm in te domine speravi , end with this verse , into thy hand , oh lord , i commend my spirit ; and this say , he look about he , as look for a pardon , but none come , he lay his head down upon the block , and at one blow have it strike off ; his body with the head be bu ? ried in the tower , by the body of Edward late duke of Somerset ( mortal even ? mie while they live , but now lie together as good friend ) so as there lie before the high altar in saint Peter church , •wo duke between two queen , namely the duke of Somerset and the duke of Northumberland between queen Anne and queen Katherine , all four behead . of what religion this duke be may well be doubt , see at his death he profess himself a papist , when late before he have importune king Edward to make the lady Jane his suc ? cessour , lest the papal religion shall be restore ; it seem he be not great of either but for other end ; a protestant then when it be to make his daugh ? ter in law queen ; now a papist , when it be to save his life ( for it be think he have pardon promise , if he will recant . at the same time and place be behead sir John gate and sir Thomas palmer , who be no such temporizer but persist and dye in the protestant religion , which they have always pro ? fess . after this , a sprinkle of mercy come from the queen ; for on the three of September the lord Ferrer of Chartley , the two chief justice , sir Roger Cholm ? ley and Montague , sir John cheek and other be deliver out of the tower whether before they have be commit ; but a shower of severity follow soon after , for on the fifteen of September master Latimer and doctor Cran ? mer archbishop of Canterbury be send to the tower , and on the three o•No ? vember follow , the say archbishop Cranmer , the lady Jane ( late queen ) page 93 and the lord Guildford her husband , with the lord Ambrose and Henry , son to the late duke of Northumberland , be all arraign at the Guildhall , find guilty and have judgement to dye . all this while queen Mary have content her self to be queen by Procla ? mansion ; but now that thing be something settle , she proceed to her Coro ? nation : for on the last of September she ride in her chariot through London towards Westminster in this order ; first ride a number of gentleman and knight , than doctor , than judge , than bishop , than lord , than the con ? cell , after who follow the knight of the bath , thirteen in number in their robe , than the bishop of Winchester lord chancellor , and the marquess of Winchester lord high treasurer , next come the duke of Norfolk , and after he the earl of Oxford who bear the sword , than the major of lond•n in a gown of crimson velvet , who bear the sceptre of gold ; after come the queen chariot , and then follow another chariot wherein sit the lady Elizabeth her sister and the lady anne of Cleeve , and then come lady and gentlewoman ride on horse , trap with red velvet : etc in this order they come through London to Westminster ; where in many place by the way , be pageant and stately show , and many rich present give to the queen . the next day she go by water to the old palace , and remain there till ele ? when of the clock , and then go on foot upon blue cloth , be rail on either side to saint Peter church , where she be crown and anoint by the bishop of Winchester , ( the two archbishop being then in the tower ) with all rite and ceremony of old accustom . after her coronation , a general pardon be publish in her name , but in ? terlace with so many exception of matter and person , that very few take benefit by it ; for after the pardon publish , there be commissioner as ? sign , to compound with such person as be except : from some of who they take away their fee and office , some they fi•ed , and some they depri ? ve of their estate and live . about this time sir Iames hale one of the justice of the common plea , who in the time of king Edward have refuse to sign a writing for disinheri ? ting the lady mary , and the lady Elizabeth ; ( a fact worthy at least of a kind remembrance from the lady marry now queen ) yet now , for that at a quarter session in Kent , he give charge upon the statute of king Henry the eight , and king Edward the six , in derogation of the primacy of the church of Rome ; he be first commit to the king bench , then to the counter , and last to the fleet ; where he grow so trouble in mind , that he attempt with a penknife to kill himself ; and be afterward recover of that hurt , and bring to the queen presence , who give he very comfortable word , yet can never come to be quiet in his mind ; but in the end , drown himself in a river not half a mile from his house , the river be so shallow , that he be fain to lie grovel before he can dispatch him•elfe of life . and now another sprinkle of mercy come from the queen ; for the mar ? quesse of Northampton , and sir Henry gate , late before condemn to dye , be now pardon and set at liberty . the lady Jane also be allow the liberty of the tower , not without hope of life and liberty altogether ; if her father the duke of Suffolk have not the second time be cause of her de ? struction . about this time also a synod be assemble , for consult about matter of religion ; and the point special of the real presence in the sacrament . the prolocutor be doctor VVeston ; and of the protestant side , be John Almer and Richard Cheyney , both bishop afterward in queen Elizabeth time , also John Philpo• , afterward burn , Iames Haddon and other . after long disputation , where reason be not so much weigh as voice number ; the papal side , as have most voice , carry it ; and thereupon be that re ? ligion again restore , and the mass command in all church to be cele ? brate , after the ancient manner . page 94 it be now the year 1553. when queen Mary be come to the age of seven and thirty year , and therefore high time now to think of marriage , at least if she mean to have issue of her body ; but a hard ma•ter it be to find a husband in all point •itting for she , yet three at this time ( in common fame at least ) be take into consideration : one be the lord Courtney m•rquesse of Exeter , a goodly gentleman and of royal blood , but there be exception against he because incline ( as be think ) to lutheranism ; another be cardinal •oole , of a dignity not much inferior to king , and by his mother descend from king ; but there be exception against he also , because four and fifty year old , ( as old a bachelor as queen Mary be a maid ) and so the less hope of issue between they : but the three ( if he may be have ) be with ? out exception , and this be Phillip prince of Spain , the emperor Charles his elder son , with who be a Spaniard , she be the fit match , as be by the mother a Spaniard her self . and now very opportune come in the be ? ginning of Ian. ambassador into England about it ; among other , the cou•• of Egmond admiral of the l•w country ; and John of memorancy lord of curryer ; who message be so kind entertain , that the marriage in short time be absolute conclude , though it seem something strange to many , that she shall now be wife to the son , who thirty year before shall have be wife to the father . but so it be , queen be never old , so long as they be within year of bear child . and indeed the match be conclude , with condition of far more advantage to quee•e mary , than they be to king Phillip , as on the fourteenth of January Stephen Gardiner bishop of Win ? chester and lord chancellor of England , open in the presence chamber at Westminster , declare to all the lord and gentleman there present : for it be agree , that after the mar•iage , king Phillip shall have the title of all the queen dominion , and be assume into fellowship of the government ; but yet with reservation to the queen , of all privilege and custom of the kingdom , and free disposition of all office and honour , as likewise the queen shall be assume into the fellowship of all the king dominion , and survive he , shall have a jointure of two hundred thousand pound a year . then for the issue between they , if she have a son , that he shall in ? herit the low country and Burgundy ; and king Phillip son Charles , which he have by a former wife , shall inherit all his dominion in Italy and Spain ; but if his son Charles shall fail without issue , than the son he shall have by queen mary , shall inherit his kingdom of Italy and Spain also . and the like good provision be also make for daughter . but notwithstanding these great •dvantage• of the ma•ch , yet such be the precipitant rashness of some ; that think themselves wise than the queen and the council , they seek by all mean to oppose the match ; give out that it •ended to bring England under the yoke of Spain , and to make the country a slave to stranger . this be the general murmur of people ; but the first that show himself in arm , be sir Thomas Wyatt of Kent ; who have communicate the matter with the duke of Suffolk the lady Jane father , with Peter Caroe a knight of Devonshire , and diverse other ; intend only to make secret provision , but not to stir till prince Phillip shall be come , that so their cause of take arm may have the better colour . on the fifteen of January , Robert dud ? ley son to the duke of Northumberland , be arraign at the Guildhall of high treason , who confess the indictment , and have judgement give by the earl of Sussex , to be draw , hang , bowele and quarter . but now in counsel communicate to many , it be a hard matter to have counsel keep , and sir Peter Caroe find that their plot be discover , flee privy into France , where lurk for a time , he be afterward take at Brux ? else , and bring captive into England ; as likewise at the same time and place sir John cheek king Edward schoolmaster be take , who be draw by terror to embrace the papal religion , with very grief after ? ward page 95 of his error pine away and dye ; sir Peter Caroe live many year of ? •er , and die in Ireland ; though it be false record , they be both burn for religion , in June of this year . Wyatt hear of sir Peter caroes flight , and that all their purpose be discover ; be drive before his time to enter into arm , give out for the cause that it be not to attempt any thing a ? against the queen , but only to remove ill counsellor , and chief to repel prince Phillip ; lest by this marriage the kingdom shall come in subjection to the Spaniard . with Wyatt be join sir Henry Isley , sir George Harper , Anthony and William Knevet , and diverse other gentleman of the county ; ah ? against he be the lord Abuegaveny , sir Thomas Cheyney lord warden of the port , sir Sobert Southwell sheriff of Kent , sir Warram Sentleger , sir tho ? mass Kempe sir Thomas Moyle , sir Thomas Finch with diverse other ; yet all these great man have such doubt of the people , that they dare not proceed but very wary . the five and twenty of January , news come to London of Wyatt ri ? sing ; against who be present send the duke of Norfolk , with sir Henry •erningham captain of the guard , sir Edward Bray , sir John fog , John counterfeit ? vert Roger Appleton esquire , and five hundred soldier out of London ; ap ? point to go after he , under the lead of captain Brett . and now see in time of sedition , how uncertain a thing it be to trust to the people ; for before Brett can overtake the duke , sir George Harper be secret get to he , who so persuade he that he and his five hundred soldier leave the duke and go all to VVyatt ; which make the duke and those with he present to fly , and put such boldness into VVyatt , that now he march in great confidence towards London , with so great terror to all sort of people , that at vvestminster-hall , the sergeant and other lawyer , plead in harness . in the mean time , the duke of Suffolk be perceive in VVarwickshire , to be raise of force in assistance of VVyatt ; against who be present send the earl of Huntington , and the duke find himself unable to make resistance , have with all his industry get together but only fifty man ; he betake himself to a tenant of his one , Vnderwood , with who he hope and have promise to remain undiscovered , till he may have opportunity to escape , as some say , as other to a keeper of his park call Nicholas law ? rinse , who keep he in a hollow oak in the say Park• for two or three day : but whether Vnderwood or Laurence , either out of fear , or out of hope of re ? ward , he betray he to the earl , by who he be take , and under a strong guard carry to the tower . upon this , queen marry her self come into London , where call the major and chief of the city together , she make a oration , wherein she show the insolency of VVyatt ; who though he pretend they but only the cross of the marriage ; yet be now grow to such presumption , that he require to have the custody of her person ; and to have counsellor retain or remove at his pleasure . a•d as for her marriage , she there affirm she have do nothing in it , but by advice of her council ; and for her self , tha• she be not so long for a husband , but that if it be not more for the good of the kingdom , then for her ownsatisfaction , she will never once think of entertain it . Having by her speech confirm the mind of the citizen ; force be present raise , and place about the bridge , and other fit place of the city . the three of February , Wyatt with a army of three or four thousand , come to London , hope of present entrance , but find the bridge break , and soldier place to resist he , after two day stay in Southwark , he remove to Kingston , where he find likewise the bridge break , yet with great industry sudden repair it , he pass over his man , and mean with all speed , to get to the court , before the queen shall have notice of he come ; and have do so indeed , if a mischance , and a error upon that miss ? chance have not hinder he . for be come within six mile of London , the carriage of one of his great ordnance break , in mend whereof so much page 96 time be spend ( and VVyatt by no persuasion will go forward without it ) that the time be pass , in which his friend at London expect his come ; which disappointment make many in those part to fall off , and be percei ? ve by those about he , many of they also ; so as one half of his army be sudden go and leave he ; among other , sir George Harper , the most inti ? mate of all his council , go to the queen and discover all his purpose : whereupon the earl of Pembroke with a company levy upon the sudden• be send against he ; which make Wyatt slack his pace , so as it be noon be ? fore he come to the suburb of the city ; and then place his ordnance upon a hill , and leave there the great part of his army , he only with five en ? sign march towards Ludgate , and be encounter at Charing-cross by the lord Chamberlin and sir John gage , after a small fight put they to flight in such sort , that word be carry to the queen , how near Wyatt approach ? ed , and how wonderful he prevail all the way he come : with which nothing dismay ; well then ( say she ) i will go in person against he my self ; and be prep•ring to do so indeed ( so much be her father valour run in her vein : ) but it need not ; for by this time sir Henry Ie•ningham captain of the guard , sir Edward bray master of the ordnance , and sir Phillip Paris , have give he battle and slay many of his man ; and that which be more , come •o Ludgate , he be deny entrance ; and then think to retire , •e hear the earl of Pembroke with his force be behind at cha•ing-crosse ; so as neither able to go forward nor yet backward , he be at a stand and in amaze ? mean , and then lea•ing a while upon a stall by the bell-savage , after a little muse , he return towards Temple-gate ; where Clarentius the herald i ? thing he , fall to persuade he , not to be a cause of more effusion of blood , nor by persist in obstinacy to exclude all hope of the queen mercy . the soldier of Wyatt be earnest with he to have stand it out ; but Wyatt as silly end , as he have unadvised begin ; yield himself to sir Maurice Berkeley , and get up upon his horse behind he , in that manner ride to the court ; where he have not the entertainment he expect , for without more ado he be present send away to the tower . the captain take , the rest make no resist•nce , few flee , and of the other many be take and lay in pri ? son : and this be do the six of February . and now consultation be hold what delinquent shall be punish ; where the first that be think on be the lady Jane , in who be verify , the father have eat sour grape , and the child tooth be set on edge• the innocent lady must suffer for her father fault ; for if her father the duke of Suffolk , have not this second time make shipwreck of his loyalty , his daughter perhaps have never taste the salt-water of the queen displeasure : but now as a rock of offence , she be the first that must be remove ; and thereupon be doctor Fecknam send to acquaint she , that she must prepare her self to dye the next day : which mes ? sage be so little unpleasing to she , that she seem rather to rejoice at it , as whereby she shall at last be set at liberty ; and the doctor be earnest with she to leave her new religion , and to embrace the old ; she answer , she have now no time to think of any thing , but of perpare her self to God by prey ? er : Fecknam think she have speak this , to the end she may have some long time of life , obtain of the queen three day long , and then come and •old so much to the lady Jane ; whereat she smile say , you be much deceive if you think i have any desire of long life ; for i assure you , since the time you go from i , my life have be so tedious to i , that i long for nothing so much as death , and since it be the queen pleasure , be mo•• willing to undergo it . before she be bring to execution , her hu•band the lord Guildford , have make suit , and obtain to see she and have some confe ? rinse with she ; but she refuse it , say , these be rather augmenter of grief , than comfort• of death• she make no doubt , but they shall short meet in a better place , and in a better condition of society : so on the twelve page 97 of February , her husband the lord Guildford first , and then she a hour or two after , be behead within the tower ; where she acknowledge her self to have deserve death , not for seek the crown , but for not refuse it , be offer ; and after prayer to God , unclthe her self , and put a hand ? carchiffe before her eye , she lay her head down upon the block , and patience ? ent suffer death , more grievous to the beholder , then to her self . this end have the lady Jane grey , a lady of incomparable piety ; and ( for her year ) of incomparable learning ; for be not pass seventeen year of age , she unacustomated ? derstood perfect the greek and latin tongue , and be so ready in all point of divinity , as if she know they by inspiration rather than by instruction ; no less a miracle in this kind then king Edward ; and therefore no marvel if he appoint she to succeed he in the kingdom , who in the endowment of mind be so like unto he , that while she reign , it may be think he continue to reign himself , at lest no more differ but only the sex . it may not be forget , that judge Morgan , who at her arraignment give the sentence against she , short after fall mad , and in his rave , cri ? ed continual to have the lady Jane take away from he , and so end his life . two day after the execution of the lady Jane , namely the fourteenth and fifteen of February , twenty pair of gallow be set up in diverse place of the city , whereon be hand fifty of Wyatt faction ; on the eighteenth of fe ? bruary Bret be hang at Rochester in chain , sir Henry• isle , who have be take in a old freeze coat and a old pair of hose , with his brother Thomas isle and Walter Mantell be hang at Maidstone , Anthony Knevet and his brother William , with another of the mantel be execute at sevenocke ; but then on the twenty of February a sprinkle of mercy come , for four hun ? dread of Wyatt follower , be bring before the queen with halter about their neck , be all pardon and set at liberty . but then severity soon after begin again , for on the three and twenty of February the lord Henry grey duke of Suffolk , and father to the lady Jane , who the week before have be attain and condemn , be on the tower-hill behead , and on the eleven of April , in the same place be behead ( the author of all this mischief ) wyot himself , who quarter be set up in diverse place of the city , his head upon the gallow at hay-hill , beside hide park . this man , in hope of life , have before accuse the lord Courtney and the lady Elizabeth the queen sister• to be privy to his conspiracy , yet at his death he clear they , and pro ? test open , that they be altogether innocent , and never have be acquain ? t with his proceed . yet be this matter so urge against they by Ste ? when gardener , bishop of Winchester and lord chancellor , that both of they in march before have be commit to the tower , though in may follow ? king they be both again release , but yet confine , the lady Elizabeth to Woodstock , under the custody of sir Henry Beningfield of Oxenborough in the county of Norfolk ; the lord Courtney to Foderingham , under the custody of sir Thomas Tres•am , who after some time be set at liberty , and go into Italy there die . it be memorable , what malice this bishop Gardiner bear to the lady Elizabeth , by who only procurement , not only she be keep i• most hard durance , but a warrant be at last frame under certain Coun ? cellour hand , to put she to death , and have be do , but that master •ridges l•ev•enant of the tower , pity her case , go to the queen to know her pleasure , who utter deny that she know any thing of it ; by which mean here life be preserve . Indeed the bishop will sometime say , how they cut off bough and branch , but as long as they let the root remain , all be nothing : and it be not unworthy the remember what •raines be lay to ens•are she . the common net at that time for catch of protestant , be the real pres•nce , and this net be use to catch she ; for be ask one time , what she think of the word of Christ , this be my body ; whether she think page 98 it the true body of Christ , that be in the sacrament . it be say , that after some pause , she thus answer : Christ be the word that speak it : he take the bread , and break it : and what the word do make it , that i believe , and take it . which though it may seem but a slight expression , yet have it more solid ? ness then at first fight appear ; at lest it serve her turn at that time to escape the net , which by direct answer she can not have do . on the seventeenth of April Thomas lord grey , the duke of Suffolk bro ? ther be behead , the last , and indeed the jest in delinquency , that suffer , for have any hand in Wyatt conspiracy . there remain yet a fag end , and be indeed but a fag end , as nothing worth ; for on the same day sir nichol•s Thr•gmorton , be accuse to have be a party in Wyatt conspiracy , be at the Guildhall arraign before sir Thomas white lord mayor , the earl of Shrewsbury and Derby , sir Thomas Bromley lord chief justice of England , sir Nicholas hare master of the roll , sir Francis Englefield master of the ward , sir Richard Southwell and sir Edward Walgrave privy counsellor , sir Roger Chomley , sir William Portman one of the justice of the king bench , sir Edward Sanders one of the justice of the common plea , master St•• ? ford and master dyer sergeant at law , master Edward Griffin attorney ge•e ? rall , master sendal and Peter titch•orne clerk of the crown , where the say m•ster Nicholas Throgmorton so full and discreet answer all objecti ? once bring against he , that he be find by the jury , not guilty , and be clear acquit , but the jury notwithstanding be afterward trouble for ac ? quit he , and send prisoner , some of they to the tower , and some to the fleet , and afterward fine to pay a thousand make a piece at least , and some 2000 l. though these sum be afterward something mitigate . more of Wya•s complice have be take , arraign and adjudge to dye , but in judgement the queen remember mercy , and give they their pardon ; of which number be master Rudston of Kent , sir Iames a Crofts , the lord John grey brother to the duke of Suf•olke , and some other . about this time , a little before and after , be advancement in honour , the lord William Howard , lord admiral of England , be create baron ho•ard of E••ingham , sir John William be create baron of Tames , sir Edward north be create ba•on of Chartleigh , sir John Bridges be create baron chandowe of Sudeley , Gerrard Fitz garret be create earl of Kildare and B• ? run of Ophelley , and not long after sir Anthony brown master of the horse , be create Viscount Mountag•• . it be scarce worth remember , that in the end of this fir•• year of •he queen reign• , one Elizabeth Cro•t , a wench of eighteen year old , be by pr•ctice put into a wall , and thereupon call the spirit in the wall , who with a whistle make for the purpose , whistle out many seditious word against the queen , the prince of Spain , the mass , confession , and such other point ; for which she do penance , stand upon a scaffold at Paul cro••e all the sermon time , where she make open confession of her fault . there have be good store of laymens blood shed already , and now the time be come to have clergy man shed , and for a preparative to it , on the ten of April , cranm•r archbishop of Canterbury , Nicholas Ridley la•e bishop of London , and Hugh Latimer late bishop of Worcester , be convey from the tower to Oxford , there to dispure with Oxford and Cambridge man in point of religion , but special of the eucharist ; the Oxford man be coal , Cha•scy , pie , Harpsefield , smith and doctor Weston prolocurour : the Cambridge man young , Seaton , Watson , Atkinson , Fecknham and Sedgewicke : the disputation end , which ( we may well think , as the matter be carry ) go against the prisoner ; on the twenty of April they be bring again page 99 on the stage ; and then demand , whether they will persist in their opini ? on , or else recant ; and affirm they will persist , they be all three add ? judge heretic , and condemn to the fire ; but their execution we must not look for till a year or two hence ; but in the mean time we have John Rogers , the first martyr of these time , burn at London the four of February ; after who the nine of February , John Hooper late bishop of VVorcester , burn at Gloucester ; after he , Robert Ferrar bishop of man , burn at Carmarden ; after he John Bradford , with many other ; and then the two famous man Ridley and Latimer , no less famous for their constant death , than their religious life , both burn at Oxford the sixteenth of October . This rise of Wyatt have be a remora to the queen marriage , and now to avoid all such obstacle hereafter , the queen in April call a parliament ; wherein be p•opounded two thing ; one for confirmation of the Marri ? age , the other for restoration of the pope primacy . this latter be not assent to , but with great difficulty ; for the six year reign of king Edward have spread a plantation of the protest•nt religion , in the heart of many ; but the proposition for the marriage be assent to ready , but yet with the add of some condition , which have no• be think of in the former article : first , that king Phillip shall admit of no stranger in any office , but only Natives• second , that he shall innovate nothing in the law and cu ? stome of the kingdom . third , that he shall not carry the queen out of the realm , without her consent , nor any of her child without consent of the council . four , that survive the Quee• , he shall challenge no right in the kingdom , but suff•r it to descend to the next heir . five , that he shall carry none of the jewel of the realm out of the kingdom , nor suffer any ship or ordnance to be remove out of the realm : and last , that neither direct nor indirect , he shall cause the realm of England to be in ? tangle with the war between Spain and France . all thing be thus agree on , the earl of Bedford lord privy seal , the lord Fitzwaters , and diverse other Lord• and gentleman , be send into Spain to fetch over prince Philip , who arrive at Southampton the twenty of July in the year 1554. and the three and twenty come to Winchester , where the queen meet he , and the five and twenty , the marriage between they there be open solemnize : ( the disparity of year , as in prince , not much regard , though he be then but seven and twenty year of age , she eight and thirty ) at which time , the emperor ambassador be pre ? send , open declare ; that in consideration of that marriage , the emperor have give to prince Philip his son , the kingdom of Naples and Hierusa ? lem ; and thereupon ( the solemnity of marriage be end ) garter king of herald open in the church , in the presence of the king , the queen , and the lord both of England and Spain , solemn proclaim , the title and stile of these two prince , as follow : Phillip and marry by the grace of God king and queen of England , France , Naples , Jerusalem , and Ireland , defender of the faith , prince of Spain and Sicily , archduke of Austria , duke of Mil ? lany , Burgundy , and Brabant , count of habspurge , Flanders and Tyroll . after this the king and queen by easy journey come to Windsor castle , where the king be install knight of the garter , and the earl of Sussex with he : the eleven of August they remove to Richmond , the seven and twenty to suffolk-place in Southwark , and the next day to London ( where the stately show that be make , may well enough be conceive without relare ) from hence after four day they remove again to Richmond , where all the lord have leave to depart into their country , and indeed so many depart , that there remain not a english lord at the court , but the bishop of Winchester : from Richmond they remove to hampton-court , where the hall door within the court be continual keep shut , so as no man may enter unless his errand be first know , which may perhaps be the fashion of Spain , but to english ? man seem very strange . page 100 about this time cardinal pool , send for by the king and queen , come over into England ; and have come soon , but that the emperor fear he may prove a corrival with his son Phillip , have use mean to stop his pass ? sage , but now that his son marriage be pass , he be content to let he pass , who though he come from room with the great authority of a legate • late , yet he will not but come private into London , because his attain ? dour be yet upon record ; a act therefore be present pass to take it off , and to restore he in blood ; for pass of which act , the king and queen in person come to the parliament house ; whither a few day after , the Cardi ? nall come himself , which be then keep in the great chamber of Whitehall , because the queen by reason of sickness , be not well able to go abroad ; and here the king and queen sit under the cloth of estate , and the car ? dinall on their right hand , all the lord , knight and burgess be present , the bishop of Winchester lord chancellor , make a short speech unto they ; signify the presence of the lord cardinal , and that he be send from the pope as his legate a late , to do a work tend to the glory of God , and the benefit of they all ; which ( say he ) you may better hear from his own mouth . then the cardinal rise up , and make a long solemn oration , where ? in he first thank they for his restore , by which he be enable to be a man ? ber of their society ; then exhort they to return into the bosom of the church , for which end he be come ; not to condemn , but to reconcile ; not to compel , but to call and require ; and for their first work of reconcile ? mean , require they to repeal and abrogate all such law as have for ? mer be make in derogation of the catholic religion . after which speech , the parliament go together , draw up a supplication , which with ? in two day after they present to •he king and queen ; wherein they show ? ed themselves to be very penitent for their former error , and humble desire their majesty to intercede for they to the lord cardinal and the see upon ? stolicke , that they may be pardon of all they have do amiss , and be recei ? ve into the bosom of the church ; be themselves most ready to abrogate all law prejudicial to the see of Rome . this supplication be deliver to the cardinal , he then give they absolution , in these word ; we , by the apostolic authority give unto we , by the most holy lord pope Iulius the three ( Christ vicegerent on earth ) do absolve and deliver you and every of you , with the whole realm and dominion thereof , from all heresy and schism , and from all judgement , censure and pain for that cause incur ? red , and also we do restore you again , to the unity of our mother the ho ? lie church , the report hereof come to roam , be cause that a solemn procession be make , for joy of the conversion of England to the church of Rome . and now the queen have a great desire to have king Phillip crown , but to this the parliament will by no mean assent . in October this second year of her reign , a rumour be spread of the queen be with child , and so forward that she be quick ; and thereup ? on be lettes send from the lord of the council : to Bonner bishop of Lon ? don , that prayer of thanksgiving shall be make in all church ; and the parliament it self be so credulous of it , that they enter into consideration of the education of the child , and make a act ; desire the king ( our of ? ? ? confidence they have in he ) that if the queen shall fail , he will be please •o take upon he the rule and government of the child ; but after •ll this , in June follow , it come to be know , that it be but a tympany , •r at lest the queen so miscarry , that there come no child , nor the queen likely ever after to have any . but howsoever , in hope of the joy that be ex ? pect ; in ianu•ry of this year , diverse of the council , as the lord Chan ? cellour , the bishop of Elye , the lord treasurer , the earl of shrewsb•ry , the controlour of the queen house , secretary Bourne and sir Richard so•th ? well master of the ordinance , be send to the tower , to discharge and set at page 101 liberty a great part of the prisoner in the tower ; as •amely , the late duke of Northumberland son , Ambrose , Robert and Henry , also sir Andrew Dudley , sir Iames cro•ts , sir Nicholas Throgmorton , sir John Rogers , sir Nicholas be ? nold , sir George Harper , sir Edward Warner , sir William Sentlow , sir Gowen Carow , William gybb esquire , Cuthbert Vaughan , and some other . about this time , one William Fetherstone , a miller son , of the age of eighteen year , name and bruit himself to be king Edward the six ; for which be apprehend and examine , he answer as one lunatic ; and thereupon be whip at a cart •ayle , and banish into the north ; but the year after , spread abroad again , that king Edward be alive , and that he have talk with he , he be arraign and condemn of treason , and at Tyburn hang and quarter . in the month of march , the queen be take with a fit of devotion , and thereupon call unto her four of her privy council , namely , William marquess of Winchester lord treasurer , sir Robert Rochester comptrolour , sir William Peter secretary , and sir Francis Englefield master of the ward , and signify unto they , that it go against her conscience , to hold the land and possession as well of monastery and abbey as of other church , and therefore do free relinquish they , and leave they to be dispose , as the pope and the lord cardinal shall think fit ; and thereupon charge they to ac ? quaint the cardinal with this her purpose . a•d short after in performance hereof , John Fecknam late deane of Pauls , be make abbot of Westminster , and have possession deliver he , and with he fourteen monk receive the habit at the same time : and on the twenty of November , sir Thomas be institute lord of saint John of Jerusalem , and be put in possession of the land belong unto it . and when it be tell her• that this will be a great diminution of the revenue of her crown ; she answer , she more value the salvation of her soul , than a thousand crown : a most religious speech , and enough , if there be but this , to show she to be a most pious prince . the four of September this year , king Phillip wait on with the earl of Arundel lord steward , the earl of Pembroke , the earl of Huntington and other , go over to Callice , and from thence to Brussels in Brabant , to visit the emperor his father ; who delive•ing he possession of the low con ? try , in march follow he return into England ; but then , on the six of July follow , by reason of war with France , he pass again over to Callic• and so into Flanders , from whence he return not till eighteen month after ; which make great mutter among the common people , as though he take any little occasion to be absent , for the little love he bear to the queen . in the three year of the queen die Stephen Gardiner bishop of Win ? chester at his house in Southwark ; of who death it be memorable , that the same day in which bishop Ridley and master Latimer suffer at Oxford , he will not go to dinner till four a clock in the a•ternoone , tho•gh the old duke of Nor•olke be come to dine with he ; the reason be , because he will first hear of their be burn , and as soon as word of that be bring he , he present say , now let we go to dinner ; where sit down and ea ? ting merry , upon a sudden he fall into such extremity , that he be fain to be take from the table and carry to his bed , where he continue fifteen day , without void any thing either by urine or otherwise , which cause his tsongu to swell in his mouth , and so die ; after who death , Nicholas Heath archbi ? shop of York be make lord chancellor . and now come the time of archbishop cranmers execution , who the year before have be condemn and degrade by commission from the pope ; after which , be by the subtlety of some , put in hope of life , out of frailty , he subscribe to a recantation , which yet do he no good ; for whether it be , that cardinal pool will no long be keep from be archbishop page 102 ( which he will not be as long as he live ) or that the queen can •ot be get ? ten to forget , his be the chief instrument of her mother di•orce ; his ex•cu ? cion be resolve to be the 14. of Febr. in the same place at Oxford where Ridley and Latimer five month before have be : before the execution d•ct . ••le preach ? ed , who to make use of cranmers recantation , tell the people , they do well to hearken to this learned man confession , who now at his death , and with his death will testify which be the true religion , never think that Cranmer will ha•e deny his former recantation ; but Cranmer be bring to the stake ( contrary to expectation ) acknowledge , that through frailty he have subscribe it , pray God hearty to forgive it ; and now for a punishment , that hand which have do it shall first suffer , and therewithal thrust his right hand into the fire , he there hold it , till it first and then his whole body be consume ; only ( which be no small miracle ) his heart remain whole and not once touch with the fire . the same year also , no few than 84. of both sex be burn for Religi ? on ; and it be a cruelty very far extend , that the bone of bucer and Ph•gi•• some time before dead and bury , be take up and public burn in Cam ? bridge . no soon be Cranmer dead , but the very same day be cardinal Poole make archbishop of Canterbury . in the four year of the queen , exemplar justice be do upon a great person ; for the lord Sturton , a man much in the queen fa•our , as be a earnest papist , be for a murder commit by he , arraign and condemn ? ned , and he with four of his servant , carry to Salisbury , be there in the mar ? ket-place hang , have this favour to be hang in a silken halter , his servant in place near adjoin to the place where the murder be commit . the four and twenty of April , Thomas Stafford second son to the lord Stafford , with other , to the number of two and thirty person ( set on by the french king ) attempt to raise sedition against the queen , for marry with king Phillip , and come out of France , arrive at Scarborough in Yorkshire , where they take the castle , but within two day be drive out by the ea•le of VVestmerland , and then take and arraign : the eight and twenty of May Stafford be behead on the tower-hill , and the next day three of his associate Strelley , Bradford and Proctor be draw from the tower to Tyburn and there execute . the first of May Thomas Percy be first make knight , after , lord , and the next day be create earl of Northumberland , to who the queen give all the land that have be his ancestor . at this time the queen entangle her self ( contrary to her promise ) in her husband quarrel , send a defiance to the french king , by Clarenti•• king at arm ; and after on the Monday in whitsonweeke , by sound of trumpet , proclaim open war against he in Cheapside , and other place of the ci ? tie ; and short after , cause a army of a thousand horse , and four thou ? sand foo• , to be transport over , to the aid of her husband king Phillip , under the lead of the earl of Pembroke captain general , sir Anthony bro•ne Viscount Montague lieutenant general , the lord grey of VVilton lord martial , the earl of Rutland general of the horse , the earl of Lincoln colonel of the foot , the lord Ro•ert Dudley master of the ordnance , the lord Thomas Howard , the lord de la VVare , the lord Bray , the lord chandowe , the •or•Ambrose Dudley , the lord Henry Dudley , with diverse knight and Gen ? t•ement ; who join with king Phillip force , they altogether •et down be ? fore s•int quint•ns , a town of the french king of great importance . to the re ? s••• whereof , the french king send a army , under the lead of the constable ? ? ? France , which consist of nine hundred man at arm , with as many light ? ? ? , eight hundred reystre , two and twenty ensign of lancequene•s , and ? ? ? ensign of french footman ; their purpose be not to give battle , but to ? ? ? more succour into the town ; which the philippian perceive , encounter they , and in the •ight slay John of Bourbon Duk of Anghien , the viscount of T•• ? rain , the Lo of Ch•denier , with many gentleman of account ; they take prisoner the duke of memorancy constable of France , the duke of montpensyer , Duk Lon ? guevile , page 103 the marshal of saint Andrew , the lord Lewis brother to the duke of Mantova , the baron of Curton , the Rhinegrave colonel of the almain , Monsieur d'obigny , monsieur de Byron , and many other ; and then pursue the victory , under the government of the earl of Pembroke , on the seven and twenty of August they take the town of saint qintyn ; in the assault whereof , the lord Henry Dudley , young son to the duke of Northum ? berland , be with a piece of great ordnance slay , and some other of account . the saccage of the town king Phillip give to the english , as by who valour chief it be win . the joy be not so great for this win of saint qintyn , but there will be great sorrow present for other loss . many of the garrison of Callice have be draw from thence , for this service of saint quintyn , and no new supply send , which be perceive by the french king , a plot be lay how to surprise it , which yet be not so secret carry , but that the officer of Callice have intelligence thereof ; who thereupon signify it to the council of Eng ? land , require speedy succour , without which , against so great a army as be raise against they , they shall not be able to hold out . but whether they give no credit to their relation , or whether they apprehend not the danger so imminent as indeed it be , they neglect to send supply till it be too late . for the duke of Guise , with no less speed than policy , take such a course that at one and the same time , he set both upon Newnambridge and also rice ? bank , ( the two main sconce for defence of the town , ) and take they both , and then fall present to batter the wall of the castle it self , and that with such violence of great ordnance , that the noise be hear to ant ? •erp• , be a hundred mile of . but have make the wall assaultable , the english use this stratagem , they lay train of powder to blow they up , when they shall offer to enter , but this stratagem succeed not ; for the french in pass the ditch , have so wet their clothes , that drop upon the train , the powder will take no fire , ( so all thing seem to concur a ? against the english ) and thereupon the castle be take also , and with it the town also have be take , but that sir Anthony Ager , with the loss of his own life and his elder son , valiant defend it , and for that time repel the french , but their number increase so fast upon the town , that the lord Wentworth the deputy , see no other way of safety , demand parley , where a composition be make , that the town shall present be yield to the french king , the life of the inhabitant only save , with safe conduct to pass away , save the lord deputy with fifty other , such as the duke shall name . and here to be quit with the english for their hard usage at saint Quintin , the duke cause proclamation to be make , that all and every per ? son of the town , shall bring their money , jewel and plate ; to the value of a groat , and lie it down upon the high altar of the church ; by which mean a inestimable sum of treasure be there offer , enough •o enrich a army , which have before enrich a town : and now to make it appear how unable the town be to hold out against so great a army . it be say , there be in it but only five hundred soldier of ordinary , and scarce two hundred more of able fight man ; but of other people , man , woman and child four thousand and two hundred , all which be suffer to depart , save the lord We•tworth the deputy , sir Ralph Chamberlaine captain of the castle , John Hu••ston captain of ricebruke , Nicholas Alex•nder captain of New•ham ? bridge , Edward Grimston the controlour , John Rogers the surveyor , with o ? there|be to the number of fifty , who be all carry prisoner into France . and thus Callice , which have be in possession of the english above two hundred year , be win from the english in eight day , which king Edward the three have not win from the french in less than a year . the lord Wentworth be suspect , and in queen Elizabeth time arraign for betray it , be acquit by his peer . Callice thus win , the duke with his army march to guysnes , five page 104 mile distant , whereof be captain the lord grey of Wilton , who hold out the siege and battery five or six day with so great valour and resolution , that he appear in nothing inferior to the enemy but in multitude , yet a• last overlay with their number , and importune by his soldier , much again•• his own will , he make composition , that the town and castle shall be whole render , himself and all officer remain prisoner , all other to de ? part with their armour and baggage . the lord grey afterward ransom for four and twenty thousand crown . and now the duke of Guise consider that guysnes will be too costly a castle to be keep , and too dangerous a neigh ? bour to Callice , if it shall be recover , raze it with the bulwark and for ? tification to the ground . guysnes thus win , there remain nothing within the english pale , but the little castle of ham , whereof be captain the lord Edward Dudley , who consider that though it be natural strong situate , as be environ with fen and marsh , yet it have but little helpe• by art of fortification , and be assure that the duke of Guise will spee ? dy come upon he , he secret in the night with all his garrison , depart in ? to Flanders , so as the castle be not win , but take by the duke of Guise ; and with the loss of this castle , the english lose all their foot in terra firma , and the king of England all the reality of their title in France , have nothing leave but nudum nomen . present after this , the french king cause the marriage between his elder son Francis the dolphin , and marry steward sole heir of Iames the five king of Scotland to be solemnize : whereupon great war ensue soon after between England and Scotland . queen Mary be infinite trouble in mind for the loss of Callice , send present forth her admiral the lord Clinton , with a fleet of more than a hundred sail , to recover , at least reparation in honour , by do some exploit upon France , who not find opportunity to set upon breast , as he be appoint ? t , fall upon the town of conquest , which he take and bur•t , and also diverse village thereabouts , and then return . in which mean time , many great conflict have be between king Phillip and the king of France ; at last , by mediation of the duchess of lorraigne , a treaty of peace be agree on , where all thing seem to be well accord , but only that king Phillip by all mean require restitution of Callice , to which by no mean the french will assent ; but while they stand upon these term , it happen that first the Em ? perour Charles king Phillip father die , and short after queen mary , and the day after her cardinal pool , and short after sir John baker of siss ? herst in Kent , who have be a privy counsellor to Henry the eight , Edward the six a•d queen marry . and so our story have no further relation to either war or peace , between the two king of France and Spain . of her taxation . Shee begin with a rare example ; for in the first year of her reign , wa• pardon by proclamation , the subsidy of four shilling the pound of land , and two shilling the pound of good , grant in the last parliament of king Edward the six . in her second year in a parliament then hold , be grant to the king and queen , a subsidy of the laiety , from five pound to ten pound , of eight penny in the pound ; from ten pound to twenty pound , of twelve penny in the pound ; and from twenty pound upward , sixteen penny in the pound ; all stranger double ; and the clergy six shilling in the pound . if this be all , then upon the matter , in all her time , there come to new charge upon her people ; for one subsidy r•mit•ed and one receive , make but even . in her last year she borrow twenty thousand pound of the city of London , and pay twelve pound a year interest for every •undred pou•d . page 105 law and ordinance in her time . in her first year , on the four of September , be proclaim certain new coin of gold and silver , a sovereign of gold of thirty shilling ; the half sovereign fifteen shilling ; a angel often shilling ; the half angel five shilling . of silver , the groat , the half groat and penny ; all these coin to be currant as before . in her second year , proclamation be make , forbid the shoot in handgun and bear of weapon . the year in which she be marry to king Phillip , a straight charge be to all victualler , taverner and alehouse-keeper , that they shall sell no meat nor drink nor any kind of victual , to any servingman whatsoever , unless he bring a testimonial to show whole servant he be . also in a parliament hold this year , among other act , the statute ex Officio , and other law make for the punishment of heresy , be revive ; but chief the pope bull of dispensation of abbey land be there confirm . in her second year , on Michaelmas even , the prisoner that lie in the counter in Bredstreet , be remove to a new counter make in Woodstreet , of the city purchase and building ; the which re ? move be confirm by the common council of the city . Affaires of the church in her time . in the first year of this queen reign , all bishop which have be de ? prive in the time of king Edward the six , be restore to their bishop ? rik , and the new remove ; also all benefize man that be marry , or will not forsake their opinion , be put out of their live ; and other of a con ? trary opinion put in their room . also this year , on the seven and tweeti ? eth of August , the service begin to be sing in latin in Paul church . also this year the pope authority be by act of parliament restore in England ; and the mass command in all church to be use . in her second year , the realm be absolve , and reconcile to the church of Rome , by cardinal pool ; and first fruit and ten be restore to the clergy : but this be soon revoke , the council find the necessity of it for the queen sup ? port . in her four year , monastery be begin to be reedify ; of which number be that of Westminster , that of sheen and Zion , that of the black-fry ? er , and the friar of Greenwich . of the number of those that die for Reli ? gion in her time , there be record five bishop , one and twenty divine , and of all sort of man and woman , two hundred threescore and seventeen . work of piety do by she or other in her time . this queen restore a great part of abbey-land that be in her posse ? sion , and if she have live long , very likely she will have restore more . in her first year , sir Thomas white then major , erect a college in Oxford , now call saint John college , before , Bernard college ; he also page 106 erect school at Bristol and Reading , and give two thousand pound to the city of Bristol to purchase land , the profit whereof to be employ for the benefit of young clothier for ten year , and after that to be employ in like manner , to the benefit of two and twenty other shire and city . in her three year die sir John Gresham , late major of London , who found a free school at Holt in Nor•olke , and give to every ward in London ten pound , to be di ? stribute to the poor ; also to maid marriage two hundred pound . Cuthbert Tunstall bishop of Du•ham , erect a goodly library in Cambridge , store it with many excellent both print and write book : he also bestow much upon build at Durham , at Alnewicke and at Tunbridge . casualty happen in her time . in her first year , on the seven and twenty of August , the goodly ship in England , call the great Harry , be of the burden of a thousand tun , be burn at Woolwich by negligence of the mariner . in her second year on the fifteen of February , appear in the sky a rainbow reverse , the bow turn ? ed downward , and the two end stand upward : also two sun shine at one time , a good distance asunder , which be take for ill sign . this year also in the month of August , at a place in Suffolk by the sea side , all of hard stone and pibble , lie between the town of Oxford and Alborough , where never grass grow , not any earth be ever see , there chance sudden to spring up without any tillage or sow , so great abundance of peason , that the poor gather above a hundred quarter , yet there remain some ripe , and some blossom , as many as be before . in her four year , hot burn ague and other strange disease , take away much people ; so as between the twen ? ti of October and the last of December , there die seven alderman , namely , Henry Heardson , sir Richard dob•s la•e major , sir William Laxton late ma ? jor , sir Henry hobblesterne late major , sir John Champneys late major , sir John Aleph late sheriff , and sir John Gresham late major . in her four year , before harvest , wheat be sell for four mark the quarter , malt at four and forty shilling the quarter , and pease at six and forty shilling eight penny ; where after harvest , wheat be sell for five shilling the quarter , malt at six shilling eight penny , rye at three shilling four penny the quarter . in the country , wheat be sell for four shilling the quarter , malt at four shil ? ling eight penny , and in some place a bushel of rye for a pound of candle , which be four penny . in her five year , within a mile of Nottingham , so mer ? vailous a tempest of thunder happen , that it beat down all the house and church in two town thereabouts , cast the bell to the outside of the church ? yard , and some web of lead four hundred foot into the field , writhen as if it have be leather ; the rive• of Trent run between the two town , the wa ? ter with the mud in the bottom be carry a quarter of a mile , and cast against tree ; with the violence whereof the tree be pull up by the the root , and cast twelve score off ; also a child be take forth of a man hand and carry two spear length high , and then let fall two h•ndred foot off , of which fall it die ; five or six man thereabouts be slay , and neither flesh nor skin pe ? rish ; also there fall some hale-stone that be fifteen inch about . this year also in harvesttime be great mortality , and special of priest , so as many church be unserved , and much corn be lose in the field for want of workman ; whereupon ensue a great scarcity , so that corn be sell for fourteen shilling a quarter , and wood sell in London for thirteen shilling a thousand of billet , and coal ten penny a sack . also this year on the last of September , fall so great store rain , that Westminster hall be full of water , and boat be row over westminster-bridge into kings-street . page 107 of her personage and condition . of her personage we can make no particular description , only we may say , she be none of the most amiable , but yet without deformity ; but of her condition we may say , she be not without deformity , and yet be very amia ? ble . if we account her religion a deformity , yet her constancy and devotion in it , we must needs count a beauty : if it be a deformity to promise the Suffolk man , not to alter the religion w•ich king Edward have establish , yet it be certain a pious dissem•ling , cretizare cum c•etensibus ; and equivocation ( will some say ) be there a virtue , where she deceive they into truth , and do they good against their will . and as for her sister Elizabeth , if she do not love she , it be but a quality hereditary in she ; for their mother do not love one another before ; and indeed not without some cause in both ; for as those upbraid each other marriage , so these , each other birth . we shall not do she right , if we deny she to be of a merciful disposition , see oftentimes she pity the person , where she shed the blood ; she can have find in her heart to have spare the lady Jane life , if ragion di•stato have not be against it• and she do spare her father the duke of Suffolk life , till his second offence give her just provocation . the goodness of her nature may be see in the badness of her fortune ; who take nothing so much to heart , as unkindness of friend ; the revolt of Callice , and the absence of king Phillip , be the two chief cause that bring she to her end . of her death and burial . the conceit of her be with child , have keep physician to look in ? to the state of her body ; so as her distemper at first neglect , bring she by degree into a dropsy , to which be add a burn favour , bring upon she by a double grief ; one for the long absence of king Phillip ( who have now be away a year and a half ; ) the other , and perhaps the great , for the loss of Callice ; as she forbear not to say to some about she , that if they look into her heart , be dead , they shall find Callice there . she begin to fall sick in September , and die at her manor of saint Iames the seven ? teenth of novemb•r , in the •eer 1558. when she have reign five year four month and eleven day . live three and forty year . her body be inter ? read in a chapel in the minster of saint Peter church at Westminster , without any monument or other remembrance . man of note in her time . of man of valour in her time , there be many , as may be see in the sto ? ry of her re•gne ; but to name some for example , there be William she ? bert earl of Pembroke , the chief assistant of king Phillip in the win of saint Quintin ; there be William lord grey of VVilton , captain of guysnes , who though he yield the town , yet more out of tenderness to his Souldi ? er , then out of fear of his enemy , which he will never else have yield page 108 up ; and to speak of one of a mean rank , there be sir Anthony Ager , who in defence of the town of Callice lose his life , but not till he make the enemy turn their back and fly . O• learned man also there be many , as John Ro ? gers bear in Lancashire , who translate the bible into English with note , Richard Moryson knight , bear in Oxfordshire , who write diverse treatise , Ro ? bert record a doctor of physic , who write a book of arithmetic , C•• ? bert Tunstall , of a worshipful family in Lancashire , though base bear , who•e ancestor come into England with the conqueror , as his Barbour , and •here ? fore have three comb his arm ; bishop first of London , and after of D•• ? ham , who write diverse learned work : Richard Samson , bishop of Coven ? try and Lichfield , who write certain trea••ses : Luc•s shephea•d bear a•Colechester in Essex a english poet : Jane Dudley , daughter •o Henry grey duke of Suffolk , write diverse excellent treatise : William Thomas a vv•lsh ? man , who w•ote the history of Italy , and other thing : Iames brook and John Standish , both of they writer in defence of the pope doctrine : VVilli ? be Peryn a black friar , who write in defence of the mass , and also diverse sir ? mons : Henry lord Stafford , son to Edward duke of Buckingham , who a ? among other thing which he write , translate a book out of latin into english , entitle vtriusque potestatis Differentia• which book ( as some think ) be first compile by Edward fox bishop of Hereford : John Hopkins who translate diverse of David psalm into english Meeter , which be to be find among those appoint to be sing in the church . Page baptize the reign of queen Elizabeth . queen Mary die on Thursday the seventeenth of no ? vember , in the year 1558 , her sister , the lady Elizabeth , of the age of five and twenty year , the only survive child of king Henry the eight , by undoubted right , succeed she in the crown ; which happen in a time of parliament : Nicholas heath , archbishop of York , and lord chancellor , send to the knight and burgess in the low house , to repair immediate to the lord of the upper house ; to who he signify , that queen Mary be that morning dead , and therefore require their assent to join with the lord in pro ? claim queen Elizabeth ; which accord be do , by the sound of trumpet , first at Westminster , and after in the city of London . the queen be then at Ha•field• from whence , on Wednesday the three and twen ? ti of November , she remove to the lord north house in the charterhouse , where she stay till Monday the eight and twenty of November , and then ride in her chariot through London to the tower ; where she con ? tinue till the five of December ; and then remove by water to somerset-house in the strand ; from whence she go to her palace at Westminster ; and from thence , on the twelve of January , to the tower ; and on the fourteenth of January , to Westminster , to her Coronation• where it be incre ? dible , what pageant and show be make in the city , as she pass : on Sunday the five and twenty of January , she be crown in the abbey church at Westminster , by doctor Oglethorp , bishop of Carlile , with all so ? lemnity and ceremony in such case accustom . at this time , to ho ? nou_r_ she coronation , she confer more honour , then in all her life after : William Parre , degrade by queen mary , she make marquess of Northamp ? ton ; Edward Seymor , who father have be attaint , she make earl of Hertford ; Thomas Howard , second son to Thomas duke of Norfolk , she make Viscount Bindon ; sir Henry carry , her cousin germane , she make baron of Hunsdon ; and sir Oliver saint John , she make baron of Bletsho . and now the queen , though she be her self very wise , yet will not page 2 trust ( and it be a great point of wisdom that she will not trust ) to her own wisdom ; and therefore she choose counselor to assist she : in which number she take Nicholas heath , archbishop of York ; William Pawlet , Mar ? quesse of Winchester , L. high treasurer ; Henry Fitz Alan , earl of Arundel ; Francis Talbot , earl of Shrewsbury ; Edward Stanley , earl of Derby ; Wil. Herbert , E. of Pembroke ; Edw. L. Clinton , L. admiral ; and William L. Howard of eff ? ham ; sir Thomas Cheyney ; sir William Peter ; sir Richard sackvyle ; and Nicholas Wootton , dean of Canterbury ; all which have be counselor to queen ma ? ry , and be of her religion : but then to make a counterpoise of Coun ? seller of her own religion , she join with they William Parre , marquess of Northampton ; Francis Russell , earl of Bedford ; sir Thomas Parry ; sir ed ? ward Rogers ; sir Ambrose cave ; sir Francis Knolles ; and sir William Cecill , late secretary to king Edw. the six ; and a little after , sir Nicholas bacon , who she make keeper of the great seal . and have thus provide for her state at home , she seek correspondence with prince abroad : to the emperor Ferdinand , she send in embassage sir Tho. Chaloner ; to the king of Spain in the Low-countries the lord Cobham ; to the prince of Germany sir Henry kill ? ligrew ; sir Aemygill w•ad , to the duke of Holst ; and another ambassador to the king of Denmark . there be also ambassador send to the pope , to the state of Venice , and to the french king ; with who at this time there be a treaty of peace hold at Cambray , between the kingdom of France , England and Spain ; where for England be employ , the earl of Arundel ; Thursbey , bishop of Ely ; and doctor Wootton , dean of Canterbury ; with who , William , lord Howard of Effingham be join by a new commission . as soon as king Philip hear of the death of his wife queen mary , pa•• ? lie out of consideration of state , and partly out of affection of love , he solicit Q. Elizabeth by his ambassador , the earl of Feria , to joyni• mar ? riage with himself ; which be no more for two sister to have successive one husband , then be do before , for two brother to have successive one wife ; and for this he promise to procure a dispensation from the pope . to which motion the queen , though she well know , that to allow a this ? pensation in this case to be sufficient , be to make her own birth Illegiti ? mate ; yet to so great a prince , and who in her sister time have do she many favour , she will not return so blunt a answer ; but put the Ambassadou• off for the present in modest term : she conceive there will be no better way to take he off clean from further suit , then by bring in a alteration of religion ; which yet she will not do all at once , and upon the sudden ( as know the great danger of sudden change ) but by little and little , and by degree : as at first , she permit only epi ? stle and gospel , the ten commandment , the lord prayer , and the creed to be read to the people in the english tongue ; in all other matter they be to follow the roman rite and custom , until order can be take for establish of religion by authority of parliament ; and a se ? veer proclamation be set forth , prohibit all point of controversy to be meddle with : by which mean , she both put the protestant in hope , and put not papist out of hope . yet private she commit the correct ? ing of the book of common prayer , set forth in the english tongue un ? der king Edward the six , to the care and diligence of doctor Parker , bill , may , Cox , Grindall , Whitehead , and Pilkington , divine of great learning ; with who she join sir Thomas smith , a learned knight : but the matter carry so close , that it be not communicate to any , but •o the mar ? quesse of Northampton , the earl of Bedford , and sir William Cecil . the two and twenty of march , the use of the lord supper in both kind be by parliament allow : the four and twenty of June , the sacrifice of the mass be abolish , and the liturgy in the english tongue page 3 establish , though , as some say , but with the difference of six voice . in July the oath of supremacy be propound to the bishop and other : and in August , image be remove out of church , and break or burn . by these degree the religion be change ; and yet the change , to the wonder of the world , breed no disturbance : which if it have be do at once , and on the sudden , will hardly ; at least not without dangerous opposition , have be admit . during this time , a parliament have be summon to begin at westmin ? star , upon the fifteen of January ; and now the queen , for satisfaction of the people , appoint a conference to be hold , between the prelate of the realm ; and protestant divine now new return , who have flee the realm , in the time of queen mary : for the prelate be choose John white , bishop of Winchester ; Ralph Bayne , bishop of Coventry and Lichfield ; Thomas Watson , bishop of Lincoln ; doctor Cole , dean of Pauls ; doctor Langdell , archdeacon of Lewis ; doctor Harpsefield , archdeacon f can ? terbury ; and doctor Chadsey , archdeacon of Middlesex : for the protestant side be appoint , doctor Scory , doctor Cox , doctor sand , doctor Whitehead , doctor Grindall , master horn , master guest , master Elmer , and master jewel . the place be prepare in Westminster church ; where , be ? side the disputant , be present the lord of the queen council , with other of the nobility ; as also many of the low house of parliament . the article propound against the prelate , and their adherent , be these : first , that it be against the word of God , and the custom of the ancient church , to use a tongue unknown to the people , in common prayer , and in the administration of the sacrament . second , that every church have authority to appoint and change ceremony , and Ec ? clesiasticall rite , so they be to edification : third , that it can be prove by the word of God , that there be in the mass a sacrifice propi ? tiatory for the live and the dead . for the manner of their conference , it be agree it shall be perform in writing ; and that the bishop shall deliver their reason in write first . the last of march be the first day of their meeting ; where , contrary to the order , the bishop bring not ? thing in write ; but say , they will deliver their mind only by speech : this break of order much displease the lord , yet they have it grant . then rise up doctor coal , and make a large declaration con ? cern the first point : when he have end , the lord demand if any of they have moor to say ; who answer , no : then the protestant party exhibit a write book ; which be distinct read by master horn . this do , some of the bishop begin to affirm , they have much more to say in the first article : this again much displease the lord ; yet this all ? so be grant they , to do at their next meeting on Monday next : but when Monday come , so many other difference arise between they , that the con ? ference break off , and nothing be determine . but in the parliament there be better agreement ; for there it be enact , that queen Elizabeth be the lawful and undoubted queen of England ; notwithstanding a law make by her father king Henry the eight , that exclude both she and her sister marry from the crown , see , though the law be not repeal , yet it be a principle in law , that the crown once gain , ta ? keth away all defect . also in this parliament , first fruit and ten be restore to the crown ; and the title of supreme head of the church of England be confirm to the queen , with so universal consent , that in the upper house none oppose these law , but only the earl of Shrewsbury , and sir Anthony brown , Viscount Montague : and in the low house , only some few of papal inclination , murmur , say , that the parliament be pack ; and that the duke of Norfolk , the earl of Arundel , and sir will ? liam Cecill , for their own end , have cunning beg voice , to make up their party . page 4 the supremacy thus confirm to the queen , the oath be soon after tender to the bishop and other ; of who , as many as refuse to take it , be present deprive of their live . and that we may see , how incli ? ning the kingdom at this time be to receive the protestant religion ; it be say , that in the whole realm ( wherein be reckon above nine thousand spiritual promotion ) there be no more that refuse to take the oath , but only fourscore parson , fifty prebendary , fifteen master of Col ? ledge , twelve archdeacon , twelve Deans , six abbot , and fourteen by ? shop , ( indeed all that be at that time , except Anthony bishop of Landaff• as Nicholas heath archbishop of York , Edmund Boner bishop of London , Cuthbert Tunstall bishop of Durham , Thomas Thursby bishop of Ely , Gilbert Bourn bishop of bath and Wells , John Christopherson bishop of Chichester , John white bishop of Winchester , Thomas Watson bishop of Lincoln , Ralph Bayne bishop of Coventry and Lichfield , Owen Oglethorp bishop of car ? lile , Iames turbervile bishop of Exeter , and David Pool bishop of Peter ? borough : and with these doctor Fecknam abbot of Westminster : all which be at first commit to prison , but soon after deliver to the cu ? stody of private friend , except those two saucy prelate , Lincoln and Winchester , who threaten to excommunicate the queen . three only , namely , Cuthbert Scot bishop of Chester , Richard pate bishop of Worcester , and Thomas Goldwel bishop of saint Assaph , change their religion of their own accord ; as also do certain noble personage , namely , Henry lord Morley , sir Francis Englefield , and sir Robert Peckham , ( who have be privy-counselors to Q. mary ) sir Thomas Shelley , and sir John gage . in the sea of the prelate remove , be place protestant bishop , as Matthew Parker be make archbishop of Canterbury , ( who be consecrate by the imposition of the hand of three that former have be bishop ; namely , William Barlow of bath and Wells , John scory of Chichester , and mile Coverdale of Exeter ) and be consecrate himself , he afterward con ? secrate Edmund Grindall bishop of London , Richard Cox bishop of Ely , Edwyn Sands bishop of Worcester , Rowland Merick bishop of Bangor , tho ? mass young bishop of saint davye , Nicholas Bullingham bishop of Lincoln , John jewel bishop of Salisbury , Richard Davis bishop of saint Assaph , Edward guest bishop of Rochester , Gilbert Barkeley bishop of bath and Wells , Thomas Bentham bishop of Coventry and Litchfield , William Alley bishop of Exeter , John Parkhurst bishop of Norwich , Robert horn bishop of Win ? chester , Richard Cheyney bishop of Gloucester , Edmund Scambler bishop of Peterbo•ough , William Barlow bishop of Chichester , John Scory bishop of Hereford , young archbishop of York , Iames Pilkington bishop of Dur ? ham , John Best bishop of Carlile , and William Downham bishop of Chester . while these thing be do in England , the treaty of peace at cam ? bray continue still ; wherein king Phillip stand for the restitution of Calais to the english , as firm as if it have be his own interest ; and with ? out it will agree to no peace with France : but when by message he unacustomated ? derstood , that his suit for marriage with queen Elizabeth be reject ; and that the protestant religion be establish in the kingdom , he then leave queen Elizabeth , see she will not be he , to her self ; and though he be ? come not present a foe , yet he become present less than a friend , and forbear to do any more good office in that business . queen Elizabeth thus leave to her self , agree with the french king , to conclude she own peace apart ; and thereupon , delegate on both side be appoint to meet at Cambray : for the queen of England be , Thursby bishop of Ely , the lord Williams , the lord Howard of Effingham , chamberlain to the queen , and doctor Wootton dean of Canterbury and York : for the king of France be , Charles cardinal of Lorraine , the first peer of France , Annas page 5 duke of memorancy , Iames Albon lord of saint Andrews , John Morvilliers bishop of Orleans , and Claude Aubespine secretary of the privy council . the commissioner meet , the chief point in difference , be the restitu ? cion of Calais ; for which , the english Commissioners• by the q•eens ap ? appointment , offer to remit two million of crown , that by just account be due from France to England ; but the queen be not more desirous to recover Calais , than the french king be to hold it : and thereupon at last , it be conclude , that Calais shall remain in possession of the french fo• the term of eight year ; and those expire , it shall be deliver to the english , upon forfeiture of five hundred thousand Crowns• for which , ho ? stage be give : but all this notwithstanding , though the condition be seal and swear to , and though hostage be assign to remain in England , till one or other be perform ; yet all be frustate , and come to nothing . about this time , Henry king of France marry his daughter Isabella to Phillip king of Spain , and his sister Margaret to Emmanuel Phylibert duke of Savoy ; at the solemnity of which marriage , he will needs be a Tiltor himself ; and thereupon commend the earl of Montgomery to run against he , who unfortunate break his lance upon the king cuyrasse , a splinter thereof ( his beaver be somewhat open ) strike he so deep in the eye , that within few day he end his life : after who death , Francis his son at the age of sixteen year , succeed he in the crown , have by the marriage of queen marry the title of Scotland , and upon ground thereof lay claim to the crown of England also , and give the arm of Eng ? land , as proper belong to he . and now begin the game of faction to be play , wherein the whole estate of queen Elizabeth lie at stake , a game that will hold play the most part of she reign , and if not play well , will put she in jeoparey of lose all , see all about she be against she , fillip king of Spain have a quarrel to she , for be reject in his suit ; the king of France have a quar ? rell to she in right of his wife , which be now his right . the que•n of Scot have a quarrel to she for detain her inheritance : the pope have a quar ? rell to she , for exclude his authority : the king of Sweden have a quar ? rell to she , for slight his son in the way of marriage : and all these be ? king against she , who have she of her side , but only her own subject , papist yesterday , and to day protestant , who be scarce settle in their religion , how shall they be settle in their loyalty ? and not be loyal , where can she find to cast anchor for her safety ? but it be a true say , nullum numen abest si sit prudentia ; Wisdom be a s•pply for all de ? fect : and indeed , the queen be very wise her self , and have a wise council about she , she pass all these difficulty , though not without danger , yet with little or no hazard . it happen ( if at least it happen , and be not rather plot of pur ? pose ) that a reformation of religion be pretend in Scotland ; but be indeed a encroachment upon the prince authority ; for at the preach of John Knox , and other headstrong minister , not only image and altar be cast down and burn , the monastery of saint Andrews , of stone , of stryvel , and of Lynlithew be overthrow ; but it be further put into the head of the nobility , that it pertain to they , of their own Autho ? rity , to take away idolatry , and by force reduce th• prince to the prescript of law : whereupon there be present a bandy of the lord of Scotland , against the queen dowager , regent of the country ; and in this case each of they •ought for aid ; the queen Dowager have aid out of France , the lord of Scotland send for aid to the queen of England : but this be matter for consultation ; it seem a bad example , for a prince to give aid to the rebellious subject of another prince . on the other side , it page 6 seem no less than impiety , not to give aid to the protestant of the same religion ; but most of all it seem plain madness , to suffer adversa ? rise to be so near neighbour , and to let the french nestle in Scotland , who pretend title to England : upon such like consideration , it be resolve to send they aid ; and thereupon a army of six thousand foot , and twelve hundred horse , be send under the command of the duke of Norfolk , the lord grey of Wilton his lieutenant general ; sir Iames a Crofts , assistant to he ; the lord Scroop , L. martial ; sir George Howard , general of the man at arm ; sir Henry Percy , general of the light-horse ; Thomas Huggens , provost martial ; Thomas Gower , master of the ordnance ; master William Pelham , captain of the pioneer ; and master Edward Randoll , Serjeant ma ? jor , and diverse other . Theise come into Scotland , join with the scot ? be Lords , and set down before Leith , where pass many small skirmish , many battery , and sometime assault : to who , after some time , a new supply come of above two thousand foot ; whereof be captain , sir Andrew Corbet , sir Rowland Stanley , sir Thomas Hesbith , sir Arthur Manwa ? ring , sir Laurence smith , and other : yet with this new supply there be little more do then before ; many light skirmish , many battery , and sometime assault ; so long , till at last the young french king , find these broil of Scotland to be too furious for he to appease , he send to the queen of England , desire that commissioner may be send , to reconcile these difference : whereupon be dispatch into Scotland , sir William Cecill , her principal secretary , with doctor Wotton , dean of Canterbury ; who conclude a peace between England and France , upon these conditi ? once , that neither the king of France , nor the queen of Scotland , shall thenceforth use the arm or title of England or Ireland ; and that both the english and the french shall depart out of Scotland ; and a general pardon shall be enact by parliament , for all such as have be actor in those stir . this peace be scarce conclude , when Francis the young king of France die , leave the crown to his young brother Charles , who be guide altogether by the queen-mother , and molest with the civil dis ? sention between the prince of Guise and Conde ; for who reconcilement , the queen send sir Henry Sidney , lord precedent of Wales ; and short after a army , under the lead of the lord Ambrose Dudley , earl of Warwick ; who arrive at Newhaven , be receive into the town ; which have keep eleven month , he be then constrain , by reason of a pestilence , to surrender again upon composition , and so return . about this time when the parliament be upon dissolve ; it be agree upon by the house of commons , to move the queen to marry , that she may have issue to succeed she ; to which purpose , Thomas Gargrave , speak ? er of the house , with some few other choose man , have access to the queen who humble make the motion to she , as a thing which the kingdom in ? finite desire ; see they can never hope to have a better prince , then out of her loin : whereunto the queen answer in effect thus ; that she be already marry ; namely , to the kingdom of England : and behold ( say she ) the pledge of the covenant with my husband ; and therewith she hold out her finger , and show the ring , wherewith , at the time of her coronation , she give her self in wedlock to the kingdom : and if ( say she ) i keep my self to this husband , and take no other ; yet i doubt not but God will send you as good king , as if they be bear of i ; forasmuch as we see by daily experience , that the issue of the best prince do often de ? generate : and for my self , it shall be sufficient that a marble stone declare , that a queen have reign such a time , live and die a virgin . in ? deed before this time , many match have be offer she : first , king Philip : and when he be out of hope of match with she himself , he then deal with the emperor Ferdinand his uncle , to commend his young page 7 son Charles , duke of Austria , to she for a husband . and when this suc ? ceed not , than John , duke of Finland , second son to Gustavus king of Sweden , be send by his father , to solicit for his elder brother Erricus• who be honourable receive , but the match reject . then Adolphus duke of Holst , uncle to Frederick king of Denmark , come into England , upon a great hope of speed ; but the queen bestow upon he the honour of the garter , and a yearly pension , but not her self . then Iames earl of Arran , be commend to she by the protestant of Scotland ; but neither the man nor the motion be accept . of mean fortune there be some at home that please themselves with hope of her marriage : first , sir William Pickering , a gentleman of a good house , and a good estate ; but that which most commend he , be his studiousness of good letter , and sweet demeanour . then Henry , earl of Arundel , exceed rich , but now in his decline age . then Robert Dudley , young son of the duke of Northumberland , of a excellent feature of face , and now in the flower of his age : but these may please themselves with their own con ? ceit ; but be not considerable in her apprehension : they may receive from her good testimony of her princely favour ; but never pledge of nuptial love . about this time the earl of Feria ( who have marry the daughter of sir William dorm ) be deny leave of the queen for some of his wife friend to live out of England , grow so incense , that he make mean to Pius the four , than pope , to have she excommunicate , as a heretic and usurper : but the pope incline rather to save then to destroy ; and know ? ing that gentle course prevail more with generous mind , than roughness and violence ; in most love manner write unto she , exhort she to re ? turn to the unity of the catholic church ; and as it be say , make her great offer , if she will hearken to his counsel ; particular , that he will recall the sentence pronounce against her mother marriage ; con ? firm the book of common prayer in english ; and permit to her people the use of the sacrament in both kind . but queen Elizabeth neither ter ? rify with the earl of feria practise , nor allure with the pope great offer , accord to her motto , semper eadem , persist constant in her resolution , to maintain that religion , which in her conscience she be persuade , to be most agreeable to the word of God , and most consonant to the primitive church . while these ground of trouble be sow in England , France , and Scotland , it be not likely that Ireland will lie fallow ; though indeed it be a country that will bring forth trouble of it self , without sow : but howsoever , to make the more plentiful harvest of trouble at this time , John Oneal ( who father king Henry the eight make earl of Tyrone ) to prevent the punishment of a private outrage upon a brother , break into open rebellion against the prince : and though his attempt be mature make frustrate by timely opposition ; yet this be he that in the begin of the queen reign , sow the seed of that trouble in Ireland ; which of ? terward take so deep root , that till the end of she reign it can never thorough be root out : though this man a year or two after come into England , and cast himself at the queen foot , acknowledge his fault , and obtain pardon . the treaty of Edinburgh shall by promise have be confirm by Francis the french king while he live : he not have do it , queen Elizabeth require his dowager the queen of Scot to confirm it : but she solicit often to it by Throgmorton the queen ligier in France ; make all ? way answer , she can not do it without the counsel of her nobility in Scotland : whereupon queen Elizabeth suspect that this answer be but to hold she in amuzement , while some mischief be practise against page 8 she , send sir Thomas Randoll into Scotland , to persuade the lord there to enter into a league of mutual amity with she , and other protestant Princes• and further , by no mean to permit their queen , now a widow , to marry again to any foreign prince ; for which she allege many great reason . in the mean while , the queen of Scot , purpose to return into Scotland , send beforehand d'oysette a french lord , to entreat queen Elizabeth , that with her leave , she she self may pass by sea into Sco•land , and D'Oysette may pass by land but queen Elizabeth open deny both the one and the other , unless she will confirm the treaty of Edinburgh ; say , it be no reason she shall do the queen of Scot courtesy , if the queen of Scots will not do she right . the queen of Scots much trouble with this answer , expostulate the matter with her ligier Throgmorton , and much complain of the unkindness : but in the mean time provide ship , she loose from Calais ; and under covert of a mist , notwithstand ? ing that ship be lay to intercept she , she arrive safe in Scotland ; where she entreat her subject in so love a manner , that she give great con ? tentment to the whole kingdom ; as well to the protestant party , as the other : and then send letter to queen Elizabeth , proffer all observance and readiness to enter league with she ; so she may by authority of parliament be declare her successor ; which be but her right . to this queen Elizabeth answer , that though she will no way derogate from her right : yet she shall be loath to endanger she own security , and as it be to cover she own eye with a gravecloth while she be alive ; but fall again to her old admonition , require she to confirm the treaty of Edinburgh : and now to show the respect she bear she , when her uncle the duke d'a•male , de albeufe , and other lord of France that have bring she home , return through England , she give they most bountiful and love entertainment . Theise two queen indeed be both of great spirit , and both very wise ; but these grow such jealousy of state between they ; ( the queen of Scots doubt lest queen Elizabeth mean to frustrate her suc ? session ; queen Elizabeth doubt lest the queen of Scot mean to pre ? vent she succession ) that it keep they more asunder in love , than they be near in blood , and be cause of many unkind passage between they : in all which , though the queen of Scots be a very near match to the queen of England in the ability of her mind ; yet in the favour of fortune she be much her inferior . but now for all the courtesy which Q. Elizabeth show to the queen of scots uncle at their return through England , yet new practise be again set on foot against she at room ; the duke of Guise especial labour ? ing to have she be excommunicate ; but pope Pius still averse from such roughness , mean now to try the queen another way ; and thereupon send the abbot Martinengi• and when he may not be admit to enter Eng ? land , then cause the bishop of Viterbo his nuntio in France , to deal earnest ? lie with the queen Ligier Throgmorton , that she ( as other prince have do ) will send her orator to the council of Trent , which he before have call ? lead . but the queen nothing tender in this point , make peremptory an ? swer , that a popish assembly she do not acknowledge to be a general council ; nor do think the pope to have any more right or power to call it , than any other bishop . This answer not only exasperate the pope , but so alienate also the king of Spain mind from she , that he be never after so kind a friend to she as he have be ; and none of her ambassador ever after have any great like to be employ to he . and now at this time , as the abbot Martinengi be the last nuntio that ever be send from the pope into England , so sir Edward Carne , now die at Rome , be the last Ligie• that be ever send to the pope from the king of England . page 9 and now queen Elizabeth know well that she have draw many ill willer against her state , she endeavour to strengthen it by all the mean she can devise : she cause many great ordnance of brass and iron to be cast ; she repair fortification in the border of Scotland ; she encrea ? sed the number of her ship , so as England never have such a navy before ; she provide great store of armour and weapon out of Germany ; she cause muster to be hold , and youth to be train in exercise of artillery ; and to please the people ( who love be the great strength of all ) she give leave to have corn and grain transport ; and call in all base coin and brass money . it be now the five year of queen Elizabeth rain : when diverse great person be call in question : Margaret countess of Lenox , niece to to king Henry the eight , by his elder sister , and her husband the earl of Lenox , for have have secret conference , by letter with the queen of Scot , be deliver prisoner to sir Richard Sackvile , master of the roll , and with he keep a while in custody . also Arthur pool and his brother , who great grandfather , be George duke of clarnce , brother to king Edward the four : Antony Fortescue , who have marry their sister , and other , be arraign , for conspire to withdraw themselves to the duke of Guise in France ; and from thence to return with a army into wale ; to declare the queen of Scot , queen of England ; and Arthur Poole duke of clearnce ; which particular they confess at the bar , and be thereupon condemn to die ; but have their life spare , in regard they be of the blood royal . also the lady Katherine grey , daughter to Henry grey duke of Suffolk , by the elder daughter of Charles Brandon• have former be marry to the earl Pembroke elder son ; and from he soon after lawful divorce , be some year after find to be with child by Edward Seymoure earl of Hertford : who be at that time in France , be present send for ; and be examine be ? before the archbishp of Canterbury : and affirm they be lawful marry ; but not be able within a limit time to produce witness of their marriage ; they be both commit to the tower : where she be bring to bed : and after by the connivance or corruption of their keeper , be suffer sometime to come together : she be with child by he again , which make the queen more angry than before ; so as sir Edward Warner Lieutenent of the tower be put out of his place , and the earl be fine in the star-chamber , five thousand pound , and keep in prison nine year after . though in plead of his case ; one John H•les argue ; they be lawful man and wife , by virtue of their own bare consent , without any ecclesicsticall ceremony . the lady a few year after , fall through grief into a mortal sickness , humble desire the queen pardon , for have marry without she know ? ledge , and commend her child to her clemency , die in the tower . at this time ( the king be under age ) dissension among the peer grow hot in erance ; of which there be two faction ; both pretend the cause of religion : of the one the duke Guise , a paipst , be head ; of the other the prince of Conde a protestant : but while delirant Reges Plectun ? ter achiui : while these prince be at variance , the people suffer for it : and chief , as be under the weak protection , the protestant party : where upon queen Elizabeth , have well learned the lesson : tum tua res agitur , partis cum proximus ardet• and fear least the flaim of their dissension , may kindle a fire within her own kingdom ; send over sir Henry Sidney lord presiden of wale into France , to endeavour by all possible mean their reconcilement , which when he can not effect , page 10 ( and perhaps it be never mean he shall effect it , but only to see what invitation will be make to the queen for her assistance ) she thereupon , at the moan of the afflict protestant , send over a army of six thousand soldier , under the conduct of the earl of Warwick , in assistance of the prince of Conde , and other protestant lord , who deliver to he the town of Newhaven , to hold in the king of France his name , until such time as Calais be restore : but the prince of Conde march to join with the english force , be by the duke of Guise interrupt and ta ? ken prisoner• which have be a great disappointment to the english , but that the duke of Colin join with he , besiege Caen in Normandy , and take it ; toge•her with Bayeux , Faleise , and saint Lo. the french hostage that be pledge for the payment of five hundred thousand Cowns , if Calais be not restore , be remain still in England ; who perceive there be like to be war with France , prepare secret to get away ; but be ready to take ship , be discover , and bring back again . in the mean while , the prince of Conde draw on with a hope , to marry the queen of Scot , and to have the chief government in France , during the king minority , conclude a peace with the king , and with the Gui ? ses ; so as now , all french , as well protestant as papist , require to have Newhaven deliver up : but the earl of Warwick perceive the •icklenesse of the french protestant , first to make su•e to draw he into France , and now upon so slight occasion to require he to be go , he shut all •rench , both protestant and papist , o•t of the town , and lay hold of their ship ; the french on the other side make ready to set upon the town , say , they fight not now for religion , but for their country ; wherefore it be meet that both protestant and papist shall join their force , see they have already conclude a peace betwixt themselves . and hereupon the duke of memorancy send a trumpeter to the earl of Warwick , command he yield the town ; who make a ? swer by sir Hugh Pawlet , that he will never yield it without the queen leave : he thereupon besiege the town , and with great violence of bat ? tery , seek to get it by force : which queen Elizabeth hear , she send a commission to the earl of Warwick to yield it up , if upon honourable condition ; which soon after be accord do , after the english have hold it eleven month ; and then the earl , without any dishonour for yield up a town , which the pestilence make he no less unwilling than unable to hold , he return into England : but that which be more doleful than the loss of Newhaven , he bring the pestilence with he in ? to England . the recovery of this town not only make the french to triumph , but hereupon the chancellor of France pronounce open , that by this war , the english have lose all their right to Calais , and be not to require it any more , see it be one of the Condi ? tion , that neither of the nation shall make war upon the other ; which be the point stand upon by the king of France and his mother , when queen Elizabeth send sir Thomas smith to demand Calais to be re ? store . at this time there be such cross design among the prince of Christendom , that a very good politician can hardly under ? stand their aim . the duke of Guise be slay in the civil war , the queen of Scot dowry be not pay she in France , and the Scot be put off from be the king guard : this exceed displease the queen of Scot : but then to please her again• and for fear lest hereupon she shall apply her self to the friendship of the english , her uncle the cardinal of Lorraine solicit she afresh , to marry Charles duke of page 11 Austria , offer she for her dowry the county of tyroll . the queen of Scot , to make use of her uncle fear , and perhaps to bring queen Eliza ? beth into a opinion of depend upon she , acquaint she with this moti ? on , and therein require her advice . queen Elizabeth not will she shall marry with any foreign prince , persuade she to take a husband out of England , and particular commend to she the lord Robert Dudley ( who wife a little before have with a fall break her neck ) promise withal , that if she will marry he , she shall then by authority of parliament , be declare her successor , in case she die without issue . but when her uncle and the queen-mother be inform of this motion , they so much disdain the marriage with Dudley , that so she will refuse that match , and perseverein the friendship of the french , they offer to pay she the dowry money that be behind , and to restore the Scot to all their former liberty in France . and as for the king of Spain , he have indeed a ligier ambassador here in England ; but rather by way of compliment , and to watch advantage , then for any sincere love ; which he begin now to withdraw from the english , as suspect they to intend a trade to the west Indies . and now the french protestant may see what they bring upon they ? self , by leave the english at Newhaven , and by trust to their con ? try-man the french papist ; for their peace be but a snare , and the mar ? riage of Henry of Bourbon , prince of Navarre , with Margaret of Valois , the french king sister , be but a bait to entrap they ; for upon the confidence of this marriage , be draw together into Paris , they be the ready for the slaughter ; and a few day after the marriage , which be all spend in feast and mask , to make they the more secure , upon a watchword gi ? when , the bloody faction fall upon the protestant , and neither spare age , nor sex , nor condition , but without mercy , and sense of humani ? ty , slaughter as many as they can meet with , to the number of many thousand . it be now the six year of queen Elizabeth reign , a year fatal for the death of many great personage : first die William , lord grey of We•lon , governor of Berwick , a man famous for his great service in war : then William , lord Paget , a man of as great service in peace ; who by his great deserve , have wrought his advancement to sundry dignity , and honour ? able place : and though zealous in the roman religion , yet hold by queen Elizabeth in great estimation to his die day : then Henry manor , earl of Rutland , descend by his mother from king Edward the four : and last , Francis the duchess of Suffolk , daughter to Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk , and mother to queen Jane and now queen Elizabeth find how fickle the french protestant have carry themselves towards she , intend to make a peace ; and to that end send sir Thomas smith into France , join Throgmorton in commission with he ; and in conclusion a peace be agree on ; whereof , among o ? the article , this be one , that the hostage in England shall be free , upon the payment of six hundred thousand crown : and this peace be ratify by the oath both of the queen of England , and the king of France . about this time the english merchant be hardly use both in Spain• and in the Netherlands , upon pretence of civil difference , but indeed out of hatred to the protestant religion : whereupon the english remove the seat of their trade to Embden in Freezland• but Gusman the Spa ? nish Liegier , new come into England , find the great damage that the Netherlands sustain by these difference , endeavour by all mean to compose they ; and thereupon viscount Mounta ? gue , Nicholas Wootton , and Walter Haddon , master of the request , page 12 be send to Bruges in Flanders ; who , after many interruption , bring the matter at last to some indifferent agreement . it be now the seven year of queen Elizabeth ; when make a pro ? gresse , she go to see Cambridge ; where after she have view the college , and be entertain with comedy , and scholastical disputation , she make her self a latin oration , to the great encouragement of the Schol ? lars , and then return . present after her return• she make the lord Ro ? bert Dudley master of her horse , first baron of Denbigh ( give he Denbigh and all the land belong to it ) and then earl of Leicester , to he , and the heir male of his body lawful beget : which honour be con ? fer upon he with the great state and solemnity that be ever know . and now Leicester , to ender himself to the queen of Scot , ac ? cuse sir Nicholas bacon , lord keeper , for be privy to the libel of Hales , who affirm the right of the crown to belong to the family of Suffolk , in case the queen shall die without issue ; and thereupon be Bacon cast into prison ; till afterward , upon his purgation , and the mediation of sir William Cecill , he be set at liberty , and restore to his place . and now for a while we must cast our eye upon Scotland , for that be now the stage where all the great business of state be act : Matthew steward , earl of Lenox , who have marry Margaret Dowglas , king Henry the eighth niece by his elder sister , have be keep as a exile in Eng ? land now twenty year ; he the queen of Scot invite to come into scot ? land• under pretence of restore to he his ancient patrimony ; but indeed to confer with he about a marriage with his son the lord Darlie , for be repute heir to the crown of England , next after her self ; she think by match with his son , to strengthen she own title , and to prevent the hope of any other . queen Elizabeth , upon suit make by his wife , give the earl leave to go ; but soon after , suspect what the queen of Scot intent be in send for he , she , to hinder the proceed , send sir Thomas rand•ll to she , to let she know , that if she proceed in this ma•ch , she will exceed wrong she self ; for that it be a match so much disli ? k by all the english , that she be fain to prorogue the parliament , lest upon dislike thereof , there shall something be enact against her right of succession : but if she will marry the earl of Leicester , she shall then by parliament be declare her next heir . hereupon , in the month of November , the earl of Bedford , and sir Thomas Randoll for queen Eliza ? beth• the earl of Murray and Lidington for the queen of Scot at Barwick , enter into a treaty concern the marriage with the earl of Leicester . the english commissioner urge the great benefit that by this match will accrue both to the queen of Scot her self , and to the whole king ? dom of Scotland : the Scotish on the other side , urge the great disparage ? mean it will be to the queen of Scot , if refuse the offer make she of diverse great prince , she shall match her self with so mean a person as the earl of Leicester . this matter hold long debate , partly for that the Eng ? lish commissioner be so appoint by queen Elizabeth ; and partly for that the Scotish commissioner have a good mind to hinder she from mar ? rie at all ; and perhaps not the least ; for that the earl of Leicester , be very persuade he shall at last obtain queen Elizabeth her self , by secret letter warn the earl of Bedford not to urge the marriage with the queen of Scots too far ; and be think for this cause to favour Darly under hand . the matter be in this manner protract for two whole year together , the queen of Scot impatient of long delay , and be resolve in her mind what she will do• use mean that the lord Darly get leave of queen Elizabeth to go into Scotland for three month only , under colour to be put in possession of his father land ( though it be strange , the queen upon any te••ms will let he go , if she real intend to hinder the page 13 marriage : but such be the destiny , if there be not a plot in it ) and •o in febr•ary he come to Edinburgh ; who be a young man , of not above nineteen year of age , of a comely countenance , and most princely pre ? sense , the queen of Scots as soon as she see he , fall in love with he , yet in modesty dissemble it for the present ; she seek to get a Dispens• ? on from room , because of their nearness in consanguinity . and now , her inclination be grow so apparent , that there be no conceal it , she send Lydington to queen Elizabeth , desire her consent . but she , through the suggestion of the earl of Murray , be induce to believe that the queen of Scot intention be , by this marriage , to get the crown of Eng ? land , and to bring in popery , enter into consultation with her privy coun ? cell , what be fit to be do to hinder the marriage ; who all conclude , that these be the best way : first , to have a company of souldi•rs levy for terror •ake , about the border towards Scotland ; then to come ? mit to prison the countess of Lenox , the lord darly mother ; and to re ? call from Scotland the earl of Lenox and his •on Darly , upon pain of the loss of all their good in England : then that the Scot , who be know to be averse from the marriage , shall be relieve and assist : and last , that Katherine grey , with the earl of Hertford , shall be receive into some grace ; about who only ( it be think ) the queen of Scots be most solicitous , as be her rival to the english crown . hereupon sir ni ? cholas Throgmorton be send to the queen of Scot , to counsel she in the queen name , not to proceed in this marriage ; and to show she the many inconvenience that will accrue unto she by it . but she return answer , that the matter be too far pass to be recall ; and that queen Elizabeth have no cause to be displease with i• ; see herein she follow her advice , not to match with • strange , but with a english man bear . queen Eli ? zabeth be inform of her answer , call home the earl of Lenox , and the lord d•rly his son , command they upon their allegiance to return : the father modest by letter excu•eth himself ; the son humble intrea• ? eth she not to be a hindrance to his preferment ; which he vow to employ in her majesty service to the uttermost of his power . and now , to make he the fit match for she , the queen of Scot honour he first with knighthood ; then with the dignity of the lord armanack , earl of Rosse , and duke of Rothsay ; which dukedom by bir•h , pertain to the elder son of the king of Scotland . after this , when he have not be above five month in Scotland , she marry he , and with the consent of most of the peer , declare he king . at this , the earl of m•rray , and other who he draw to his pa•ty extreme fret , and fall to move of tur ? bulent question , whether it be lawful to admit a papist king ? whether the queen of Scots may choose a husband at her own pleasure ? and when ? there the peer of the kingdom may not out of their authority , impose one upon she ? but howsoever , they raise arm , and have disturb the nuptial , but that the queen levy a army to encounter they ; with which she pursue they so close , that they be fain to fly into engl••d for protection ; where queen Elizabeth make no •cruple to receive they , see the queen of Scot have receive Yareby , Sta•don , and Walsh , that be flee out of England ; but the ea•l of Murray especial , who have always be find addict to the english . queen Elizabeth perhaps be not much trouble at this marriage ; partly as know the mild disposition of the lord Darly , and how little access of strength it bring •o •he queen of Scot ; but most of all , ? ? ? plain•y •eeing •here wo•ld ••ouble• ? ? ? in Scotland upon it ; and the trouble of Scotland will be the q•i•tnes•e of England ; which , as a good mother of her co•••rey , be the •ark she aim ? ed at : yet she make • show of be offend with it ; but rather to co•ceal her aim , than that •he be offend with it indeed . page 14 at this time the emperor Maximlian send to queen Elizabeth his ambassador ? sadour , Adam Smiricote , renew the former suit for his brother Charles of Austria ; for which marriage the earl of Sussex be very earnest ; the earl of Leicester as much against it ; so as it grow to a quarrel between they , and the court be divide into faction about it : but the queen , who ne ? ver like the dissension of her peer ( though it be a rule with some , divide , and reign ) make they friend , at least in countenance . we may now leave Scotland a while , and see the honour do at this time to queen Elizabeth , not much inferior to the honour do to Solo ? mon by the queen of Saba ; for now Cecil , the sister of Errick king of Sweden , and wife of Christopher marquess of Baden , be great with child , come from the far part of the north ( a long journey ) through Germa ? nigh , of purpose to see she , for the great fame she have hear of her wisdom : at her be here , she be deliver of a child , to who , in requital of her kindness , queen Elizabeth be godmother , and name he edwar ? d•s Fortunatus ; give to she and her husband , beside royal entertain ? mean , a yearly pension . at this time also , for the great fame of her wisdom , Donald mac Carty more , a great potentate of Ireland , come and deliver up into her hand all his most ample territory ; and than recei ? ving they again from she , to hold they to he and his heir male law ? full beget ; and for want of such issue , to remain to the crown of England . the queen in requital , invest he with the honour of earl of Glenkarne , and baron of Valence ; and beside many present give he , pay the charge of his journey . it be now the eight year of queen Elizabeth reign ; when sir Nicho ? alas Arnold , a knight of Gloucestershire , govern Ireland under the title of a justice , be call home , and sir Henry Sidney place in •his room . and here by the way it be to be note , that the governor of Ireland , after it come under the english , be at first call justice of Ireland ; afterward , lieutenant ; and their vicegerents be call deputy . afterwards at the prince pleasure , sometime deputy , sometime justice , and some ? time lieutenant ; which last title , though it be of great honour , yet in power be in a manner but the same . Si•Henry Sidney at his come into Ireland , find the province of Munster in much disorder• by reason of strife between Gyrald earl of Desmond , and Thomas earl of Ormond : whereupon the queen send for the earl of Desmond into England , ordain a new government in that province , appoint a precedent to administer justice , together with a assistant on the bench ; two lawyer and a notary : and the first precedent she make in this place , be sir William sentlege . and now queen Elizabeth in a progress go to Oxford ; where she take pleasure in view the college , in hear oration , in see of come ? die , till the comedy of Palemon and Arcett turn to a tragedy , for by the fall of a wall , through the multitude of people that press in to see it ; three man be slay . at she come away , she make a oration in latin to the scholar , a sufficient recompense for all the oration they have make to she . and this year , be a call of seven new sergeant at law , who keep their feast at Gray inn in Holborn . upon the queen return from Oxford , the parliament begin , where they present fall upon the m•tter of succession ; and move the queen to mar ? ry• in which point some go so far , that they spare not to accuse the queen , as one careless of Posterity• to defame Cecill with libel and re ? proache , as if he be her Counsello•• in this matter ; but above all , to curse doctor huic she physician , who be think to dissuade she from marriage , by reason of i know not what womanish insufficiency . at last in the upper house it be agree , that sir Nich•la• bacon , lord keeper , their orator , shall in all their name beseech the queen to marry ; and page 23 withal , to declare a successor in the crown , if she shall happen to die without issue ; for which he give many reason , declare what mischief be likely to befall the kingdom , if she shall die before a successor be design . but in the low house there be some , among who , be bell and mou•son ( two lawyer of great account ) Dutton , sir Paul go ? wort• , and other , who grow to far high term , disparage the queen authority , and say , that prince be bind to design a successor ; and that in not do it , the queen shall show her self no better than a parricide of her country . the queen be content to bear with word speak in parliament ; which speak out of parliament , she will never have endure : but not will to expostulate the matter with the whole number , she command that thirty of the high house , and as many of the low , shall appear before she , to who she deliver her mind to this effect ; that she know what danger hang over a Prin ? ces head , when a successor be once declare ; she know that even child themselves , out of a hasty desire of bear rule , have take up arm against their own father ; and how can better condition be expect from kindred ? she have by read observe , that successor in a collate ? rall line , have seldom be declare ; and that Lewis of Orleans , and Fran ? cis of angoulesme be never declare successor , and yet obtain the crown without any noise . last , she say , though i have be content to let you debate the matter of succession , yet i advise you to beware , that you be not injurious to your prince patience . with these and the like reason she give so good satisfaction , that they never after trouble she with make any more such motion . and though she consent not in plain term to declare a successor , yet soon after she give some intimation of it ; for one Thornton , a reader of the civil law in London , who in his le ? cture , call the queen of Scots right in question , be clap up in pri ? son for his labour . in the begin of her nine year , Charles the nine , king of Fr•nc• , send his ambassador Ramboulet into England to the queen , with the robe and ornament of the order of saint Michael , to bestow upon which two of her nobility she please ; and she make choice of the duke of Norfolk , and the earl of Leicester , they be by Ramboulet invest with they ; and ho ? nou_r_ that have never be confer upon any english , but only king Henry the eight , king Edward the six , and Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk , though afterward prostitute almost to any , without difference . and now to return to the affair of Scotland : the nineteenth of June last pass , the queen of Scot , in a happy hour , be at Edinborough castle dilive•ed of a son , that be afterward Iames the six of Scotland , and the first monarch of great Britain ; whereof she present send word to queen Elizabeth by Iames Melvyne ; who thereupon send sir Henry Killigrew to congratulate her safe deliverance , and her young son , with all daemon ? stration of love and amity . but now the love of the queen of Scot to her husband the lord Darly , be not so hot at first , but it be now grow to be as cold ; and she have not heap honour on he so fast before , but now as fast she take they off : for where before in all public act , she have use to place her husband name first , now she cause it to be place last , and in the coin of money begin to leave it quite out . this unkindness between they be foment by one David rizie a italian , who the queen have take into her service , first , as a musician , and then take a like to he , make he here secretary for the french tongue ; by mean whereof , he have oftentimes secret conference with she , when the king her husband may not be admit ? t . this indignity the king himself , be give to his pleasure of page 16 hunt and hawk , resent not so much , as some lord that be his fri•nds ; who tell he plain , that it stand not with his ho ? nou_r_ to suffer this fellow to live . by who instigation the king draw to plot his death ; one day , take with he the earl of Reuven , and other , he rush into the queen chamber at her supper time , where find David rizie at a cupboard , taste some meat that have be take from the table , he seize upon he , drag he forth into a outer chamber , and there murder he ; the queen at that time be great with child , and like by that affright to have mis ? carry : but the fact be do , the king come in to she again , as ? sure she there be no hurt at all intend to her person . the man that have animate the king to do this fact , be especial the earl Murray , of who it be necessary to say something , because his part will be the great of all the scottish action of this time . he be the base son of king Iames the five , and so the base brother of the queen ; make at first , prior of saint Andrew : but not like that religious title , he affect rather some temporal honour ; which when the queen , be then in France , deny he , then in a angry mood return into Scotland , where , by the advice of Knox , who he hold for a great patriarch , bring the matter so to pass , that in a assembly of the state , the religion be alter , and the french be banish out of Scotland . yet afterward , as soon as the queen be a widow , he post into France , and so insinuate with she , that she create he earl of Murray , and promote he to a honourable marriage . be thus exalt , he return into Scotland ; where , for the further growth of his ambitious design , he sow seed of se ? dition , affirm often , what a misery it be to be under the come ? man of a woman ; and that royalty be not to be tie to any stock or kindred , but to virtue only , whether the party be legitimaie or no ; by this course make way to the kingdom for himself . to this end , he use all the mea•s he can to keep the queen from marry again ; which when he can not effect , he then seek way how to make discord between she and her husband ; for which cause he have cause the king to murder rizie . of the foulness of which fact , when the king have a while grow sensible , he mean to be revenge of Murray , who have counsel he to do it : which Murray understand , prevent it with cause the like to be do to he , as will present be see . for the queen have be deliver of a son , and the day ap ? point for the christening be come ; where the godfather be Charles king of France , and Philibert duke of Savoy ; queen Elizabeth be ? king request to be godmother , send thither the earl of Bedford as her deputy , and a font of massy gold for a present , in value 1043 l. but give he express command , that he shall not honour Darly with the title of king . but before a month or two , after the christen be pass , the king in a stormy and tempestuous night , be strange ? lead in his bed , and then cast forth into the garden , and the house imme ? diate blow up with gunpowder . the rumour of this murder be spread abroad , the common fame lay it upon Murray and Morton , and their confederate ; mur ? ray and Morton upon the queen : but we must not here give ear to that which Buchanan write ; who to curry favour with the earl Murray , lay most impudent scandal upon the queen ; whereof , before his death , he repent himself ex ? treme . the king thus murder , and the queen leave alone to her self , she be counsel to marry with some , that may be able to assist she against all her opposite : Iames page 17 Hepburn earl of Bothwell be then great in her favour , and of great eminency for his valour : and though he be the man that have act the murder , yet be he by Murray and his confederate , commend to the queen ; to which motion , as be destitute of friend , and not know ? king who to trust ; she at last consent , but upon these condition , that above all thing , respect may be have to her young son ; and that Bothwell may be legal quit , both from the bond of his former marriage , and also of the king murder . hereupon a course be plot ? t , by which , Bothwell be call to the bar ; and Morton be his advocate , by the sentence of judge he be clear acquit . upon this , he be create duke of orken•y , and by consent of many of the nobility , be marry to the queen ; which breed a suspicion in many , that the queen be conscious of the murder , which be the thing that by the marriage they intend : and the suspicion once raise , they seek by all mean to increase , that they may have the better colour against she ; and so , the very same man who have absolve Bothwell , and consent to the marriage , now take arm against she , as a delin ? quent in both ; force he to flee , and then seize upon the queen , who , cl•d in a very homely garment , they thrust into prison in loch-levyn , under the custody of murray mother , who have be the harlot of king Iames the five ; but boast her self to have be his lawful wife , and her son , his lawful issue . queen Elisabeth have at length notice hereof , send sir Nicholas Throgmorton into Scotland , to expostulate with the confederate , touch this insolent usage of the queen ; and to consult , by what mean she may be restore to her liberty . but Throgmorton come into Scotland , find the confede ? rate in more insolent term then have be report ; be divide in opinion , what to do with the queen , some will have she banish perpetual , into England or France ; some will have she question before the judge , commit to perpetual custody , and her son pro ? claim king : other , more inhumane , will have she at once depri ? ve of princely authority , of life and all ; and this , Knox and some other minister thunder out of the pulpit . Throgmorton on the other side , allege many passage out of the holy scripture , touch obedience to the high power ; maintain , that the queen be subject to no Tri ? bunall , but that in heaven ; that no judge upon earth may call she in question ; that there be no office nor jurisdiction in Scotland , which be not derive from her authority , and revokeable at her pleasure . they again oppose the peculiar right of the kingdom of Scotland ; and that in extraordinary case , they be to proceed beside order , take up Buchanans argument ; who in those day , by instigation of Murray , write that damn ? ed dialogue , de jure Regni apud Scotos ; wherein , against the verity of the scottish history , he endeavour to prove , that the people have power , both to create , and to depose their king . after all their debate , all that Throg ? morton can get of they , be a write without any subscription , wherein they protest , they have shut up the queen for no other in ? tent , but to keep she apart from Bothwell , who she love so desperate , that to enjoy he , she regard not all their ruin ; will he to rest satisfy with this answer , till such time as the rest of the peer meet together . and notwithstanding all he can say , they shut up the queen daily , in more straight custody , though with tear she beseech they to deal more mild with she , and to let she but once have a sight of her son , which will not be grant she . at last when fair persuasion will not serve to make she free give over the kingdom , they threaten to question she oh ? pen for incontinent live , for the king murder , and for tyranny , so as through fear of death , they compel she , unheard , to set her page 18 hand to three instrument ; in the first whereof , she give over the king ? dom to her young son , at that time scarce thirteen month old : in the se ? cond , she constitute Murray viceroy during the minority of her son : in the three , in case he refuse the charge , these governor be nomina ? t ; Iames duke of Chasteau , herald , Giles Spike earl of Argile , Matthew earl of Lenox , John earl of Atholl , Iames earl of Mo•ton , Alexander earl of Glencarn , and John earl of Mar. and present she signify to queen Elizabeth by Throgmorton , that she have make these grant by come ? pulsion through the counsel of Throgmorton , tell she that a grant extor ? t from one in prison ( which be a just fear ) be actual void and of no effect . five day after the queen have make this resignation , Iames the six , the queen son , be anoint and crown king , John Knox preach at the same time ; but a protestation be then put in by the Hamiltons , that all this aught to be no prejudice to the duke of Chasteau herald in his right of succession against the family of Lenox ; but queen Elisabeth have forbid Throgmorton to be at the action , that she may not seem by the presence of her ambassador , to approve their proceed in displace of the queen . fifteen day after this transaction , Murray himself return ou• of France into Scotland , and within three day go to the queen with some other of the confederate , who charge she with many crime , and wish she if she tender her life and honour , to observe these prescript ? tion : not to disturb the peace of the kingdom , nor desire to be at li ? berty , not to stir up the queen of England , or the king of France to m• ? le•t Scotland with any war , not to think any more of bothwell love , or meditate revenge upon bothwell adversary . Murray be now proclaim regent of Scotland , he bind himself under his hand and seal to do nothing which shall concern war or peace , the king person or his marriage , or the liberty of the queen , without the consent of the confedera•es ; and then give Throgmorton warn by lyding•on , not to make any further intercession for the queen liberty , for that he and the rest have rather run any hazard then to suffer it . Soon of ? ter he put to death John H•pburn , Daglish , and other that be bothwell servant , for have a hand in the murder of the king : but they ( which he little expect ) when they be at the gallow , ready to dye , protest before God and his holy angel , that Bothwell have tell they , that Morton and M•rray be the first author of the murder . they free the queen from all suspicion , like as Bo•hwell himself be prisoner in Denmark , both live and die , often protest with deep asse•erations , that the queen be innocent . and fourteen year after , Morton go to execu ? cion , confess that Bo•hwell deal with he to consent to the murder of the king , which , when he refuse utter unless the queen under her hand write will allow of it ; Bothwell make answer , that can not be , but the fact must be do without her knowledge . a little before this time , upon one and the same day , die two of the privy council , sir John Mason treasurer of the Queen• chamber , a grave and learned man , but a great usurper and encroacher upon ecclesiastical live ; and sir Richard •ac•vile vice-treasurer of the exchequer , a man both prudent and provident , and ally to the queen by her mother an•e Bol•• . in his room succeed Walter Mildmay , a man of wisdom and inte ? grity ; in Masons office come sir Francis Knowles , who marry Katherine car•e , the daughter of Mary Bolen , the queen mother sister . it be now the year 1567. and the ten year of queen Elizabeth reign , when the earl of Stolberg come into England from the emperor Max•millian , to treat of the marriage of the queen with the archduke Charles upon which very occasion the queen a little before have send the E. of Sussex page 19 to the emperor , with the order of the garter : but in the treaty of mar ? riage , there fall out so many difficulty , about religion , maintenance of the duke , about the royal title , and concern succession , that after it have be treat of seven whole year together , it come at last to nothing , and the duke not long after marry marry daughter to Albert the five duke of Bavaria ; yet both he and the emperor continue ever after a good corre ? spondence with the queen . about this time , there come from John Basil emperor of Russia and Muscovia , Stephen Twerdic• , and Theodore P•gorella , with a present of rich fur of otter , Miniver , and the like , tender all service and obsequious ? ness to the queen and the english . the merchant by virtue of a grant from queen marry , have combine themselves into a society , which they call the Muscovie company ; and have large privilege grant they from the emperor , go thither with a navy yearly , make a very gain ? full voyage ; but than it prove most gainful , when for the queen sake they obtain at the emperor hand , in the year 1569. that none but the english of that company , shall traffic in the north-part of Russia . with these russian ambassador there return into England , Anthony Ienkinson , who in his travel have make curious observation of Russia , set forth a geographical description of it , and be the first of the english that sail through the caspian sea and this year , the 8. of June , sir Thomas Sackvile be create baron of Buckhurst , at Whitehall . we have see before , the first act of the queen of Scot tragedy : now come in the second , have be 11 month keep a prisoner ; at last , by the help of George Dowglas , to who brother she be commit , she make escape from loch-levyn , to hamiltons castle ; where upon the testi ? money of Robert Melvyn , and other , in a meeting of a great part of the nobility , there be draw a sentence declaratory , that the grant extort from the queen in prison , ( which be Iustus metus ) be actual void from the beginning . upon which declaration , great multitude •locked to she , so as within a day or two she have get a army of at least six thousand ; but when they join battle with Murray , be but raw and unexpert soldier , they be soon defeat . in this case , the queen seek to save her self by flight , journey in one day threescore mile , and come at night to the house of Maxwell lord Heris , from thence she send John Beton to queen Elisabeth with a diamond ring , which she have fo•merly receive from she , as a pledge of mutual amity ; intimate , that she will come into England , and implore her aid , if her subject offer ? ed to prosecute she any further . queen Elisabeth return answer , that she shall expect from she , in abundant manner , all love and friendly office . but before the messenger be return , she , contrary to the advice of her friend , enter into a small bark , and with the lord , Heris , and Fleming , and a few other , land at Wickinton in Cumberland , near the mouth of the river of Decwent , the seventeenth day of may ; and the same day write letter to the queen in french with her own hand , the effect whereof be , that have make a escape from they the hand of her insolent and rebellious subject , she be now come into England , upon certain hope of her approve clemency ; and therefore humble desire , she may forthwith be conduct to her presence . queen Elisabeth send letter by sir Francis Knolles , comfort she , and promise her aid and de ? fence , accord to the equity of her cause ; but deny her access , for that she be hold guilty of many crime , give command to have she bring to Carlile , as a place of better safety . the queen of Scots receive this an ? swer , and find access to the queen deny she , make request again by letter , that she may have leave , both to unfold the injury she have receive , and to answer the crime object , in her own presence ; page 20 humble entreat she , that either she may be admit to have conference and assistance , or else have free leave to depart out of England , to gain supply elsewhere , and not be hold a prisoner in the castle at Carlile• for •s much as she come voluntary into England , rely upon her love so often profess . upon thes• letter , queen Elisabeth exceed commisera•ed her case , and can have fo•nd in her heart to admit she to her presence , but that her counsellor conceive it to be matter for consultation , what to do in this case . to detain she in England , have many mischief attend ? ing on it ; to send she into France ; as many ; to send she back into Scotland , many more ; so as in conclusion , the most be of opinion , to have she de ? tain , as one take by right of war , and not to be dismiss , till she have make satisfaction for assume the title of England , and for the death of Darly her husband , who be bear one of the queen subject . in this diversity of opinion , queen Elisabeth out of her own judgement , send word by Middemore , to the regent of Scotland , that he shall come he ? self in person , or else depute some fit person to answer the complaint of the queen of Scot against he and his confederate , and render sufficient reason wherefore they have deprive she ; otherwise• she will forthwith dismiss she , and with all the force she can , settle she in her kingdom . to this summons , Murray obey , and come to York , the place appoint for this treaty , accompany with seven more of his intimate friend , who stand delegate for the infant king , namely , Iames earl of Morton , ad•m bishop of the ork•neys , Robert of dunferm , Patrick lord of Lyndsey , Iames mac-gylly , and Henry •adinary ; and with these , Lydington the secretary , and ge•rge Buchanan . and the very same day come thither Thomas Howard duke of Norfolk , Thomas Ratcliff earl of Sussex , and sir Ralph Saedler a privie-councellour , appoint commissioner for queen Elisabeth . for the queen of Scot , ( who take it heinous , that queen Elisabeth will not hear the caus• h•r self , but refer h•r to subject , be a absolute prince , and not ty•d to their proc•edings ) there appear John Lesley bishop of Ross , Will ? liam lord Levyng••on , Robert lord boyde , Ga••• of Kilwynnin , John G•urd•n , and Iames Cock•urn . be meet , Lydingto• turn himself to the Scot , in a wondrous liberty of speech , give they this advice , mature to consider , what prejudice they shall draw upon themselves , by accuse th• queen of Scot , and call her reputation in question public before the english , profess enemy of the scottish nation . likewise , wha• ac ? count they shall be able to give hereof to the king , when he shall grow to •iper y••rs , and shall see what a injury this be to the kingdom , his mo ? there , and his own per•on . Wherefor• ( say he ) it seem requisite to for ? bear this business al•ogether , unless the queen of England will enter into a •u•uall league of offence and defence , against all those , which under this pretenc• , shall go about •o molest we . upon this speech of he , the d•l•gates of the que•n of Scot make protestation , that although it please the qu••n of Scot , to have the cause between she and her disloyal subject , d•••ted befo•• the english , yet she be a free prince , and ob ? noxious to no earthly prince whatsoever , do not thereby yield her self subject to th• jurisdiction and command of any person . on the contrary , the english pro•est•d , that they do in no wise admi• that protestation , in pr•judice to the right which the king of England have ancient challen ? ge as superiou• lord of the kingdom of Sco•land . the day after , the queen of Sco•s delegate s•t forth at large the injurious deal of Morton , Murray , Marre , Gle•car• , ? ? ? , and other , against the queen ; and how they have compel h•r , for fear of death , to resign her crown ; which there ? fore ( they say ) be of no •or•• . Murray and his confederate make an ? sw•r , that they have do nothing , but by consent of the peer in Parlia ? mean ; and tha• in pros•cu•ing o•Bothwell , the author of the king mur ? there , page 21 who the queen protect ; and as for her resignation , •hat it be voluntary and free do . all this the queen of Scot delega•es a ? swer and confute , affirm in particular , that where there be 100 earl , bishop and baron , ( moor or less ) that have voice in the Parlia ? mean of Scotland , there be not in that tum•ltous assembly they speak of , above four earl , one bishop , a abbot or two , and six baron ; where ? before their earnest request be , that the q•een of England will be ••n ? sible of these indignity offer she ; and take some course for a speedy re ? dnesse . after this , some new commissioner from queen Elizabeth be add to the former , to some of who , the queen of Scot take excepti ? on ; unless the french and spanish ambassador may be take in , and her self admit into the presence of the queen and they , public to de ? fend she own innocency ; and that Murray may be detain and •ited , who she affirm , she be able to prove to have be the chief plotter of the murder of her husband Darley . this be hold to be a just demand by the duke of Norfolk , the earl of Arundel , Sussex , Leicester , and the lord Clinton : but queen Elizabeth wax somewhat angry , open say , that the queen of Scots shall never want a advocate as long as Norfolk live : it be see here , which be say , that the heart of the king be inscrutable ; for how queen Elizabeth stand affect in this case of the queen of Scot , no man can well discern• she detest the insolen ? cy of her subject in depose she , and yet give no assistance to restore she . after long agitation of this business , and nothing conclude , mur ? ray a little before his return into Scotland , sly propound the marriage of the queen of Scot to the duke of Norfolk ; which he with a modest answer reject as a thing full of danger . but withal , Murray the more to alienate queen Elizabeth mind from the queen of Scot , give ou• , that she have pass away to the duke of Andyn her right to the crown of Eng ? land , and that the transaction be confirm at room ; he show letter also which the queen of Scot have write to some friend who she trust ? ed ; wherein she accuse the queen for not deal with she accord to promise , and boast of succour she expect from some other . this last clause something trouble queen Elizabeth , neither can she conje ? cture from whence any such succour shall come ; see both France with the civil war , and the king of Spain in the Low-countries have eno•gh to do at home . but at last it break out , that one Robert Ridolph a florentine under the habit of a merchant in London , be suborn by pope •ius the five , to make a secret commotion of the papist in England against the queen , which he perform indeed with a great deal of secrecy and much cunning ; whereupon the queen of Scots be remove from Bolton ( a castle of the lord scroop ) where all the neighbour people be Papists• to Tutbury more towards the heart of the country , under the custody of George earl of Shrewsbury . about this time the guise in France , and the duke D'Alva in the Low-countries , begin to endeavour the utter extirpation of the protestant Reli ? gion . in France the minister of the gospel be command within a limit time to depart the kingdom ; when queen Elizabeth forget the •icklenesse of the protestant at New-haven , once again take upon she their protection ; supply they with two hundred thousand crown in money , beside munition in abundance , and with all humanity receive the french that flee into England ; the rather , for that they make solemn pro ? testation they take not up arm against their prince ; but only stand upon their own defence . in the Low-countries likewise , the duke D'Alva , breathe nothing but slaughter and blood ; make the dutch come flock ? ing into England as into a sanctuary , where with all courtesy they be receive . page 22 and here it will be fit to show how the war in the Low-countries be ? begin first , which be thus : at which time the king of Spain bring in the spanish Inquisition• a small number of the mean sort of people , in tumultuous manner• cast the image out of church and break •hem in piece , and although that tumult be soon quiet , yet the king of Spain take advantage at the rashness of a few , to charge the whole nation with rebellion : send among they Ferdinando Alvarez , duke de Alva , a bloody and fierce man , ( who contrary to the ordinance and custom of the country ) take away all authority from the ordinary court of Ju ? stice ; erect new consistory ; condemn and put to death the peer , without trial by their lawful judge ; place garrison of Spaniards throughout all their city and village , and by force exact the twenti ? eth part of the fruit of the earth , and the ten of moveable upon every alienation . at that time , a mighty mass of money borrow from the genoese , and other italian merchant be send out of Spain into the Low-countries , there to be employ to interest , which be bring by ship ? ping , be pursue by the french ; and force to fly for succour into the haven of England , who the queen command to be succour ; as conceive the money to be the king of Spain as it be give out : but at the same time , cardinal Odette come out of France into England , and give notice to the queen that the money be not the king of Spain , but belong to certain merchant of Geneva ; from whence the duke de Alva have take it against their will , with a purpose to employ it to the ruin of the protestant ; and information also be give she by one that have a property in the money that it be so• she determine to put in security , and to borrow the money of the merchant her self , which be a usual thing with prince when good be take in their port ; and the king of Spain himself have late do the like . the duke de Alva be ? king inform of this deal of thou Queens ; by Gerard de Spese the king of Spain ambassador in England ; seize present upon all the good of the english in the low-co•ntries , and keep the man prisoner ; the queen do the like with the dutch merchant in England , letter of mart be grant on both side , and this grow to such a quarrel between the nation , that be nourish with other difference afterward , it bring forth in eighty eight , that spanish invasion , which be , and will be memo ? rabble in all future age . upon occasion of this money detain , certain peer of England , a ? among who , be the duke of Norfolk , the marquess of Winchester , the earl of Arundel , Northumberland , Pembroke , Leicester , and other , accuse sir William Cecill , for send away money into France , make this their colour , but do indeed out of envy his great favour with the queen , and suspect he to incline to the house of Suffolk in the matter of succession . hereupon they consult sec•etly how to get he be impri ? son ; and Throgmorton ( who envy he as much as they ) suggest that if he be once clap up , they may soon find out a way to crush he ; but the queen ( by what mean it be uncertain ) come to have no ? entice hereof , give a check to their purpose , and protect Cecill against their combine practise . the earl Murray be return into Scotland , make the lord believe that he desire a meeting at Edinbourgh , to consult about restore the queen to her liberty ; but as Hamilton duke of Chasteau herald ( appoint vicegerent of the kingdom by the queen ) and the lord Heris be come thither , he circumvent they , and before any of the rest come cast they into prison ; and forthwith in a open war , oppress all her favourer . it may be think , the earl Murray can have be content , the queen shall have be set at liberty ; but that he know , page 23 her liberty can not be without his servitude ; and queen Elisabeth perhaps will willing have have her resto•e• to her kingdom , but that she doubt , her restore will endanger she own security : and thus , while they regard their own end in the first place , and she but in the second , she have the fortune to be pity , but not the happi ? ness to be relieve ; and all she can do she self , be but to tie the knot of her bond the fast ; if she can have sit still , they will perhaps have loosen of themselves ; but now , the more she stir , the more she be entangle . and now the destiny of the duke of Norfolk begin to work : it be in every one mouth , that the duke shall marry the queen of Scot ; and it be true , there have be motion make ; but the matter not so forward , as the voice of the people , which common pre ? sage what will follow . it have be motion to the duke at York , by the bishop of ros•e ; and afterward ( in pretence at least . ) by mur ? ray himself at hampton-court ; but the duke , before he will re ? solve in the matter , deliberate with the earl of Aru•dell , nor ? thumberland , Westmoreland , Sussex , Pembroke , Southampton , and Leicester himself , who all judge it fit , he shall acquaint the queen with it first , and then leave the matter to her like . within a few day , sir Nicholas Throgmorton meet the duke in the palace at Westminster , advise he , to move the earl of Leicester himself to embrace the match , see he have former sue for it ; but if he re ? fuse it , then at least to take he along with he , for that himself a ? lone will hereby be able to procure the queen consent . a day or two after , the earl of Leicester propound the matter to the duke , and then communicate it to the earl of Arundel and Pembroke ; who thereupon , together with Throgmorton , write letter to the queen of Scot , commend the duke of Norfolk to she for a husband ; the duke himself likewise write to she , tender his singular love and respect unto she . upon this , article be draw , write with leicester own hand , and send to the queen of Scot ; to which if she consent , they then promise to procure , that queen Elisabeth shall give her assent , and that forthwith she shall be reinvest in her kingdom , and the succession of England shall be confirm upon she . we may easy believe , the queen of Scots be not hardly draw to give consent to her own desire ; but in the mean time , the duke have impart to the lord Lumley the whole proceed , and have much ado to get the earl of leicester consent , that he may advise of it with some other of his friend ; yet a little after , he open the matter to Cecill also . the rumour of this marriage be soon come to the queen ear ; which the duke understanding , he deal earnest with the earl of Leicester , to have the matter propound to the queen out of hand . Leicester make delay , and pretend cause to put it off• which Cecill see , he advise the duke , to go and acquaint the queen with it himself . this council Leicester oppose , promise to open it to the queen as she go in progress . at length , at Farn ? ham , the duke stand by as the queen sit at table , she give he a tart admonition , that he be best take heed , upon what pillow he rest his head . after this , at Tichfield , Leicester fall sick , or at least counterfeit ; to who the queen come , and bid he be of good cheer ; he with sigh and tear crave pardon for his fault , and unfold to she the whole story from the very beginning . where ? upon , the queen call the duke into the gallery , reprove he sharp , for go about the marriage , without acquaint she ; and command he , upon his allegiance , to desist . the duke make page 24 she a free and hearty promise of obedience , and spare not to say ( as if he light ? tle regard the queen of Scots ) that his revenue in England be not much less than she in Scotland ; and that when he be at his house in Norwich , he think himself in a sort not inferior to some king : but notwithstanding , find the queen anger by her countenance , and perceive Leicester to be in a manner quite alienate , and most of the nobility also , as scarce salute he when they meet he , he grow extreme deject , and prepare present to leave the court , mean to stay at Norfolk , till by his friend intercessi ? on , and his own submissive letter , the queen heart may be mollify to ? ward he : mean while , the court be suspitous fearful , lest he shall raise rebellion , and ( they say ) it be conclude , that if he do so , the queen of Scots shall present be make away . and now the duke , who hold secret commerce by letter with the bishop of Ross , Throgmorton and Leicester ( for they be send to and fro in bottle ) be examine touch the marriage of the queen of Scot , and certain secret conference with the bishop of Rosse , confess most of the objection , and be thereupon commit to the tower , under the custody of sir Henry Nevil ; within two day after the bishop of Rosse likewise be examine , and together with the florentine Robert Ridolph , be deliver to the custody of sir Francis Walsingham , the earl of Pembroke be confine to his house , and examine private ; but his confession be not commit to write ; it be his request because he can not write himself . at this time , the rumor of insurrection in the north , begin in autumn before , grow very strong , by reason of some frequent meeting of the earl of Northumberland , Westmoreland , and other , who thereupon be upon their allegiance send for to repair pre ? sent to the queen , they make delay ( for they stay wait for supply , both from the Scot , and from the duke D'Alva ) when the earl of nor ? thumberland , doubtful what to do , be fright of purpose by his sir ? vaunt , tell he , that man in arm be near at hand to apprehend he ; who thereupon in a tempestuous night , rise out of his bed , and in great fear get into his park at Topcliffe , and the night follow to branspith to the earl of westmerlands house , where a great many be meet that be acquaint with the enterprise : here they break forth into a open rebellion , be press forward , by one Nicholas Morton a romish priest , send by the pope to pronounce queen Elizabeth a heretic ; and therefore to have utter lose all right of sovereignty : by and by they send forth a writing , wherein they declare that they have take arm for no other end , b•t that the religion of their forefather may be restore , wicked Coun ? seller remove from the queen , the duke of Norfolk , and other of the loyal nobility relieve , who be now in disgrace ; but towards the queen , profess themselves most dutiful subject ; withal they send letter to the papist all the kingdom over , require they to come to their assistance• but they be so far from join with they , that many send both the let ? ter and the bearer of they to the queen , and afford their aide and pur ? pose against they ; no less than the best protestant , even the duke of nor ? folk himself be not backward in it . Theise rebel go first to Durham , where th•y tear in piece all the Bibles and book of common prayer they can find in church of the english tongue : when they have be twelve day in rebellion , they number their army , and can not reckon above 600 horse , and 4000 foot ; whereupon be certain inform , that the e : of Sussex with 7000 , and the e : of Warwick with 12 , be set out against they , they betake themselves to Rabie , the chief house of the e : of west ? merl••d ; go from thence they besiege bernards castle , which for lack o• provision , be yield to they . at which time , be proclaim traitor and he•ring afresh of the great force that be come against they , th• two earl with a small company , get present into Scotland hard by , page 25 where the earl of Northumberland hide himself at harclow ; in a poor cottage , among the grayham ( famous robber ) who afterward betray he to the earl Murray : Westmoreland make a shift to get into the low-countrye , where he have a slender pension from the king of Spain , and there live even to old age . of the rest , for terror and example sake , there be hang at Durham , threescore and six of the chief ; among who , Plomtree , a note priest . at York be execute , Simon Digby , John Fulthrop , Thomas bishop , Robert Penyman ; and at London a few month after , Christopher and Thomas ; and some other in other place . after this , the head of the rebel be convict of high treason , be proscribe ; namely , Charles , earl of Westmoreland ; Thomas , earl of Northumberland ; Anne , countess of nor ? thumberland ; Edward Dacres of Morton ; John Nevil off leversege ; John Swinborn , Thomas Markenfield , Egremond Ratcliff , brother to the earl of sus ? sex ; Christopher Nevil , Richard Norton , Christopher Marmaduke , Robert and Michael tempest , George Stafford , and forty other of good account . out of the ash of this rebellion , a new fire be kindle at Naworth in Cumber ? land , by Leonard Dacres , second son to the lord Dacres of Gyllisland ; he be a party with the earl in their rebellion ; but they break forth soon than he expect , and he at that time be at the court , and there admit to kiss the queen hand , tender his service to go against they ; and to that purpose , be send home : but in his journey ( brand himself with a double disloyalty ) he consult with the rebel , and encourage they to go on ; and by virtue of letter of credence from the queen , he surprise the ca ? stle of Greystock , and other house of the Dacres , and gather together a army of three thousand man : but be encounter by the baron of Huns ? don , after a great fight , wherein , though he be crookbacked , he behave himself valiant , he be put to flight , and flee into Scotland , from whence soon after , he pass over into the low-countrye , and in great misery and poverty die at louvayn . but though the queen be thus entangle with rebellion at home , yet she be not careless of the afflict protestant in France ; for she stir up the protestant prince to defend the common cause ; supply they with money , take in pawn the queen of navar jewel ; and give leave to Henry champernoon to lead into France a troop of a hundred horse , gentle ? man all , and voluntary ; among who be fillip butsh , Francis bark ? ley , and Walter Raleigh , a very young man , who now begin to look into the world . but as the queen of England assist the french , so in revenge there ? of , the king of France mean to assist the Scot , but that he be take away by death ; be slay by a shot , at the siege of S. John D'Angelo . there be at this time a rebellion in Ireland also , raise by Edmund and Peter , brother to Boteler earl of Ormond ; but after many outrage by they commit : the earl of Ormond first by persuasion , obtain of they to submit themselves ; and when notwithstanding they be commit to pri ? son , he then obtain of the queen they shall not be call to the bar , be exceed grieve that any of his blood shall be attaint of re ? bellion . the rest of the rebel be pursue by sir Humphrey Gilbert , and soon disperse . and now the earl of Murray , regent of Scotland , when he have wrought all thing to his heart desire , and think himself secure , at Lithquo , ride along the street , be shoot into the belly with a bullet , beneath the navel , and there fall down dead . the actor be a Hamilton , who do it upon a private revenge , for that Murray have force he to part with a piece of land which he have by his wife ; who thereupon fall lunatic , he in a great rage commit this slaughter . after murrayes death , the country be without a regent , be cause of many disorder . Tho. Carre , and Walter Scot , two principal man among page 26 the scottish border , and devote to the queen of Scot , make In•odes into England ; waste all place with fire and sword , till by force send out of England ; under the command of the earl of Sussex , and the lord H•nsdon , they be defeat . in who pu•suit , three hundred village be •ired , and above fifty hold be overturned . for which service the earl make many knight , as sir William Drury , sir Thomas manner , sir George carry , sir Robert constable and other , and then return . and now to prevent further disorder , the lord of Scotland be ready to assemble about the election of a new regent , they ask counsel of queen Elizabeth in the matter ; but she make answer she will not meddle in it , because she will not be think to work any thing prejudicial to the queen of Scot , who cause be not yet tried• they create Matthew earl of Lenox regent ; which queen Elizabeth do the better like , as conceive he can not choose out of natural affection , but have a special care of the young king be his grandchild . but while queen Elizabeth favour the king party in Scotland , the earl of Hun•ley , the duke of castle-h•rald , and the earl of Argyl• , ( the queen of Scot li•u•enants ) employ the lord Seton to the duke D'Alva , re ? quit he for many great reason , to vindicate the queen of Scot liberty allege how acceptable a work it will be to all christian prince and to the whole catholic church : whereunto the duke make answer ; they shall find he ready to the uttermost of his power to satisfy their re ? quest . at which time also the french king deal earnest with queen Elizabeth to the same purpose ; and the spanish ambassador in his master name urge it no less extreme ; but queen Elizabeth assault with all these importunity , make answer , that as she will omit nothing that may serve for the reconcile of the queen of Scot and her subject , so sh• must have leave to provide for her own and her subject safety ; a thing which nature , reason , and her own honour require at her hand . and now when these prince prevail not with queen Elizabeth to set the queen of Scot at liberty , ou• come pope Pius Quintus with his bull declaratory , which he cause to be fasten in the night time upon the gate of they by ? shop of London palace , wherein all her subject be absolve from their oa•h of allegiance , or any other duty ; and all that obey she , accurse with Anathem• . he that fasten up the bull be one John F•lton ; who never flee for the matter , but as affect martyrdom , suffer himself to be ap ? prehend , confess and justify the fact , and thereupon arraign , be condemn and hang near the place where he have fasten the writing . the same day that Felton be arraign , the duke of Norfolk seem now extreme pontitent for his fault , and utter to abhor the marriage , be deliver out of the tower , and suffer to go to his own house , but yet to be in the custody of sir Henry Nevil still . Indeed Cecill be a good friend of the duke , have tell the queen , that the law of 25 of Edward the three can not take hold upon he : and now be in a kind of liberty , Cecill deal earnest with he to marry speedy some other ; thereby to take away all suspicion in that behalf : yet some again think that this livre ? berty of the duke be grant he of purpose to bring he into greate• danger . at this time die William Herbert earl of P•mb•ook the grandchild of a earl of P•mbrook , yet the son but of a esquire , and grandfather to Phillip earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery now live , who lie bury in Paul , un ? there a fair monument of marble , with a inscription •estifying his great de ? serving while he live . many conspiracy be at this time to set the queen of Scot at liberty ; among other , there conspire Thomas and Edward Stanley young son page 27 of the earl of Derby , with other ; but the matter discover , they be soon suppress , and some of they execute . and now the lord of the queen of Scot party continue to protect the english rebel , the earl of Sussex once again , accompany with the lord Scroop , enter Scotland , burn the village all along the valley of Anandale , and compass the duke of castle-herald , and the earl of Huntley and Argyle , under a write sign with their own hand and seal , to forsake the english rebel . whereupon the earl of Sussex return home , he make these knight ; Edward Hastings , Francis Russell , Valentine brown , William Hilton , Ro ? bert Stapleton , Henry Carwen , and Simon Musgrave . queen Elizabeth mind be now in great suspension , by reason of that bull from Rome , and the late conspiracy in Norfolk , send sir William Cecill , and sir Walter Mildmay to the q•een of Scot , who be then at Chattesworth in Derbyshire , to consult with she by what mean the breach in Scotland may best be make up , she reinvested in her former dignity , and her son and queen Elizabeth may be secured• the queen of Scot do little deplore she own afflict condition , put her self whole upon the queen clemency ; when the commissioner make unto her certain proposition of agreement : first , that the treaty of Edinborough shall be confirm : then , that she shall re ? nounce she right and title to England , during queen Elizabeth life , or any child of her body lawful beget : then , that she shall send her son for a hostage into England , with other six hostage ; such as the queen shall nominate : then , that the castle of Humes and fast-castle shall be hold by the english for three year ; with some other . to which proposition the queen of Scot for the present give a provident answer ; but refer the full answer to they by ? ship of Rosse her ambassador in England , and some other deal ? gate ; who afterward allow some of the proposition , and not all ? low other ; the treaty come to nothing , but the matter rest in the state it be before . a• this time fillip king of Spain have contract marriage with anne of Austria , daughter to the emperor Maximilian , his own niece by his sister ; who be now set sail from Zealand towards Spain ; when queen Elizabeth , to testify her love and respect to the house of au ? stria , send sir Charles Howard with the navy royal , to conduct she through the bri•ish sea and now be the twelve year of queen Elizabeth reign finish ; which certain wizard have make papist believe shall be her last : but contrary , as if it be but her first , a new custom begin , of celebrate the seventeenth day of November ( the anniversary day of her reign ) with ring of bell , tilt , and bonfire : which custom , as it now begin , so it be never give over as long as she live , and be not yet forbear so long after her death . at this time in Ireland , Connagher o Brien earl of Towmond , no• brook ? ing the severe government of Edward Fitton , precedent of Connaght , enter into consultation with some few to raise a new rebellion ; which , be at the point ready to break forth , be strange discover : for the day before they mean to •ake up arm , Fitton know not at all of the matter , send •h• earl word in friendly manner , that the next day he and a few friend with he , will be his guest . the earl con ? vince by his own conscience , imagine that his intendment be reveal ; that Fitton will come as a enemy , rather than a guest . out of which feare• he present set sail into France ; where repent himself serious of his fault , he confess the whole busi ? ness page 28 to Norris , the queen ambassador in France ; and by his intercession , be afterward pardon and restore . in January , the thirteenth year of her reign , queen Elizabeth in royal pomp , enter the city of London , go to see the burse which sir Thomas Gresham have late build , for the use of the merchant ; and with sound of trumpet , and the voice of a herald , solemn name it the royal exchange . a few day after , for his many great service , she make sir William Cecill baron Burgley . there be now about the scottish affair , in the name of the king of of scots , the earl Morton ; peruare abbot of Dumformelin ; and Iames mac-gray ; who when queen Elizabeth require to show more clear , for what cause they have depose the queen ; they exhibit a long and tedious commentary ; wherein with a certain insolent liberty , they en ? deavour to prove , by the ancient right of the kingdom of Scotland , that the people of Scotland be above the king : and urge Calvins authority also , that popular magistrate be constitute for the moderation of the licentiousness of prince : and that it be lawful for they , both to imprison king ; and upon just cause , to depose they . This write the queen can not read without indignation ; but to the delegate she give this answer ; she see no just cause yet , why they shall handle the queen in such manner ; and therefore will they to think upon some course out of hand , how to allay the dissension in Scotland . hereupon in sir Nich. bacon house , keeper of the great seal , a proposition be make to the bishop of Rosse , the bishop of Galloway ; and baron Levingston , delegate for the queen of Scot , that for the security of the kingdom , and the queen of England ; it be requisite , that before the queen of Scots shall be let at liberty : the duke of castle-herald the earl of Huntley and Argyle , the lord Humes , Heris , and another of the baron shall be deliver for hostage , and the castle of Dumbriton and H••e• yield up into the hand of the english , for three year . but they make answer , that to yield up great personage , and such fortification as be demand ; be nothing else ; but to leave the miserable queen utter destitute of faithful friend , and naked of all place , fit for guard and defence : yet they offer , to give two earl and two baron for hostage , till two year be expire : which not be accept , they straightway gather , and speak it open ; that now they plain per ? ceive the english mean to keep the queen of Scots perpetual prisoner , and likewise to break off the trea•y ; see they rigorous demand such security as Scotland be not able to make good . and now queen Elizabeth see that nothing can be do , for her own , the king and queen of Scot safety , unless both faction in Scotland consent ; she hold it fit that the lord of Scotland shall themselves appoint some choose person to compound the matter . while matter in England , proceed in this sort ; the queen party in Scotland be hardly use : dumb•tion Fryth• the strong castle in Scotland be take : and i . Hamilton archbishop of saint Andrew ; the duke of castle-herald brother , as a accessary to the murder of d••lye , be hang without be arraign accord to law . in England , the queen of Scot have all her servant take from she , except ten only , and a priest to say mass : with which indignity the queen of Scot provoke , cause a large commentary of her counsel , with certain love-letter to the duke of Norfolk , to be carry to the pope , and the king of Spain , by Ridolphu• ; which be bring first to the duke , Higford ( one that wait on the duke in his bed chamber ) have copy out : but be command to burn they , he hide they under a Matt in the duke bedchamber ; and that ( it shall seem ) purposely . Ridolphus to daw on the duke to be head of the discon ? tent party in England , aggravate to he the wrong he have suffered• page 29 how against all law he have be keep a long time in prison : and now , to his great disgrace , be not summon to the parliament : he exhibit to he a catalogue of such of the nobility , who have vow to assist he : he show how the pope , ( so the catholic religion may be promote ) will himself undergo all the charge of the war , and have already lay down a hundred thousand crown ; whereof himself have distribute twelve thousand among the english that be flee : he promise , that the king of Spain will send four thousand horse , and six thousand foot to his assistance ; to these reason the bishop of Rosse add , that it be a easy matter for he to surprise the queen ; who , when he have in his hand , he may then set the queen of Scot at liberty , and may easy obtain of queen Elizabeth , a toleration of religion . the former reason take somewhat with the duke , but this point of surprise the queen , he abhor ? red , as a impious fact , and therefore reject as pernicious and dangerous . in France a little before this , be the marriage solemnize between Charles the nine king of France , and Elizabeth of Austria daughter to the emperor Maximilian ; in gratulation whereof , queen Elizabeth send into France , Thomas lord Buckhurst , who with great magnificence be receive , and perhaps the more , in regard of a motion now intend to be make : for the lord buck ? burst , have in his retinue , one Guydo Cavalcantius a noble man of Florence , the queen mother of France , as be a florentine she self , have often conference with he , when she will many time say , what a happiness it will be to both the kingdom , if a match be make between the queen of England and her son Henry duke of Angiou ; and at last desire he to commend the motion to the queen of England , both from she , and from her son the king of France , as a thing they both exceed desire . the lord Buckhurst return , have for a present from the king of France a chain weigh a thousand french crown ; and Cavalcantius at his return make the motion to the queen , who seem not unwilling to hearken to it ; for by this match , there shall be add to the kingdom of England , the wealthy dukedom of Angiou , Bourbon , auverne , and in possibility , the kingdom of France it self . hereupon a treaty be hold , in which the french propound three article , one concern the coronation of the duke ; another , concern the joint administration of the kingdom ; a three , concern a toleration of his religion : to which it be answer , that the two first article may in some sort be compose ; but the three , scarce possible : for though a contrary religion may be tolerate , between subject of the same king ? dome ; yet between a wife and her husband , it seem very incongruous and inconvenient ; yet the matter at last come to this conclusion , that if the duke will afford his presence with the queen at divine service , and not refuse to hear and learn the doctrine of the church of England ; he shall not be compel to use the english rite , but at his pleasure use the roman ; not be express against the word of God . but upon these punctili•s they can not accord : and so the treaty , after it have continue almost a year , break utter off . it be indeed general think , that the ma•ch be never real intend of either side , but that they both pretend it , for only their own end : for the earl of Leicester ( who know more of the queen mind then any man ) write at this time to sir Francis Walsingham , the queen ambassador in France , that he find the queen inclination so cold in the matter , that though the point of religion be •ully accord ; yet she will find one point or other to break it off . at this time the continuance of the duke of Norfolk affection towards the queen of Scot , come to be discover by a packet of letter , send by Ridolphus to the bishop of ros•e , and by bailiff confession ( who bring the letter ) be set upon the rack ; so as the bishop of Rosse be confine to the isle of Ely : Thomas Stanley , sir Thomas Gerard , and R•l•ton be cast into the page 30 tower : and H•nry Howard , who have a aspire mind to be archbishop , be commit to the archbishop of Canterbury keep . at the same time the queen of Scot send money to her confederate in Scotland ; which be by Higford deliver to one brown to carry , and tell it be silver , when he find by the weight that it be gold , he begin to suspect some ? thing ; and thereupon go and deliver both the money and letter to the lord of the council . upon this , Higford be examine , confess the whole matter ; and withal give notice of that commentary also of the queen of Scots which be mention before . two day after , the duke himself be examine , and know nothing what his servau•s have con ? fess , de•yed every particular ; and thereupon , be bring again to the tower , by Ralph Sadler , Thomas smith , Henry Nevil , and doctor Wilson : and after he bannest , who be the duke counsel at law : the earl of arun•el and Southampton ; the lord Lumley , the lord Cobham ; Henry Percy , Lowder , Powell , Goodyer , and other , be commit to prison ; who upon hope of pardon , confess all they know concern the matter . when these thing , and especial the commentary , which the duke think have be burn , be show he , he then cry out , i be betray ? ed by my own servant ; not have learn to be distrustful , which be the very sinew of wisdom . and then with all submission , he beseech the lord to mediate for he to the queen ; towards who , he protest he never have the least thought of do any hurt . and now see it appear that the bishop of Rosse have be the whole-contriver of the business , it be deliberate what to do with he , be ? cause he be a ambassador . hereupon diverse civilian be call ; as David Lewis , Valentine dale , William Drury , William aub•y , and Henry Jones ; of who these question be ask : first , whether a ambassador who raise rebellion against that prince •o who he be a ambassador , may enjoy the privilege of a Ambassa ? dour , and be not lya•le to pun•shment ? they answer , that such a ambassador have forfeit the Privi ? ledge of a ambassador , and be liable to punishment . second , whether the minister or proctor of a prince , who be depose by public authority , and in who room another be ina•gurated , may enjoy the privilege of a ambassador ? they answer , that if such prince be lawful depose , his proct•r can challenge the privilege of a ambassador , forasmuch as none but absolute prince , and such as have-right of majesty , can ap ? point ambassador . third , whether a prince who be come into another princ•s country , and hold in custody , may have his proctor ; and if he shall be hold and be ? bassadour . they answer , if such a prince have not lose his sovereignty , he may have his proctor ; but whether that proctor shall be repute as a ambas ? sadour or no , this depend upon the authority of his delegation . four , whether if a prince give warning to such a proctor , and to hi•• prince who be under custody , that this proctor shall not from hencef•rth be account for a ambassador ; whether that proctor may by law challenge the privilege of a ambassador ? they answer , a prince may forbid a ambassador to enter into hi• kingdom , and may command he to depart the kingdom , if he •ontain n•t himself within his due limit ; yet in the mean while he be to enjoy the privilege of a ambassador . page 31 upon these answer , the bishop of Rosse be warn by the lord of the council , that he shall no long be esteem a ambassador , but be punish as his fault shall deserve . the bishop alle•dged for himself , that he have not violate the right of •n ambassador via juris , but V•• Fact• , ( to use his own word ) and therefore advise they , not to use hard ? ere measure to he , then be use to the english ambassador , ? … ? in France , R•ndoll and t•mwo•th in Scotland ; who have raise rebellion there , and be open abettor of the same ; and yet have no great pu ? nishment , than to be go at a time limit . when they begin to urge he what the english have testify against he , he love request they to give no credit to it• forasmuch as by a receive custom , which have the force of a law , the testimony of a english man against a scot , or of a scot against a english man , be not to be admit : but after some other altercation , the bishop be lead away to the tower , and keep close prisoner . at this very season , Matthew earl of Lenox , regent of sco••and , the king grandfather be by the adverse party set upon at unaware ; who have yield himself to David spense of wormester , ( that be then very careful to defend he ) together with he , be slay by bell and c•ulder ; when with great industry he have govern the kingdom for his grandchild about fourteen month . in who room , John Areskin , earl of mar•e , by common consent of the king faction , be choose regent of Scotland ; who be a man of a quiet disposition , through extreme grief of the m•ny trouble he sustain in the place , depart this life when he have govern thirteen month . and now a parliament be hold at Westminster ; wherein , beside a law for prevent of the treacherous endeavour of seditious subject , ano ? the law be make , that if any one , during the queen life , by book write or print , shall express affirm , that any i• , or aught to be the heir or successor of the queen ( beside the natural off-sp•ing of her body ) or shall to that purpose publish , print , or dispers• any book or schedule ; he , and his favour•rs , shall for the first offence suffer a year imprisonment , and the loss of one half of his good : and if they offend again , they shall be in a Pr•munir• . a law also be make , by which to be reconcile to the sea of Rome , be make treason : and it be pro ? nounce against the queen of Scot , that if she offend again against the law of England , it may be lawful to question she , as the wife of a peer of the kingdom of England . but here the queen interpose her authority , and will not suffer it to be enact . about this time , in may , a solemn tilt be perform at Westminster ; where th• challenger be Edward Earl of Oxford , Charles Howard , sir Henry lee , and Chri••• ? pher Hatt•n esquire ; who all do valiant , but the earl of Oxford best . assoon as the parliament be dissolve , a consultation be hold , whe•her John story , doctor of the law , the duke d'alva searcher ( who sometime before , be by a wile bring into England ) be a Englishman bear ; and have in bra•ant consult with a for•aign prince , about the invade of England , be to be hold guilty of high treason ? it be resolve a• ? firmative : whereupon he be call to the bar , and indict of Treason• that he have consult with one pres•all a conjurer , to make away the queen ; that he curse she daily , when he say grace at table ; that he show a way to the secretary of duke D'Alva how to invade England , etc where he affirm , that the judge have no power to meddle with he , for that he b•longed not to the queen of England , but be the king of Spain swear subject• be nevertheless condemn by the fo•m of nihil dicit ( forasmuch as no man can renounce the country wherein he be bear , nor abjure his prince at his own pleasure ) and final execute after the manner of tray•ors . page 32 Ireland at this time be indifferent quie• ; for sir John Perot , precedent of Munster have bring Iames Fitz morris to submit himself , and crave par ? don . Sidney the lord deputy return into England , and sir William Fitz Williams , who have marry his sister , succeed in his room . it be now the fifteen year of queen Elizabeth reign ; when Thomas Howard , duke of Norfolk , on the sixteenth day of January , be bring to his trial at Westminster-hall ; where sit as commissioner , George Talbot , earl of Shrewsbury ( make high steward of England for that day ) Reynold Grey , earl of Kent ; Thomas Ratcliff , earl of Sussex ; Henry Hastings , earl of Huntington ; Francis Russell , earl of Bedford ; Henry Herbert , earl of pembr••k ; Edward Seymor , earl of Hertford ; Ambrose Dudley , earl of Warwick ; Robert Dudley , earl of Leicester ; Walter Devereux , viscount of Hereford ; Edward , lord Clinton , admiral ; William , lord Howard of Effingham , chamberlain ; William Cecill , lord Burley , secretary ; Arthur , lord grey of Wilton ; Iames blunt , lord Mountjoy ; William , lord sand ; Thomas , lord Wentworth ; Willi ? be , lord Borough ; Lewis , lord Mordant ; John Pawlet , lord saint John of b•sing ; Robert , lord rich ; Roger lord north ; Edmund Bruges , lord Ch•n ? dois ; Oliver , lord saint John of Bl•tsho ; Thomas Sackvile , lord Buckhurst ; and William west , lord de la ware . after silence bid , sir Owen Hopton , lieu ? tenant o• the tower , be command to bring the duke to the bar ; and then the clerk of the crown say , Thomas , duke of Norfolk , late of Keningale , in the county of Norfolk , hold up thy hand ; which do , the clerk with a loud voice read the crime lay to his charge : that in the eleven year of the queen reign , he have traitorous consult to make she away , and to bring in foreign force for invade the kingdom : also , that he deal with the queen of Scots concern marriage , contrary to his promise make to the queen under his hand write : also , that he relieve with money the earl of Northumberland and Westmoreland , that have stir up rebel ? lion against the queen : also , that in the thirteenth year of the queen reign , he implore auxiliary force of pope Pius the five , the queen profess enemy , of the king of Spain , and the duke D'Alva , for the free ? ing of the queen of Scot ; and restore of the popish religion : and last ? lie , that he send supply to the lord Heris , and other the queen enemy in Scotland . Theise indictment be read , the clerk demand of the duke , if he be guilty of these crime , or not ? here the duke request he may be allow to have counsel . but Catiline , chief justice , make answer , that it be not lawful . yet ( say the duke ) i have hear that Humphrey Stafford , in the reign of king Henry the seven , in a cause of treason , have one assign to plead for he . to which dyer chief justice of the common-plea , make answer , that Stafford have counsel assign he concern the right of sanctuary , from whence he be take by force• but in the indictment of treason he plead his own cause . after this , the duke yield to be try ? ed by the peer ; first Barham , sergeant at law ; then Gerard the queen at ? tourney ; and last , Bromley , the queen solicitor , enforce the crime ob ? ject against he : to all which the duke make colourable answer ; but most of they be prove by sufficient testimony , he ask upon occasion , whether the subject of another prince , who be confederate , and in league with the queen , be to be account the queen enemies• to which catiline answer , they be ; and that the queen of England may wage war with any duke of France , and yet hold firm peace with the french king . when it grow towards night , the lord high steward demand of the duke if he have any more to say for himself ? who answer , i rely upon the equity of the law . after this , the lord withdraw a while , and then return , the lord steward begin at the lowermost , ask they , my lord de la ware , be Thomas duke of Norfolk guilty of these crime of high treason , for which he be call in question ? he rise up , and lay his hand upon his page 33 breast , answer guilty , in like manner they answer all . after this , the lord steward with tear in his eye , pronounce sentence in form as be use . a few day after be barn and Mather execute , who conspire with one Herle , to make away certain of the coun ? cellor , and to free the duke ; but Herle reveal the business pre ? sent , to who Barnes ( when he see his accuser bring forth ) smile say , Herle thou be but one hour before i ; else i have be in thy place for the accuser , and thou in my room to be han ? ge : at the same time with they be hang also Henry Rolfe , for counterfeit the queen hand . but though the duke be now con ? demean , yet the queen be so tender of his case , that it be four month after before he be execute , at last on the second of June at eight of the clock in the morning , he be bring to the scaffold upon the tower-hill , and there behead . at this time and upon this occasion , a parliament be assemble , wherein among other law , it be enact , that if any man shall go about to free any person imprison by the queen express come ? mandement• for treason or suspicion of treason , and not yet arraign ? ed , he shall lose all his good for his life time , and be imprison during the queen pleasure , if the say person have be arraign , the rescuer shall forfeit his life ; if condemn , he shall be guilty of rebellion . in the time of this parliament , the queen create Walter Devereux earl of Essex , be before but viscount Hereford ; because he be de ? scend by his great-grand-mothers from the bourchier , and make the lord Clinton ( who have large revenue in Lincolnshire ) earl of Lincoln ; also she call forth John Paulet of base , the marquess of Winche ? ster son , Henry Compton , Henry Cheyney , and Henry morris for baron by summons . within ten day after the duke death , William lord delaware , sir Ralph Sadler , Thomas Wilson doctor of the law , and Thomas Brumley the queen solicitor , be send to the queen of Scot , to expostulate with she ; that she have usurp the title and arm of the kingdom of England , and have not renounce the same , accord to the agree ? mean of the treaty at Edinburgh , that she have endeavour the marriage of the duke of Norfolk , without acquaint the queen , and have use all forcible mean to free he out of prison ; have raise the rebellion in the north , have relieve the rebel both in Scotland and in the Low-countries ; have implore aid from the pope , the king of Spain and other ; have conspire with certain of the english , to free she out of prison , and declare her queen of England ; last , that she have procure the pope bull against the queen , and suffer herself to be public name the queen of England in foreign country : all which accusation she either absolute deny , or else fair extenuate , and though ( as she say ) she be a free queen , and not subject to any creature ; yet she be content , and request , that she may make her personal answer at the next parliament . about this time , the king of Spain by his ambassador here , come ? plain to the queen , that the rebel of the Netherlands be har ? bour and entertain in England , contrary to the article of the league ; whereupon the queen set forth a severe proclamation , that all the dutch , who can any way be suspect of rebellion , shall present depart the realm ; which yet turn little to d'alva , or the king of Spain benefit : for hereupon , count vander-mark , and other Dutch go out of England surprise the Brill first , than flush , and afterward draw other town to revolt , and in a short time exclude page 39 the duke D'Alva in a manner from the sea and this error , to suf ? fer the protestant party to get possession of the sea-town , have be the cause they have be able to hold out , even all this long time , against the king of Spain . and now many military man have little to do at home , get they into the Netherlands , some to duke D'Alva ; but the far great number to the prince of Orange : the first of who , be tho ? mass Morgan , who carry three hundred english to Flushing ; then follow ? ed by his procurement nine company more under the conduct of Humphrey Gilbert ; and afterward it become the nursery of all our english soldier . at this time , Charles the french king set his mind whole ( at least see ? ming so ) upon the low-country war , conclude a peace and enter in ? to a league with queen Elizabeth ; which be to remain firm , not only du ? ring their two life , but between their successor also , if the s•ccessor sig ? nifie to the survivor within a year that he accept it , otherwise to be at livre ? berty . it be likewise agree , what aid by sea or land , they shall each of they afford to other upon occasion ; and for ratification of this league , Edward Clinton earl of Lincoln and admiral of England be send into France , with who go the lord Dacres , rich , Talbot , sand , and other . the french king likewise send the duke of memorancy , and Paul Foix i• ? to England with a great train ; that the queen in the presence of they , and the ambassador in ordinary may swear to the league , which she do at Westminster , the seaventeenth of May , in the year 1572. the day after she make memorancye knight of the garter . memorancye while he tarry in England , make intercession in his king name , that what favour can be without danger , may be show to the queen of Scot ; and then make much a do again about the marriage with the duke of Angiou ; but be hopeless to make conclusion thereof , by reason of the diversity of religion he return into France ; for now be great provision make ready for the marriage , between Henry king of na ? varre ; and the lady Margeret the french king sister ; to which solemnity with notable dissimulation , the queen of Navarre and the chief of all the protestant be allure , be bear in hand that there shall be a renova ? cion of love , and a perpetual peace establish : the earl of Leicester likewise and the lord Burleigh be invite out of England , and out of Germany , the son of the prince elector palatine under colour of honour : but indeed , that they may be entrap , and they , and together with they the protestant religion at one blow , if not clean cut off , yet receive• deadly wound : for the marriage be celebrate , there present follow that cruel massacre at Paris , and the terrible slaughter of the protestant throughout all the city of France ; but to set a show of equity upon the fact , edict and proclamation be present set forth , that the Prote ? stant have plot a wicked conspiracy against the king , the queen mo ? there , the brethren , the king of Navarre , and the prince of the blood royal ; and to keep the thing in memory , coin be present stamp , upon the one side whereof be the king picture with this inscription , vir ? tus in rebel , on the other side ; Pietas excitavit justitiam ; but the king of France , notwithstanding all the show he make of piety , escape not the divine revenge , for before the year come about , he fall sick of a bloody flix , and afterward with long and grievous torment end his life . a little before this , Mota Fenell ambassador to the king of France , be in England , by virtue of a order from the queen mother of France , propound to queen Elizabeth at Kenelworth ( two day before the massacre in that kingdom ) the marriage of her young son Francis duke of Alenson ( for the queen mother have be tell by some cunning man , that all her son shall be king , and she know page 35 no weigh for it but this ) b•t queen Elizabeth , by rea•on of the disparity of age , modest excuse her self , ( for he be scarce •eventeen year old , and she be now past eight and thirty ) yet she promise to consider of it , and Alenson do not leave to prosecute the ••it . at t•is time , Thomas Percy earl of North•mberland , who first re ? bell , and afterward flee into Scotland , be for a sum of money deli ? vex by the earl of Morton , to the lord Hunsdon governor of bar ? wick ; and a while af•er be behead •t York . and now as these two great personage , the duke of Norfolk• and the earl of Northumberland be take away by a violent death ; so three other great personage be at this time t•ken away by a natural death : first w•ll•am Paulet , who from a private man come by degree ; to be marquess of Winche ? star : live to the age of within three year of a hundred , and can reckon a hundred and three of his child , and his child issue , of ? ter he have hold the p•ace of lord treasurer of England above twenty year ; in who room succeed sir W•lliam Cecill , lord Burleigh , then die Edmund earl of Derby , famous as well for his hospitality and good housekeep , as for his skill in surgery and bonesetting ; then die sir William Peter , who be descend from a honest stock at Exeter in Devonshire , be privy counsellor and secretary to king Henry the eight , ki•g Edward the six , queen mary , queen Eliza ? beth ; who plant•d himself in Essex , where he purchase grea• possession ? once ; who son John be by king Iames make baron of writle in that country . and now q•een Elizabeth have former borrow money o• her subject , she thankful repay it , which win she no less love , than if she have give it , and more love she gain also at this time by two proclamation ; by one of which , she command noble man to observe the law of keep ret•iners ; by the other , she restrain informer , who , under colour of spy out crown land conceal by private perso•s , sacralegio•sly seize upon the land of parish-churche , and alms-house pious endow by the queen ancestor . and more love and honour also she gain at this time by two act of justice ; the one , that she satisfy the english merchant out of the good which be det•ined belong to the dutch , and restore the rest to the duke de Alva , and make a full transaction with the merchant of Geneva for the mon•y intercept ; the other , that she free England at this time of the debt which her father and her brother have run into in for ? reign part• , and be increase by yearly interest , and cause the obligati ? of|we of the city of London , which have so often be renew to be give in , to the great rejoice of the citizen . the spanish affair grow now very turbulent in the Netherlands , flu ? shing lose , the town of holland revolt , and the spanish navy vanquish by the zelander , duke D'Alva against his will , begin to show more kind ? ness towards the english , so as in the month of January , the trade which in anno 1568. have be forbid , be now allow again between the dutch and the english for two yeer• ; but those two year expire , the english remo ? ve their trade to the confederate State• . the last year in the month of November , a daughter be bear to the french king , to who he request queen Elizabeth to be god-mo ? there , who the•eupon send William Somerset earl of Worcester into France with a font of massy gold to stand as her deputy at the christen . hereupon , and for that the queen promise to observe the league strict ? lie , the french king and the queen mother begin to affect she more and more , and the duke D'Alenson write sundry love-letter to she , the french king and his mother intercede for the marriage with all earnestness . page 36 it be true , the queen conceive diverse reason , why it be fit for she to marry ; but the courtier for their own end dissuade she as much from it : at last the queen mother of France be wonderful importu ? nate , that her son Alenson may have leave to come and see her• whereunto , be weary with continual letter and message , she give her consent ; but upon condition , that he shall not take it for any disgrace to he , if he return without obtain his suit : but as soon as queen Elizabeth have notice , that his brother Henry be elect king of Poland , and that the king of France be very sick , she give inti ? mansion to Alenson , by Edward Horsey governor of the isle of wight , that he shall not make too much haste into England ; but shall first procure a peace by some mean or other in France , and declare by some notable argument , his good will towards the protestant , thereby to be the more welcome guess into England . hereupon a peace be con ? clude in France , and in certain place the protestant be allow to exercise their religion : and then again the french king and the queen mother , use all their endeavour to have the marriage go for ? ward ( for they be very desirous th•t Alenson , who be of a crooked and perverse disposition , and prone to raise tumult ) may be remove out of France ; and withal , they request of queen Elizabeth , that if the duke of Angiou take his voyage into Poland by sea ; he may have public caution to sail through the british ocean . to this last re ? quest , she not only consent with all alacrity , but also make offer of a fleet to conduct he thither . in the mean while , Alenson fall sick of the measle , which his mother signify to queen Elizabeth by count rhet , excuse he thereupon for not come into England as he have determine : the count find the queen at Canterbury , where she give he royal inter ? tainment : and Matthew Parker archbishop of Canterbury , royal entertain ? mean to they both . all this while since the death of the earl of Marre , there have be no regent in Scotland , but now by the procurement of queen Eliza ? beth chief ; Iames Dowglas earl of Morton , be make regent ; who , when his authority in a parliamentary assembly be establish , en ? act many profitable law for the defence of religion against papist and heretic , in the name of the king : but the pro•ection and keep of the king person , he confirm to Alexander Areskin earl of Marre ( to who the custody of the king in their tender year , by spe ? ciall privilege belong ) though he be himself in his minority : upon these condition , that no papist , nor factious person shall be admit to his presence : a earl shall come with only two sir ? vaunt attend he : a baron , with only one : all other , single : and every one unarm . the french king in the mean time , send his ambassador monsieur vyriar , to corrupt the earl of Atholl and H•nt ? ley with large promise , to oppose the regent : queen Elisabeth as much labour to defend he : but though by the ministry of Kil ? ligrew , she have draw Iames Hamilton duke of castle-herald , and George Gourdon earl of Huntley , and the most eminent of that faction , upon indifferent condition , to acknowledge the regent , yet VVilli ? a k•r••ld , lord gra•nge , ( who Murray when he be rege•t , have make gove•nour of Edingborough castle ) the lord hum•s , lie ? dington , the bishop of Dunkeld and other , will by no mean add ? mit of the regent government , but hold that castle , and fortify it in the queen of Scot name , have Lydington for their counsellor here ? in , and trust to the natural strength of the place , and to the duke de alva and the f•e•ch king promise , to send they supply both of man and money . now when these person , can by no mean page 37 draw to accept of condition of peace , and to deliver up the castle to the regent , queen Elizabeth ( who can in no case endure the french in Scotland ) suffer her self at length to be entreat by the regent , to send force , gun and ammunition , for assault of the castle upon certain condition , whereof one be , that ten hostage shall be send into England , to be security fo• return the man and munition , un ? less by the common hazard of war they shall chance to miscarry . the condition be argue on ; William Drury marshal of they gar ? rison at Barwick , with some •reat ordnance and fifteen hundred soul ? diers , ( among who be some noble volunteer , George carry , hen ? ry carry , Thomas Cecill , he•ry lee , William Knolles , Sutton , Cotton , Kelway , William Killigrew , and other , enter into Scotland , and be ? siege the castle , which after three and thirty day siege , be delive ? read up to the regent for the king use , with all the person that be in it ; among who kircald lord Grange , and Iames his brother Mus ? man , and cook goldsmith ( who have counterfeit coin in the castle ) be hang ; although to redeem granges life , a hundred of the fami ? lie of the kircald , offer themselves to be in perpetual servitude to the regent , beside a annual pension of three thousand mark ; and twen ? ty thousand pound of scottish money in present ; and to put in caution , that from thence forth he shall continue in duty and homage to the king ; but it will not be accept . Humes and the rest be spare , through queen Elizabeth merciful intercession ; Lydington be send to Leith , where he die , and be suspect to be poison : a man of the great understanding in the scottish nation , and of a excellent wit , but very variable ; for which , George Buchanan call he the ca ? melion . and now from this time Scotland begin to take breath , after long civil war , and as well the captain of both party , as the soul ? diers , betake themselves into Swedeland , France and the low-con ? try , where they valorous behave themselves , and win great come ? mendation . as for John less bishop of Rosse he be now set at liberty , but command to depart present out of England , and be beyond the sea , he continue still to solicit his mistress the queen of Scot cause , with the emperor , the pope , the french king , and the germane prince of the popish religion ; who all lead he on with fair promi ? ses , but perform nothing : for indeed he in who he have great confidence , which be the duke de Alva , be at that time call a ? way , partly out of jealousy of state , as be think to grow too great , and partly out of opinion , that by his cruelty he make the people to revolt ; and therefore in his place be send Ludovicus Zuinga , a man of great nobility in Spain , •ut of a more peaceable disposition than de Alva ; and •ow this man do all good office to win queen Elizabeth to he , and mind his own affair only , will not intermeddle with the scottish or english matter . about this a frentick opinion be hold by one Peter Bourche• a gen ? t•eman of the middle-temple , that it be lawful to kill they that open ? pose the truth of the gospel ; and so far be he possess with this oh ? pinion ; that he assault the famous seaman captain Hawkins , and woun ? dead he with a dagger , take he for Hutton , who at that time be in great favour with the queen , and of her privy counsel , who he have be inform to be a great adversary to innovation . the queen grow so angry hereat , that she command marshiall law shall be execute upon he present , till her counsel advise she that marshiall law be not to be use , but in the field , and in turbulent time , but at home and in time of peace , there must be legal proceed : here ? upon page 38 Bourchet be send to the tower , where take a brand out of the fire , he strike it into the brain of one of his keeper name Hugh long ? wroth and kill he , for which fact , he be condemn of murder , have his right hand cut off , and nail to the gallow , and then himself hang . after the violent death of this varlet , we may speak of the natu ? rall death of two great person ; first , William lord Howard of of ? fingham , son of that warlike Thomas Howard duke of Norfolk , by his second wife Agnes Tilney . This William be make a baron by queen mary , and lord high admiral of England , and by queen e ? lizabe lord chamberlain , till such time that be take with age , he yield up that place to the earl of Sussex , and be then make keeper of the privy seal , which be the four degree of honour in England . his son Charles succeed he in the dignity of his ba ? rony , who be after make lord chamberlain to the queen , and then lord high admiral of England . a while after he , die Reginold grey earl of Kent , who the queen a year before of a private man have make earl of Kent , when as that title , from the death of rich ? ard grey earl of Kent , who have waste his patrimony , and be el ? der brother to this man grandfather ; have lie asleep for fifty year together . at this time many particular rebellion be in Ireland ; the o C• ? nor , and oh moor take arm , and commit many outrage : in must ? star , Iames Fitzmorris , and Fitz Edmund do the like ; but by the inn ? industry of sir John Perrot , precedent of Munster , be suppress . in Ulster , Bryan Mac Phelym burn Knockfergus , and many other join in rebellion with he . against these , Walter Devereux , ( who the queen have late create earl of Essex ) desire leave to go ; which sir William fitz-williams deputy of Ireland oppose , as fear , that the glory of so great a earl will eclipse his light . but for this , the queen find a remedy , by appoint Essex , to take a parent of the deputy , whereby to be make governor of Ulster . but this re ? medy for fitz-williams , may have make a sore in the mind o• E• ? sex ; ( to receive his authority from his inferior ) but that the noble ? ness of his mind , make he more to regard the virtue , than the glory . and so , in the end of August , he land at Knockfergus , have with he the lord , Darcy and rich , and sir Henry Knowles and his four brother , Michael and John carve , Henry , William , and John Norreses : at his land , Bryan Mac Pheli• welcome he , ten ? dr unto he all manner of dutifulness and service ; but present a• ? ter , fall from he , and join with Turlogh leynigh . after this re ? volt , the ea•l of Essex , find many difficulty in the business , and himself not well provide of skilful soldier , make suit to the queen for leave to come home ; which the earl of Leicester , ( who like his room better than his company ) oppose ; till after expense of a yeer• time , and much treasure , he at last obtain leave , and return home . the next year , be 1574. and the seventeenth year of queen Eli ? sabeth reign , the duke of Alenson grow more importunate in his suit , then at any time before ; so as he obtain of the queen , to come into England , any time before the twenty of May ; and this she the rather do , because she perceive he now to be real bend against the guise her swear enemy . but before this answer be bring he , Valentine dale doctor of the civil law , the queen Embass• ? dour in France , give intimation to the q•een , that Alenson and no ? varre be in restraint , and commit to keeper : for the guise have page 34 suggest , that Alenson hold intimate friendship with admiral Colin , the chief leader of the protestant in France ; and indeed , Alenson be examine , free confess , that he have now for a good while desire the marriage of the queen of England• and conceive , that good correspondence with Colin may be useful to he to that end , he have thereupon have conference with he thereabouts , and concern ? ing the low-country war . in the mean time , Thomas w•lks , dale secretary , get cunning to Alenson , and in the queen name , make promise both to he , and to Navarre , that she will omit no oppor ? tunity of procure their enlargement . for which , the subtle queen-mother so complain of he to queen Elisabeth , that he be fain to go into France , and there to crave pardon for his fault . but Navarre , not unmindful of this kindness in Wilks , when about five and twenty year after , be king of France , he see he in Normandy , he knight he . hereupon the queen send Thomas Randoll into France , to the queen-mother , that if it be possible , he may gain Recon ? ciliation for Alenson she son , and for the king of Navarre . but be ? fore he be land in France , Charles the then french king die , who funeral rite be solemn perform in saint Paul church in London . assoon as Henry the three , king of France , be come from Po ? land , Roger lord north be send into France , to congratulate his re ? turn , and his happy inauguration into the kingdom ; who thereupon , together with the queen-mother , do forthwith send their joint let ? ter into England , strong solicit the business of marriage , be ? tween Alenson and the queen . in the mean time notwithstanding , they use all possible device , ( and leave no mean unsought ) to get the young king of Scotland to be send into France , and to deprive mor ? tun who be the regent , of his authority , whereof the queen of Scots also be very desirous ; she be persuade , that if her son be once get safe into France , she and the catholic in Eng ? land shall be more mild use . at which time , a aspersion be cast upon the queen of Scot , as if she have make the match between Charles uncle to the queen of Scot ( who have late the earldom of Lenox confirm to he by parliament ) and Elizabeth Cavendish the countess of shrewsburie daughter by a former husband ; upon which ground , both their mother and some other also be keep in prison for a time ; and be doubt whereunto this marriage shall tend : Henry earl of Huntington , precedent of the council in the north , be authorize with secret instruction to examine it . it will be fit here to say something of this place of government in the north ; which from small beginning , be now become so eminent as it be at this day , whereof this be the original . when as in the reign of Henry the eight , after that the rebellion in the northern part , about the subversion of abbey be quiet , the duke of Norfolk tarry in those quarter , and many complaint of injury do be tender unto he , whereof some he compose himself , and other he commend under his seal to man of wisdom to determine : hereof when king Henry hear , he send down a peculiar seal to be use in these case , and call home the duke , commit the same to Tunstall bishop of Durham , and constitute assistant with au ? thority to hear and determine the complaint of the poor , and he be the first that be call precedent ; and from that time , the authority of his successor grow in credit . it be now the year one thousand five hundred seventy five , and the eighteenth year of queen elisabeths reign , when Henry the three page 40 king of France be return from Poland , and crown at Rheims , be careful to have the league of Blois confirm ; which , in the year 1572. have be conclude between his brother Charles and that most illustrious queen Elizabeth ; now therefore he con ? firm it with his own subscription , and deliver it to dale the queen Legier , as the queen like wise ratify it at Saint-James near Westminster : but a little after he demand by letter , whether the mutual defence against all person mention in the league , be in ? tend to comprehend the case of religion also ? whereunto she an ? swear , that it do comprehend it ; he thereupon hear this from the queen , begin present to prepare war against the protestant , and Alenson be draw to the adverse party , there be no speech of the marriage for a long time . in the Netherlands at this time , lodovicke Zuinga who be suc ? cessor unto duke D'Alva , be whole bend to recover the come ? man of the sea , which D'Alva have neglect ; but not be suf ? ficient provide of a navy , he send Boischott into England , that with the queen leave , he may take up ship and mariner to go against the Hollander and Zelanders , but this she will not grant : than he make suit , that the queen will please not to take it in evil part , if the banish person of the english in the low-con ? try serve the king of Spain in a sea-fight against the Hollander ; and that they may have free access to the port of England , to buy provision for ready money ; but this she will not grant neither : then he make request , that the dutch , who be rebel against the king of Spain , may be put out of England ; but neither will she grant this , as be a action void of humanity ; and against the law of hospitality ; yet because she will not be think to violate the old burgundian law , she command by proclamation , that the ship of the dutch which be make ready , shall not go forth of the haven ; nor yet the dutch , who have take up arm a ? against the king of Spain , enter into the port of England , and by name , the prince of Orange , and fifty other the prime of that fa ? ction ; and this she do the more willing , because Zuinga at the intercession of Wilson the english ambassador , have remove the earl of Westmoreland , and other english fugitive out of the dominion of the king of Spain , and have also dissolve the english seminary at Douai ; though in stead thereof , the guise through the procure ? mean of pope Gregory the thirteenth , set up another seminary at Rheims . and at this time the prince of Orange , perceive his force but small , and think himself too weak for the king of Spain , and little hope of aid from England , he enter into consultation with the confederate state , to who protection , they be best and in the most security to betake themselves : the prince of she ? many they know be not all of one mind , part from money ve ? ry hardly , and do not every way , nor will not by no mean pos ? sible accord and concur with they in their religion ; and therefore they be not so fit . then , the french they see , be entangle in a civil war , and so have enough of their own to do ; beside the old grudge and heartburning that be between the french and dutch ; and therefore neither be they so fit . there remain then the english , as the fit of any ( if it may be obtain ) see they be Neighbouss , of the same religion , and of a language not much different , strong in ship , and rich in merchandise . hereupon ( con ? sidere the commodiousness of the english nation ) they send into page 41 England , Philip marnizie of saint aldegond ; Janus Dowsa , William nigh ? well , and doctor Melsen ; who in a honourable ambassage , offer the country of holland and Zealand to be possess or protect by the queen , forasmuch as she be descend from the prince of holland , by Philip wife of Edward the three , daughter of William of Bavaria , count of Hanonia and Holland ; by who other sister , the hereditary right of •hose province come to the king of Spain . to this offer , the queen take time to answer ; and at last , have mature advise of the matter , her answer be this , that as yet she conceive not how with safety of her honour , and a upright conscience , she can receive those pro ? vinces into her protection , much less assume they into her possession ; but promise , she will deal earnest with the king of Spain , that a well condition peace may be conclude . present upon this , Zuinga , governor of the Low-countries die ; after who death , the state of Brabant , Flanders , and the other province , take upon they the ancient administration , and authority in the common ? wealth ; which the king of Spain be fain to confirm to they , till such time as John of Austria be come , who he determine to make governor there . in the mean time , queen Elizabeth in behalf of the king of Spain , send William Davyson in ambassage to those province , to ex ? hort they to be peaceable and quiet , which yet , by reason the spanish soldier , be so outrageous , little prevail . in England all be calm and quiet for all this year , only a differ ? ence fall out between sir John Forster , governor of Berwick , and John Cormichill , keeper of Liddesdale in Scotland : in compose whereof , the regent of Scotland , have give queen elizab•th some discontentment , be fain to come arm before the earl of Hun ? tington , appoint the legate for England , at Bonderod , and so the matter be take up , and the regent ever after continue constant in observe the queen , and to his great commendation , restrain ? ed the freebooter of the border , to the great good of both king ? dome . this year there die in Scotland , Iames Hamilton , duke of castle-herald , and earl of Arran , who be great grandchild to Iames the second , king of Scot , by his daughter , appoint tutor to marry , queen of Scot , and design heir and governor of the kingdom , du ? ring she minority . at this time the earl of Essex be come into Ireland again , wh•re ha ? ving do good service , and be in the midst of victory , he be on a sudden command to resign his authority in Ulster ; and as though he be a ordinary commander , be set over three hundred soldier ; which disgrace be wrought by his adversary in court , to the continual pe• ? plex of his mild spirit . and now be sir Henry Sidney the three time send deputy into Ireland ; who go into Ulster , there come to he and sub ? mit themselves Mac Mahon , Mac guyre , Turlogh leynigh , the oh conor and o moor , the earl of Desmond , and the rebellious son of the earl of Clan ? ricard , all who he receive into favour , and with great commendation administer the province . at this time the Spaniard in the Low-countries begin to deal rough with the people , and harry the inhabitant with all manner of spoil and injury ; Antwerp , the most famous town of traffic in all Europe , be miserable pillage , the english merchant house rifle , insomuch that the state be enforce to take up arm , and messenger be send to all neighbour ? ing prince ; and to Q. Elizabeth be send Monsieur aubig•y , both to show she upon how necessary and just cause they have take up arm , and also to borrow of she a great sum of money , the better to enable they to resist page 42 the Spaniard . but she be certain inform , that they first sue to the french king for help , deny the request , yet promise to intercede earnest with the king of Spain• for peace . and in that employment , she address into Spain , John smith , cousin German to king Edward the six , a man of spainsh behaviour : and well know to the king of Spain , who be liberal receive by the king ; and with such wisdom retort the contumelious speech , of Gasper Quiroga archbishop of Toledo , and the spanish inquisitor , who will not admit in the queen title , the attribute of de ? fendor of the faith ; that he have gain great thanks from the king of Spain himself , who request he , not to speak of it to the queen , and give severe command , that the title shall be admit . and now by this time be John of Austria come into the Low-countries , with a large commission : for he be the natural son of the emperor Charles the five ; to who the queen send Edward Horsey , governor of the isle of wight , to congratulate his come thither , and to offer help , if the state call the french into the Netherlands ; yet at the same time , sweve ? ham be exceed importunate on the state behalf , she send they twenty thousand pound of english money ; ( so well she can play her game of both hand ) upon condition , they shall neither change their prince nor there religion , nor take the french into the Low-countries , nor refuse a peace , if John of Austria shall condescend to indifferent condition , but if he they ? brace a peace , than the money shall be pay back to the spanish soldier , who be ready to mutiny for lack of pay . so careful she be to retain these decline province in obedience to the king of Spain . at this time a voyage be undertake , to try if there can be find any sea upon the north part of America , lead to the wealthy coast of Cathaia , whereby in one commerce , may be join the riches of both the east and west part of the world , in which voyage be employ Martyn Frobysher , who set sail from Harwich the eighteenth of June , and the nine of August , en ? tread into that bay , or sea , but can pass no further for snow and ice . the like expedition be take in hand , two year after , with no better success . about this time die the emperor Maximilian , a prince that deserve well of queen Elizabeth and the english , who thereupon send sir Philip Sidney to his son Ridolphus king of the roman , to condole his father death , and congratulate his succession : as likewise to do the like , for the decease of the count elector palatine , name Frederick the three , with her survive son . and now Walter Deveruex earl of Essex , who out of leicester envy , have be recall out of Ireland , be out of leicester fear , ( as be threaten by he ) send back again into Ireland , but with the empty title of earl martial of Ireland ; with the grief whereof , he fall into a bloody flux , and in most grievous torment end his life . when he have first de ? sire the stander by to admonish his son ( scarce ten year old at that time ) to have always before his eye , the six and thirty year of his age , as the utmost term of his life , which neither himself , nor his father before he can outgo , and the son indeed attain not to it , as shall hereafter he declare . he be suspect to be poison , but sir Henry Sidney , deputy of Ireland , after di ? ligent search make , write to the lord of the counsel , that the earl often say , it be familiar to he upon any great discontentment to fall into a flux , and for his part , he have no suspicion of his be poison , yet be this suspicion increase ; for that present after his death , the earl of Leicester , with a great sum of money and large promise , put ? ting away Douglas Sheffield , by who he have a son open marry Essex his widow . for although it be give out , that he be private marry page 43 to she , ye• sir Francis Knolles his father , who be well acquaint with leicester rove love , will not believe it , unless he himself be present at the marriage , and have it testify by a public notary . at this time also , die sir Anthony cook of gyddy-hall in Essex , who have be schoolmaster to king Edward the six , and be no less schoolmaster to his own daughter , who he make skilful in the greek and latin tongue ; marry all to man of great honour ; one to sir William Cecill , lord treasurer of England ; a second , to sir Nicholas bacon , lord keeper of the great seal ; a three , to sir Thomas hobby , who die ambassador in France ; a four , to sir Ralph Lowlet ; and the five to sir Henry Killigrew . at this time , the son of the earl of Cla•ricard , who scarce two month before have obtain pardon for their rebellion , fall into rebellion again ; but be by the deputy soon suppress ; and William Drury new make Pre ? sident of Munster , reduce the whole provice to good order , except on ? lie the county of Kerry , whither a number of vagabond be get , trust to the immunity of the place . for king Edward the three make Kerry a county palatine , and grant to the earl of Desmond all the roy ? all liberty which the king of England have in that county , except Wreckby fire , forestall , and treasure trou•e . the governor notwithstan ? ding , who wise judge that these liberty be grant for the better preservation of justice , and not for maintenance of outrageous malefactor , enter into it , and violent put to flight and vanquish the mischievous crew , which the earl of Desmond have place there in ambush . the earl in the mean while make great complaint of Drury to the deputy ; and particular , of the tax which they call cease , which be a exaction of pro ? vision of victual at a certain rate , for the deputy family , and the soul ? diers in garrison . this tax , not he only , but in Leinster also many lord refuse to pay , allege that it be not to be exact but by Parlia ? mean ; but the matter be examine in England , it appear by the record of the kingdom , that this tax be ancient impose ; and that , as a certain right of majesty , a prerogative royal , which be not subject to law , yet not contrary to they neither , as the wise ci ? vilian have observe . yet the queen command to use a moderation in exaction of this nature , say , she will have her subject shear , but not devour . it be now the year 1577 , and the twenty of queen Elizabeth reign , when John of Austria , pretend to queen Elizabeth no ? thing but peace , yet be find to deal secret with the pope , to peprive she of her kingdom , and himself to marry the queen of Scot , and invade England : of which his practice the prince of Orange give queen Elizabeth the first intelligence . whereupon ( find his deep dissem ? ble ) she enter into a league with the state , for mutual defence both at sea and land , upon certain condition ; but have conclu ? dead it ( because she will not have it wrongful interpret , as though she mean to foster a rebellion in the Netherlands ) she send Thomas Wilkes to the king of Spain with these information ; that she have always endeavour •o keep the low-countrye in obedience to the king of Spain ; have persuade ( even with threaten ) the prince of orange to accept of peace ; but withal , if the king of Spain will have his subject obedient to he , she then request he to restore their privilege , and to remove I•hn of Austria from the government , who not only be her deadly enemy , but labour by all mean to bring the Netherlands into utter servitude . if this be grant by the king of Spain , she then faithful promise , that if the state perform not their allegiance to he , as by their promise to she they be engage to do , she will page 44 utter forsake they , and bend her self with all her force to compel they . while Wilkes in Spain unfold the•e matter , John of Austria send to queen Elizabeth , in most grievous manner accuse the state for diso ? bedience , and make a large declaration of the cause for which he have take up arm again . thus queen Elizabeth ( like a fortunate princess ) sit as a honourable arbitress between the spanish , the french , and the state ; insomuch that it be not untrue which one write , that France and Spain be balance in the scale of Europe ; and England the beam to turn they either way ; for they still get the better , to who she add ? here . about this time , when the judge sit at the assize in Oxford , and one •owland i•nkes a bookseller be question for speak approbrious word against the queen , sudden they be surprise with a pestilent favour ; whether rise from the noisome smell of the prisoner , or from the damp of the ground , be uncertain , but all that be there present , almost every one , within forty hour die , except woman and child ; and the contagion go no further . there die Robert bell lord chief baron , Robert d'oylie ; sir William Babington : d'olye sheriff of oxfordshire , Harcourt , Weynman , Phetiplace , the most note man in this tract ; Barham the famous lawyer ; almost all the juror , and three hundred other , more or less . this year the title of the lord Latimer , ( which have flourish in the family of the Nevills , ever since the day of king Henry the six ) be extinct in John Nevil , who die without issue male , and leave a fair estate to four daughter , whereof the old marry Henry earl of Northumber ? land , the second , Thomas Cecill , who be afterward earl of Exeter ; the three , sir William Cornwallis ; and the four sir John Daverse . in Ireland the o-moore and o-conors , and other , who ancestor the earl of Sussex in queen Mary day , have for their rebellion , deprive of their patrimony in Loyse and Oph•li• , do now break forth into a new re ? bellion , under the conduct of Rori• Oge , that be , Roderick the young : set on fire the village of naasse , assault L•chlin , from whence be drive back by the valour of George Care• the governor , he be afterward slay . out of England at this time there go into the Low-countries , John north , the lord norths elder sonne•iohn Norris , second son to the lord Norris , Henry Cavendish , and Thomas Morgan colonel , with many voluntary , to learn military experience . thither also come caesamire the elector palatine son , with a army of germane horse and foot , at the queen charge : upon the•e don John , assist by the prince of Parma , Mondragon , and other the best commander of Spain , confident of victory , fly furious , before they expect he , yet after a long fight , be force to retreat ; but then turn again , and think to break through the hedge , and brake where the english and scottish voluntary have place they ? self , be again repulse ; for the english and scottish be so hot upon the matter , that cast away their garment , by reason of the hot weather , they fight in their shirt , which they make fast about they . in this battle N••••• fight most valiant , and have three horse s•ain under he , as also ? ? ? the scot , Bingham , and William M•r•ham . now for comfort •o the afflict province , there come at that ••me in ? to the Netherlands , the count Sw••zenberg from the emperor , M•nsie•• be•••••re from the french king , and from the queen of England , the lord Cobham and Wal•ingham , with commission to procure condition of peace , but return without do any thing , for that don John refuse to admit the Pro•estan• religion , and the prince of Orange refuse to return into hol ? land . about this time egr•m••d R••cliffe , son to Henry earl of Susse• , by his second wife , who have be a prime man in the rebellion of the north , and page 45 serve now under don John , be accuse by the english fugitive , that he be send under hand to kill don John ; which ( whether true or false ) he be thereupon take and put to death . the Spaniard have affirm , that Ratcliff at his last end , confess voluntary , that he be free out of the tower of London , and move by Walsinghams large promise , to do this fact ; but the english that be present at his death , deny that he confess any such thing , though the english rebel do all they can to wrest this confession from he . at this very time , don John , in the flower of his age , die of the pesti ? lence , or ( as some say ) of grief , as be neglect by the king of Spain his brother ; a man of a insatiable ambition , who aim first at the kingdom of Tunis , and after , of England ; and who , without the privity of the french king , or king of Spain , have make a league with the guise , for the defence of both crown . Alanson , although very busy about the belgic war , yet now begin again to pursue the marriage with queen Elizabeth ; for renew of which suit , first be bachervyle send to the queen ; and soon after Ramboulet , from the french king ; and within a month after that , simier , a neat courtier , and exquisite learn in the art of love , accompany with a great number of the french nobility ; who the queen at Richmond entertain in such love manner , that Leicester begin to rage , as if his hope be now quite blast . certain a little before , when Ashley , a lady of the queen bedchamber , mention the earl of Leicester to she for husband , she , with a a•gry countenance , reply , do thou think i so unlike my self , and so forgetful of majesty , as to prefer my servant , who i my self have advance , before the great prince of the christian world ? but it be now time to return to the scottish affair . the earl of Mor ? ton , regent of Scotland , though a man of great wisdom and valour , yet be now so overcome of covetousness , that he grow universal hate ; and thereupon , with the joint consent of the nobility , the administration of the commonwealth be translate to the king , though he be yet but twelve year old , and twelve of the chief lord be appoint to at ? tend he in council , three of they by course for three month ; among who , the earl of Morton for one , that they may not seem to cast he quite off . the king have take upon he the administration , send pre ? sent the earl of Dumformelin to queen Elizabeth , acknowledge her great desert towards he , and request to have the treaty of Edinburgh , agree on in the year 1559 , to be confirm , for the more happy restrain ? ing the robber about the border ; and withal , that his ancient patrimo ? nigh in England ; namely , the land grant to his grandfather ma••hew , earl of Lenox , and the countess his grandmother , may be deliver into his hands• who be the next heir . the queen ready promise the former demand , but stick a little at the last , concern the patrimony ; for she will not grant , that Arbella , the daughter of Charles the king of Scot uncle , bear in England , be the next heir to the land in Eng ? land ; neither will she grant the ambassador proof out of history , that the king of Scot , bear in Scotland , do ancient ( without question ) hold the earldom of H•ntington by right of inheritance . yet she come ? mand a sequestration to be make of the revenue of those land , by B•rleigh master of the ward ; and will the king , that out of the good of the earl of Lenox in Scotland , satisfaction may be make to his grandmothers creditor here . for she too• it in ill part , that the king have recall the in••o••ment of the earldom of Lenox ( make to his uncle Charl• and his heir ) after the death of Charles , to the prejudice ( as be suggest to she ) of Arbella ; although indeed , it be a privilege of the king of Scotland , that they may recall donation make in their minor•ty . page 46 the earl of Morton in the mean while , not endure the disgrace to be out of his regency , regard not the prescript form of government late set down , but draw the administration of all matter to himself , and keep the king in his own power , at the castle of Sterling , admit none to his presence , but who he please . at this presumption , the lord grow angry , make the earl of Atholl their captain , and in the king name levy a great army , and be ready to encounter Morton ; but by the intercession of Robert bow , the english ambassador , they be stay from fight ; and Morton present betake himself home , and the earl of Atholl soon after die , not without suspicion of be poy ? son . at this time the king of Spain , and pope Gregory the thirteenth , hold see ? great consultation , to invade at once both England and Ireland , and to work the absolute ruin of queen Elizabeth ; the pope to gain the kingdom of Ireland for his son Iames Buen of Compagno , who he have make marquess of Vincola . the king of Spain secret to relieve the irish rebel , as queen Elizabeth do the dutch , while friendship in word be uphold on both side : and be know , that the great strength of England consist in the navy royal , and merchant ship , it be advise , that the italian and Dutch•Merchants shall hire these ship for long voyage ; to the end that while they be absent , the queen navy may be surprise with a great fleet : and at that time Thomas Stukley , a english fugitive , shall join himself to the irish rebel with new force . for he make great boast , and promise the kingdom of Ireland to the pope bastard son , have so insmuate himself into grace with the ambitious old man , that he adorn he with the title of marquess of Leinster , earl of Wexford and Caterlogh , Viscount M•rogh , and baron of Rosse ( the principal dignity of Ireland ) and make he commander over eight hundred italian Souldi ? er , to be employ in the irish war with which force Stuckeley set sail from ? ? ? Vecchia , arrive at length in Portugal , where he and his Forces• be by the divine providence , divert another way . for S••a ? ••ia• king of Porti•gall ( to who the chief command , in this expedition against England be assign ) be first to dispatch a war in Africa , in aid of Mahomet Abdall , son to the king of Fesse , persuade Stukley to go along with he into Maure•ania , together with his italian soldier ; and then afterward they will go together against Ireland : to this motion Stukley soon agree , and therein agree with his destiny ; for in that memorable battle where three king be slay , both he and Sebastian lose their life . at this time sir Henry Sidney ( who have be deputy of Ireland at several time eleven year ) deliver up his deputyship to sir William Drury , precedent of Munster : such a deputy , for good government , that if any have equal he , none have exceed he . it be now the year 1579 , and the two and twenty year of queen Eli ? zabeth reign ; when John Casimire , son of Frederick the three , count pa ? la•ine of the Rhyne , come into England ; where , after he have be entertain ? ed with tilt and joust , make knight of the garter ( the queen tie the garter about his leg ) and reward with a yearly pension , he return . and now be Alexander ••rnise , prince of Parma , make governor of the Netherlands by the king of Spain : and queen Elizabeth supply the state with a great sum of money ; for which William Davyson bring into e•g ? land the ancient precious habiliment of the family of Burgundy , and their costly vessel , lay to pawn by Matthew of Austria and the state . Si•ier in the mean time herein England , cea•eth not by all amorous de ? vice to persuade the queen to marry Alanson ; wherein he draw she so far , that the earl of Leicester give ou• , he creep into the queen affection by page 47 love potion and unlawful art : and simier on the other side endeavour ? ed by all mean to cast down Leicester , discover his marriage with the earl of Essex widow , whereat the queen grow so angry , that she consign he to the castle at Greenwich , and have mean to have he commit to the tower , but that the earl of Sussex ( though his great adversary ) dissuade ? ed her : tell she that none ought to be molest for contract lawful matrimony . but Leicester notwithstanding be so provoke for his con ? fine , that he be bend to revenge it , and if it be true , as some said• he have suborn on teud•r a yeoman of the guard to murder simier , sure it be the queen by proclamation command that no person shall offer injury to the ambassador or any of his servant . at which time it fall out that as the queen , together with simier , the earl of Lincoln , and Hatton vice-chamberlaine be row in a barge to Greenwich , a young man shoot off a harquebus out of a boat , shoot one of the rower in the queen barge through the arm with a bullet , who be present take and lead to the gallow , but upon solemn protestation , that he do it unwilling , and out of no malicious intent , he be let go and pardon . some will have persuade the queen that be purposely suborn to shoot either she or the french ambassador : but she be so far from suspect she subject ; that she will often say , she will not believe any thing against they which a mother will not believe against her child . after a few day Alanson himself come private into England with only on or two attendant , and come to the queen at Greenwich , at a time when she think not of it ; they have secret conference together , all party be send away , after which , be see of very few , he return home ; but within a month or two after the queen enjoin the lord Burleigh treasurer , the earl of Sussex , Leicester , Hatton and Walsingham , serious to weigh both the danger , and the commodity likely to arise from the marriage with he , and to consult with simier concern the marriage covenant . as in England there be some fear of this Frenchman : so in Scotland at this time of another Frenchman , call esme steward , lord of Aubigny , who come now into Scotland to visit the king his cousin . he be the son of John steward brother to Matthew steward earl of Lenox the king grand ? father , and have denomination from Aubigny in France , which title Charles the seven king of France have ancient confer upon John steward of the family of Lenox , who be constable of the scottish army in France , vanquish the english in one battle , and be slay by they in another : and from that time the title belong to the young descent of that house . This esme steward , the king embrace with exceed great love , make he lord chamberlain of Scotland , and captain of the castle of Dumbriton , and create he first earl and then duke of Lenox . the fear from this man be ; because he be devote to the guise and the popish religion , and that which increase the fear from this man ; because he apply himself to Mortons adversary , and mediate to have Thomas Carre lord of Fer ? nishurst call home , who of all man be most addict to the queen of Scot . about this time queen Elizabeth , at the request of William harbou•ne a Englishman , procure a grant from the turkish emperor for the english merchant to exercise free traffic in all place of his dominion , as well as Venetians , Polanders , and other neighbour nation ; whereupon they set up first the company of turquoise merchant , manage a most gainful trade at Constantinople , Alexandoria ; Egypt , Aleppo , Cyprus , and other part of Asia , bring home spice , perfume , unwrought silk , tapestry , indigo , corrant , and the like . this year die sir Nicholas bacon , lord keeper of the great seal ; but who , by virtue of a act of parliament , always exercise the jurisdiction of page 48 lord chancellor ; a very fat man , but singular wise , and a chief prop of the queen privy council : in who place succeed sir Thomas brom ? ley , the queen solicitor , with the title of lord chancellor of Eng ? land . in Ireland at this time , in the province of Munster , Iames Fitz morris kind ? lead a new fire of rebellion ; for after his former submission upon his knee , vow all obedience to the queen , he steal away into France , and promi ? sed the french king , if he will lend he assistance , to make he king of Ireland . but be by he slight , he go into Spain , and make the like offer to the king there . the king of Spain send he to the pope , from who ( by mean of Nicholas Sanders , a english priest , and Alan a irish ? man , both doctor of divinity ) he obtain a little money , a legate authority for Sanders , a consecrate banner , and letter of Commenda ? cion to the catholic king . And return from Spain with those di ? vine , three ship , and a few man , he land at Smerwick Kerry , a demy island in the west part of Ireland , about the first day of July , where ( the place be first of all consecrate by the priest ) he build a fort , and bring the ship close under it ; but these be present set upon and carry away , by Thomas Courtney , and thereby the Spaniard deprive of their opportunity of come thither by sea but now John and Iames , brother to the earl of Desmond , gather together a small number of irish , join themselves present with their kinsman Fitz morris . yet the Spaniard see that but a very few irish , and those unarm , come unto they , they begin to distrust the estate they be in , and to cry out , that they be undo ; who Fitz morris hearten the best he can , tell they that supply be present to come . And go himself to get more company , he pass through the land of his cousin William a burgh , who though he have be a rebel before , yet be now grow loyal , so as there fall out a skirmish between they ; in which Fitz Morris be strike through with a pike , and shoot into the head with a leaden bullet , die in the place , and most of his company with he ; but withal , two of William Burghs son be in that skirmish slay also ; when the queen , to comfort he for the loss of his son , adorn he with the dignity of baron of castle Conell , and reward he with a yearly pension beside : which favour so overwhelm he with joy , that he live but a short while after . and now sir William Drury the deputy grow very sick , appoint sir Nicholas Malby then governor of Connaght , to be precedent of Munster , and general of the army ; at which time , the earl of Des ? mond , who have all this while make a show of loyalty , break open ou• into rebellion ; when now Drury the deputy die at Waterford , and by his death malbyes authority cease , sir William Pelham be by the counsel choose justice of Ireland , with authority of viceroy , until such time as a deputy be appoint , and the earl of Ormond be make precedent of Munster . Pelham go into Munster , and send for the earl of Desmond , who refuse to come , be thereupon proclaim traitor , and a enemy to the state ; and this be publish , the justice commit the follow the war to the earl of Ormond , who slay most of the Spaniard , and ad ? herent to Desmond , compel he to send his wife to the justice , to beg his pardon . the lord justice Pelham now certify , that Arthur lord grey be land with authority to be deputy of Ireland , at Munster deliver the army to George Bour•hier , the son of John , second earl of bath , of that name , and himself return to Dublin , to deliver up the province to his successor . the lord grey at his land , before he receive the sword , hear where the rebel have their rendezvous , march towards they , who present betake themselves to glandilough , a grassy valley , and beset thick with page 49 tree , where they who dwell near , scarce know the wind out ; yet the deputy ( take one C•sbie a old man , well acquaint with the place , to be be leader ) enter into it , where he lose diverse of his man ; namely , Peter Carew the young , George Moore , Audeley , and Cosbie himself th•t be his leader . a short time after , there land at Smerwick in Kerry , under the come ? man of San Joseph a italian , about seven hundred italian soldier , who fortify the place , and name it fort del Or. whereupon the de ? puty send a trumpeter to the fort to demand who they be , what they have to do in Ireland , and who send they ; withal command they to depart immediate . but they reply , that some of they be send from his holiness , other from the catholic king , upon who the pope have bestow the kingdom of Ireland , for that queen Eliza ? beth ( by reason of heresy ) have forfeit the right unto she ; and there ? before what they have get , they will maintain . upon this the depu ? ty prepare for battery , let|we fly his ordnance four day together ; in which time the Spaniard once or twice make sally out , to their own loss much , but not a Englishman slay , but only John cheek , a courageous young gentleman , son to sir John cheek , a learned knight . and now san Joseph , who command the fort , a white-livered soldier , terrify with the continual battery , and have no hope of relief , either from the king of Spain , or Desmond ( contrary to the will of all his soldier ) he set up a white flag , and desire parley , but parley be deny , because he have combine with rebel , with who it be not lawful to hold parley . than he demand that his company may pass away with their baggage , but neither will this be grant . than he require •hat some of the chief sort may have leave to depart ; but neither can this be obtain . at last , when they can prevail in nothing , they hang out the white flag again , and submit themselves absolute , without any con ? dition , to the deputy mercy , who present consult how to deal with they , and this be the case ; their number be well near as great as the english ; there be present fear of danger from the rebel ; and the english be so destitute of meat and apparel , that they be ready to mutiny , unless they may have the spoil grant they ; and beside , there be no ship neither to send they away if they be spare : for these reason it be conclude ( the deputy gainsaying , and let tear fall ) that only the leader shall be save , the rest all slay , and all the irish hang up ; which be present put in execution ; to the great disli ? king of the queen , who detest the slaughter of such as yield themselves , and will accept of any excuse or allegation . and yet more cruelty than this be at that time commit in the ne ? therland ; for John Norris , and Oliver temple , english commander , to ? gether with some company of dutch , set out early one morning , take Mechlyn a wealthy town of Brabant , at a assault with ladder , where they promiscuous murder both citizen and religious person , off ? fear violence even upon the dead , take away gravestone , which be send into England to be sell . about this time certain english priest , who be flee into the ne ? therland , in the year 1568 , by the procurement of William Allen , a Oxford scholar , join themselves to study at Douai , where they en ? tread into a collegiate form of government ; to who the pope all ? low a yearly pension . but tumult arise in the Low-countries , and the english fugitive be command by the king of Spain deputy to depart from thence , other the like college , for the train up of the english youth , be erect , one at Rheims by the guise , and another page 50 at room by pope Gregory the thirteenth , which always afford new •upplyes of priest for England , when the old fail , who shall spread abroad the seed of the romish religion here among we ; from whence , those college have the name of seminary , and they call seminary-priest who be train up in they . in these seminary , among other disputation , it be conclude , that the pope have such fullness of power , by divine right , over the whole christian world , both in ecclesiastical and secular matter , that by virtue thereof , it be law ? full for he to excommunicate king , absolve their subject from their oath of allegiance , and deprive they of their kingdom . from these seminary at this time , there come two into England , Robert Parsons , and ed ? mund Campian , both of they Englishman , and Jesuit . Parsons be bear in somersetshire , a fierce and rough condition fellow ; Campian be a lon ? donor , of a mild disposition . they have be both bring up in Oxford ; Campian a fellow of saint John college , and have be proctor in the year 1569 ; and when he be make Deacon , counterfeit himself to be a pro ? testant , till such time as he slip out of England . Parsons be of Baylioll college , where he make open profession of the protestant religion , till for dishonest carriage , he be expel the house , and then flee to the Po ? pish party . both these come privy into England , in the disguise one while of soldier , another while of nobleman ; sometime like english minister , and sometime in the habit of apparitor . Parsons , who be make the superior , break forth into such open word among the papist , about depose the queen , that some of themselves have a purpose to come ? plain of he to the magistrate . Campian , though something more mode ? rate , yet in a write provoke the english minister to a dispu•e ; and pub ? lish in latin a elegant book of his ten reason , in maintenance of the doctrine of the romish church ; as parson in like manner , set forth another violent pamphlet against Clark , who have write modest against Campians provoca•ion . but doctor Whitaker sound confute Campian , who be after a year apprehend , and put upon the rack , be afterward bring out to a disputation ; where he scarce make good the great fame that go of he . in this year be the return of captain drake from his incredible voyage round about the world ( which Magellan have before attempt , but die in the voyage ) whereof to rela•e all particular accident , will require a large volume : it may suffice in this place , to deliver some special passage . he be bear of mean parentage in devonshire , yet have a great man ( Francis Russell , after earl of Bedford ) to be his godfather . his father , in king Henry the eighth time , be persecute for a protestant , change his soil , and live close in Kent . king Henry be dead , he get a place among the mar ? riner of the queen navy , to read prayer , and afterward bind his son Fran•is to a ship-master , who in a ship which go to and fro upon the coast with commodity , one while to Zealand , another while to France , train he up to pain and skill at sea ; who afterward die , take such a like to he , that he bequeathe his bark to he by his will : this bark Drake sell , and then in the year 1567 , go with sir John Hawkins into America ; in which voyage , he unfortunate lose all he have . five year after , have get again a good sum of money by trade and piracy , ( which the preacher of his ship tell he be lawful ) he buy a ship of war , and two small vessel , with which he set sail again for America , where his first prize be great store of gold and silver , carry over the mountain upon mule ; whereof the gold he bring to his ship , but leave the silver , hide it under ground : after this , he fire a great place of traffic , call , the cross , at the river Chiruge , when roam to and fro upon the mountain , he espy the south sea ; page 51 where fall upon his knee , he crave assistance of almighty God , to find out that passage , which he reserve for another voyage ; and for the present , have get much riches , he return home . afterwards , in the yee• 1577 , the thirte••th day of November , with five ship , and seaman , to the number of 163 , he set sail from plimmo•th , for the southern sea , and within five and twenty day , come to Cantyne , a Cap• in ba•b•ry , and then sail along by the Isl• of F•g• , which send forth ••emes of sul ? phur ; and be now un•e• the line , he let every one in his ship blood . the sixteenth of Ap••l , enter into the mouth of the Plate• they espy ? ed a world of sea-calve ; in which place iohn-•oughty , the next to drake in authority , be call in question for raise sedition in the navy , w•o be find guilty , be behead . some report , that Drake have charge give he from the earl of Leicester ; to make away doughty upon some pre•ence or other , for that he have say , that the earl of Essex be crafty make away by Leicester• the twentyeth of August , two of his ship he turn off , and with the other three come to the sea , which they call• the straight of magell•n . the six of September , en ? tr into the wide southern ocean , which they call• the pacific sea , he find it out of measure troublous , so that his ship be here by tempest disperse ; in one of which , John winter be master , who return back into England ; Drake himself , with only one ship , coast along the sho•e , till he come to the isle Mo•cha , from whence lose , he light upon a fellow fish in a little boat , who show he where a spanish ship lade with treasure •ay ; Drake make towards it ; the Spaniard think he to be their own country man , and thereupon invite he to come on ; but he get aboard present shut the Spaniard ( be not above eight person ) under •atches , and take the ship , in which be four hundred pound weight of gold . at Taurapasa , go again on shore , he find a Spaniard •leeping by the sea ? side• who have lie by he twenty bar of mass•e silver , to the value of four thousand ducat , which he bid his follower• take among they , the spani ? ard still sleep . after this , go into the port of Africa , he find there three vessel without any mariner in they ; wherein , beside other ware , be seven and fifty silver brick , each of which weigh twenty pound ; from hence , tide it to lime , he find twelve ship in one road , and in they great store of silk , and a chest full of money coin , but not so much as a ship-boy aboard ; ( such security there be in that coast : ) then put ? ting to sea with those ship , he follow the rich ship call Cacofoga• and by the way meet with a small ship , without ordnance or other arm , out of which he take fourscore pound weight of gold , a golden crucifix , and some em•aulds of a finger length . the first day of march , he overtake the ca ? cofoga , set upon she , and take her• and in she , beside jewel , fourscore pound weigh• of gold , thirteen chest of silver ready coin , and as much silver as will ballast a Ship. and now think he have gain wealth e ? nough , he resolve to return home• and so on the three of November 1580. he land at Plymouth , have sail round about the world , in the space of three year ; to the great admiration of all that know what compass the world be of . the queen welcome he home , but make a sequestration of the good , that they may be ready if the king of Spain require they ; and common ? dead the ship to be draw on shore near Detford for a monument ( where the carcase of it be ye• to be see ) and her self feast in it , at which time she knight captain dr•ke . but Bernardine M•ndoz• , the king of Spain ambassador in England begin to rage ; and earnest demand restitution of the good , and complain , that the english sail upon the indian sea to who it be page 52 answer , that the good be sequester , and ready to make the king of Spain satisfaction , although the queen have expend against the re ? bell , who the Spaniard have excite in England and Ireland , more money than that which dr•ke bring home . and as for sail on the indian Sea• that it be as lawful for the queen subject as his , see the sea and the air be common for all to use . notwithstanding , to Pedro S••••a , the k•ng of Spain agent in this business , a great sum of money be re-paid• which be not •estored to they •o who it belong , but employ to the Spaniard war in the low-co•••ries , as be know of ? ter• when it be too late . but at this time , when Iackman and Pett , two skilful pilot , be send forth with two ship by the Londoner , to find out • short cut to the east Indies , by the north-west passage ; they have not the like success ; for a few league beyond the isle of •aygat• , they meet with such uncertain tide , so many shallow , and such mountain of ice , that •hey can go no further , and have much •do to return home . about this time , Henry Fitz Allen , earl of Arundel die , in who the surname of a most noble family end , which have flourish in this honour for above three hundred year , from Richard Fitz Alan ; who be ? king descend from the al•anets ( ancient earl of Arundel and Sussex , in the reign of king Edward the first ) obtain the title of earl , by re•so• of the possession of Arundel castle , without creation . he have •hree daughter by his wife Katherine , daughter to Thomas grey , marquess of Dorset , all who he outlive ; H•nry , a young man of great hope , who die at Brussells ; Joan , wife to the lord Lumley ; and mary , who be mar ? ry to Thomas Howard , duke of N••folke , bring forth Philip , in her right , earl of Arundel . in Ireland , Arthur lord grey the deputy , go against the oh conor , who •aised stir in Ophalie , put to death Hugh oh Moley , quiet all that quarter , even the family of the mog•hig•ns , and oh Charles , and in the very beginning suppress a conspiracy which be break forth , by put to death the lord N•g•n•• who be confident in his own inno ? cency , when the deputy promise to save his ilfe , if he will but confess himself guilty , choose rather to die and be hold guiltless , then to live in in ? famy , by betray his own innocency . with who death the queen be extreme displease , as by which she be make a patroness of cruel ? ty , to her great dishonour . but the deputy know with what kind of peo ? ple he deal , and by this example of severity , bring turl•gh leymigh to accept condition of peace ; and the oh b•i•s , and cavenagh ( rebellious fa ? mily in Leinster ) humble to crave Peac• also , and to offer hostage . in Scotland at this time , great jealousy be •ad of Lenox , lord of Obig ? •y , lest , be in so great favour with the king , he shall allure he to marry into France , and bring into Scotland the popish religion . where ? upon ( although he purge himself by letter to queen Elizabeth , and proffer himself to be a protestant ) yet many course be take to see ? quester he from the King• but so far from take effect , that on the con ? trary , the earl of Morton ( who among all other be most addict to the english ) be soon after accuse of treason by the earl of Arran , and cast into prison• and not long after ( notwithstanding all the mean the queen can use to save he ) be behead , as convict to be accessary to the murder of the king father . whereupon the earl of Angus , and other , who labour for M•rt•• , flee straightways into England . in the Low-countries about this time , the count Rheinberg proceed victorious for the king of Spain , and beleaguer St•nwick in Freezland ; against who the state send Norris general of the field , who put the ••einburghs company to the worst• and raise the siege : but afterward page 53 ? … ? with Verdugo the Spaniard at N•rthone , even when the vi ? ? … ? get ( Roger Williams have put the enemy to flight ) ? … ? of the war turn , Norris be vanquish , wound , and a great ? … ? his man slay ; among who be cotton , Fitz• Williams , and ? … ? commander . here it must not be omitted• that the english ? … ? the dweller in the northern part of the world , be hither ? ? … ? drinker , and deserve praise for their sob•iety ) in these dutch ? … ? to be drunkard ; and bring the vice so far to overspread ? … ? •ome , that law be fain to be enact for repress it . ? … ? while the state and the king of Spain con•end about a few ? … ? the Low-countries , he seize upon the whole kingdom of por ? ••• ? … ? for the last year , Henry , king of P••tingall die , many comp ? ? … ? allenge the kingdom ; as the duke of Savoy ; the prince of Par ? ? … ? Natharine bracant , and the queen of France . but Philip king of ? … ? son of Henry elder sister , put the case to his divine and ? … ? and adjure they to pronounce to who of right it belong , ? … ? , for he : whereupon he send duke D'Alva , who put to ? … ? ••tonio , who the people have elect king , and within seventy day ? … ? all Portugal . the queen of France angry hereat , and envious be ? ? … ? the king of Spain dominion thus enlarge ( be now master ? … ? gall , the east Indies , and many island beside ) advise , among ? … ? P•••ces , queen Elizabeth , to bethink themselves in time , of restrain ? ? … ? •o excessive dominion . whereupon the queen receive don ? ? ? , and l•vingly relieve he , which she think may be do without ? … ? breath of the league with Spain , see don Antonio be descend of ? … ? blood , and of the house of Lancaster ; and that no cau•ion be ? … ? •eague ; that the portuger shall ? ? ? be admit into England . and now the queen-mother of Frano• , and the king her son , mo•e ? ? ? then ever , pursue the ma•ch with Alanson , now duke of A•gio• ; ? … ? transact whereof , they send in ambassage into England• Francis ? ? ? , prince of daulphine ; Arthur C•sse• marshal of France , and many ? ? ? hono•rable personage , who be entertain with great respect ( a ? ? ? be purposely build at Westminster for that use , royal furnish ; ••tings and joust proclaim , by Philip earl of Arundel , Frederick baron ? ? ? Windsor , sir Philip Sidney , and sir Fulk grevill , against all come•s• the ••••gates that be to confer with the french concern the marriage , ? ? ? sir William Cecill lord treasurer ; Edward , earl of Lincoln , lord ad ? ••••ll ; Robert Dudley , earl of Leicester ; sir Christopher Hatton , and sir ? ? ? Walsingham , Secretary• by who , covenant of marriage be at ••th agree on ; first , that the duke of Angio• , and the queen of Eng ? •••• , within six week after the ratification of the article , shall contract ••trimony• and the rest , most of they such as be before agree on , in the •arriage between queen mary and king Philip , chief consist in confer ? ••ng honour upon the duke , but power upon the queen . it be also be ? ••ed , that all pa•ticulars shall be ratify within two Months• by the •••thfull promise and oath of the french king , for he and his heir , and •eservation also be add apart , with the hand and seal of every ? ? ? ? … ? delegate , that queen Elizabeth be not bind to finish the marriage , ••till she and the duke have give each other satisfaction in some ? ? ? , and have certify the french king of the same within six we•ks• be ? •ore those six week be expire , simier , secretary to the cou•••ll , be ? ? ? into France , to require the king of France his Confirmation• then ? ? ? will not hear he , but press to have the marriage accomplish , ? … ? be contract , and that nothing else be to be do . •i••ier on they ? ? ? side , show by the article , that a league offen•••e and defensive ? ? ? first be conclude : this the french king disclayme•h : whereupon page 54 W•lsinghams be present send •o compose this differan•e , who joint with Henry C•bham , the embass••our in ordina•••• and simier , allege to the french king these partic•l••s , that queen Elizabeth for no other reason be willing to marry , but for the •atisfaction of he• people ; and see many impediment be come in the way since the first treaty , namely the civil war in Franc• and the duke engagement in a war with Spain , w•• make the wi•est of her subject to be now against the ma•ch . This have make she to defer the accomplishment of it , although her affection be still constant towards the Duke• for this cause the queen will have no further treaty to be held• till the french duke be free from the spanish war , and a leauge of mutual offe••• and defence be agree on . the french king willing accept of ••e L•agu• defensive ; but of the offensive he will hear no speech , till th• marriage be finish . no• long aft•r• the french D•k• himself come into England , have with good success raise the si•ge of C••bray ; he be here receive with as great humanity as he cou•• w•sh , and nothing omitted• where by he may judge himsel• to be true welcome . insomuch th•• in November , when the anniver ? sari• of the qu•••s inauguration come to be solemnize , the Q. ( while they be in love conference ) draw a ring off from her finger , and put it upon he , upon some private condition . the stander by imagine , that by this ceremony the Marriag• be confirm between they ; and alde ? g•nd governor of Antwerp be there , present dispatch messen ? gers into the low-countries• to give notice of it ; and thereupon bonfire be make , and all show of Rejoycing• but the earl of Leicester ( who priv•ly plot to cross the ma•ch ) H••ton the vice-chamberlain , and secretary Walsingham , fr•• and be enrage , as if the kingdom , the queen and religion , be now utter ov••throwne . the maid of honour , and ladi•s that be familiar wi•• th• queen , make grievous lamentation , and so ? ? ? and daunt she , that she can take no rest that night . the nex• day• she call to she the french duke , and cause all company to go aside , they private •n•er•ain a long discourse . at length the duke re ? turn to his lodging , cast the ring away from he , and after a while take it up again , terrible exclaim against the levity and inconstancy of woman . the queen at this time be much trouble at a book late put forth , with this title , the gulf wherein England will be swallow , by the french marriage : whereof , conceive that some Puritan be the author , it make she high displease with the Puritan : whereupon within a few day , John stub of Lincolns-inn , a zealous professor , and the author of this book , ( w•ose sister , Thomas Cartwright , the father of the Puritan , have marry ) William page that disperse the copy , and Singleto• the Printer , be ap ? prehended• against who sentence be pronounce , that their right hand shall be cut off• by virtue of a law make in the reign of fillip and ma•ie , against the a•thors and disperser of seditious write ; ( though the chief lawyer and judge of the kingdom can not agree concern the f••ce of that s•a•ue : ) hereupon stub••s and page be bring to the scaff•ld , make of purpose , in the market place at Westminster , and their right hand , with a butcher knife and a malle• , cut off by the wrist ; the Printer be p••doned• at that time , Stubbs when his right hand be cut off , un ? cover his head with the left , and cry out , God save the queen , to the great amazement of all the beholder . at this time the queen , upon importunate suit of her counsel , give way , •hat Edmund Campian , Ralph Sherwin , and Alexa•der Bryant , priest , shall be call to the •arre , who be accuse by virtue of a law make in the five and twenty year of king Edward the three , to have plot the ruin of the queen and kingdom ; to be adhere to the pope , the page 55 queen enemy , and come into England , to raise force against the state , be then condemn of high-treason , and accord execute . Campian after he be convict , be demand ; first , whether queen Elizabeth w•re a lawful queen ? will make no answer ; afterward , whether he •ould stand for the queen , or for the pope , if he shall send a army a ? against the queen ; he plain profess , that he will be of the pope side , •nd witness so much under his hand . after this , some other papist up ? on the like occasion be also put to death , which the queen rather necessa ? •ily , than willing assent to , as be unwilling to force the conscience of any . Theise , and the like exorbitancy of papist , be cause , that new ••d strict law be enact against they the parliament follow , which begin the next January . the french duke after three month abode in England , take his jour ? ney in February , into the Low-countries , who the queen her self bring on his way as far as Canterbury• and then command the earl of Leicester , the lord Charles Howard , Hunsdon , Willoughby , Windsor , Sheffield , sir Philip Sidney , sir Francis Russell , sir George Bourchier , and some other prime knight , to accompany he to Antwerp , where he be make duke of Brabant , lim ? b••rg , and Lorraine ; for the dutch have long before remove the king of Spain government , and quit the people from their oath of allegiance , that it may be in their power to choose any other prince . He•e the duke of Anjou give free leave to exercise the roman religion , to as many as will swear fealty to he , and abjure the king of Spain authority : but •fter all , have spend a great mass of money , with which he be supply from England ; and observi•g , that only vain and empty title be confer ? read upon he , while the state hold all the dominion in their own hand , he rash enterprise a assault upon Antwerp , and some other town , and short depart without any great matter perform . at this time queen Elizabeth , as well to get she some friend , as she have procure her self many enemy ; receive into the order of t•e garter , Frederick the second king of Denmark ; to who she employ sir Pere ? grine bertye ( who she have late make lord Willoughby of Eresby ) to in ? ve he . but now to prevent the duke of guyses design in Scotland , which be to make use of the duke of Lenox favour with the king , to withdraw his ass ? ction from the english : William Reuthen , who the king have late make earl of gowry , endeavour with other , by all mean to remove Lenox , and the earl of Arran from the king ; and so , while Lenox be go from Ferth ( where the king at that time be ) to Edinburgh , and Arran be also absent on a journey : the earl gowry , Marre , Lindsey , and other , take the opportunity , invite the king to the castle of Reuthen , and there detai ? ned he , not permit he to walk abroad : all his trusty servant they remove from about he , Arran they cast in prison , enforce the king to call home the earl of Angus , and to send away Lenox into France , who be ? king a man of a soft and gentle disposition , for the king safety ready con ? scent ; and not content with all this , they compel the king by his let ? ter to queen Elizabeth , to approve and allow of this his thraldom . the queen of Scot in the mean while , bewail her own hard fortune , and the distress of the king her son , lay open the same in a large letter , write to the queen in french : with which letter , queen Elizabeth be some ? what affect , send unto she Robert Beale clerk of the council , to expostu ? late with she concern the querulous writing , and joint with the earl of Shrewsbury , to treat of the set she at liberty . and indeed , serious consultation be hold at the council table about it , and the most be of opinion• that upon certain condition she shall have her liberty ; but the scottish of the english faction oppose it , nothing be effect . page 56 soon after this , the king send colonel William steward , and John Colvill to queen Eliz•beth , proffer all manner of respect and observance , and request her advice for quiet the tumult in Scotland , and also for his contract of marriage . at which time , news be brough• , that the duke of L•nox be dead in France , who depart this life •t Paris , even at the very point of death , as oftentimes before , make open profession of the pro ? ••stant religion ; thereby confute those who have malicious traduce he for a papist . after who death , when the surpriser of the king be lift up in their own conceit , as think they have he safe enough . he on a sudden ( though scarce eighteen year of age ) with some few other , convey himself to the castle of saint Andrews , to who the nobility present repair , bring arm band with they , as fear some dan ? she may befall he . afterwards , in fair word , he advise some of his surpriser to go from the court , for avoid of tumult , and promise they pardon , if they wo•ld crave it . but gowry only ask pardon , and sub ? mit himself , use this distinction , that he have not offend in matter , bu• in form only ; and then the king send for the earl of Arran to the court , and respect he as his intimate friend , employ he to come ? pose the differen•es among the nobility , and to purge the kingdom and his own court from civil dissension . while he be sedulous in these care , come sir Francis Walsingham from queen Elizabeth , to advise he not to be lead away by evil counsellor , to the destruction of both kingdom . he find the king accompany with the flower of the nobility , and behold another manner of majesty than he look for in Scotland : pla•ing audience give he , he put the king in mind , of what the queen out of Isocrates , in private letter have former admonish he : that a prince must be such a lover of truth ; that more credit may be give to his bare word , than to another oath ; and in many word advise he , to beware now in his youth of evil counsellor , and always to be like himself . the king answer , that he be a absolute prince , and will not that other shall appoint he councillor who he like not ; but that he have long since devote the first-fruit of his amity to the queen of England , his deer sister , and do now willing make proffer of the same . Walsingham now deal with he far ; not to lay to the queen charge what broil have late fall out in Scotland ; show , how benefi ? ciall to he , and to both kingdom amity have be hitherto , and will be in time to come also , so it be not neglect ; and that the same may the better be confirm , if the variance between the nobility be lay asleep , by a law of oblivion enact in parliament , the peer which now be remove from the court call back again , religion look into , and a firm league conclude between both kingdom . the king make answer , that he glad embrace amity with England , and that he will constant defend the religion already establish : afterwards he love dismiss Walsingham , though he hold he no good friend to he and his mother ; and careful look to matter , with understanding , even above his year , propose and proffer reconciliation to those that have surprise he , if within a limit time they ask pardon ; which they be so far from do ? king , that the enter into new consultation to surprise he again ; where ? upon they be command within a set time to leave the kingdom , of which number , mar , glames , Paslet and some other , betake themselves into ire ? land ; boyde , Zester , weeme , Lochlevin , into the Low-countries ; Dumfermilin into France , the earl of Angus be confine to his earldom , gowry only to his own ruin stay behind after the limit time , hatch new devise . about this time happen a difference , and thereupon a war , between the emperor of Muscovia , and the king of Sweden ; when John king of page 57 Sweden , doubt himself to be no fit match for the emperor , send a roy ? ••l ambassage to queen Elizabeth , request she to intercede for he to ••e emperor ; which she do without delay , and by her ambassador draw the muscovian to a peace upon reasonable condition . B•t the muscovian••ortly after die , and Theodorus his successor , grant free traffic to ••rchants of all nation that will come thither ; the queen importune he to admit of none but english merchant , require he to confirm the privilege which his father have grant they : whereto , by way of answer , he demand free trade for all the english , say , it be not fit that a small company shall exercise a monopoly , and all other be •estrayned : but as for custom , he promise to take less by one half of that company , then of any other , because they first open the way thither . the next summer , Albertus Alasco , a palatine of Poland , of a comely personage , and great learning , come into England to see the queen , who be noble entertain , both by she , and the nobility , as also by the Schol ? l•rs of Oxford , with learned oration , and other recreation : but have ••rryed here four month , and run i•to much debt , he secret withdraw himself and depart . this man i see my self afterward in crakow , very bare , though it be report of he , that he have in a dowry with a wife , fif•y castle of great value : but what my can bear the charge of pro ? digality ? this year prove fatal to diverse great man ; for there die this year , •••st , Thomas Ratcliff , the three e•rl of Sussex of this family ; a man of grea• spirit , and great faithfulness to his country . there die also hen ? ry Wriothsley earl of Southampton ; one exceed devote to the romish religion , and a great favourer of the queen of Scot , which cost he queen Elizabeth displeasure , and imprisonment beside . there die also sir Humphrey Gilbert , who be cast away at sea , in his return from the north p•rt of America , whither he late sail with five ship , have sell his patrimony , in hope to plant a colony t•ere . there die also Edmund grin ? dall , arch-•ishop of Canterbury , be blind through age , a gra•e and pious p•elate , who stand high in the queen favour for a long time , till he lose ? ? ? last , by favour ( as be say ) the Puritan conventicle ; but the ••ue cause indeed be , for disallow the marriage of Iuli• a italian why ? sitian , with another man wife , against the earl of leicester pleasure . grin ? d•ll die , John whiteguyft succeed in the see of Canterbury , be transla ? •ed thither from the see of Worcester . at this time , certain popish book write against the queen , and prince excommunicate , withdraw diverse from their allegiance , and particular , so intoxicate one somervile , a english gentleman , that he go private •o the court , and breathe out nothing but blood and death against all protestant , set upon one or two by the way , with his draw sword . be ? king apprehend , he stick not to say , that he will murder the queen with his own hand . hereupon he , and upon his intimation , edw•rd Arden•is father in law ( a man of a ancient house in warwickshire ) Arden wife , their daughter ; Somerviles wife , and hall a priest , be bring to the bar , and all condemn ; somervile as principal , the rest as accessary . th•ee day after , Somervile be find strangle in the prison ; Arden be •••cuted and quarter ; the woman and the priest be spare . many pi•ied the old gentleman Arden , as mislead by the priest , and ( as it be ge ? n•rally believe ) bring to his end through the envy of Leicester , who he use to call whoremaster , upstart , and many such opprobrious ••mes . in the Netherlands , the english garrison at Alost in Flanders be negle ? ct , the governor Pigot , and the other captain , for want of pay , upon page 52 composition , yield up the town to the Spaniard , and then fear this ? grace at home , join themselves to the prince of Parma ; at who hand find themselves slight , by degree they steal all away , and come all to unlucky end . in Ireland the famous rebel , Gyrald-Fitz Gyrald , the eleven earl of Desmond of this family , have a long time in lurk place escape the english , be now by a common soldier find out in a poor cottage , and slay . his head be send into England , and set upon London-bridge . this end have this great lord , descend from ma•rice , the son of Gyrald of W•nd ? sore , a Englishman , famous among those who first set upon Ireland , in the year 1170. he possess whole country , together with the coun ? thy Palatine of Kerry , and have of his own name and race , at least five hundred gentleman at his command . all who , and his own life also , he lose within the space of three year , very few of his house be leave alive . and this disaster he fall into , by prove traitorous to his prince , at the instigation of certain popish priest . of who , the chief be one Nicholas Sanders a Englishman , who at the same time die mi ? serable of famine , be starve to death , when as be forsake , and run mad upon his ill success , he roam up and down the moun ? tains and grove , find nothing to sustain he . in his scrip be find certain oration and letter , write to hearten the rebel , and promise large reward from the pope and king of Spain . up ? on the rebel ill success , Iames Fitz Eustace , Viscount Baltinglas , flee into Spain , where he pine away with grief . he out of zeal to the roman religion , a little before he have take up arm with the re ? bell , and exhort the earl of Ormond his neighbour to do the like , ( who draw his lineage from saint Thomas of Canterbury ) he use these w•rds to persuade he , that if saint Thomas of Canterbury have not dye for the church of Rome , thou have never be earl of Ormond , for king Henry the second , to expiate the murder of Thomas b•cket , give large land in Ormond to his prede ? cessor . the beginning of the next spring , certain Scot , together with Gow ? ry , plot again to surprise the king , pretend only a care of Reli ? gion , and to remove ill councillor from he : but the king have in ? telligence of their practice , use mean by colonel steward , to have g••ry take and cast into prison : whereupon mar , glames , Angus , and other of the confederate , fly into England , and beseech the queen to commiserate their estate , who have incur the king displeasure , to do she and the kingdom of England service . the king on the other side , ac ? cuse they to the queen of heinous crime , and require to have they deliver up into his hand . but secretary Walsingham , who bear great good will to these man , send letter with a command , that they shall be safe admit into lind farm , otherwise call , the holy island ; where Hu•sdon be Governou• there , and great addict to the king of Scot , resist Walsinghams command , allege he can not satisfy the secretary in this point , unless the queen give express command . here ? upon grow a dispute , whether a secretary of state may not transact a business of state , without special commission from the prince . how this case be determine , be uncertain ; but sure it be , the Scot come not thither , though some favour they have show they here in Eng ? land . in the mean time , Gowry be try by his peer , at S•eclyn ; where , be accuse of many treason , though he give colour ? able answer to they all , yet be find guilty , condemn , and be ? head ; who head his servant sew to his body , commit to the grave . page 59 about this time be practise plot against queen Elizabeth , in behalf ? ? ? the queen of Scot , chief by Francis Throgmorton , elder son of John ••••gmorton , justice of Chester , who come to be suspect , by reason of •etters send to the queen of Scots which be intercept . upon his ap ? •••hension , Thomas lord Paget , and Charles Arundel , private steal away ? ? ? France , grievous complain against Leicester and Walsingham , for ••ienating the queen from they , and use such wile , that scarce any m•n be able to live in safety . Henry earl of Northumberland , and fillip earl of Arundel , be confine to their house , his wife commit to the ••stody of sir Thomas Shirley ; William Howard , the earl brother , and he••y Howard their uncle , brother to the duke of Norfolk , be exami ? ned about letter from the queen of Scot ; and many statagem be set on foot , dangerous to some particular person , but necessary ( as shall ? ? ? ) for the queen security . certain it be , that now the malice of the papist against the queen , break forth more violent than ever be ? fore ; for in print book they stir up the queen own servant to •ttempt the like upon she , that Judith do on Olephernes . the author of these book can not be find , but the suspicion lie upon one G•egory Martin , sometime of Oxford ; and carter a statio•er , who print ? ed the book , suffer for it . and whereas the papist every where ••aduced the queen for cruelty , she desirous always to leave a bless ••membrance behind she , grow extreme offend with the come ? missioner for popish cause , tax they of too much cruelty , inso ? much that they be fain , in a print declaration , to clear they ? self , protest ; that they question no man for his religion , but only for dangerous attempt against the queen and State• and that C••pian himself be never so rack , but that he can present walk up and down . but all this give not the queen satisfaction , but she command the commissioner to forbear torture , and the judge other •u•ishments ; and not long after , when seventy priest be take , and some of they condemn , and the rest in danger of the law , she cause ? say they all to be ship away , and send out of England : the chief of who : be Gaspar Heywood , the great epigrammatist son , the first •esuite that ever set foot in England ; Iames B•sgrave , John hart , and ed ? •••d Rishton . at this time Mendoza the spanish ambassador , be thrust out of England , for join with Throgmorton , in his treason against the queen ; whereupon sir William Waad be send to the king of Spain , to satisfy he how ill Mendoza have discharge the office of a ambassador here in England ; who , when the king admit he not to his presence , but in a slight manner , put he off to his councillor ; Waad take it in great disdain , bold say , that it be a declare custom among prince ( though in heat of war ) to give ambassador audience , and thereupon stou•ly refuse to ••clare his ambassage , and so return into England unheard . the great matter lay to Mendoza charge , be get ? t•n out of throgmorton confession ; for when he be in danger to be ap ? prehend , he send to Mendoza a box of write ; and when his ch•sts be search , there be find two scrowl , one with the name of the port of England , and in the other the name of the nobility and gentry in England that favour the romish religion . Theise , when Th•ogmorton see bring forth , he say they be counterfeit , and •tood to it upon the very rack ; but be bring to the rack the second time• he then con ? fess all , that Morgan by letter out of France , have give he information , that the catholic prince have decree to invade England , and with the help of the duke of Guise , to free the queen of Scot ; and that nothing be now want ? king , but money and aid in England : and that for procure of this , Charles Pa•e• , page 60 under the counterfeit name of mope , be send into Sussex , where the duke of Guise intend to land ; and that he have import all this matter to man ? doza , and intimate the name of the port , and of the nobleman that shall assist . but be arraign at the Guildhall , he deny all this again , say , he have speak so , because he will not be rack again . yet be ? king condemn to die , he fly to the queen mercy , confess in a manner all he have before related• and then at the gallow go about to deny it again . so false to it self be the mind of man when it be divide between hope and fear , and lie under the burden of a guilty conscience . sir William Wade be return from Spain , be employ to the queen of Scot , about a treaty begin two year before : to who , the distress ? sed queen sincere profess , that she devote her service and her self to the queen of England ; and make solemn promise , that if the former trea ? thy might go on , she will mediate with the king her son , to receive into favour the earl of Angus , and the other scottish lord , and will charge the bishop of Rosse and Glasco , her agent in France , to have no further to do with the english fugitive . Theise thing q•een Elizabeth hear glad ? lie , and thereupon send Beale to the queen of Scot , who joint with the earl of Shrewsbery shall signify unto she , that if she continue still in the same mind , as she have deliver to Waad ; sir Walter Mildmay shall come out of hand •o she , and treat concern her liberty : but withal she command Mildmay and Beale to dive into she as well as they can , to know what practise the duke of Guise have on foot . to that which she have speak to sir William Waad , the queen of Scot make a wary answer ; but to that concern the duke of Guise , she plain confess ; that be sickly he• self , and weak of body , she have commit her self and her son , to the protection of the duke of Guise , her dear cousin , of who intendment she know nothing ; nor if she do , will she disclose they , unless she may be sure of her own liberty . last , she request , that be a free and a absolute prince , she may not be worse handle , than queen Elizabeth her self be , when she be a subject , and keep in prison by her sister . Theise thing have a hear , but no feeling , and the rather by a strange accident ; for Creighton a scottish Jesuit , sail from the l•w-countries , and take by dutch pirate , have certain paper which he tear and thre• away , which throw overboard , and by the wind blow back into the ship , miraculous ( as Creighton himself say ) they be bring to sir William Waad , who patch they together with much la ? bour and cunning , discover by they some new intendment of the pope , the king of Spain• and the Guise , about the invade of England : where ? upon , and upo• diverse other rumour , the better to provide for the safety of the queen , a number of her subject ( the earl of Leicester be the fore ? most ) man of all rank and condition , bind themselves mutual to each other , by their oath and subscription , to persecute all those to the very death , that shall attempt any thing against the queen ; which league of they , they call the association . the queen of sco•s who present apprehend , that this association be enter into for her destruction ; make this proposition by Nave her secretary , to the queen and the Councell• that if she may have her libre ? ty grant , and be assure of the q•een••ove , she will enter a strict league and •mity with she , and pass by all matter of offence , esteem and honour •er , above all the prince of the christian world ; yea , and ( save the an ? cient league betwixt fra•ce , and sc••la•d ) she will her self be compre ? hend in t•e association , and a league defensiv• , against all that shall go about to injure the queen . herewith queen Eli•abeth be wonderful please , and at that time cer•••nly have a inclination to grant her freedom . B•t see what malice can do ; for many in England• but special the sco•s of page 61 ? ? ? •dverse party , endeavour by all mean to hinder it ; exclaim , that ? ? ? queen can be no long in safety , if the queen of Scots be set at livre ? berty , that both kingdom be utter undo , if she be admit into ? ? ? •oynt government of the kingdom of Scotland , and that the reform ••••gion lie a bleed , if papist be admit within the court wall ; ? ? ? be this all , but the scottish minister in their pulpit , load they ? ? ? of Scots with all manner of contumely , slander the king himself , and ? ? ? council in most bitter manner ; and be cite to appear before he , ? ? ? , say , that the pulpit be exempt from all regal authority , and that ecclesiastical person , be not to be censure by the prince , but ? ? ? their own consistory ( direct against the law make the year before in pa•liament ) whereby the king authority over all person , whether eccle ? •••s•icall , or secular , be confirm ; and namely , that the king and his council , be supreme judge in all cause ; and that whosoever refuse ? ? ? b• try by they , shall be hold guilty of high-treason ; all Presby ? •••••s and lay-conventicle forbid , parity of the clergy take away , ? ? ? the authority of bishop restore , who call the presbytery have condemn as wicked and antichristian : and last , all scurrilous libel •••inst the king and his mother , prohibit , namely , the scottish history of George Buchanan , and his dialogue , de jure Regni apud Scotos . at this time , upon her adversary suggestion , the queen of Scot be take from the earl of Shrewsbery , and commit to the custody of sir amiss pawlet•nd sir draw Drury , and that on set purpose ( as some be persuade ) to drive she into abrupt and desperate attempt ; and indeed upon this , she grow more importunate with the pope and king of Spain , to hasten their inn ? ••ndment , whatsoever become of she , as ill indeed be like to become of she , if it be true ( as some say ) that Leicester send out assassinate to make she •way , but that Drury detest the villainy , and will grant they no ••cesse . and how to alienate queen Elizabeth utter from she ; it be suggest to ? ? ? , that Allen for the catholic of the clergy , Inglefield for the Layity , •nd the bishop of r•sse for the queen of Scot , with consent of the pope and the king of Spain , have joint combine to depose she , and to bar the king of Scotland from his hereditary right to the crown of England , and to marry the queen of Scot to a english nobleman of the romish re ? ligion , and he the english catholic shall choose king of England , and the pope confirm the election ; and all this upon the credit of hart the priest : but who this english nobleman shall be that shall marry the queen of Scot , can not be find , though Walsingham be very busy to seacrh i• out : the fame go upon Henry Howard , the duke of Norfolk brother , •ho be a single man , a great papist , and of high estimation among the catholic . this year die in exile and misery , Charles N•vill , who be in the rebel ? lion of the north , the last earl of Westmoreland of this family ; a house from whence descend many noble personage , six earl of Westmoreland , •wo earl of sali••••y and war•i•k , a earl of Kent , a ma•quesse Mount•cut• , ? ? ? duke of Bedford , baron Ferrer off ? ? ? , the lord Latymer , the lord of ? ? ? , one queen , and five duchess ( to let pass counte••es and baronne•ses ) a archbishop of York , and a numerous company of other lord . in E•gl•nd die none of •eckoning this year , but only pl••den the famous lawyer ; but in France , •he duke of Angi•• die of grief• a•d in holland , William prince of orange , shoot into the body with •hree bullet , by one b•lth•s•r Gerard , a burgundian . it be now the year 1585 , and the eight and twenty of queen Eliza ? ••••• reign , when , to ti• the french king more near to she , who then ? ? ? ••fore she have receive into the number of the knight of the •arter , page 62 she send the earl of Derby into France , to invest he with the robe and or ? nament , accord to the due solemnity ; which he kind accept , and at evening prayer be invest with they . at this time a parliament be assemble at Westminster , wherein William Parrie a Welshman , a doctor of the law , when in the low house a bill be read against the Jesuit , he alone stand up , and exclaim that it be a cruel and bloody law : and be ask his reason , he stout refuse , unless he be require by the lord of the council . hereupon he be send to the gatehouse , but upon submission , be receive into the house again . Soon after , he be accuse by Edward Nevil , for hold secret consultation about make the queen away ; who thereupon apprehend ? ed , upon his examination , confess in effect thus much , that out of this ? content he go beyond the sea , where , by the encouragement of camp ? gio the pope nuntio at Venice , and grant of a plenary indulgence from the pope , he undertake to kill the queen ; but come into England to that intent , he alter his mind , and disclose to the queen the whole matter . after this , he receive a letter from the cardinal of Com• , persuade he to go forward with the enterprise ; and this letter also he show the queen . after this , he chance to see a book of doctor Allens , write contra justitiam britannicam , wherein be declare , that prince who be for heresy excommunicate , may lawful be deprive of their life and kingdom . this book wonderful confirm he , and he read it to Nevil ; who , though he take a oath of secrecy , yet now upon a hope of the earldom of Westmerland• betray he . this be his confession , before baron Hunsdon , sir Christopher hatt•n , and sir Francis Walsingham : as like ? wise in his letter to the queen , to the lord Burleigh , and the earl of lei ? cester , acknowledge his fault , and crave mercy . a few day after , he be call to the bar in Westminster-hall , where he confess himself guilty , and thereupon be condemn . after the sentence of death pro ? nounce , he furious cite the queen to God tribunal : five day of ? ter he be lay upon a hurdle , and drag through the city to Westminster , where at the gibbet he make a vainglorious boast of his faithfulness to the queen , but not so much as in a word commend himself to God ; and in the great palace at Westminster be execute as a traitor , the Nobi ? lity and commons sit then in parliament . in this parliament , the association before speak of , be universal ap ? prove , and enact in this form ; that four and twenty , or more , of the queen privy council , and peer of the realm , shall be select and authorize , under the great seal of England , to make enquiry of all such per ? son as shall attempt to ? ? ? the kingdom , or raise rebellion , or shall attempt any evil against the queen person ; f•r whomsoeve• , and by whosoever , that lay any claim to the crown of England ; and that person for who , or by who they shall •ttempt •ny such thing , shall be altogether uncapable of the crown ; and more to this purpose . Laws also for the queen safety , be enact against Jesuit and Popis• priest , and against all that shall receive or relieve they . Theise law ter•ified many , and particular out of fear of they , Philip ea•l of Arundel ; the duke of norf•lks old son , purpose with himself to travel beyond Seas• for have be once or twice cite before the lord of the council , and confine to his house , and after six month set at liberty , he •hereupon wrot• a letter to the queen , that for the service of God , and hi• soul health , he purpose to leave his country , but not his loyal •ffection towards her• but as he be take ship , by his own servant treachery he be discover , apprehend , and lay in the tow•r . at the same time lie in the tower , Henry Percy earl of Northumberland• a man of a lofty spirit , be suspect by rea•on of secret consultation page 63 ? ? ? Throgmorton , the lord Paget , and the guise , about the invade of Eng ? ••••• and free of the queen of Scot ( who cause he ever high favou ? ••d ) but in the m•neth of June , he be find dead in his bed , shoot into the body with three bullet , under his right pap , and the door bolt on the ••de : the corroner inquest examine the matter , find and pronoun ? ••d , that he have kill himself . three day after , the lord meet in •he star-chamber , Bromeley lord chancellor , declare this fact of the earl , •nd then command the attorney general to show the cause of he in ? •••sonment , and the manner of his death ; whereupon , Popham first , and then Egerton the queen solicitor , in long oration , lay open all his trea ? son , and how for fear of the law , he have lay violent hand upon he ? self . and now the queen know that the seed of these treason proceed from the duke of Guise , and his adherent , she seek for the strengthen of her self , to enter into league with the prince of Germany ; and to this end , she send sir Thomas B•dley to the king of Denmark , to the count ele ? ctor Palatine of the Rhine , to the duke of Saxony , Wittenberg , Brunswick , L••ceburg ; the marquess of Brandenburg , and the Lant grave of Hessia ; and into Scotland , she send sir Edward Wootton , to let the king understand how sincere she be affect towards he , and withal to draw the king ( if he can ) into a league of mutual defence and offence , and to commend to he the match of the king of Denmarks daughter . the king be very inclinable to the matter of the league , but for the present the business be interrupt , by the death of Francis Russell , son to the earl of Bedford , slay at a meeting to compound a difference between the borderer , by a sudden tumult of the Scot , but who it be that slay he , be not know . the english lay it upon the earl of Arran , and the lord Fernihurst governor of the middle border ; whereupon , at the queen complaint , the earl of Arran be confine , and Fernihurst commit to prison at Dundee , where he die ; a man of great valour and resolution , and one that be always f•rm for the queen of Scot . but queen Elizabeth not thus satisfy , give leave by way of connivance to the scottish lord that be flee into England , namely , the earl of Angus , the Hamiltons , John and Cladius , the earl of m•rre , glames , and other , that they shall steal away into Scotland ( she sup ? •lying they with money ) there to master and subdue the earl of Arran . for Maxwell , who be late make earl of Bothwell , baron Humes , Colding ? kn•lls and other in Scotland , have already promise they their assistance , even •n the very court . sir Patrick Grey ( arran great rival for the king fa ? vour ) Belenden , and secretary Maitland ( by wootton craft ) be make a ? against Arran . Theise man , upon their first entry into Scotland , command all person in the king name , to aid they for conserve the truth of the gospel , for free the king from corrupt councillor , and for main ? tain of amity with the english , so as there present join with they •bout eight thousand man . the earl of Arran hear hereof , make haste to the king , and accuse Patrick grey as author of this commotion : but while Arran be make provision for defence of the town , the even ? mie be ready to scale the wall : whereupon , Arran be advise , that only his life be seek , get secret away with only one servant , the rest betake themselves to the king in the castle . then the rebel get into the marketplace , and display their banner against the castle : the king send grey to know the reason of their come ; they answer , to submit themselves , and in humble manner to kiss the king hand : the king of ? fer restitution of all their good , if they will depart ; they desire to be admit to his pre•ence , which upon these condition the king grant . that they shall not attempt any thing against his li•e , or those who he shall nominate , nor make any innovation in the government . they page 64 protest , they be ready to sacrifice their life for the king safety , and of any innovation they have not so much as a thought ; only they request to have their adversary , and the fortification of Scotland deliver up in ? to their hand . hereupon after a day consultation , they be admit in ? to the king presence and forthwith the earl of mount Rosse , Crawford , and Rothsay ; colonel steward , down , arran brother , and other , be deliver to they : the earl of Arran , who be flee into the western island , be call home ; the assaulter be pardon , and pronounce good subject . Hamilton be set over dumbriton castle ; goldingknoll over Edin ? burgh ; the earl of Angus over Tantallon ; the earl of Marre over Stelyn ; and glames be make captain of the guard . upon this , all proscription and outlary whatsoever against all person , since the king inauguration ) sa•ing some few proscribe for the murder of the king father ) be call in , and with a unanimous consent of all party , the treaty of a league with the queen of England be agree upon , and delegate nominate to that purpose . in Ireland likewise be a combustion this year ; first the Burkes ( descend ? ed of the ancient family of the Burroughs in England ) provoke by the severe government of Richard Bingham , governor of conn•ght , raise rebellion ; but this be soon suppress , for Thomas Burk die fight ; m•yler , and Theobald Burke , be take and hang . after this , the Clan-Gibbons , clan-donells , and joy , combine together in great number , and say plain , they will have a Mac-William of their own , one of the Burks to rule over they , or some other lord out of Spain ; they will admit of no sheriff into their country , nor appear before the english court of Ju ? stice ; and thereupon harry all the country with fire and sword , and neither by the persuasion of the archbishop Tuan , nor by the entreaty of the earl of clanricard ( the chief of the house of the Burks ) will be quiet , till John Bingham the president brother , follow they into the wood , drive away five thousand head of their cattle , so as after forty day , half starve , they come forth and submit themselves . but this be not yet a end ; for now the precedent understand , that two thousand scottish islander be land , and ready to break into Connaght ; where ? upon he muster his man to give they battle ; but they fly to bog and wood , he retire back as though in fear , thereby to draw they from the bog to firm ground , and then with his whole force set upon they , slay three thousand of they ( indeed all but fourscore ) among who be Donell garmy , and Alexander garmy , the son of Iames mac-conell , who have long disquiet this part , and those Burkes who be the first author of this rebellion . this be a famous victory , for the good of the present and future time ; for hereby the name of the mac-williams in Connaght be utter extinct , and the insolent attempt of the scottish islander abso ? lute crush . in the Low-countries at this time the state be very hard beset , so as they hold a consultation , whether to fly for protection , either to the french king , or to the queen of England . Monsieur Prunie the french Ambassa ? dour show many advantage , and give many reason why they shall fly rather to the french king ; the english on the other side , allege man ? nigh reason why they shall fly rather to the queen of England : but in conclusion , they have first recourse to the king of France , and afterward be by he neglect , to the queen of England . but then in England it be consult , whether it be meet to protect they ; wherein the con ? cell be divide ; some be of opinion , that it be good to receive and aid they , lest the Spaniard first conquer they , may have the better way to annoy England ; other again think , they be to be hold no better than rebel to their lawful sovereign , and therefore unworthy of assistance . after long deb••ing the matter , the queen refuse to take into page 65 protection , much less to exercise sovereignty over they . Neverthe ? •esse , to raise the siege of Antwerp , which be then beleaguer by the prince of Parma , she be content to supply they with four thousand soul ? diers , so as the town of sluice , and the ordnance belong to it , be gi ? when up into their hand : but while this matter be discussing• the town of Antwerp be fain to yield it self . but the queen better bethink herself , partly , as fear the growth of the king of Spain power , and partly , as commiserate the afflict of her own religion , at last resolve to undertake their protection , upon conditi ? on of her part , to supply they with five thousand foot , and a thousand horse , under a sufficient general , pay they during the war ; and after ? ward the expense to be pay back , upon condition on their part , by way of pledge , to deliver Flushing , and the fort of Ramekyn , the town of Brill , with the two neighbour fort : and for the justify of this her action , •he set forth a large declaration . And know that herein she incense the king of Spain , she think best to turn his anger further from home , and thereupon send out sir Francis Drake , and Christopher Carlile , with a na ? vy of one and twenty ship ( wherein be two thousand voluntary and mariner ) towards the west Indies ; who first surprise the town of saint •ago , afterward saint Dominick ( where five and twenty thousand crown be give they , to spare the town from burn ) afterward Cartagena , which they hold seven week , till the Spaniard redeem it for a hundred and ten thousand crown . after this , the calenture wax hot , and di ? minish their force , they return homeward , pass by Virginia , a colony which sir Walter Raleigh have there plant ; from whence drake bring hom• with he Ralph lane , who be the first that bring tobacco into England , which the Indians take against crudity of the stomach . at this expedition be lose about seven hundred man , who for the most part die of calenture : their booty amount to the value of threescore thou ? s•nd pound sterling , beside two hundred and forty brass and iron piece . Theise thing be do under the torrid zone in America ; when in the mean while , captain John Davis , with two ship ( at the charge of William Sanderson , and other citizen of London ) find out away to the East-indies , •y the high part of America , under the frigid zone . at the end of this year , the earl of Leicester be send general of the queen force into holland , accompany with the earl of Essex , the lord Audley , and north , sir William Russell , sir Thomas Shirley , sir Arthur Basset , sir Walter Waller , sir Gervase Clifton , and diverse other knight , beside five hundred gentleman . land at Flushing , he be first by sir Philip Sidney the governor his nephew and after by the town of Zealand and Holland , entertain in most magnificent manner , •nd come to the Hague in January ; the state by patent commit to he the command and absolute authority over the unite province , with the title of governor and captain general of holland , Zealand ; and the confederate province : so as be now salute with the ti ? tle of his excellency , he begin to assume unto he princely spirit . but the queen take he soon off from further aspire , write to he in most peremptory manner ; that she wonder how a man who •he have raise out of the dust , can so contemptuous violate her command , and therefore charge he upon his allegiance , to put in •xecution the injunction she send he by hennage her vice-chamberlaine ; withal , in letter apart , she expostulate with the state , that to her great disparagement , they have cast upon the •arle of Leicester her subject , the absolute command over the unite province without her privity , which she she self have utter refum ? say ; and therefore will they to divest he of that absolute authority , to page 66 who she have set bound , which he shall not pass . the state return answer , that they be hearty sorry they shall incur her displeasure by confer upon the earl that absolute authority , not have first make she acquaint , but they beseech she to consider the necessity of it ; see , that for avoid of confusion , that authority must needs be cast upon some one or other ; neither , be there any great matter in the word absolute , see the rule and dominion reside still in the peo ? ple . by these letter , and leicester own submissive writing , the queen be soon satisfy ; Leicester all this while receive contribution and re ? ward from all province , make martial law , and endeavour like ? wise to raise new custom upon merchandize , incur great dislike a ? among the common people . his first service be to relieve grave , a town in Brabant , which the prince of Parma , by count Mansfield have besiege : hither he send the count Hohenlo a germane , and Norris general of the english foot ; but notwithstanding all the great service they do there , the town in the end be take ; but Hemart the governor , for his cowardly yield it up , lose his head . from hence the prince of Parma march into Gelderland , and pitch his tent before Venlow , where skenkic a friez ? lander , and Roger Williams a Welshman perform great service , yet that town in a short time be take also . but in the mean while , the lord Willoughby governor of Bergen ap zome , cut off the enemy convoy , and take away their victual ; and sir Philip Sidney , and Maurice the prince of Orange son , upon a sudden onset , take Axale a town in Flanders . from Venl• the prince of Parma go to Berke , where there be twelve thousand english , under the command of colonel Morgan ; he notwithstanding lay siege to the town , which the earl of Leicester come to raise , but find his force to weak to raise it , he seek to divert it , by beleaguer Duis ? bourgh ; which before the prince of Parma can come to relieve , he take . and now the prince of Parma , fear least Zutphin shall come in danger , command victual to be carry thither , which the Spaniard carry along in a fog , the english by chance light on they , vanquish a troop of their horse , slay Hannibal Gonzaga , and diverse other , bat then on the english side be one slay , more worth than all the english and Spaniards put together ; sir Philip Sidney , who have his horse slay under he , and get upon another , be shoot into the thigh , and 25 day after , in the •loure of his age , die : a man of so many excellent part of art and no ? ture , of valour and learning , of wit and magnanimity ; that as he have equal ? lead all those of former age , so future age will hardly be able to equal he . his funeral be in sumptuous manner solemnize at saint Paul church in London . Iames king of Scotland make his epitaph , and both university celebrate his death with funeral verse . after this , Leicester assault Zutphen , where set upon a fort , he take it in this manner ; Edward Stanley ( of the Stanley of Elford ) catch hold of a Spaniard lance , which be brandish at he , hold it so fast , that by it he be draw into the very fort ; whereupon , the Spaniard be of ? fright ( as think all the enemy be come up ) forsake the place ; Leicester knight Stanley for this act , give he forty pound in present more ? ney , and yearly pension of a hundred mark during his life . and now though in this forwardness to win the town , yet winter be already come on , he think it unseasonable to besiege it any long ( especial so many english garrison lie round about it , which be in nature of a siege ) but return to the h•g•e , where the state entertain he with come ? plaint , that their money be not careful husband , that the number of the english supply be not full , that foreign soldier be levy with ? out their consent , that the privilege of the unite province be set at nought , and new devise for contribution invent ; for all which evil , page 67 they entreat he to provide some present remedy . to which complaint ( have a purpose to go for England ) he give a friendly answer ; but upon the very day in which he be to depart , he commit the government of the province , to the deliberation of the state ; and the same day , make a ? other private instrument of writing , where he reserve to himself the whole authority over the governor of the several province , city , and fort ; and more than this , take away the wont jurisdiction •rom the state council , and president of the province ; and come into England the three day of December . and thus pass the affair of the netherland for this year . but in England , Philip earl of Arundel , who have lie in prison a whole year , be at last bring to the starchamber ; and be charge with foster of priest , and have correspondence with Allen and Parsons the Jesuit , and offer to depart the kingdom without licence , be fine ten thousand pound , and imprisonment during the queen p•easure . at this time , the queen , by sir Horatio Palavicino , supply with a large sum of money the king of Navarr• ; through who side , the guise open ? pose the reform religion in Scotland , but her most intentive care be how to unite England and Scotland in a solid friendship : to which end , she send Thomas Randoll into Scotland , who make proposition to the king , touch a league offensive and defensive , though the king at first require some addition , and though the french ambassador infinite oppose it , yet at last he consent to it ; and in July follow , there meet at Barwick , Edward earl of Rutland , William lord ever , and Thomas Randoll for the queen of England ; Francis earl of Bothwell , Robert lord boyde , and Humes for the king of Scot , and there the league ( which be call the league of strict amity ; for that the word offensive like not the Scot ) be upon certain point conclude : first , for the maintenance of the reform re ? ligion , and then other such article , as common in league be usual . the very same month that this league be agree on , a most dangerous conspiracy against the queen be discover . for first , one John Savage , be by the persuasion of Gifford , doctor in divinity , induce to believe , that it be a meritorious work , to take away the life of prince excom ? municate , who thereupon vow to kill queen Elizabeth : but to make the queen and her council secure , at the very same time they write a book• exhort the papist in England , to attempt nothing against their prince , and to use only the christian weapon of tear , prayer , watch , and fast . about Whitsuntide , one Ballard a seminary priest of Rheims , ac ? quaint with the vow of savage ( have deal in France with Mendoza and Charles Paget , about invade of England ) arrive here in a soldier habit , and by a counterfeit name , call captain Fos•• ; with these matter he ac ? puaint one Anthony Babington , a gentleman of Darbyshire , who by they by ? shop of Glasco , the queen of Scot ambassador in France , have be come ? mend to she , as one worthy of her love ; so , as between they , there pass ? say often letter in unknown character . in short time , Babington have draw into the plot , other gentleman as zealous of the romish religion as himself ; namely , Edward Windsor , brother to the lord Windsor , Thomas Salisbery of a good family in Devonshire , Charles Tilney one of the queen pensioner , Chydiock Tichburne of Hamshire , Edward Abington ( who fa ? there be cofferer to the queen ) Robert gage of Surrey , John Travers• , and John Charnock of Lancashire , John Iones• Savage former speak of , barn ? well of a noble family in Ireland , and Henry Dunne a clerk in the office of first-fruit and ten , one Pollie also serve himself into their company , a fellow thorough acquaint with the affair of the queen of Scot , who be think to have reveal all their consultation to Walsingham day by day . to these gentleman , Babington communicate his affair , but not page 52 every particular to every one , but to Ballard , Tichburne , and Dunn• , he show the letter which pass between he and the queen of Scot ; with Tilney and the rest , he deal to be the assassinate ; of who , some at first loath , at last consent , and in a foolish vaingloriousness , a picture of the assa ? sinates be make to the life , and Babington in the midst , with these word ; quorsum haec alio properentibus ? this picture ( they say ) be get and private show to the queen , who know none of they by face , but only Bernwell ( who have oftentimes come to she in the cause of the earl of Kil ? dare , who servant he be ) certain it be , that the queen one day walk abroad , spy this Bernwell , and turn to Hatton say , be not i well guard , that have not so much as one man in the company with a sword by his side ? thus much Bernwell himself tell the rest of his confederacy , and how easy a matter it have be to have dispatch she at that time , if the rest have be present . the chief discoverer of the plot , be then afore ? say Gifford : this man be a gentleman of a good hou•e at Chellington in Staffordshire , not far from Chartley , where the queen of Scots be keep pri ? soon , and be now send by the english fugitive in France , under the coun ? terfeit name of Luson , to put savage in mind of the vow he have make , and to convey letter between they and the queen of Scot . but he , whether prick in conscience , or dismay in mind , come to Walsingham private , reveal who he be , and for what end , and by who send into England . Walsingham courteous entertain he , and send he down into Stafford ? shire , to do the work he have undertake . here Gifford bribe the brewer of the house , where the queen of Scot lie , contrive the matter in such sort with he , that by a hole in the wall , in which a loose stone be put , he shall give in , and receive forth letter , the which by messenger purposely lay by the way , come evermore to Walsinghams hand , who break they oh ? pen , copy they out , and by the rare cunning of one Thomas Philips , find out the meaning of the private character , and by the singular art of be ? thur Gregory , seal they again so curious , that no man will imagine they to have be open , and ever send they to the party , to who the superscription direct they . in like manner be the former letter from the queen of Scot to Babington intercept ; as also , other letter write at the same time to Mendoza the spanish ambassador , Charles Paget , the lord Paget , the archbishop of Glasco , and Francis Englefield . the queen as soon as she understand by these letter of the storm hang over her head , both at home and abroad , command Ballard to be apprehend , who on a so ? deign be take in babingtons house . Babington hereupon go to Walsingham , with who he have long be a suitor , for licence to go into France , promi ? sing to do great matter in discover the practise of the fugitive ; wall ? singham with fair promise drive he off from day to day ; and now per ? swade he , that for a small space till he can get his licence seal , he will lodge at his house in London , where they may have secret conference with ? out suspicion . this web Walsingham himself have spin hitherto , and no other of the queen council be make acquaint ; and long yet he will have draw the thread out , but that the queen be unwilling ; lest ( as she say ) by not avoid danger when she may , she shall seem ra ? there to tempt God , than to trust in he . whereupon , Walsingham send a note to his man Scudamour from the court , to look careful to Babington : this note be deliver in such manner , that Babington sit by at table when Scudamour read it , overlook he , and read it likewise ; hereupon , suspect that all be discover , the next night he and Scudamour , and one or two more of Walsinghams servant sup at a tavern , and be very merry , he make a excuse that he must needs step aside , and rise up , leave his cloak and his sword , and so make haste through the dark to Westminster , where gage and he change apparel , and then together withdraw themselves page 63 ? ? ? S. John wood near the city , whether Barnwell also and dun betake they ? •••ves . in the mean space they be proclaim traitor all England over• hereupon they lie lurk in wood and by-place ; they shave Babingtons ? ? ? , disfigure the beauty of his countenance ( for he be of a extraor ? d••ary beauty ) with the husk of green walnut ; and when they be hal• starve , go to the house of the Bellamy , near harrow on the hill , who be great papist ; there they be hide in barn , and put into a con ? ••ey habit : but notwithstanding all their shift , within ten day after they be discover and bring to London . the other complice be soon after take , most of they in the suburb of the city , Salisbury and Tra ? v••se in Cheshire , and Jones in Wales , who harbour they in his house , after he know they be proclaim traitor , Windsor only be never hear of . many day be spend in the examination of they , who cut one the other throat with their own confession . all this while , the queen of soit and her servant be so narrow look to by Pawlet , that she know nothing of all these passage : assoon as they be apprehend , Thomas gorge be send to acquaint she with the whole matter , which yet he do not do , till she be get on horseback to ride a hunt , and be not then suffer to return , bu• in show of courtesy be carry up and down , to see the house of the gentry thereabouts . in which mean while , John manner , Edward Acton , Richard Bagot , and sir William Waad , take Nave and curl the queen of Sc••s secretary , and the rest of her servant , and deliver they to keeper apart , that they may have no speech between themselves , nor with their lady the queen of Scot . than they break open all door , and such desk and box as they find with any paper in they , they set their seal upon , and send they to the court : in which , be break open before the queen , be find a number of letter from foreign part , the copy likewise of letter send to several person , and threescore alphabet at least of private character ; as also , letter to she from some of the english nobility , contain great proffer of love and service , which the queen notwith ? stand take no notice of , but pass over in silence , accord to her Mot ? to , video , and Taceo , i see , and say nothing , Gifford now , who have all this while serve their turn , be send into France ; but ere he go hence , leave a indenture with the french ambassador here in England , with instruction , that he shall deliver no letter to the queen of Scot , or the fugitive in France ; but to he that exhibit a indenture match with that , the which he send underhand to sir Francis Walsingham . the twenty o•September , seven of the forename conspirator be arraign , and plead guilty , be condemn of high-treason . two day after , seven other be call to the bar , who plead not guilty , but notwithstanding be find guilty by their own confession , and con ? demean ; Pollie only , though he be privy to all passage , yet because he have disclose many thing to Walsingham , be not call in question . the twenty day of the month , the first seven in saint Giles field , where they be wont to meet , be hang , cut down instant , their privy member cut off , and themselves yet live and behold it , be in cruel manner bowele and quarter ; namely , Ballard , Babington , savage ( who , the roap break , fall dowd from the gibbet , and be present take by the hang ? man , his privy member cut off , and bowele , while he be perfect live ) Barnwell , Tichburne , Tilney , and Abbington . the next day , the other seven be draw to the same place , and execute in the same fashion , but in a more gentle manner , by the q•eens special charge , who detest the former cruelty , for they be to hand till they be quite dead . Salisbery first , then dun , than Jones , cherno•k , traverse , gage , and with they Hierome Bellam• , who have conceal Babington after he be proclaim traitor ( who bro ? ther be guilty of the same fact , have strangle himself in prison . page 70 when these man be execute , Nave a Frenchman , and curl a Scot ? man , secretary to the queen of Scot , be examine concern the let ? ter , the copy of letter , and priviate character find in the queen of Scot closet ; who under their own voluntary subscription acknowledge , that they be their own hand write , dictate in french by the queen her self , take by nave ; turn into English by curl , and copy out in se ? great character . hereupon , sir Edward Wootton be send out of hand into France , to make know to the king , the order of the treason , and to show he the copy of the queen of Scot letter , confirm by the testimony of sundry of the english nobility , that the french king may see what dan ? gerous plot be by Charles Paget , and the english fugitive contrive he ? against the queen of England . and now , what shall be do with the queen of Scot , be a great con ? sultation , wherein the counsellor be not all of one mind ; some con ? ceive , that it be not good to take any rigorous course against she , but only to hold she in fast custody ; both for that she be not author of the treason , but only conscious to it , and because she be crazy , and not likely to live long . other , out of a care of religion , be of opinion , to have she forthwith arraign and put to death accord to the law ; Leicester think it better to have she poison , and send a divine to Walsingham to prove it lawful , but Walsingham protest against that course . a difference then arise among they , by what law to proceed against she ; whether by the law of the 25. of Edward the three ? ( in which they be pronoun ? ce guilty of treason , who plot the destruction of the king or queen , raise war in his dominion , or adhere to his adversary . ) or else by the 27. of the queen , enact a year since : their opinion at last prevail , who think best to proceed against she by this latter law , as be indeed in this case provide . whereupon , diverse of the lord of the privy Coun ? cell , and other of the nobility , be authorize by the queen letter , to inquire by virtue of that law , and pass sentence against all such as raise rebellion , invade the kingdom , or attempt any violence against the queen . Theise commissioner therefore upon the 11. day of October , re ? pair to Fotheringay castle in Northamptonshire , where the queen of Scots be then hold prisoner ; and the next day , send unto she VValter Mildmay , Pawlet and Edward Barker , public notary , who deliver she the queen letter ; which , have with a settle countenance read , she say , it seem to i strange• that the queen shall lay she command upon i , to hold up my hand at the bar ; as though i be a subject , see i be a absolute queen , no less than her self ; but howsoever , i will never do any thing prejudicial to prince of my degree , nor to my son the king of Scotland . after many meeting , she stand still upon her innocency , and upon her exemption from answer , as be a absolute prince , and special for yield to be try by the english law ; of which , one ( she say ) have late be make of purpose for her destruction . it be at last tell she plain , by the chancellor and treasurer , that if she refuse to answer to such crime as shall be object , they will then proceed against she , though she be absent . be bring at last , with much ado to consent , the commissioner come together in the presence chamber ; a chair of estate be set for the queen of England , in the upper end of the chamber , under a canopy ; beneath over against it , be place a chair for the queen of Scot ; on both side of the cloth of estate , stool be set , upon which on the one side sit the lord chancellor , the lord treasurer , the earl of Oxford , Kent , Derby , Worcester , Rutland , Cumberland , Warwick , Pembroke , Lincoln , and Viscount Mountacute• on the other side sit the lord abur ? gavany , zouch , Morley , saint John of Bletsho , Compton , and Cheyney ; next to these , sit the knight that be privy councillor , sir Iames Crofts , sir page 71 Christopher Hatton , sir Francis Walsingham , sir Ralph Sadler , sir Walter mild ? •• , and sir Amis Pawlet ; forward , before the earl , sit the two chief justice , and the lord chief baron ; on the other side , the two baron , and the other justice ; dale , and Ford , doctor of the civil law , at a table in the midst , Popham the queen attorney general , Egerton her solicitor , •••die her sergeant at law , the clerk of the crown , and two notary . when the queen of Scots be come , and have place her self , silence be ? king make , bromely lord Chancellor turn towards she , say ; that the queen have appoint these commissioner , to hear what she can answer to crime lay to her charge , assure she , that nothing will be cause of more joy to the queen , than to hear , that she have prove her self innocent . upon this , she rise up , say ; that although , be a absolute prince , she can not be compel to appear before the de•egates , yet to manifest her innocency , she be now content to appear . then gawdy , open every speciality of the law late make ( against which she have take excception ) show , by babingtons confession , by letter pass between they , by the confession of Ballard , and savage , by the confession of her secretary , nave , and curl , that she be privy to their treason , and consent to the invasion of England , and destruction of the queen . to which she answer ? red , that letter may be counterfeit , her secretary may be corrup ? t , and rest , in hope of life , may be draw to confess that which be not true : in this she stand peremptory , that she never consent to any at ? tempt against the queen person ; though for her own delivery , she con ? fess she do . after many other charge by the commissioner , and re ? ply by the queen of Scot ; at last , she request , that she may be hear in a full parliament , or before the queen her self , and her council . but this request prevail not ; for on the 25. day of October follow , at the star-chamber in Westminster , the commissioner meet again , and there pro ? nounce sentence against she ; ratify by their seal and subscription , that after the 1. day of June , in the seven and twenty year of our sovereign lady queen Elizabeth , diverse matter be compass and imagine in this kingdom , by Anthony Babington , and other , with the privity of Mary queen of Scot , pretend title to the crown of England , tend to the hurt , death , and destruction of the royal person , of our say sovereign lady the queen . after a few day , a parliament be hold at Westminster , the which be begin by authority from the queen , derive to the archbishop of can ? terbury , the lord treasurer , and the earl of Derby ; and the same , not with ? out some president . at this parliament , the proscription of the lord Paget , Charles Paget , Francis Inglefield , Francis Throgmorton , Anthony Babington , Thomas Salisbury , Edward Jones , chyd•ock Tichburne , Charles Tilney , and the other complice , be confirm , and their good and possession adjudge confiscate . also the peer of the kingdom , with a unanimous consent , exhibit a petition to the queen by the lord chancellor , that for the pre ? servation of the true religion , and safety of the queen , of themselves , and their posterity , the sentence pass against mary queen of Scot , might ac ? cord to law be present promulge : they put the queen in mind of the fearful example of God judgement extant in scripture , upon king Saul , for spare of Agag , and upon Ahab , for not put Benhadad to death . but the queen answer they to this effect : first , acknowledge ? king God miraculous preservation of she , and then their constant affection towards she , for who sake only she desire to live : otherwise , when she call to mind thing past , behold the present , and expect what may happen in time to come , that she account they most happy , who go soon hence . that the law late make , by which the queen of Scot be con ? demean , be not make ( as some malicious have imagine ) to ensnare she ; page 72 but cont•ariwise , to forewarn and deter she from attempt any thing against it , which though it have not be make , yet be there other ancient law enough to condemn she . Nothing can have be more grievous to i , than that a prince , and one so near ally unto i , shall deserve the sentence pronounce against she ; and see the matter be of rare example , and of a very weighty consequence , i hope you will not ex ? pect , that i shall at this present determine any thing ; yet that there may be no danger in delay• i will in due time signify my mind unto you ; and in the mean time , will have you to expect from i , whatsoever good subject may look for , from a gracious prince . twelve day after , have deep weigh the matter in her mind , she send the lord chancellor to the peer , and pucker to the low house , entreat they to advise more diligent concern so weighty a matter , and to bethink themselves of some wholesome remedy , by which the life of the queen of Scots may be spare , and their security also provide for . they , when they have a long time in most serious manner deliberate hereof , return at last this verdict ; that the queen life can not be in safety , while the queen of Scot live , unless she either repent and acknowl ? ge her crime , or be keep in straight custody , or bind by her oath and obligation , or give hostage , or last , depart the kingdom . And see none of these be likely to be remedy ; it remain , that only her death will be a remedy . repentance in she they can little hope for , who will not so much as acknowledge her self faulty : close imprison ? mean , obligation , oath , and hostage they account as nothing , which all vanish , if the queen life be once take away ; and if she depart the kingdom , they fear she will straightway go about to invade it again . Theise thing the lord chancellor , and pucker the speaker of the lower-house , declare to the queen at large , and urge she in their name , to have the sentence put in execution . hereupon , the queen of ? ter a short pause , speak at last to this effect : i protest , my chief desire have be , that for your security , and my own safety , some other way may be devise , than that which be now propound ; but see it be now evident and certain , that my safety without her destruction , be in a more deplorate estate , i be most grievous affect with inward sorrow ; that i , who have pardon so many rebel , have neglect so many treason ( either by connivance , or silence ) shall now at last exercise cruelty , upon a prince so near ally to i . as for your petition , i beseech you to rest in a answer , without a answer : if i say i will not grant your Pedro ? tition , i shall happy say what i mean not ; I• i shall say , i will grant it , then cast i my self into destruction headlong , who safety you so ear ? nest desire , and that i know , you in your wisdom will not i shall do . after this , the parliament be prorogue , and then be the lord buck ? burst and beale send to the queen of Scot , to let she understand that Sen ? tense be pronounce against she , and confirm by parliament , and that the execution of it be earnest desire , by the nobility and the come ? mons ; and therefore persuade she , that before her death , she will make acknowledgement of her offence , against God and the queen ; inti ? mate , that if she live , the religion receive in England , can not sub ? sist . hereupon , she be take with a unwonted alacrity , and seem to triumph for joy , give God thank , and gratulate her own felicity , that she shall be account a instrument , for establish religion in this island ; and therewith request , she may have some catholic priest to administer the sacrament to she ; but be deny , which some deem , not inhumane only , but tyrannical and heathenish . the bishop and the dean , who for this cause they commend to she , she utter page 73 reject , and jeer at the english nation , say ; the english be ever •nd anon wont to murder their own king , and therefore , no mar ? ? ? ? they shall now thirst after her destruction . in Dcember follow the sentence against she be proclaim , in London first , and after , over all the kingdom , wherein queen Elizabeth serious protest , that this promulgation of the sentence be extort from she , to her great grief , by the importunity of the whole body of the kingdom . the queen of Scot be tell hereof , seem not a whit deject with it ; but write to the queen , never make intercession for her self , nor ex ? postulate her death , but only make three small request , one , that she may be bury in France , by her mother ; another , that she may not be put to death private , but her servant to be present ; the three that her servant may free depart , and enjoy such le ? gacy as she have give they . of which request , she desire the queen to vouchsafe she a answer ; but whether this letter ever come to queen Elizabeth , be uncertain . this condemnation of the queen of Scot , as a thing strange , and scarce credible , be soon spread far and near ; so as inter ? cession come thick in her behalf to queen Elizabeth , but special from the king of Scot , and the king of France , who send their several ambassador , use all the reason that natural of ? fection in the one , and likeness of condition in the other , can urge , for spare of her life ; but when the necessity of the state , seem to obstruct all way of clemency , the french Ambassador l' Aubespine , fall from reason to action , and think no way so effectual for sa ? ve the queen of Scot life , as to take away queen Elizabeth life ; and thereupon , first , he deal covert with William Stafford , a young gentleman , and prone to embrace hope ( who mother be of the bedchamber to queen Elizabeth , and his brother at that time , ambassador lieger in France ) and afterward , more open by trap his secretary , to murder the queen . Stafford , though not dare to act such a villainy himself , yet commend one moody to he , a resolute fellow , and one that for money will be sure to do it . upon this , Stafford bring trap to moody , be then in the common gaol , who upon trap offer , undertake it : but then the consul ? tation be , by what way it shall be do ? Moody propound poi ? son , or else to lay a bag of gunpowder under the queen bed , and sudden fire it . but Trappe like of neither of these way , but will rather have it do , as be do to the prince of Orange . but while they be thus consult about the way of do it ; Stafford discover all to the lord of the council . whereupon Trappe , who be now bind for France , be apprehend , and be examine , confess the whole matter . upon this , the ambassador himself be send for to cecill house , the twelve of January ; where meet he by the queen appointment , Cecill lord treasurer , the earl of Leicester , sir Christopher Hatton vice-chamberlain , and Davyson one of her see ? cretary ; who declare to the ambassador every particular which Stafford , moody , and Trappe his secretary have confess . assoon as staff ? ford be bring forth , and begin to speak , the ambassador interrupt he , and revyl he , make asseveration , that St•fford first propound it ; when Stafford fall on his knee , make fearful imprecation , that the ambassador first propound it himself . but whosoever propound it ( say BVRLEIGH ) it appear , that you be make acquaint with the matter . to which he present reply ; that if he have know of any such thing , yet , be he be a ambassadovr , he o•ght not page 74 to give notice of it , but to his own king . after much reason in this manner ; the lord Burleigh admonish he , to beware how he offen ? dead hereafter in this kind ; and let he know , that he be not quit from the offence , though for this time the queen be please to for ? bear he . but upon this treason , the queen of Scot adversary put many ter ? ror into queen Elizabeth mind , give out , that the spanish navy be come to Milford haven , that the Scot be break into England , that the duke of Guise with a great army be land in Sussex , that the queen of Scots be escape out of prison , and have get a company up in arm , and many other such feign suggestion ; through which , at length they draw the queen to this : that she seal letter , for execute the sentence against the queen of Scot ; and one of her great perswa ? dear to it ( as the Scot report ) be one who the king of Scot have send to dissuade she from it ; namely , Patrick grey , who sound often in her ear , Mortua non mordet ; when she be dead , she can bite . the queen notwithstanding , begin to weigh with her self , whether it be better to rid she out of the way , or else to spare she ; and many great reason offer themselves on both side , but where only speculative reason present themselves for spare she ; many practical reason , and those press both by courtier and preacher , be present to she ; so as long hold in suspense , she will oftentimes sit speechless , and her countenance cast down : at last , her fear prevail , she deliver to secretary Davyson , letter under her hand and seal , to get the commission make under the great seal of England , for the execution of the queen of Scot , which may be in a readiness upon any fear of danger ; charge he not to disclose the matter , to any whosoever . but the next day her mind be alter , and send sir William Killegrew to Davyson , to counter ? man the make of the commission . whereupon Davyson go to she , and let she know , that the commission be already make , and the seal put to it ; whereat , the queen extreme angry , rebuke he sharp ? lie for his hastiness ; yet Davyson impart the matter to privy con ? cellor ; and persuade they , that the queen command , the come ? mission shall be put in execution . hereupon , beale clerk of the coun ? cell , be send down with letter , wherein authority be depute to the earl of Shrewsbury , Kent , Derby , Cumberland , and other , that she shall be put to death accord to the law ; with which proceed , the queen be not once make acquaint ; and more than this , although she have intima ? t to Davyson , that she will take some other order concern the queen of Scot , yet do not he stay Beale from go . and now come in the last act of the queen of Scots Tragedy• for assoon as the earl be come to Fotheringay ; they , together with sir Amis Pawlet , and sir draw Drurie , with who she be then in custody ; go unto she , and read the commission , signify the cause of their come ? ming ; and in a few word , admonish she to prepare her self for death , for that she must dye the next day . whereto , without any change of countenance or passion of mind , she make answer ; i have not think that my sister the queen , will have consent to my death , who be not subject to your law ; but since it be her pleasure , death shall then be to i most welcome . than she request that she may confer with her confessor , and Melvyn her steward , which will not be grant : the bishop or Deane of Peterborough they offer she , but they she refuse . the earl be depart , she give or ? der that supper shall be hasten , where she eat ( as she use to do ) sober , and spare ; and perceive her man and woman servant to lament and weep , she comfort they , and bid they rejoice rather , page 75 that she be now to depart out of a world of misery . after supper , she look over her will , read the inventory of her good and jewel , and write their name several by they , to who she give any of they ; at her wont hour she go to bed , and after a few hour sleep , awake ; spend the rest of the night in her devotion . and now the fatal day be come , which be the 8 of February , she get up , and make her ready in her best apparel , and then betake her self in her closet to almighty God , implore his assistance with deep sigh and groan ; until Thomas Andrews sheriff of the county give notice , that it be time to come forth , and then with a princely majesty , and cheerful conntenance , she come out , her head cover with a linen Vayl , and carry a ivory crucifix in her hand ; in the gallery the earl meet she , and the other gentleman , where Melvyn she servant upon his bend knee , deplore his own fortune , that he shall be the messenger to carry this sad news into Scotland ; who she comfort say , do not lament Melvyn , thou shall by and by see mary steward free from all care . then turn her self to the earl , she request that her servant may stand by she at her death , which the earl of Kent be very loath to grant , for fear of superstition ; to who she say , fear nothing , these poor wretch desire only to give i my last farewell . i know the queen my sister , will not deny i so small a re ? quest . after this , the two earl , and the sheriff of the county lead the way , she come to the scaffold , which be set up at the upper end of the hall , where be a chair , a cushion , and a block , all cover with mourn . then the dean of Peterborough go to prayer , she fall upon her knee , and hold up the crucifix in both her hand , pray with her servant in latin , out of the office of the bless vir ? gin . prayer be end , she kiss the crucifix , and sign her self with the sign of the cross , say , as thy arm , oh Christ , be spread forth upon the cross , so embrace i with the open arm of thy mercy , and forgive i my sin . then the executioner ask her pardon , she forgive he . and now her woman help off her outer garment , and break ? king forth into shriek and cry , she kiss they , sign they with the cross , and will they to leave lament , for now a end of she for ? row be at hand ; and then shadow her face with a linen cloth , and lie down on the block , she repeat the psalm , in te domine speravi , ne confundar in aeternum ; at which word she stretch forth her body , her head at two blow be take off . her body be afterward royal bury in the cathedral church at Peterborough ; but since that , she no ? ble son Iames , king of great Britain , erect a royal monument for she , in king Henry the seven chapel at Westminster . this end have Mary queen of Scot , in the six and forty year of her age , and of her imprisonment in England the eighteenth ; a lady so complete in all excellent part of body and mind , that must needs have make she a hap ? py woman , if she have not be a queen ; and perhaps a happy queen too , if she have not be heir to the crown of England : for why do all her endeavour want success , but only from the fear of that success ? sion ; and no innocency of he can be a defence , where the fury of jea ? lousy make the assault . assoon as it come to the queen knowledge , that the queen of Scots be put to death , her countenance grow deject , and her speech fail she ; insomuch that all in mourn weed , she give her self over to sorrow , command her councillor from her presence , and cause Davyson to be cite to the starchamber . and assoon as grief will suffer she , she write a letter with her own hand to the king of Scot , and send it by sir Robert carry , to this effect ; that her mind be infinite disquie ? t , in regard of this lamentable event , against her meaning and intent ; page 76 entreat he to believe , that if she have command it , she will never have deny it , and withal , protest her true affection towards he , and her assiduous watchfulness for the prosper of his affair . while Carye be on his journey , Davyson be cite to the star-chamber before these delegate , sir Christopher Wray chief justice of the kings-bench , for that time make lord privy seal , the archbishop ; of Canterbury and York , the earl of Worcester , Cumberland , and Lincoln , the lord grey , and Lumley , sir Iames Croft , Comptroller of the queen house , sir Walter Mildmay , chancellor of the exchequer , sir Edmond Anderson , lord chief justice of the common plea , and sir Roger Manwood , lord chief baron ( where note , that bromely lord chancellor , Burleigh lord trea ? sure , Leicester , and Hatton , who be indeed more guilty of the fact , than Davyson , be none of the number . ) before these delegate , Popham the queen attorney lay to davysons charge , contempt of the queen ; ma ? jesty , violate of his trust , and neglect of his duty , lay open all parti ? cular of his fact ; which after Egerton the queen solicitor , gawdy , and pucker her sergeant at law , urge also against he with great aggra•a ? cion : to which Davyson mild answer , that he will not contest with the queen ; only protest , that if he have do any thing otherwise than he ought , it be out of ignorance and mistake , and not out of any purpose to disobey her majesty . it seem the queen have carry her self , as one that will have it do , and yet be loath to do it , scarce know she one mind , and yet will have another know it ; mean to make it the work of mistake , rather than of purpose , that so at least she may leave some place of satisfaction to her self , that it be not absolute of her do . the plead end , the commissioner go to censure ; Manwood begin , and give his opinion , that Davyson , for the inconsideratnesse of his fact• shall be fine ten thousand pound , and imprisonment during the queen pleasure ; the rest go on in that sentence , only the lord Grey ex ? cuse Davyson so far , that he tho•ght he worthy of reward , rather than of punishment : the conclusion be , the first sentence for his fine and imprisonment , be by Wray keeper of the privy seal confirm ; and dam ? vyson never after recover the queen favour , though she relieve he sometime in his necessity . a man ingenious indeed , but not thorough acquaint with the way of the court ; and think to have be raise to this place , of purpose to act this part , and for nothing else . by this time sir Robert carry , son to the lord Hunsdon , who be send to excuse the queen , be come to the border ; but be come thither , be not suffer to set foot in Scotland , the king will scarce hear he by another , and with much ado receive his letter . he call home his Ambassa ? dor out of England , and thought of nothing but revenge . but the queen still lay the fault upon Davyson , and the unadvised ere ? dulity of her councellro , by little and little allay his passion ; and expe ? ct , till time have somewhat assuage his grief , that it will endure to be touch , at length , by her agent in Scotland ; and soon after by the lord Hunsdon governor of Berwicke , she admonish he , how dange ? rous iter will be for he , to break out into war against England , and what little help he can just expect from either Spain or France , but if he persi ? stead in the amity with England , he may be sure the queen of England , will most love account he for her son and to the end , that he shall assure himself , that the queen his mother be put to death without her privity , she send he the sentence against Davyson , under the seal of all the delegate , and attest under the great seal of England ; and anon ? the instrument likewise sign with the hand of the judge of England ; in which they aver , that the sentence against the queen of Scot , can in no wise be prejudice to his right in the succession . page 77 Having now by these and the like course , somewhat assuage the king of Scot indignation ; to prevent the war which they foresee be immi ? nent from the king of Spain , they send forth drake with four of the queen ship and other , unto the coast of Spain , to set upon their ship in the ha ? ve•s , and to intercept their munition . Drake enter into the port of Cales , sink , take , and fire , about a hundred ship , wherein be great store of munition and victual : then return to the cape of saint Vincent , he set up three fort , and compel they to yield . Thence set sail towards the western island , call azore , under the great meridian ; by great good fortune he happen upon a huge and wealthy carrack , call saint Philip , return from the East-indies , and easy vanquish it ; whereupon the mariner on both side , from the name of Philp , portend no good luck to fillip king of Spain . at the same time , Thomas Cavendish of Suffolk , in the other part of the world , who two year before have set sail from England with three ship , pass through the strait of Magellan , in the coast of chy , Peru , and Nu•va Hispania , fire a great number of spanish town , take and pillage ninteen great ship , and among they a wealthy ship of the king , nigh unto Caliphornia , in north America ; and so by the Philippine isle , the mo ? l•cce , the cape de bone esperance , and the island of saint Helen , return home the next year , be the three after Magellan , that sail about the world . as drake and Cavendish at this time gain great fame and renown• so two other man in the Netherlands ( Stanley and York ) purchase as great in ? famy and disgr•ce : this York be a Londoner , a bold fellow , and of loose behaviour ; famous for bring first into England , the manner of turn the point upon the adversary in single combat , whereas the english till this time , be wont to be arm with buckler and sword , and to strike with edge , and it be hold no manhood to turn the point , or strike below the girdle . he suffer some affront from the earl of Leicester , flee away , and for a time , serve under the Spaniard in the Netherlands , till at length be reconcile to Leicester , he be send over the fort near Zutphen ; but be ? king bribe , he not only yield up the place to the enemy , but draw to the like villainy one Stanley , who with great valour have serve in a irish expe ? dition ; to yield up Daventry to the Spaniard , a wealthy and well fortify town . but what get they by their treachery , the Spaniard set York and Stanley at variance , they poison York and seize upon his good , his carcase be three year after dig up by the state commandment , and hang up ? on a gibbet till it rot away•Stanley go into Spain , where there be no credit give to he ; for the Spaniard have a say , it be lawful to give honour to a traitor sometime , but never to trust he . Theise late treachery , wrought the earl of Leicester much envy with the confederate Netherlands , because the traitor be very intimate with he ; whereupon the state in large letter to the queen , accuse Le•cester for his ill manage of the weal-public , in the matter of money , mer ? chandize , and military affair ; and to his credulity , they impute the harm which accrue by York and Stanley . the queen , for the narrow sift of the matter , and compose it ; send thither Thomas Sackvile lord Bucke ? burst ( late take i•to her privy council in leicester absence ) Norris , and Bartholomew Clerke : b•t when as the officious diligence of Buckhurst , seem to trench upon leicester re•utation ; his grace with the queen pro ? ve so forcible , that Buckhurst at his return , be for certain month confi ? ned to his house . afterwards , sluice be beleaguer by the prince of Parma , Leicester be by the state send for out of England , to succour it ; the town be furious a•saulted , with seventeen thousand great shot , and a mighty breach be page 78 make into it ; which nevertheless , Roger Williams , Franis Vere , Nicholas Baskervile , with the garrison of the english and wallon , be valiant defend for a while , but at last be enforce to yield it up•Leicester , that come to relieve it , find himself too weak for the besieger , be go away . and indeed , the state will not commit any great army to his command ; who ( they know have a determination to se•ze L•yden , and some other town into his own hand , and have a purpose to surprise the absolute government . whereupon , the state use mean , that Leicester be call home ; give up the government to the state , and in his room succeed Maurice of Nassaw son to the prince of orange , b•ing now but twenty year of age . ) Peregrine lord Willonghby , be by the queen make gene•all of the english force in the Low-countries , to who she give command to reduce the english faction into the state obedience ; the which , with the help of prince Maurice , he easy effect . Leicester be now come home , and perceive that a accusation be prepare against he by Buckhurst and other , for his unfaithful manage of affair in holland ; private with tear he cast himself down at the queen foot , entreat she , that she will not receive he with disgrace , at his re ? turn , who she have send forth with honour ; and so far prevail with she , that the next day be call to examination before the lord , he take his place among they , not kneel down at the end of the table , as the man ? ner of delinquent be ; and when the secretary begin to read the head of his accusation , he interrupt he , say ; that the public instruction which he have receive , be limit with private restriction ; and make his appeal to the queen , elude the whole crimination , with the secret in ? dignation of his adversary . this year be famous for the death of many great personage : in the month of February , die Henry Nevil lord of Aburgaveny , great grandchild to Edward Nevil , who in the reign of king Henry the six , get this title in the right of his wife , only daughter and heir to Richard Beauchamp earl of Worcester , and lord of Aburgaveny ; in which right , when as the only daughter of this Henry , wife to sir Thomas Fane , challenge the ti ? tle of baroness of Aburgaveny ; a memorable contention arise concern the title between she , and the next heir male , to who by will ( and the same confirm by authority of parliament ) the castle of Aburgaveny be bequeathe . this question be a long time debate ; at last in a Parlia ? mean hold in the second year of king Iames , the matter be try by voice ; and the heir male carry the lordship of Aburgaveny , and the ba ? rony le Dispencer , be ratify to the female . this year also , in the month of April , die Anne Stanhope duchess of Somerset , ninety year old , who be the wife of Edward Seymer duke of Somerset , and protector of England , contend for precedency , with Katherine Parre , queen dowager to king Henry the eight . there die also , sir Ralph Sadler , chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster , the last baneret of England , with which dignity he be adorn at the battle of Musselborough in Scotland . after he die Thomas Bromley lord chancellor of England ; and six day after , he , who the queen mean shall have succeed he , Edward earl of rut ? land ; but he now fail , sir Christopher Hatton be make lord chancellor , who though he be a courtier , yet the queen know he to be a ho ? nest man , think he not unfit for that place , where conscience have , or shall have more place than law ; although some be of opinion , that it be not so much the queen own choice , as that she be persuade to it by some that wish he not well ; both thereby to be a cause of absen ? thing he from the court , and think that such a sedentary place , to a cor ? pulent man that have be use to exercise , will be a mean to shorten his life , and indeed he live not full out three year after . page 79 this year sir John Perot be call home out of Ireland , and leave all in ? ? ? quiet to fit Williams his successor . for hitherto the english ? ? ? it not hard matter to vanquish the irish , by reason of their unskill ? •ulnesse in arm ; eight hundred foot , and three hundred horse , be ••ld a invincible army : but after that by perots command , they be ••••cised in feat of arm , and teach to discharge musket at a mark , ? ? ? have in the Low-countries learn the art of fortification , they hold the english better to it , and be not so easy overcome . and now we be come to the one and twenty year of queen Eliza ? ••••s reign , be the year 1588 , long before speak of by astrologer , ? ? ? be a wonderful year , and even the climacterical year of the world . and yet the great wonder that happen this year , be but the wonderful fleet that Spain provide for invade of England , if the defeat of that wonderful fleet be not a great wonder . it be true , there be at this time a treaty of peace between England and Spai• ; and the earl of Derby , the lord Cobham , sir Iames Crofts , dale and Rogers , doctor of law , commissioner for the queen : for the prince of Parma , the count Aurenberg , champigny , Richardot , Ma•s , and garvyer , doctor , have many meeting about it near to ostend ; but it seem on the p•rt of Spain , rather to make the english secure , that they shall not make provision for war , than that they have any purpose of real proceed , see they accept not of any reasonable condition that be off ? fear , but trifle out the time , till the spanish navy be come upon the coast , and the ordnance hear from sea , and then dismiss the Eng ? lish delegate . the spanish navy consist of one hundred and thirty ship ; where ? of galleass and galleon , seventy two , goodly ship , like to float tower ; in which be soldier , 19290 ; mariner , 8350 ; galley ? slave , 2080 ; great ordnance , 2630 : for the great holiness of their action , twelve of their ship be ca•led , the twelve apostle . chief commander of the fleet , be don Alphonso , duke of Medina ; and next to he , John Martin Recalde , a great seaman . the twenty of May they weigh anchor from the river Tagus , but be by tempest so mi ? serable disperse , that it be long ere they m•t again : but than they send before to the prince of Parma , that he with his force , consist of fifty thousand old soldier , shall be ready to join with they , and with his ship conduct they into England , and to land his army at the Thames mouth . the queen preparation in the mean time , be this ; the lord Charles Howard , lord admiral , with all her navy ; and sir Francis Drake , vice-admiral , to be ready at Plymouth ; and the lord Henry Seymor ( second son to the duke of Somerset , with forty English and dutch ship , to keep the coast of the Netherlands , to hinder the prince of Parma come forth . then for land-service , there be lay along the southern coast , twenty thousand soldier , and two army beside off train man be levy ; over one of which , consist of a thousand horse , and two and twenty thousand foot , the earl of Leicester command , and pitch his tent at Tilbury , near the Thames mouth : over the other , ap ? point to guard the queen person , and consist of four and twen ? ty thousand foot , and two thousand horse , the lord Hunsdon be gene ? rall . Arthur lord grey , sir Francis Knolles , sir John Norris , sir ri ? chard Bingham , sir Roger Williams , and other military man , be choose to make a council of war , and consult how the land-service shall •e order . Theise declare , among other thing , that the place which lie fit for the enemy land , as Milford haven , F•lmouth , Plymouth , page 80 Portland , the isle of wight , Portsmouth , the down , the Thames mouth , Harwich , Yarmouth , Hull , and such other , shall be fortify with work and garrison ; the train soldier of those shire which lie near the sea coast , shall defend those place , and be ready at the alarm to hinder the enemy from land ; but if he do land , than to spoil the country round about , that he may find no food ; and by continual cry , arm , arm , give the enemy no rest , but yet shall not give battle , till good store of commander be come together . at this time many fear the papist at home , no less than the spa•iards abroad , persuade the queen to take off the head of some of t•e great of they ; but she detest such cruelty , take order one ? lie , that some few of they shall be commit to custody in Wisbych castle . and now all thing on both side prepare , the spanish navy set forth out of the groin in may , but be disperse and drive back by weather . the english navy set forth somewhat late out of Plymouth , bear up towards the coast of Spain ; but partly by occasion of contrary wind , partly by advertisement that the Spaniard be go back , and upon some doubt also that they may pass by towards the coast of Eng ? land , while they be seek they afar off , they return to Plymouth ; at which time , a confident ( though false ) advertisement come to the admiral , that the Spaniard can not possible come forward that year : whereupon the e•glish navy be upon the point of disb•nding , and many of the man be go on shore ; when sudden the invincible armada ( for so it be call in a spanish ostentation ) be discover upon the western coast : whereof the lord admiral be inform , have much ado to get the queen navy out of the haven ( the wind be contrary ) yet at length he hale it forth . the next day , the english behold the spanish ship , in height like to castle , sail slow along , who they suffer peaceable to pass by , that they may have the benefit of the wind to follow after . the one and twenty day of July , the admiral of England send a pinnace before , call , the Defianc• , which by a great shot , challenge the Spaniard to fight , and by and by they fall to it . then drake , Hawkins , and Forbisher let fly against the outmost squadron , which Recalde command , make he glad to fly to their main navy for succour . the night following• a mighty biskayner of oquenda ( in which the king of Spain treasure be ) be by chance fire with gunpowder , but be timely quench ? ed by other ship send to her succour ; one of which ship , be the galleon of don Pedro , who sir Francis Drake take prisoner , and send he to Darthmouth . the biskayn it self ( the treasure be take out by the Spaniard ) they leave behind they , which the english bring into the haven at Weymouth . the three and twenty day of this month , they have a seco•d fight , in which most of the spanish shot fly over the english ship , and never hurt they ; only cock a Englishman , be with his little vessel in the midst of the enemy , die valiant . the four and twen ? ti day , they rest on both side ; in which time the lord ad ? mirall rank his whole fleet i•to four squadron : the first he rule himself , drake the second , Hawkins the three , and Forbisher the four . the five and twenty day ( which be the saint Iames day ) they fall to it the three time ; in which fight , the english have again the better , so as after this time , the Spaniard will no more turn upon the english , but hold on their course , dispatch a messenger to the page 81 prince of Parma ; require he forthwith to join himself to the king fleet , and withal to send they bullet . the day follow , the lord admiral knight Thomas Howard , the lord Shefield• Roger Townsend , John Hawkins , and Martin Frobisher ; and hold a council of war , they decree not to set again upon the enemy , till they come to the strait of Calais , where the lord Henry Seymor and sir William winter wait for their come . and now so far be the Eng ? lish from be terrify with this invincible navy , that many of they no ? bility and other of special note , hire ship at their own charge and come to the admiral ; as the earl of Oxford , Northumberland , cum ? berland , Thomas and Robert Cecill , Henry brook , sir Charles blunt , sir Walter Raleigh , sir William Hatton , sir Robert carry , sir Ambrose Willoughby , sir Thomas Gerard , sir Arthur gorge and other . the seven and twenty of July towards the evening , the Spaniard cast anchor near unto Calis , and not far from they ride the english ad ? mirall , within shot of a great ordnance , to who Seymor and winter join themselve• , so as by this time there be in the english navy a hundred and forty ship , nimble and serviceable for fight or sail , yet only fifteen of they bear the stroke of the battle . and now again the Spa ? niard send post after post to the prince of Parma to send they forty flye-boate , without which they be not able to skirmish with the english , by reason of the greatness and unwieldiness of their ship , and impor ? tune he present to put to sea with his army ; but he be unprepa•ed , and his flat-bottomed boat be full of chink and leak , and beside , the Hollander hover before the port of dunkerk and Newport , in such sort , that he dare not look forth . the eight and twenty day ; the lord admiral make ready eight of his worst ship , on the outside daub with wildfire , rozin and brim ? stone , within , full of combustible matter , and under the conduct of young and Prowse , send they down with the wind in the silent time of the night towards the spanish fleet ; the which when the Spaniard see approach they , and the sea as it be all on a light fire ; imagine withal , that those fireship may carry in they some murder engine , they make • hideous noise , take up anchor , cut cable , spread sail , and betake themselves to their oar , but more to flight : one of the spanish galleas have lose her rudder , and float up and down , be hold in fight by a ? nias Preston , Thomas Gerard , and Harvie , who •lew captain Hugh Moncada , cast the soldier over board , and carry away a great deal of gold , but the vessel and ordnance be wreck to the governor of Calais . Drake and Fencz in the mean while perceive the spanish fleet to gather togethea again before gravel , set upon they with great violence , to who str•ightwayes , Fenton , Southwell , Beeston , cross , and riman join themselves , and soon after the admiral himself , sir Thomas Howard , and the lord Sheffield , the Galleon call saint Matthew , be sore batter by Seymor and winter , drive towards Ostend , and set upon again by the zelander , and at last be take by the flushinger . and now the spanish navy have want of many nec•ssaries , and no hope of the prince of Parma come , they resolve to return north ? ward for Spain ; in which passage they lose both many ship and man , the english navy still follow they close , till they be fain to give they over for want of powder . while these thing pass at sea , the queen •n person come to Tilbury to view the army and camp there , where she show such undaunted courage and resolution , that it wonderful ani ? mate the spirit of they all . and thus this navy , which be three whole year in prepare , in the space of a month be often beat , and at length put to flight , many of page 82 their man be slay , more than half of their ship take and sink ( of the english not above a hundred at the most miss , nor so much as a ship , but cock little vessel ) and sail about all Britain by Scotland , the orkeney and Ireland , they return into Spain with as much disho ? nou_r_ as they come out with boast , for indeed Mendoza in France by a book in print , triumph before the victory . for the happy success of this action , queen Elizabeth appoint prey ? er and thanksgiving over all the church of England , and she ( as it be in triumph ) come in person , attend with a great troop of the nobility into the city , and go into the cathedral church of saint Paul ( where the banner take from the enemy be place in view ) and there in most humble manner give thank to almighty God . and •hat which increase the public joy , be the news which sir Robert Sidney bring out of Scotland , that the king have overpast all injury , be love affect towards the english , and desire to embrace sincere and perfect amity with the queen . for as for the king of Spain , he witty tell the Embassa ? dour , that he expect no other courtesy from he , but such as Polyphemus promise Ulysses , that he shall be the last who he will devour . and now die the great earl of Leicester the four day of Septem ? ber , at his manor of Killingworth of a violent fever ; i may well say the great earl , consider the many great honour he enjoy , which be extant in the story ; yet one honour great than any he have before , he effect even then when he be ready to go out of the world , and that was• to be vicegerent in the high government of England and Ireland , for which the patent be already draw , and have be seal ; but that burr ? leigh and Hatton show the queen how dangerous a thing it may prove , for so great authority to reside in one subject . he be while he live in so great favour with the queen , that some thought ( and himself not the least ) that she mean to marry he ; yet when he die , his good be sell at a outcry to make payment of the debt he owe she . about this time fillip earl of Arundel , who three year before have be cast in prison , be now cite in Westminster hall , to the judgement of his peer , and Henry earl of Derby be make high steward of Eng ? land for the time . the matter lay to his charge be these : that he have contract friendship with cardinal Allen , Parsons the Jesuite , and other traitor , exciting diverse both abroad and at home to restore the romish religion , promise his assistance thereunto : and for that reason have a purpose to depart the kingdom . that he be privy to the bull , in which pope Sixtus Quintus have depose the queen , and give England to the Spaniard ; that be imprison in the tower he cause mass to be say for the prosperous success of the spanish fleet , and for that purpose have frame peculiar prayer for his own private use . be demand whether he be guilty of these thing ; turn himself to the judge , he ask they these question : first , whether it be lawful to heap up so many crime together in one bill of indictment ? they answer that it be : then whether argument take from presumption be of force ? they answer ? red , that it be lawful for he to interpose exception if he see cause . then again , if he may be arraign for those thing which be capital , by the law make the thirteenth year of the queen , after that the time express ? say in the act be expire ? they promise , they will proceed against he by no law ; but the old statute of treason , make in the reign of king Edward the three . but now again ask if he be guilty or not• he plead not guilty , whereupon pucken the queen sergeant at law , Pop ? ham attorney general , Shuttleworth sergeant at law , and Egerton the queen solicitor , in their turn , urge and prove the crime object ; some whereof he deny , some he extenuate ; but in conclusion be by page 83 his peer find guilty and condemn ; yet the queen spare his life , and be content with thus much do in terror to the papist . it be now the year 1589. and the two and thirty of queen Eliza ? •eths reign ; when to be in some sort revenge of the Spaniard for their invasion , she give leave to sir John Norris and sir Francis drake to under ? •ake a expedition at their own private charge , require nothing of she but a few ship of war , who take along with they Anthony the bastard , lay claim to the kingdom of Portugal , and of souldidr to the num ? ber of eleven thousand , of seaman about fifteen hundred : set sail from Plymouth the five day of April , they arrive at the groin in Ga ? •acia ; whereof , with great valour they take first the low town , and of ? terward the high , and from thence sail towards Portugal , they meet Robert earl of Essex , who without the queen leave have put to sea : of ? ter two day they arrive at Penycha a town of Portugal , which they take ; and leave the castle to Don-Antonio , and from thence they march by land to ? ward Lisbon threescore mile off : the foot company lead by Norris , who Drake promise to follow with the fleet. be come to the west suburb of Lisbon , they find no body there but a few poor disarm por ? tugall who cry out , God save king Antonio . the day follow the Spaniard make a sail out , in which skirmish bret , Caresley , and car , ( stout commander ) be slay ; yet do the earl of Essex drive the spani ? ards to the very gate of the city . and now have tarry here two day , and see no sign of the portingall revolt ; which Don-Antho ? nio have assure they will be , find fresh supply come into the town , their own army sickly , victual and powder fail ; and that which most of all sir Francis Drake not bring the great ordnance as he promise , they depart from the suburb of Lisbon towards Cascais , a little town at the mouth of the river Tagus , which town Drake have take this mean while , who excuse his not come to Lisbon , by reason of the Flat• he must have pass , and the castle of saint Julian , fortify with fifty pie ? ces of great ordnance . near this place they find threescore Hulke• of the house town of Germany , lade with corn and all manner of Muni ? cion , which they take as good prize towards their charge , in regard the queen have forbid they to carry victual or munition to the Spaniard . from hence they set sail towards virgo , a forlese town by the seaside , and pillage all along that quarter , return for England , have lose in the voyage of soldier and mariner about six thousand ; yet not so much by the enemy , as by eat of strange fruit and distemper of the climate . it concern the state of England , to look at this time into the state of France ; for while those thing be in do between Spain and England , the popish prince of France , under pretext of defend the catholic re ? ligion , enter into a combination , which they call , the holy league : the purpose whereof be , to root out the protestant , and to divert the right of succession to the crown of France ; for they bind themselves to each other by oath , to suffer no person but a catholic to be king of France ; which be direct to exclude the king of Navarre , and the prince of Con ? de , if the present king , without issue male , shall fail . the head of this league , be the duke of Guise , who have give some overthrow to the germane force , that come into France in aid of the protestant , be immea ? surable extol by the clergy and other ; and grow to such a height of re ? putation , that enter into Paris , he make the king glad to leave the city , and in a assembly at Bloys , to make he great master of the french cava ? lery , and to consent by edict , to the cut off the protestant . so as the king stand now in fear of he , use mean at last , even in the very court , to have he murder ; and soon after , the cardinal his brother page 84 to be strangle . hereupon so great a confusion follow , that the people every where disobey the magistrate , and spoil the king very palace at Paris . some city affect a democr•cie , other and aristocracy , but few like of a monarchy . the confederate in the mean while , make a new seal , usurp the royal authority , seize into their hand the best fortify place , intercept the king revenue , call in spanish soldier , and in all place denounce war and violence against the king . and the king in this case be force to fly to the Protestant• for succour , they then most wic ? ked , by one Iames Clement a monk , make he away . the king be rea ? die to dye , declare the king of Navarre to be his lawful successor , but the confederate will exclude he as a open heretic ; and yet who to make choice of they can well agree , some will have the duke of Lorraine , as be descend from the ancient king of France , some th• duke of Savoy , as bear of the french king daughter , a prince po•e•t and courageous ; other will have the duke of Guise brother that wa• murthered• other the king of Spain ; but the great part give thei• voice for the c•rdinall of Bourbon , who be one degree near al•yed to the slay king , than the king of Navarre his nephew . he therefore be present proclaim king of France , with the title of Charles the ten ; but he be a priest , the king of Navarre also be at the same time proclaim king of France , who abide at diepe a sea town of nor ? mandy , and doubt not to drive the cardinal easy out of France . the king of Navarre be thus raise in dignity , but weak in mean , implore aid of the queen of England , offer to make a league Offen ? sieve and defensive ; the queen out of a pious respect to a king of her own religion , send he present two and twenty thousand pound sterling in gold ( such a sum of gold , as he profess he have never see at one time before ) and withal supply he with four thousand soldier , under the command of Peregrine lord Willoughby ; for colonel , she appoint sir Thomas Wilford , who be make marsh•ll of the field , John boro•ghs , Si•William Drury , and sir Thomas baskervyle , and give they a month pay in hand . hereupon the confederate ( who the king have vanquish • little before at Arques beyond all expectation ) begin to quail , and the day before the arrival of the english they vanish away , with this addition of force the king march to Paris , and be ready to enter the city , cause a retreat to be •ounded , as loath to have spoil make of a city , which he hope short shall be his own . afterwards by the assistance of the english he win many town , and then have march at least five hundred mile on foot , he give they leave after a long winter service , to return into England . in which voyage of man of note , die cap ? tain Hunnings , but of a natural death , also Stubbs ( he who right hand be cut off for write the book against the queen marriage ) and sir William Drury slay by master boro•ghs in a single combat , where the quar ? rell be , that he be but a knight , will take place of borough that be the young son of a baron , contrary to the law of the Eng ? lish gentry . about this time , Iames king of Scot ( with queen Elizabeth good livre ? king ) espouse Anne the daughter of Frederick the second king of den ? mark by his deputy ; but she afterward sail for Scotland , be by tempest cast upon Norway , and there , through continual storm force to stay , so as the king in the winter season set sail thither , that the mar ? ri•ge accord to his vow may be accomplish within the year : some be of opinion that those storm be cause by witchcraft , and be confirm indeed by some witch take in Scotland ; who confess they have raise those storm to keep the queen from land in Scotland , and that the earl of Bothwell have ask counsel of they concern the page 85 king end ; who be thereupon cast into prison , but in a short time break loose , occasion new stir in Scotland . this year , many noble personage die ; Frances countess of Sussex , sister to sir Henry Sidney , sir Walter Mildway , chancellor and vice-trea ? sure of the exchequer , William Somerset earl of Worcester , so numerous in his offspring , that he can reckon more child of both sex , than all the earl of England . also John lord Sturton , Henry lord Compton , and at Brussels the lord Paget . at this time , the queen who be always frugal , strain one point of frugality more than ever she have do before ; for upon the information of one Caermarden , ( though Burleigh , Leicester , and Walsingham be offend , that credit shall be give to such a one , and themselv•s negle ? ct ) she raise Thomas smith the customer from thirteen thous•nd pound yearly , to two and forty thousand pound , and at last to fifty thousand . it be now the year 1590. and the three and thirty of queen Elizabeth reign , in which , the earl of Cumberland make a voyage to the Indies , where he lay level to the ground the fort of the isle of •iala , and bring away eight and fifty piece of great ordnance . this year be fatal to many noble personage ; first die Ambrose Dud ? ley earl of Warwick , ( son to John duke of Northumberland ) without be ? sue . after he sir Francis Walsingham , secretary , a man more skilful in the politic , then in the economic ; more cunning in manage matter of the public state , then of his own private estate , which he leave so mean , and die so much indebt , that he be fain to be bury by night , without a•y funeral pomp , in the cathedral church of saint Paul ; leave behind he one only daughter , famous for her three husband , all of they the goodly man of their time ; the first , sir Philip Sidney ; the second , Robert earl of Essex ; the three , Richard Burgh earl of Clanricard , by king Charles make earl of saint Alban . within two month after W•lsingham , die sir Thomas Randol• , who have be fourteen time send in embassage to seve ? rall prince , yet be never reward with any great dignity , than the chamberlainship of the exchequer , and the postmastership of England . Soon after he die sir John crof•s , who have do good service in Scot ? land , in Edward the sixths time ; in queen Mary time be condemn of high treason ; in queen elisabeths time set at liberty , and make comptrol ? let of her house . after he die George Talbot , the seven E. of Shrewsbury of this house ; he be make earl martial of England , and leave behind he a memorial of wisdom and integrity . last die Thomas lord Wentworth , the last of the english that have be governor of Calais . in Ireland at this time Hugh Gaveloc ( so call , because he have be long keep in fetter ) the natural son of Shan oh Neale , accuse Hugh earl of tir-oen , for hold private consultation with certain Spaniard , who in 88 be by shipwreck cast upon the coast of Ireland : tir-oen to prevent the accusation , take the say Hugh , and when other refuse to do it , take a cord and with his own hand strangle he . hereupon he be send for into England , and come , and upon pardon obtain , solemn undertake in presence of the queen at Greenwich , to maintain the peace with Turlogh leynigh ; not to usurp the title of o-neal , nor any authority over the gentry about he ; to reduce the territory of tir-oen to the form of a county , and civil behaviour , and many such matter ; give hostage for his true performance ; and indeed for a time he observe all thing very due . this trouble allay , another arise ; for soon after this , Hugh Roe Mac-Mahon , a potentate in the territory of Monaghan , compel those under his juris ? diction to pay he tribute ; whereupon the deputy cause he to be take , and try by a jury of common soldier , and then to be hang up , divi ? ding his land among certain english ; and some of the macmahons , refer ? ve page 86 a certain year rend to the crown of England , by this mean think to extinguish the power and title of Mac-Mahon . but hereupon , o-rork , fear ? ing he shall be serve in like manner , take up arm against the queen , who Bingham precedent of connacht soon distress , and drive into Scot ? land , and at the queen request , be by the king deliver up into his hand . it be now the year 1591. and the four and thirty of queen elisabeths reign , when she , careful lest Britain shall come into the Spaniard hand , send Edmund York into France , to advertise the king to take care thereof ; and promise to send he force to that end , if he will , some town , where they may be in safety . hereupon he name Cherburg , Granvile , or breast , as the fit ; and it be agree , that three thousand English shall be send into brittainy and Picardy ; but in the mean time , Henry palmer be send to sea , with certain ship , who seize upon thirteen spanish ship , as they be return from Nova Francia . and now Roger Williams , with a company of six hundred soldier , pass over to diepe in Normandy ; and sir John Norris with the rest of the force , haste into Britain soon after . Roger Williams , with his own six hundred , and the help of charter governor of diepe , put to rout the confederate , that have block up the passage ; who valour , the french king in his letter to the queen , high extol . whereupon grow more courageous , and not mind his charge , which be to stay at diepe , he accompany the king to the very suburb of Paris , where in honour of his nation , he send a challenge to the Spaniard , to encounter two hundred pikeman of the english , and a hundred Musque ? tier , with as many Spaniards in open field . after this , the king of France acquaint the queen , that he have a pur ? pose to set upon roan , or New-haven , before the prince of Parma shall come into France , and thereupon request she , to send four thousand Eng ? lish into Normandy , which upon certain condition she willing do , and send they under the command of Robert earl of E•sex , accompany with sir Thomas Leighton , and sir William Killegrew , as his counselor . when the earl come into France , he find that the king be at Noyon , and in Normandy no preparation for the war at all , which seem strange , and much trouble he ; but by and by sir Roger Williams come to he from the king , request he to come to Noyon , that they may confer con ? cern a course of war thither the earl make a tedious journey , and be ? king come thither ; the king tell he , he be now of necessity to go himself into champagne ; but promise to send martial Byron , and the duke of Montpensier forthwith to he , to lay siege to roan . hereupon the earl re ? turn to his tent , expect their come , but neither of th•m ••me , which trouble the earl more than before ; so as be weary now ? ? ? do nothing , he make himself one approach to roan , where hi• brother W•lt•• Devereux be unfortunate slay . Indeed the affair of the •ing of fr•nce be at this time upon so uncertain term , that before he can ••t ? ? ? h• have resolve , something still intervene , that divert he ; for which , by his letter he excuse himself to the queen of England , and by the media ? cion of the ea•l , and Mornay lord du Plessie , who to that end he send into England , obtain new supply , and then besiege roan . at this time be memorable the prodigious carriage of one Hacket , bear at Oundale in Northamptonshire , a mean fellow of no learning , who first prank be this ; that when , in show of reconciliation to one with who he have be at variance , he embrace he , he bite off his nose , and the man de ? sire to have his nose again , that it may be sow on , while the wound be green , he most villanous eat it up , and swallow it down before his face . after this , all on a •udden , he take upon he a show of wonderful holiness , do nothing but hear sermon , and get scripture by heart , page 87 ••d counterfeit revelation from God , and a extraordinary call , and •rew to be so magnify by certain zealous minister , and special of one •••ard Coppinger , ( a gentleman of a good house ) and one Arthington , a great admirer of the Geneva discipline ; that they account he as send •rom heaven , and a great prophet than Moses or John Baptist , and final , that he be Christ himself , come with his fan in his hand , to judge the world . and this they proclaim in Cheapside ; give out that Hacket par ? ticipate of Christ glorify body , by his especial spirit , and be now come to propagate the gospel over Europe , and to settle a true discipline in the church of England ; and that they themselves be two prophet , the one of mercy , and the other of judgement ; with many other such in ? credible blasphemy ; whereupon Hacket be apprehend and arraign ; and at last , hang , draw and quarter , continue all the time , and at his death , his blasphemous assertion . Coppinger a while after starve himself to death in prison , Arthington repent , and make his recantation in a public writing . beside these , other also at this time oppose the establish government of the church of England , cry down the call of bishop , with who side some common-lawyer also , affirm , that the queen can not depute , nor these man exercise any such ecclesiastical jurisdiction ; and that the oath ex Officio be unchristian . but the queen conceive , that through the side of the prelate , she she self be shoot at , suppress they what she can , and maintain the government former establish . about this time , the lord Thomas Howard , with six of the queen ship , have wait at the azore six whole month , for the come of the spanish fleet from America , be at last set upon by Alphonso Bassano , with three and fifty ship , send out for the convoy of the American fleet , where Richard Granvile vice-admiral , be in the revenge , and separate from his company , be so hem in by the spanish ship , and so batter with great shot ; that most of his man be slay , his mainmast cut off , himself sore wound in the head , he command to sink the ship , that it may not come into the Spaniard hand ; but this be countermand by most voiȝ ? ces , it be agree , to yield it to the Spaniard , upon condition that the man shall be set at liberty . Granvile himself be carry into the spanish ad ? mirall , where within two day he die , not without praise of his very even ? mie : thus the great ship call the revenge , be yield , but have so many leak in the ke•l , that soon after it be cast away in a storm ; and the loss of this one ship the english soon make good upon the Spaniard , by take many of they . about this time also , Cavendish , who in the year 1578. have sail round about the world , now with five ship bend his course towards the Magellan strait , but by reason of foul weather , be not able to pass they , be dri ? when to the coast of Brasile , be there cast away . and now , enmity increase daily between Spain and England , two Pro ? clamation be set forth ; one , prohibit upon pain of high-treason , to carry victual or munition into any of the king of Spain dominion : a ? other , forbid all person to entertain any in their house , till inquiry make , what they be , lest they may entertain popish priest , who at this time come swarm into England , by reason the king of Spain have late found a seminary at Valledolid for the english . at this time die sir Christopher Hatton , lord chancellor , who of a mean gentleman house , the queen favour have raise to this height of dignity ; a goodly personage of body , of noble , but no aspire spirit ; the only of all the queen special favourite , that die a bachelor ; and therefore leave William Newport his sister son his heir , who erect for he , in Paul church , a sumptuous monument . after his death , the keep page 88 of the great seal be for certain month commit to the lord Bur ? leigh treasurer , Hunsdon , Cobham and Buckhurst : afterwards , pucker the queen sergeant at law be elect , not chancellor , but keeper of the great seal . at this time also , Brian o-rork , the irish potentate , be arraign at Westminster ; his indictment be , for raise rebellion against the queen , for drag her picture at a horse tail , for give the Spa ? niards entertainment ; which thing be tell he by a interpreter , ( for he understand not English ) he say , he will not be try , un ? less than queen her self in person sit to judge he . yet be tell , that it be the law ; he only say , if it must be so , let it be so ; and so condemn , be execute at Tyburn as a traitor , whereof he seem to make as little reckon , as if it have but be in jest . and now this year , the queen make the college of Dublin in Ireland , a university , which be former the monastery of all-saint , endow ? king it with power to confer scholastical dignity . at this time , sir John P•rot , who have be deputy of Ireland , and do good service there , be yet by the malice of adversary , of who Hatton be one , call in question , before the baron Hunsdon , the lord Buckhurst , sir Robert Cecill , ( late make a counsellor ) sir John for ? tescue , sir John Wolley , and some of the judge : his accusation be ; first , that he have speak opprobrious word against the queen , say , she be illegitimate and cowardly ; second , that he have foster notorious traitor , and popish priest ; three , that he hold corre ? spondence with the prince of Parma , and the queen enemy . to the first of which he confess , that in his passion he have speak of the queen unadvised , for which he be infinite grieve ; the rest he deny : and all man know , he be never popish affect . his ac ? cuser be , one Philip Williams , sometime his secretary ; Denys O-Rog ? han a irish marry priest , who life he have save ; and one wall ? tun , a fellow of no worth or reputation . yet the crime be urge against he , by Popham and other lawyer , till eleven a clock at night ; he be at last condemn of high treason , but sentence wa• not pronounce till twenty day after ; and yet be not put to death , but die a natural death in the tower ; he be a man of a goodly personage , stout and choleric , and one who ( many thought ) the queen have the more reason to respect , for her father king Henry the eighths sake . the earl of Ess•x , after a tedious winter siege in Normandy , chal ? lenge Monsieur villerse governor of Roan to a single combat , who refuse to meet he ; he then return into England , be call home by the queen , who favour , by his long absence , may else have suffer prejudice . and now the king of France , hear that the prince of Parma be come i•to France , once again be fain to fly to the queen for succour , to who , upon certain condition , she grant a army of four thousand man , and some great ordnance , with which sir John Norris be send into France ; who yet the french king employ not , as be agree , to the great displeasure of the queen . but as for the prince of Parma come into France , he be prevent by death , when he have govern the Netherlands under the Spaniard fourteen year ; a prince of many excellent part , and who queen Elisabeth never mention but with honour . and now queen Elizabeth consider that the king of Spain chief strength be in his gold of America , send forth sir Walter Ralegh with a fleet of fifteen ship to meet with the spanish fleet ; who page 89 pass by a promontory of Spain , receive certain intelligence , that the Spa ? •ish fleet be not to come forth that year : whereupon , divide his navy into two part ; whereof , the one he commit to sir John Bur ? •••ghs , the other to sir Martin forbisher ; he wait other opportunity , when soon after , a mighty Caraque come in view , call the mother of God , which from the beak to the stern , be a hundred threescore and five foot long , build with seven deck , and carry six hundred man , beside rich merchandise . this great vessel they take , and in it , to the ••lue of a hundred and fifty thousand pound sterling , over and above what the commander and seaman pilfer . this year , the queen go in progress , pass through Oxford , where she be entertain by the scholar with oration , stage-pl•yes , and disputation ; and by the lord Buckhurst chancellor of the Uni ? versity , with a sumptuous feast . at her departure , she make a latin oration , wherein she vow a vow , and give they counsel ; her vow be , that as she desire nothing so much , as the prosperity and flourish estate of her kingdom , so she as much wish to see the university and school of learning to flourish likewise . her counsel be , that they will serve God above all , not follow the curiosity of some wit , but the law of God , and the kingdom , that they will not prevent the law , but follow they , nor dispute whether better law may be make , but observe those which be already enact . this year , die Anthony brown viscount Montacute , who queen mary honour with this title ; because his grandmother be daughter , and one of the heir of John Nevil Marquesse Montacute ; who , though he be a great Roman catholic , yet the queen find he faith ? full always , love he , and in his sickness go to visit he . there die at this time also , Henry lord Scroop of Bolton , knight of the garter , and long time governor of the western border towards Scotland . at this time Henry Barrow , and his sectary , condemn the church of England to be no christian church , and derogate from the queen au ? thority in matter ecclesiastical ; he the say barrow , as ringleader of the rest , be put to death , in terror to all such disturber of the peace of the church . about this time , by reason of the queen correspondence with the Turk , to the end , her subject may have free trade in his territory ; it be malicious give out by some , that she have excite the Turk to a war against the Christians ; which cause the queen to write to the Em ? perour , show he the falseness of this report , wherein she give he full sa••sfaction . and now a constant report come into England , that the king of France have already embrace , or be ready to embrace the romish religion , which so much trouble the queen , that she present send Thomas Wilkes into France ; with reason ( if it be not too late ) to divert he from it . but before Wilkes come , the king indeed have open profess the romish religion , at the church of saint Denis in Paris ; of which his conversion , he declare the cause to Wilkes at large , show , the necessity of it , unless he will suffer himself to be utter thrust out of the kingdom . and the french ambassador signify as much to the queen , in great perplexity , she write to he to this effect . Alas , what grief ? what anxiety of mind have befall i , since i hear this news ? be it possible that worldly respect shall make you lay aside God fear ? ••uld you think , that he , who have hitherto uphold and keep you , will now at the last , leave you ? it be a dangerous thing to do evil , that g•od page 90 may come thereof . but i hope your mind may alter ; in the mean while , i will pray for you , and beg of God , that the hand of Esau , may not hinder the blessing of Jacob. to this the king answer , that though he have do this in his own person out of necessity ; yet , he will never be want to those of the reform religion , but will take they into his special care and protection . and now be Richard Hasket , condemn and execute for Treaso• , be ? king send from the english fugitive beyond sea , to persuade Ferdinand earl of Derby , son to Henry new decease , to assume the title of the kingdom ; by right of descent from Mary , daughter to Henry the seven ; and threaten he , that unless he undertake this enterprise , and withal , conceal he the abettor , he shall short dye in most wretched manner . but the earl fear a trap be lay for he , re ? veal the matter ; yet the fellow threat prove not altogether vain , for the earl within four month , die a most horrible death . this year , death have his tribute pay he from the nobility ; for there die Henry Ratcliff earl of Sussex , and three renown baron , Arthur grey of Wilton , Henry lord Cromwell , and Henry lord go ? worth ; beside sir Christopher Carlile , who warlike prowess at sea and land , deserve to be remember . in Ireland , at this time , diverse great man in Connaght rebel ? lead ; and Tu•logh leynigh be dead , tir-oen assume to himself , the title of o-neal , ( which in Ireland be more esteem , than to be call emperovr ) but upon a sudden , dissemble his this ? conte•t , he submit himself to the depvty , and promise all obedience . I• be now the year 1594 , and the seven and thirty of queen ELIZABETH• reign ; when the good correspondence between the king of Scot and queen Elizabeth , give the papist small hope that ever he will prove a instrument to restore the catholic religion . whereupon , they begin to bethink themselves of some English papist , that may succeed the queen ; but find none of their own sect , a fit person , they fix their thought upon the earl of Essex , who always seem a very moderate man ; and he they devise to have some right to the crown , by descent from Thomas of Woodstock , king EDVVARD the three son . but the english fugitive , be for the infanta of Spain , and desire to set the king of Scot and the earl of Essex at odds ; they set forth a book , which they dedicate to Essex , under the name of Doleman , but be write indeed by parson ( dolemans bitter adversary ) cardinal Allen , and Francis Englefield . the scope of which book be , to exclude from succession , all person whatsoever , and how near soever ally to the crown , unless they be roman catholic ; contend further , for the right of Isabel , infanta of Spain , as be descend from Constance , daughter of William the conqueror ; from Eleanor old daughter to Henry the second , marry to Alphonso the nine king of Castille ; from Beatrix , daughter to king Henry the three , title obsolete , and which exceed the bound of heraldry to discuss . this year , the nineteenth of February , be Henry prince of Scotland bear , to who the queen be godmother , and send Robert earl of Sussex for her deputy . but now great matter be in hand , plot be lay against the queen life ; some Spaniards think to make she away by poison , and not dare to trust any Englishman in such a business ; they treat to that purpose , with Roderick Lopes a JEV• , and physician to the queen , page 91 wi•h Stephen Ferreir• , Emmanuel loyfie , and other portugall ; for diverse of that nation come into England at this time , in relation to don Anthonio• who be discover by letter of they , that be intercept , be be ? reign at Guildhall , and by their own confession convince , to have con ? spi•ed against the life of the queen , they be all condemn , and Exe ? •••ed at Tyburn ; LOPES profess that he love the queen , as well as Jesus Christ , which be cause of laughter to them• that know he to be a jevv . the next day after they , be condemn Patrick C•llen• a irish fencer , send hither by the english fugitive , to kill the queen , who be straightway execute , though he be at that very time sick and ready to dye . about this time , sir John Norris have be in a hot conflict at sea a ? against the Spaniard , where sir Martin forbisher receive his death wound , be now call home , with a purpose to send he into Ireland . in which mean while , Richard Hawkins , son of sir John Hawkins the famous sea captain , have be set forth a year since , with three of the queen ship , and two hundred man in they ; whereof , one of they at the isle o• saint Anne , be by chance fire , another of they separate by tempest , return into England ; himself in the three , pass the strait of ma ? gellan , be the six man in the spanish account , that have ever do it ; and be now come into the wide southern sea , he take five ship la ? den with merchandise ; one whereof he take away , the rest he suffer to redeem themselves for two thousand ducat : but at last , be set upon by Bertrandus a Castro , who be send out by the viceroy of those part , with eight ship against he ; after three day battery , he yield , and though upon composition , yet be nevertheless send into Spain , and there for diverse year keep prisoner . but Iames Lancaster in another part of America , have better suc ? cease ; for be set forth by some London merchant ( who good the Spaniard have seize ) with three ship and a long boat , he take nine and thirty spanish ship , and at fernanbucke in Brasile , where the wealth of a East-Indian Caraque be late unlade ; he desperate venture upon the shore , load fifteen ship with the wealth of the indian caraque ; sugar , reed , Redwood call Brasill , and other merchandise , and then safe and victorious return home . at Rome , about this time die cardinal Allen , bear in Lancashire of a honest family , bring up in Oxford , in oriall col ? ledge . in queen Mary day he be proctor of the university , and after canon of the cathedral church at York . upon the change of religion in England , he leave the kingdom , and be divinity professor at Douai in Flanders , and make canon of the church at Cambray . he procure a seminary to be set up in Douai , for the Eng ? lish , another at Rheims , and a three at room ; and through zeal of the Ro ? mish religion , forget who subject he be bear . at home , at this time , die John Peers archbishop of York , in who place , succeed Matthew Hutton , translate from the see of Durham . there die also Ferdinand Stanley earl of Derby , be in the flower of his age , miserable torment , and vomit •tuffe of a dark rusty counterfeit ? lour , be think to have be poison or bewitch . there be find in his chamber a little image of wax , with hair of the colour of his hair , thrust into the belly ; which some thought be do of pur ? pose , that man shall not suspect he to be poison ; his vomit so stain the silver andiron , that it can never be get out , and his body though put in searcloathe and wrap in lead , do so •tinck and putrify , that for a long time none can endure to come near where he be bury . page 92 the master of his horse be much suspect , who the same day the earl take his bed , take one of his best horse , and flee away . about this time also die Gregory Fines lord Dacres , a man somewhat craze , the son of Thomas lord Dacres , hang in the reign of king Henry the eight . and now sir William Fitz William lord deputy of Ireland be call home , and William Russell young son of Francis earl of Bedford , be send in his room ; to who present come the earl of tir-oen , and in hum ? ble manner crave pardon of his fault , that he have not present himself at the call of the late lord deputy . Bagnall marshal of the irish force , exhibit many article against he , but he so plead for himself with promise of loyalty hereafter , that he be dismiss . but see the subdolous ? ness of this man , for he will never after be get to come again , though the deputy send for he with many kind message . it be now the year 1595 , and the eight and thirty year of queen Elizabeth reign ; when ed•ond York , and Richard Williams who be for ? mer apprehend , come to their trial , and be execute at Tyburn , for be bribe to kill the queen . at this time a constant rumor be blow abroad from all part of Europe , that the Spaniard be come again against England , with a far great fleet than that in eighty eight , and that it be already under sail ; where ? upon , soldier be levy , and place on the sea-coast . two navy be make ready , one to expect they at home in the channel ; the other , to go for America , under Hawkins and Drake ; but when all come to all , it be but certain Spaniards , who loose from the sea-coast of France , with four galley , which betimes in the morning land in Cornwall , fire a church stand alone in the field , and three village of fisherman , Neu ? line , Moushole , and Pensaus , and then present retire , not take or kill any one person ; and these be the first and last Spaniards , that in hostile manner •ver set foot upon english ground . and now mischief grow daily in France , a great number persuade the king , to conclude a peace with Spain , and the queen her self begin to mistrust he ; especial , have late receive intelligence out of the pope conclave ; that he be receive into the bosom of the church of Rome , with the pope benediction , and that upon condition prejudicial to the protestant . and therefore at this time , be diverse undertake of the english against Spain ; sir Walter Raleigh captain of the guard , have deflower a maid of honour ( who afterward he marry ) have lose the queen favour , and be hold in prison for certain month ; but afterward be set at liberty , though banish the court . he undertake a voyage to Guyana , set sail from Plymouth in February , he arrive at Trinidada , where he take saint Io ? seph town , but find not a jot of money there : from hence , with boat , and a hundred soldier , he enter the vast river Orenoque , range up in Guyana four hundred mile , but get little , but his labour for his travel . in like manner , Amias Preston and Sommers , pillage sundry town of the king of Spain in the western part ; and three ship of the earl of cum ? berland , set upon a huge caraque , which by casualty be fire when they be in fight , and these be the enterprise of private person : but the queen be inform , that great store of wealth for the king of Spain use , be convey to port Rico , in saint John island ; send thither Hawkins , Dr•k• , and baskervile with land force , furnish they with six ship out of her own navy , and twenty other man of war they set sail from plimmo•th the last of August , and seven and twenty day after , come upon the coast of the great canary , which be strong fortify , they for ? bore to assault . a month after , they come to the isle of saint Dominicke , where five spanish ship be send forth to watch the english , light upon page 93 one of the small english ship which be stray from the company , and •••ting the master and mariner upon the rack , understand by they , that the english navy be bend to port Rico ; whereupon they make all possible speed to give notice thereof , that be forewarned , they may accord ? ing be arm . and thereupon , as soon as the english have cast anchor ? ? ? the road at port Rico , the Spaniard thunder against they from the shore ; si•Nicholas Clifford , and Brutus Browne be wound as they sit at •upper , and two day after die . Hawkins also , and drake , partly of this ? ••se , and partly of grief for their ill success , die soon after . at the end of eight month , the fleet come home , have do the enemy little hurt , fire only some few town and ship , but receive infinite damage they ? s•lves ; lose two such seaman , as the kingdom , i may say , all Europe have •ot their like leave . for the Spaniard have of late year receive great ••rms by the french and english , have now provide for themselves with fortification which be not easy to be win . at this time the queen make know to the state in the Low-countries , the great charge she have be at in relieve they ten year together ; for which she requite some considerable recompense : the state again all ? leadge the great charge they be at in eighty eight , in repel the Spa ? niard in her cause ; yet ( not to fall out about the matter ) they be content to allow some reasonable retribution ; but yet for the present , nothing be conclude . likewise at this time , the hanse town in Germany make come ? plaint to the emperor , and the prince of the empire , that the Immuni ? tie from custom ancient grant they by the king of England , begin to be antiquate , and that a monopoly of english merchant be set up in Germany ; to which , the queen by sir Christopher Perkins , first show the cause of the first grant , and then the reason of queen Mary prohibit it afterward , make they so satisfactory a answer , that those very hanse-town which complain , bring into England at this time , such store of corn , that it prevent a mutiny , which through dearth of corn , be like to have happen in London . this year be famous for the death of many great personage , Philip earl of Arundel , condemn in the year 1589. the queen have all this while spare , but now death will spare he no long , have since that time be whole give to contemplation , and macerate himself in a strict course of religion , leave one only son , Thomas , by his wife Anne Dacres of Gillis•and . he have two brother , Thomas lord Howard , who queen Elizabeth make baron of Walden , and king Iames afterward earl of Suffolk ; and William lord Howard of the north , who yet live ; and one sister , the lady Margaret , marry to Robert Sackvile , afterward earl of D•rset , and father of Edward earl of Dorset now live ; a lady so mild , so virtuous , and so devout in her religion , that if her brother macerate himself be in prison , she certain do no less , be at liberty ; who i the rather mention , because i have the happiness to know her live , and the unhappiness to be a mourner at her funeral . there die this year also , William lord Vaulx , a zealous papist , and sir Thomas hineage , vice-cham ? berlain , and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster , who only daughter marry to sir Moyle finch of Kent , be no small advancer of that house . there die also William Whitaker , master of S. John college in cam ? bridge , and divinity professor : as likewise sir Roger Williams , and sir tho ? mass Morgan ; so as this year be honour with the death of two great lord , one exquisite courtier , one great scholar , and two famous soldier . in Ireland at this time , Russell the deputy doubt a storm of war from tir-oen , send into England , require to have some experience soldier send to he with force , who though he desire baskervyle to be the man , yet page 94 sir John Norris be send , with thirteen hundred old soldier , beside a further supply ; who tir-oen hear to be come , set present upon the fort of Blackwater , and in the absence of Edward Cornwall the governor , take it . but now be doubtful of his case , in a subdolous manner ( as he be a double deal man ) he both offer his help to the earl of Kil ? dare , against the deputy servant ; and at the same time , make promise to the earl of Ormond , and sir Henry wallop , of loyalty and obedience ; but notwithstanding he be forthwith proclaim traitor , under the name of H•gh oh Neal , bastard son to con oh Neal. there be at this time with the rebel in Ulster , a thousand horse , and 6280 foot : and in Connaght , two thousand three hundred , all at tir Oens command ; and the force of the english under Norris , not much few , with who the deputy himself join , and march together to Armagh ; which so terrify the rebel , that tir even forsake the fort of Blackwater , begin to hide himself . whereupon the deputy return , leave Norris to follow the war , with the title of general of the army . but this satisfy not Norris , and there ? fore out of emulation betwixt himself and the deputy , he perform nothing worth the speak of , and seem to favour tir even , as much as the de ? puty hate he ; insomuch , as he have private conference with he ( a thing not lawful with proclaim traitor ) and upon his submission , and ho ? stage give , a truce be grant both to he and Odonell , till the first of Ian•ary . when the truce be expire , tir even exhibit certain Petiti ? once , protest , if they be grant , he will then perform all duty of a loyal subject . in consult about which petition , another truce be conclude , till the first of April : during which truce , tir even deal secret ? lie with the king of Spain for aid to be send he , make nevertheless a fair show of willingness to obedience , so far , that by the procurement of Norris and Fenton , a pardon be grant he ; the which he pretend to receive more joyful , than the instrument whicd confer the earldom upon he ; yet all this be but dissimulation , to win the time for his own end . in the midst of these irish affair , Albertus archduke of Austria , and cardinal , who the king of Spain have new set over the Netherlands , muster together the spanish force , upon pretence of raise the siege of la fere in Picardy ; but upon a sudden turn aside , and besiege Calais ; and take Newnham fort , the very first day become master of the haven . the queen inform hereof , forthwith , upon the very Sunday , in time of divine service , command to levy soldier , who she commit to the earl of Essex ; but before they can be ship , certain news come , that the town and fort be take by the Spaniard : whereupon , the queen army be dismiss , and only some money lend to the french king . but a few day after , a far great , and more select army be raise in England , wherein many of noble house serve as voluntary : for the queen , to divert the king of Spain from invade her border , think it the best way to invade his : whereupon a navy of a hundred and fifty ship be make ready ; where be soldier under pay , 6360 ; Volunta ? rise of the nobility and gentry , 1000 ; mariner , 6772 , beside the Dutchman , who bring two and twenty ship . Robert earl of Essex , and Charles Howard lord admiral of England , be make general with equal authority ; but the admiral to hold prerogative at sea , Essex at land to these , for a council of war , be join , the lord Thomas Howard , Walter Raleigh , Francis Vere , George Carew , and Conyers Clifford . the whole fleet be divide into four squadron ; the admiral command the first , Essex the second , the lord Thomas Howard the three , and Raleigh the four . the officer of the army be Francis Vere , sergeant major general , or page 95 marshal ; John Winkfield , quartermaster general ; George Carew , master of the ordnance ; Conyers Clifford sergeant major . colonel be , Ro ? be•t earl of Sussex , sir Christopher blunt , sir Thomas Gerrard , sir Richard Winkefield ; William winkefild be commander of the vo•untaries , and Anthony Ashley , secretary to the council of war , be to register their act and consultation . the commission be draw , the queen give they private instruction , and withal , a prayer of her own make , to be d•ily use in every Ship. this f•eet set forth from Plymouth at the begin of June . Nigh un ? •o Cabo S. Vincent they light upon a irish bark , which tell they , that at Cales they be secure , and that in the haven there be at anchor galley , ship of War• and a great many merchant vessel . the twenty of June , they cast anchor on the west side of the island ; within two day they be agree to set upon the spanish ship , where ? at the earl of Essex cast up his cap for joy . this business be allot ? •ed to the lesser ship , because the road be too shallow for the great . the galley quick flee , and creep along the shore , shift away , but the spanish ship that lie at anchor at puntall , turn their broad side ; so as the english fight with they , last from break of day till noon ; at which time , the Spaniard have their gallon miserable tor• , and many of their man slay , resolve to fire the the ship , or run they ashore . the spanish admiral , be fifteen hundred tun of burden , be fire by a moor , and two other ship which lie next she take the fire , and be lose likewise . when this sea-fight be end , Essex land eight hundred soldier at puntall , a league from the town of Cales , when half a mile from the town , the spanish horse and foot show they ? self , and present give back again ; but straightway come forth a great number : then Essex command his force to make a fair re ? treat ; and have entice forth their enemy , they turn upon they with such violence , that they force they back into the town . then the earl get up to a bulwark new raise , near the gate , where he spy a pass ? sage into the Town• but so high from ground , that they must leap a spear length to get down . yet Evans the earl of Sussex his lieutenant , Arthur sa ? vage , and other , leap down ; and the mean while sir Francis Vere break the gate , and rush in , and the rest with he . in the market place John Winkfield be shoot in the head , and with stone from the top of the house diverse be wound ; among who , Samuel Bagnall receive eight wound , and Arthur Savage be bloody all over ; which two be knight in the place . the next day the castle be yield , upon condition , that the inhabitant may depart with the clothes on their back , the rest to be leave for spoil . for five hundred and fourscore thousand ducat the castle be to be re ? deem ; and for the payment , forty of the chief citizen to be send Hosta ? ges into England . now Raleigh be command to fire the merchant ship lie at port real , when they promise two million of ducat to redeem they : but this the admiral will not hear of , say , he be send to de ? destroy ship , not to dismiss they upon composition . a world of munition be find in the city , and great store of money private carry away , eve ? ry one shift for himself . it be think by the wise sort , that the Spa ? niard can not be damnify less by this expedition , than twenty million of ducat . none of note be slay among the english , but only wink ? field , who also slay a spanish captain ; and now at last , threescore military man be honour with knighthood . after this , have spoil the whole Island• and demolish the Forts• they return into England , much against the will of Essex , who will fain have be attempt some other enterprise . the queen receive they home with much affability , give many thank to those of principal note , but extol the earl of Essex and the page 96 admiral , above the rest . and now bethink her self of a fit man to be governor of the Bryll , which be give by the state as a caution town for money due , she make choice of sir Francis Vere , although Essex come ? mend other to she for the place : but another thing he take with great in ? dignation , that in his absence she have make sir Robert Cecill secretary , whereas he have former with great instance commend sir Thomas Bodley to her• and now the king of Spain , to recover his honour lose at Cales , set forth a navy for England and Ireland , with a great number of irish Fugi ? tives• but be at sea , most of his ship be either run upon rock , or cast away in storm ; so as this expedition come to nothing . but the queen at this time , for her better security , enter a league of defence and offence with the french king , against the Spaniard , upon cer ? tain condition ; which league , she confirm by oath , in the chapel at Greenwich , the nine and twenty of August , lay her hand upon the hand of Henry de la tour , duke of bulloign , and martial of France ; the bishop of Chichester hold forth the evangelist , and a great company of the no ? bility stand round about . in September follow , Gilbert Talbot , earl of Shrewsbury , be send on ambassage into France , to take the french king oath , and to present sir Anthony Mildmay for the queen ambassador in ordinary , in the room of sir Henry Unton late there decease , and to in ? ve the king with the order of the garter . Soon after , baskervile waft into Picardy with two thousand soldier ; for no more be by agreement to be send this year . it be now the year , 1596 , and the nine and thirty of queen Eliza ? beth reign , when Thomas Arundel of Warder return into England , from the war in Hungary against the Turk ; who , for his good service do there• the emperor by his letter patent , have create earl of the sacred empire , and all and singular his heir and their posterity , male or female , lawful descend from he , to be earl and countess of the holy empire for ever . those who be grace with this title , have a place and voice in the imperial diet , may purchase land in the emperor dominion , may take up voluntary soldier , and be not bind to a ? swer any matter before any judge , but only in the chamber of the empire . at his return , a great question come in agitation , whether title of honour give to the queen subject without her privity , aught to be accept by they , or admit by she . for this new earl stick in the stomach of the english baron , who inward grudge to give he place . the matter be long dispute on both side , but what issue it have , or whether he be permit this honour here at home , i find not : certain it be , that sir Nicholas Clifford , and sir Anthony Shirley , who the french king two year since receive into the order of saint mi ? chael , be lay in prison at their come home , and charge to resign their robe of the order . this year many great person die ; John Puckering , lord keeper of the great seal , who Thomas Egerton succeed ; Richard Fletcher , bishop of London ; who for marry the lady Baker ( as goodly a lady as he be a prelate ) incur the queen displeasure ; and to cure his care , fall he ? moderate to drink of tobacco , and so expire . Henry Cary , ba ? run of Hunsdon , lord chamberlain of her majesty house , and her cousin germane . sir Francis knoll , who marry hunsdons sister , in queen Mary day a exile in Germany for the gospel , by queen Elizabeth make first vice-chamberlain , than captain of the guard , afterward trea ? sure of the household , and knight of the garter . Henry Hastings earl of Hu•tington , and precedent of the counsel in the north , who spend his estate upon Puritan minister : Francis lord Hastings , nephew to he by his page 97 brother George , who succeed he in the earldom , and Margaret Clifford countess of Derbie , ( who descend of the blood royal , from Charles Brandon ) consult with sorcerer and cunning man , and thereupon a little before her end , be in a manner exclude from the queen favour . the queen at this time be tell , that the king of Spain be prepare a new fleet against Ireland ; whereupon to encounter he , she also prepa ? red a navy of a hundred and twenty ship , seventeen of the queen , three and forty lesser ship of war , the rest for the carriage of provision : they be part into three squadron : Essex command the first , who be also chief commander in the expedition ; the lord Thomas Howard the second , and Raliegh the three . in this fleet be sundry of the nobility and gentry , Charles blunt , lord Mountjoy , Vere , Carew , sir Christopher blunt , the earl of Rutland and sou ? thampton ; the lord , grey , Crumwell , rich , and many other . the nine of July they weigh anchor from Plymouth and be to direct their course to feral and the groin , to seize upon the spanish fleet in the harbour , and towards the isle call azore , to intercept the indi•n fleet at their return into Spain ; but this expedition be cross and over ? throw by tempest , for they have not sail forty league from Plymouth , when they be shake with such a terrible tempest for four day together , that the mariner themselves be at their wit end , and the fleet have much a do to recover plimmo•th ; the na ? vy be mend , then hoist up sail the second time , but the wind •ell present again so cross , that for a whole month time they can not get out of the haven , return to Plymouth the seven ? teenth of August they get out of the haven ; and now the three time , with a side wind hoist up sail , but before they come in view of Spain , they be disperse by another horrible Tempest• wherein of the two great ship which be take at Calis , one be dash in piece , the o ? there wander no man know whither . at the island Flores the fleet meet again , where Raleigh be distress for water , go on shore with ? out leave ; and ere he have water , have charge to follow Essex to faith ? •ll : but not find he there , he observe the port , and call a council , the commander wish he to set upon the place , and not let slip so fair a booty . upon this , Raleigh with some of the prime voluntary , get to shore , and win the town , but find no boo ? ty in it . the next day Essex come thither , who Merrick inform what Raleigh have do , affirm spiteful , that he have do it on ? lie to prevent his lordship in the honour of the exploit : where ? upon , some persuade the earl to call a council of war and than d••place he , other again ? to take of his head for go to land , without the chief commander leave ; say , he be never like for to have such another opportunity to be rid of his adversary ; up ? on this , Sidney , Brett , berry , and other of rawleigh company be displace , and lay by the heal ; Raleigh himself be send for , and entertain with a grim look by Essex and all his party ; Essex rebu ? keth he angry , for land his force , which none upon pain of death may do , without the general command ; Raleigh make answer , that the captain indeed , shipmaster and the rest be within the compass of that law ; but not the three prime commander , of who himself be one : that he have a long time wait his come , and long will have wait , but that the islander provoke he to fight . and now the lord Thomas Howard mediate , that no severity may be use against Raleigh , and perswa ? dead he to acknowledge his fault ; which be do , all be friend , and the displace captain be restore to their place , for the earl be of a placable disposition ; easy apt to take offence , and as easy ready to remit it . page 98 from hence they sail to gratiosa , where the inhabitant crave mercy and obtain it ; and here Essex will have tarry , in expectation of the indian fleet ; but that grave the pilot dissuade , because the harbour be not good : and now see the unluckiness of ill counsel , for the english be not go above a hour , or two , •rom this place ; when lo , the Ameri ? can fleet ; ( wherein be forty ship , and seven of they load with treasure ) come thither ; which , hear that the english be there about , direct their course to Tezcera , where they gain the ha ? when , all but three ship , indifferent wealthy ; which English take : and then be mind to set upon the rest , in the port ; but find the attempt not forcible , they pass from hence , to saint michaell ; where Southampton , Rutland , Evers , Bredon and Dockwray , be Knighted• and then Essex land within six mile of the town ; nigh unto villa Franca , a fair town , and well furnish with marchan ? dize ; wine , wood , and corn ; where they tarry six day : and the common soldier find good booty . and now a caraque be espy , come out of the east Indies ; which , by a warn piece shoot off in a dutch ship , perceive that the english be there ; run herself a shore , unload her merchandise , and then fire herself . thus the english have ill luck every where in this expedition : and the nine of October they hoist sail for England ; but within two day , a ter ? rible tempest , from the northward disperse they ; and the spanish fleet also at the same time , so as they never come in view of one another : one Spanish ship be cast upon Dertmouth , the mariner and soldier half starve in she ; who intimate , that the spanish fleet in ? tend to seize upon some haven in Cornwall , which be nigh the mouth of the channel ; may be convenient to receive force from Spain : but the divine providence frustrate the design both of the Spaniard and the english . but now at his return , the earl of Essex find that do in Eng ? land , in his absence , which infinite discontent he : sir Robert Cicill make chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster ; and which be more , Charles lord Howard , create earl of Nottingham , with relation in his patent to the victory in eighty eight ; and his good service at Cales : this glory he envy he , and beside stomach it ; that he must now take place of he . it be enact in the reign of Henry the eight , that the chief officer of the kingdom , shall have presidence of all man of their degree . whereupon the queen , to give he content , be fain to create he earl martial of England ; by which he recover his place again . about this time , a ambassador come into England , from the king of Poland ; who , when the queen expect he shall give her thank for have procure a peace between the king his master , and the Turk , he clean contrary expostulate unkindness , for breach of privilege in trade with Spain , require a present remedy , or else the king will otherways right himself . the queen not a little offend , sudden reply , •ow be i deceive ? i expect a Em ? bassadour , and behold a herald ; such a speech i never hear in all my life time : and after some further check of he for his boldness , she refer he to her council ; and then retire into her closet . the ambassador afterward , in private conference with some of the council , excuse himself , say , that his speech be pen ? ned by other , and then give he in wright . to his message , the council give the like answer ; as they have give before the hanse-towne , upon the like occasion : though now again , the hanse-towne obtain of the emperor , to prohibit the english from trade page 99 in Germany , which make the queen to prohibit the house town from tra ? ding in England , and put they out of the Stilyard till this difference be accord . this year the chancellor of Denmark come into England to restore the garter , which she have bestow upon the king father , and withal offer the king help , to make a peace for the queen with the Spaniard . the queen thank he ; but mean not to use his help for that which she do not desire , and especial not now , when he have new molest the king of France her ally , and have take Amiens the strong town of Picardy : though why shall the queen be so tender of the french king , when now to get a aid of four thousand soldier from she , he fall to devise ; intimate unto she , that he be now offer by the pope nuntio a very commodious peace , if he will but forsake she . but while these thing be in treaty , Amiens be recover a ? gain by the valour of Baskervile ( who die at the siege ) and of sir Arthur savage , as the king in his letter to the queen thankful ? lie acknowledge . about this time a parliament be hold at Westminster , where subsidy be willing grant ; and to this parliament be call the lord la ware and restore to his blood , which by act of parliament in the reign of king Edward the six be taint ; also to this parliament be call Thomas lord HOVVARD , by the title of ba ? run Howard of Walden . in Ireland at this time , a great part of Ulster , and almost all con ? nacht be in rebellion ; whereupon Russell the deputy be call home , and Thomas lord Burrough send in his place , a man very stout and courageous , but no soldier : this infinite discontent Norris , who think himself sure of the place himself , and now to see his rival prefer before he , and himself to be under he , Presi ? dent of Munster , drive he into such a melancholy , that in a very short time , ( and as he think to himself with much disgrace ) he en ? dead his life . and now the farle of tir-oen crave , and obtain a month truce of the new deputy , at the month end , the deputy march against the rebel , and gain the fort at Blackwater , when sudden ? lie the rebel sl•w themselves upon a hill hard by , against who the earl of Kildare march and put they to flight ; but yet with some loss of his own side , as Francis Vaughan the deputy brother in law , Turner a sergeant major , and two foster , brother of the earl of Kildare , whole death he take so heavy , that within a few day he die himself . as soon as the people have fortify the castle at Blackwater and withdraw his army , the rebel begin to besiege it again ; ( for this be the main place of their strength ) which cause the deputy with all possible speed to make thither , but unhappy die by the way . whereupon the rebel set upon the fort more fierce than before ; but be still reppel ; they comfort themselves with this , that there be not many day provision leave in the fort ; yet the admirable fortitude of Thomas Williams the captain , and the garrison soldier save the place , who , when their horseflesh be all spend , feed upon weed grow within the trench , and endure all kind of mouse ? ry . and now the lord Burrough the deputy be dead , the army by direction from England , be commit to the earl of Ormond , and the government to two lord justice , Adam Lofthouse arch ? bishop of Dublin and chancellor , and Robert gardener : to this new lieutenant , tir-oen exhibit a bill of his oppression and grievance page 100 with request of pardon , and at the same time stir up mac-hugh to a new rebellion in Leinster . in France at this time , the french king be importune by the pope , and by his own subject , begin to incline to a peace with Spain , which the queen understanding , she send into France , sir Robert Cecill , Herbert and W•lks , ( who die at his land in France : ) the state likewise send thither , Iustine of Nassaw , and barnevolt , and other likewise into England to this ? suade the peace : but notwithstanding all they can say , or do , the french king short after conclude a peace , to the great discontentment of the queen and the state , but to the great good , and establishment of the french commonwealth . and now the queen provide for her own and her people safety , send sir Francis veer to the state , to know if they be willing to join in a trea ? ty of peace with the Spaniard ; if not , what they will afford towards a war ; and to deal earnest with they , about repayment of money due to she from they . at home in the mean time , a great consultation be hold , whither a peace with Spain be convenient for England , or no ; and many reason be on both side allege . Burleigh lord Treasu ? rer be for peace , Essex for war , and so vehement in it , that the treasurer , after a long debate , in a strange manner of presage , rea ? she|will forth the book of the psalm to he , point he to that verse , the bloody mind man shall not live out half his day . which make es ? sex afterward to set forth a apology , with reason for justification of his opinion . but now another consultation be hold , about a fit man to be deputy of Ireland ; the queen intend to send sir William Knolles , Essex his uncle ; but Essex be violent for sir George Carew , who he have a mind to remove from the court ; and when he can not by any mean persuade the queen to it , he then , forget himself and his duty , uncivil and contemptuous turn his back upon the queen , mutter ? i•g certain word . whereupon she grow impatient , give he a box on the ear , and bid he be go with a vengeance ; Essex lay his hand upon his sword hilt , and swear a great oath , that he can not , nor will not put up such a indignity ; and that he will not have take it at king Henry the eight his hand ; and so in a rage flun• away from the court . but afterward , admonish by the lord keeper , he become more mild , and in a short time , return into the queen favour . about this time , William Cecill lord Burleigh , and high treasurer of eng•and , find himself to droop with age , ( for he be now three ? score and seventeen year old ) send letter to the queen , entreat she to release he of his public charge ; whereupon she go to vi ? sit , and comfort he , but within a few day he end his life , of ? ter he have be the principal stay of the english commonwealth for many year together . one great good he do to his country , a little before his death , that he bring the state of the Low-countries to a composition , for the payment of eight hundred thousand pound , by thirty thousand pound year ; likewise , a new league to be con ? clude with they . the king of Denmarks Subjects have late seize upon some good of the english as prize , to the value of a hundred thousand dollar ; the queen send the lord zouch , and Christopher Perkins doctor of law , in Em ? bassage to the Dane , both to congratulate his late marriage with the elector daughter of Brandenburg ; and also to crave restitution of the english good ; who obtain , that in lieu thereof , threescore thousand dollar be repay . and now George Clifford earl of Cumberland , have with page 101 a navy of eleven ship , wait for Portugal Cariques , and the American fle•t , till the season of the year be pass ( they not dare to stir forth ) he at last set upon Port-Rico and take it ; but seven hundred of his man fall sick of calenture , and die within forty day , he be fain to return home with some honour , but little profit . about this time , one Edward squire be arraign of high treason , he have be at first a ordinary scrivener , afterward a groom in the queen ; stable , and go as a soldier in drake last expedition , be take pri ? soon and carry into Spain , there he come acquaint with one wallpoole a english Jesuite , who cause he to be put into the inquisi ? cion for a heretic , and the fellow taste of misery , be easy draw to become a papist , and afterward to attempt anything for the catholique cause . his ghostly father persuade he it be meritorious to make away the queen and the earl of Essex , and send he into England with a cer ? tain poison , wherewith to anoint the pommel of the queen saddle , and the chair in which the earl shall sit , which he accord perform , but neither of they take effect , whereupon wallpoole suspe ? ct squire fidelity be bend to revenge it , and send one into England , who in general term shall lay this aspersion upon he ; whereupon squire be call in question , and never think that his confessor will detect he , direct deny all at first ; but after see himself betray , confess all the matter and be execute . this whole year the rebellion be hot in Ireland ; for tir-oen not ? withstand his pardon late obt•ined , all on a sudden besiege the fort at Blackwater , to the raise of which siege , the lieutenant general ( for there be as yet no deputy ) send 13 company under the command of the martial , tir-oens sworre adversary , he tir-oen slay , and put his whole army to rout , and achieve such a victory , with so great loss to the Eng ? lish , as they have never •elt the like since they first set foot in Ireland• for thirteen valiant commander ; and fifteen hundred common soldier be slay at this skirmish , and soon after the fort of Blackwater be yield up . and now tir-oens fame begin to resound , as the assertor of the liberty of the nation , and upon a sudden all Munster break forth in ? to rebellion . for the cherish whereof tir-oen send thither o•ny mac-rorye and Tyrell ( who original a Englishman , be grow a deadly enemy to the english nation ) with four hundred kern . against these ; Thomas nor ? ris precedent of the province , march to Killmallock with a good force ; but find that the irish soldier of his company be ready to revolt , he be fain to disperse his army and retire to cork . hereupon the rebel grow insolent , spoil the country , and in cruel manner put all the english to the sword . Furthermore they declare Fitz Thomas to be earl of Desmond• but upon condition he shall hold of o-neal• , that be , of tir-oen , who now dispatch letter to the Spaniard , relate his victory to the full , and vow to accept no term of peace with the english , and yet at the same instant ( after his wont treacherous manner ) proof ? read some kind of submission to the lieutenant ; but withal make un ? reasonable demand . the state of Ireland be thus in combustion , a serious consultation be hold who to send to quench it , the queen and most of the counsel think sir Charles blunt lord Mountjoy the fit man• but Essex covert in ? timate , that he have no military experience , and beside be too bookish to prove a good commander , he seem to aim at the place for himself , though he make a show modest to refuse it , and yet still ready with his exception if any other be nominated• many think it dangerous to have a army put into his hand , for his follower talk of great matter , that he ( for ? sooth ) be descend of the blood royal of Scotland and England , page 102 and have better right to the crown , than any other of the competitor . in conclusion , he be appoint viceroy ; with ample authority , to make war or conclude peace , and pardon all offender , even tir-oen himself . a army be allot he as great as he desire : indeed great than ever Ireland have see before ; twenty thousand foot , and thirteen Hun ? dread horse : with these , and a great retinue beside of the nobility , he pass into Ireland ; where as soon as he have take the sword , contrary to his commission ( which be to go immediate against the arch-rebell ) he march towards Munster , against the petty rebel , take the castle of Cahir , and drive the rebel into the wood and grove adjoin . his force be now impair , he tarri to make they up ; but in the mean time send direction to sir conier Clifford , precedent of connacht , to set upon the rebel in one place , ( thereby to sever their force ) while he as ? sault they in another ; Clifford march towards belike , with 1500. soldier , where the rebel be upon they at unaware , under the conduct of o-rorke , ( his son that be hang here in England ) the english re ? pell they at first with ease , and march along , but the rebel find they want powder , set upon they again , and put they to flight ; in which skirmish , Clifford and many of the old soldier be slay . Essex have by this time receive new supply out of England , and a check for neglect the queen command , set forth at length towards the border of Ulster , with thirteen hundred foot , and five hundred horse , be come thither , tir-oen by a messenger request parley , Essex refuse say , he may speak with he the next morning , between the two be ? mye ; the next day , word be bring to Essex , that tir-oen crave the queen mercy , and that he may only be hear speak , appoint the shallow of Balla clinch for a most convenient place ; thither come Essex alone , with who tir-oen ( ride his horse up to the girt ) have private conference a full hour ; a while after , con tir-oens base son come to Essex , request in his father name a second parley , and that some of the chief on both side may be present : Essex consent , so there come not more than six . at the day appoint , many word have not pass , but it be argue , that their delegate shall treat the next day concern a peace : between they it be conclude , that a truce shall be hold from six week to six week , till May•day . by this time , the queen understanding that no more be do , after so much time and money spend , in a great anger taxe the earl proceed , and i know not how , it fall from she to some other that stand by , that he have o ? the thought in his mind , than the good of his prince and country : and thereupon dispatch very sharp letter to he , blame his delay , and let slip every fair opportunity : with which letter Essex be so net ? lead and chief trouble , that the queen have now make Cecill master of the ward , which he expect himself : that he begin to cast strange project within his mind , and hold private consultation of return into England with part of his force , to surprise his adversary ; but from this course , the earl of Southampton , and sir Christopher blunt dissuade he , as be dangerous and wicked . yet within a month , over he go , and come to the court at Nonesuch ; to inform the queen of the state of Ireland . by the way , the lord grey of Welton cross he , but salu ? t he not ; who one of his follower offer to kill for his contempt : but Essex will not suffer he : and make such haste , that early in the morning he be upon his knee , before the queen in the privy chamber . she enteriain he courteous , but not with the countenance she be wont : and after a little talk , bid he keep in his chamber ; and soon after , commit he to custody , in the lord privy Seales house ; where enter into consideration of his case , he give himself page 103 whole to divine contemplation , and write wonderful letter to his friend , of the vanity of the thing of this life . it be now the year one thousand six hundred , and the two and for ? ti of queen Elizabeth kaign , when after the departure of the earl of Essex , tir-oen begin to carry himself as monarch of Ireland , and send kern to make spoil in the possession of such as continue in their loyalty to the queen , under Mac-Guir their captain , who light casual upon sir Warham saint Leger , thrust he through with a speer , and be himself thrust through withal . whereupon the queen send sir Charles blunt lord Montjoy , to take upon he the deputy place , who lose no time , but first of all march towards Ulster build a fort , within eight mile of Armagh , which , in honour of sir John Norris , under who he have his first military school , he call by the name of mount N•rris ; there he place Edward blanye who keep the rebel in awe in those pa••s , from thence back he go into leynster , wherein the glynne he reduce into order , donell-spaniah , Phelim mac-pheoph , and the re ? bell nation of the o-toole , take hostage of they , then back into Ulster again , be victor wheresoever he come , and at Tradagh , receive into protection Mac-Henry , mac-cowly , and other rebel who fall at his foot for mercy . all this and more he do in his first year , and no less successful be Carew precedent of Munster , who drive out of the county the titular earl of Desmond , and have find Munster a turbulent province in April , he overcome and make it so quiet by December follow , that the rebel maintain not one fort in it against the queen . and now a new consultation be hold in England , touch a peace with the king of Spain , the which he seek both by the french king , and by Alb•rtus the archduke , who be now return into the Netherlands out of Spain , where he be marry to the infanta . the queen consent to a treaty , leave it to the french king to nominate both the time and place for the meeting of the delegate , who set down the month of May , and Boulogne in France ; but now foresee that a question will arise a ? about precedency , some be appoint to search ancient record concern that point . Theise man find in the book of the ceremo ? nie of the court of Rome , which ( accord to the canon ) give rule to the rest , as the lady and mistress ; that among king , the first place be due to the king of France , the second to the king of England and the 3. to the king of Castille ; that the english quiet hold this privilege in the general counsel of Basill Constance , and other , beside the kingdom of Castille , which be the Spaniard first title , be but a upstart in regard of England , which have earl , but no king till the year one 1017. in like manner , that pope Iulius the three , give sentence for Henry the seven of England , against Ferdinand , who be then king of Castille . at the day appoint , the delegate meet at bulloign , sir Henry nevyll , Legier ambassador , sir John Herbert , Robert Beale , and tho ? mass Edmunds for the english , and other for the king of Spain and the archduke . the english have instruction , first concern preceden ? cy , in no case to give way to the king of Spain ; yet if they contend , to put the matter to the division of lot , rather than the treaty shall be dissolve ; and for the rest , to propose and mention the renew of the ancient burgundian league , freedom of come ? merce , etc at the meeting , when she have several show their counterfeit ? mission ; the Eng ? lish challenge the precedency , the Spaniard do the like , and in so peremptory a manner , that without it they will dissolve the treaty : page 104 hereupon the english make a proposition , to let pass the question of precedency ; and to transact the business by wright , and Messen ? gers between they : or that the treaty may be intermit only for threescore day , not quite break off ; but all be to no purpose ; and at three month end , they par ? t . the state the mean while , be so far from regard a peace , that at this time , they think upon reduce the sea coast of Flanders into their command• and thereupon they land a be ? my there , of fourteen thousand foot , and three thousand horse under the conduct of Maurice of Nasaw ; and fifteen hundered of the english under the command of sir Francis Vere , and his brother Horatio : at which true happen the famous bataile of Newport , against the archduke , wherein nine thousand of the Spaniard be slay ; and the victory by the valour of the english , fall to the dutch , for so forward be the english in this battle , that of their fif ? teen hundred , eight hundred be slay and sore wound , eight captain kill , and of the rest every man hurt . all this year , and the year past , sundry quarrel and complaint arise between the english and the french , touch reprisal of good take from each other by pirate of either nation : also touch custom and imposition , contrary to the treaty of Bloys , and deceit in english clothes , to the great infamy of our nation . in Denmark likewise arise controversy touch commerce , and the fish of the english upon the coast of island and Norway . the queen also either time , for the inn ¦ crease of navigation and commerce , found the company of East-India merchant , allow they large privilege : but whether , thi• have prove beneficial to the commonwealth , ( there have be by this mean such a mass of money and great store of other commodity c•rried out of the kingdom , and so many mariner lose every year ) wise man make a question . about this time also , pope Clement the eight , perceive the queen to be in her decline age , send two breeve into England , the one to the popish c•ergy . the other to the Layity , to suffer no person whatso ? ever , to take the kingdom upon he after the queen death , but one that shall promise by oath to promote with all his might , the Ro ? man catholic religion , how near soever otherwise , he be ally to the blood royal of the king of England . this year by reason of intemporate weather , happen a great scar ? city of corn in England , and thereby many grievous complaint be occasion . the common people cast out reproachful slander , a ? against the lord treasurer Buckhurst , as the grant of licence for transportation of corn ; but he appeal to the queen , she forth ? with defend his innocency , and make it know by open Proclama ? cion , impute the fault , upon the brogger of corn , and forestal ? lers of market , and give order that the slanderer shall be reprehend and punish . the earl of Essex , who have now be prisoner six month in the house of the lord privy Seale• he then begin to repent in good earnest , resolve to put away his perverse councillor , cylly Merick and Henry Cuffe , and then he show so much patience and great submission , that the queen then send he to his own house , and to be there confine , always protest that she will do nothing that shall be for his ruine• but only that , which shall be for his amendment . nevertheless , when as the common people extol his inn ? nocency , she can not , for the removal of suspicion of injustice , free her self page 105 and she counsellor , but bring he to a trial , not in the star-chamber , lest the censure shall fall too heavy on he ; but in the house of the lord privy seal , where the cause shall have a plain hear before the lord of the council , four earl , two baron , and four judge of the realm . the objection be , that contrary to his commission , he have make the earl of Southampton , general of the horse , have draw his force into Munster , neglect the arch-rebell tir-oen , entertain a parley with he , against the dignity of the queen majesty , and the person of a viceroy , which he represent ; and that the say parley be suspicious , in regard it be private . some aggravation the lawyer add from ab ? rupt sentence , in his letter to the lord privy seal , write two year since , as these ; no storm be more fierce than the indignation of a impotent prince . what ? can prince err ? may they not injure their subject , and such like . he fall upon his knee at the end of the board , profess he will not contest with the queen , nor excuse the fault of his young year , ei ? there in whole , or in part , protest that he always mean well , howso ? ever it fall out otherwise , and that now he will bid the world farewell , withal , shed many tear , so as the stander by weep also . yet can he not contain himself , but begin to plead excuse , till the lord privy seal interrupt he , advise he to proceed as he have begin , to fly to the queen mercy , who will not have he question for disloyalty , but only for a contempt ; and that he do not well to pretend obedience in word , which in deed he have not perform . at length , in the name of the rest , he pronounce this sentence against he ; that he shall be de ? pose from the office of a privy councillor , suspend from the function of the earl martial , and master of the ordnance , and be imprison du ? ring the queen pleasure . she have give express charge , not to suspend he from the office of master of the horse ( mind to take he short into favour ) and that his censure in no case shall be record . af•er this , he make show of wonderful humility and mortification , which so affect the queen , that short she remove Barkeley his keeper , and give he leave to go at large ; only admonish he , to make his own this ? cretion his keeper , and not to come at the court , or in her presence . after this sentence , cuff , who always persuade the earl to stand stout in his own defence , begin so plain to tax he of cowardice and pusillanimity ; that the earl in anger , command his name to be put out of the roll of his servant , yet Merrick the steward do it not , as be of cuff mind himself . Essex , be now ready to go into the country , remember himself to the queen , by the lord Henry Howard , in these word ; that he kiss the rod , and the queen hand , which have •nely correct , not overthrow he ; yet he shall never enjoy solid comfort , till he may see those bless eye , which have be his loadstar , whereby he have happy steer his course , while he hold on his way at lawful distance ; but now he resolve to eat grass with nebuchadnezzar , till it please the queen to restore his sense . she be great joy with these his speech ; will to God ( say she ) his deed may be answerable to his word ; he have long try my patience , i must now make trial of his humility . and now the earl grow so confident of thou Queens favour , that he be ? come a suitor to she for the farm of sweet wine ; but she to try his tem ? per , and with what mind he will bear a repulse , make he answer ; that she must first know what it be worth , and not give away thing hand over head ; and have oftentimes in her mouth , the aphorism of physician , that foul body , the more you nourish they , the more you corrupt they . and indeed , this be the right way to find , whether the ulcer of his mind be thorough cure or no ; for be not thorough cure , it will en ? dure page 106 not touch ; and no more do his , but as though every denial of a courtesy , be a injury that require revenge ; his melancholy be pre ? sent turn into choler , and now begin to hearken to cuff again ; tell he , that it be now plain , the queen determine to make he as poor as Job , that he shall live of the basket , and gather crumb under the ta ? ••e . hereupon he return to London , Southampton be send for out of the Low-countries , his door be set open for all comer , Merricke his steward receive to his own table decay soldier , discontent and audacious person ; sermon be make there every day by Puritan Mini ? ster , to which the citizen flock , and all sign of popularity appear ; which matter come to the queen ear , alienate her affection from he daily more and more ; but especial she be exasperate , that her person be despise by he ; for ( not to say the worst ) he have mutter , that the queen be now old and decrepit , and wither as well in mind as body . and now again , he run upon desperate counsel , for the removal of his adversary from the court , seek to serve himself into the king of Scot favour , to who he traduce his adversary , by name Raleigh , Cobham , Carew , Cecill , and the admiral , as incline to the spanish faction , and at one and the same time , seek to win to he both Puritan and pa ? pist . many be of his party , but few of his counsel ; and these be the earl of Southampton , sir Charles Davers , sir Ferdinando gorge , captain of the garrison of Plymouth , sir Christopher blunt , and some other . with these he meet private in Drury house to avoid suspicion , where he first gi ? ve they a catalogue of the nobility and gentry that favour he , to the number of a hundred and twenty . than they consult , whether it be better to set upon the tower of London , or the queen palace ; this latter they resolve upon , which shall be do in this manner . Blunt shall keep the great gate , with a select number of man , and Danvers seize upon the pre ? sense chamber : then Essex with his company shall come from the Mues , and present himself before the queen . but now suspicion arise from diverse circumstance , secretary Herbert be send to call he before the council , at the treasurer house ; but he doubt the matter , excu ? se himself , that he be not very well . and now the plot of seize upon the court , which have be four month in contrive , be by this mean quite dash , for they have ready at the present , neither soldier , nor muition , so as some speedy course must now be think on ; at which time very opportune come one to they ( set on no doubt by Essex his adver ? saries ) as if he have be send on purpose from the citizen , to promise he their aid , which make Essex to applaud his own great good fortune . and now be four of the lord , namely the lord keeper , the earl of Worcester , sir William Knolles , and the lord chief justice of England , send by the queen to Essex house , who can hardly be suffer to come , in , all their attendant be keep out , save he that carry the seal before the Kee ? per . in the court , they find a confuse number of people , and the earl of Essex , Rutland , and Southampton in the midst of they . the keeper tur ? ning himself to Essex , tell he , the queen have send he and the rest to understand the cause of this concourse , promise justice , if any person have do they wrong . Essex with a loud voice cry out , they lie in wait for my life , we be meet to defend our self . the keeper urge Essex a ? gain to unfold some part of his grievance ; the unruly multitude cry out , away , let we be go , they come to betray you , kill they , cast away that great seal . Essex retire into the house , the lord follow he , he char ? ge they to make the door fast , and turn he to the lord , have pa ? tience for a while ( say he ) i must go into the city , to dispatch a little busi ? ness with the mayor and sheriff , i will return present . page 107 there the lord be keep prisoner ; Essex make haste into the city , with a troop of 200 man at his heel ; the E. of Bedford , the lord Cromwell , and ••her lord meet he by the way , join themselves : come into London , •e cry out aloud , for the queen , for the queen , they lie wait for my life . the citizen come run to gaze , but not so much as one person take arm to take his part pass along the city , he come all in a sweat to the sheriff smith house , who shift himself forth at a back door , and go to the lord Maior . by this time , certain of the nobility enter the city with a herald , declare Essex and his adherent traitor . hereupon , hear also that the lord admiral make towards he with a army , he begin to be dishear•ned ; gorge take care for himself , request he may be send to re ? lease the counselor , and with they to crave the queen mercy , while the issue be yet doubtful . the earl content , that Popham only shall be free ; but he refuse , unless the keeper also may be dismiss . then gorge free they all , and go along with they to the court by water . now when Essex think to return , he find a chain fasten across the street , at the west end of Pauls , and man in arm on the other side : than he begin to draw his sword ; and have once give the word , blunt let fly at they , slay one of they incontinent , himself be sore wound and ta ? ken . Essex himself have his hat shoot through ; whereupon retire , he take boat at queen Hythe , and go to Essex house ; where find the counselor all dismiss , he grow extreme angry and dismay , and cast certain paper into the fire , say , they shall tell no tale . by and by the admiral be ? siege the house , command they to yield . Southampton offer , if the admiral will give hostage to secure they , they will present they ? self to the queen . the admiral answer he by Sidney , that rebel be not to proffer condition . within a hour , Essex find the case despe ? rate , resolve to rush forth ; and the lord sand ( the most age in the come ? pany ) great urge it , say , it be better to die valiant , than by the hand of a hangman . but Essex his mind , upon a little deliberation alter ? king , they fall upon their knee , and deliver their weapon to the admiral , when it be ten of clock at night . Owen Salisbury , and one or two more be slay with musket shoot , and as many of the besieger . the next day , Thomas Lea , commander of a company of soldier in Ireland , who to one across a sea-captain ( that detect he ) intimate , how noble a exploit it be , for six stout fellow to go to the queen , and compel she forcible to release es ? sex and Southampton , be present apprehend , examine , find guilty and execute . Essex and Southampton be carry first to Lambeth , to the arch ? bishop house , because it be a dark night ; but anon be send to the tower , by the queen direction ; and with they , Rutland , sand , Cromwell , Mounteagle , danverse , and Bromley , the rest be put in common prison . on the nineteenth of February , Essex and Southampton be call to their arraignment , before their peer in Westminster-hall , where Buckhurst lord treasurer , be appoint lord high steward of England for that time . the peer be several call by their name , Essex demand , if it be not lawful for they to except against some of the pee•s , as private person may do against the juror . the judge make answer , that the credit and fidelity of the peer of England be presume to be such , that in trial they be not bind to take a oath , nor be they liable to any excepti ? on . then be they joint indict of high treason ; namely , that they plot to deprive the queen of her life and kingdom , to surprise she in her very palace ; and that they break forth into open rebellion , by imprison the counselor of the kingdom , by exciting the Londoner to rebellion with vain fiction ; by assault the queen loyal subject in the city , and by defend of Essex house against the queen force . hereunto they plead , not guilty . page 108 Essex withal aver , that they have do nothing but of necessity , and the law of nature . Yelverton aggravate the specialty ; and Edward cook attorney , argue , that the earl can not excuse himself from the law of nature , see majesty be not to be affront for private revenge . the earl of Essex with great confidence make answer , that to his prince and country , he always have and will bear a loyal affection . the Francis bacon ( one that be little expect to speak against Essex , by who he have be raise ) in defence of Cobham , Cecill , and Raleigh , aggravate his cry out , that the crown of England be sell to the Spaniard : whereto Essex re ? ply , that he hear indeed , that Cecill the secretary shall say to one of the lord of the council , that the right of the infanta of Spain to the king ? dom of England , be as good as any of the competitor . upon this Cecill ( who stand by as a auditor ) step in , and fall upon his knee , be ? seech the steward that with his good leave , he may quit himself from this foul aspersion : which leave be grant he , he provoke Essex , if he dare , to name the counsellor ; but he will not : therefore ( say Cecill ) it be a faction : still Essex aver it . then Cecill turn himself to south ? ampton , beseech he , by all manner of obtestation , to name the man . he refer it to the honourable assembly , and to Cecill himself , if in ho ? nou_r_ and good reason he ought to do it : they affirm , he may , south ? ampton name sir William Knolles , Essex his uncle . he be send for , at cecill entreaty , say , that Cecill two year since tell he , that one Dolman , in a book , have assert the right of the infanta , and have speak no other ? wise than so . now after the judge have deliver their opinion what be law in the matter alleadge• , the earl , by the steward direction , be take aside : then the peer rise , and go apart , and have consult about a hour , return to their seat , and in their order , pronounce the earl guilty of high treason . then the high steward , advise Essex to implore the queen mercy , give sentence , and that do , break his staff and de ? part . the next day , sir Robert Vernon , sir William constable , sir Edmund Bayn ? ham , Littleton , Cluff , captain Whitlock , John and Christopher Wright and Orell a old soldier , be call to their trial : but the queen ( inform by sir Fulk grevill , that most of they be draw unwitting into the dan ? she ) command that only Littleton , Baynham , and Orell shall have their trial , the rest to be send back to prison . Theise be all condemn , but their life spare ; which favour , Raleigh ( for a good sum of money recei ? ve of Baynham ) procure . Essex in the mean while , request he may speak with some of the counselor , to who he reconcile himself , and to Cecill especial ; and then intimate , that the queen can not be in safety while he live ; he request he may be execute private in the tower : he grievous in ? veigh against some of the conspiracy , and wish to speak with some of they , but special with blunt and Cuffe ; who as soon as he see , he break forth into these word ; oh cuff , ask pardon of God and the queen , for thou have chief provoke i to this disloyalty . also he intimate sir Henry Nevil , ordinary ambassador in France , to have be acquaint with the conspiracy ; and that other in Scotland , France , the Netherlands , and the lord Mountjoy , deputy of Ireland , know of his purpose , and other in Eng ? land ; who be many in number , and the lord Mountjoy order the affair of Ireland in good fashion , the queen wise will take no notice of it . the five and twenty day of February , which be to be the fatal day , there be send to the earl diverse minister , to give he ghostly come ? fort . the queen now waver in her self , one while remember the page 109 ••ci•nt kindness she have show he , she command he shall not be •xecu•ed ; then again , think of his stubbornness , that he will not once ask her mercy , and have say open , that he can not live , but she must perish ; countermand her former word , she give order that he shall •e execute . then be he bring forth into the yard , where a scaffold be erect , and sundry of the nobility present , among who Raleigh also ; but be •old , it be a inhumane thing to stand by and behold the death of his add ? versary , he withdraw himself into the armoury , and from thence behold the tragedy . Essex be ascend the scaffold , uncover his head , cast up his eye towards Heaven• and cry God mercy for the manifold sin of his youth , but this last special , which he say be a bloody , cry , and contagious sin ; crave pardon of the queen and her councillor , commend his spirit into the hand of God , and have his head take off at the three blow , though the first bereave he both of sense and motion . the five of march , sir Christopher blunt , sir Charles Davers , sir John Davis , sir Gyllie Merrick , and cuff , be bring to their trial in west ? minster-hall , before the queen delegate . the head of their indite ? ment , be the same which be object to Essex and Southampton . the other say little in their defence , only cuff stand upon these two answer ; whereas ( say he ) i be challenge of treason , because i be in Essex house the day of the rebellion ; by the same argument the lion in the cellar may be indict ; all that day i lament the earl fortune , and deal with he to fly to the queen mercy . and as for the consultation in Drury house , it be no more to be call high treason , than a Embryon may be account a perfect man . the lawyer on the other side daemon ? strate , that no necessity lay upon he to tarry in the house ; and that the consultation in Drury house be it self a treason , though it have never break forth into act . Merrick say only this , the earl of Essex raise i , and he have overturn i . the thirteenth of march , Merrick and Cuffe be draw to Tyburn , where Cuffe enter into a long speech , be by the sheriff interrupt ; and then , after prayer to God , and desire God and the queen to pardon he , he be cast from the ladder : a man of great wit and learning , but of a boisterous and turbulent disposition . in the same manner die Merrick . the fifteen of march , sir Charles Davers , and sir Christopher blunt be behead on the tower-hill ; albeit Davers offer ten thousand pound to redeem his life , though with perpetual imprisonment . the earl of Southampton , and the sheriff smith , be keep prisoner ; though smith , after some time , be upon surety suffer to go at large . the eight of July , sir Henry Nevil be cite before the lord of the counsel , where it be lay to his charge , that he be present at the consultation in Drury house , yet have not reveal their sinister purpo•es ; and have impart to Essex the secret of his french ambassage . he confess , that at the earl entreaty , he show he the commentary of the french proceed , be present at one of their consultation only , but contemn their counsel , yet dare not be a informer against so great personage . hereupon he have a grievous check give he , and be commit to prison . one act of they by , be not here to be omit . Essex at his arraignment have complain , that his hand-writing be counterfeit . it happen , the countess of Essex be fearful in her husband behalf , give a letter which she have receive from he , to the custody of one ri•ove , a Dutch-woman that wait on she : this dutch-woman husband , name Daniell• light by chance upon the letter , and perceive some passage in it which may bring the earl of Essex into danger , get a cunning fellow to draw a counterfeit copy of the say letter ; with this he come to the fearful page 110 lady , who be new bring to bed , threaten to give the same to her husband adversary ; unless she will present give he three thousand pound . she to shun the danger , pay he eleven hundred and seventy pound at the very instant ; yet do he deliver she the counterfeit copy on ? lie meaning to make use of the true one , to get another sum of the earl adversary . this imposture be find out , he be censure to perpetu ? all imprisonment , condemn in three thousand pound ( two of which be to go to the countess ) and his ear nail to the pillory , with this write over his head ; a notorious cheater . Soon after , a parliament be assemble , wherein grievous complaint be tender to the low house touch monopoly ; the queen , by way of prevention , send out proclamation , declare the say Licenses and patent to be void in part , leave some part to the discussion of the law : which thing be so acceptable to the low house , that they present send 80 select person ; together with the speaker , to give the queen thank ; and she on the other side , give they thank , for be such faithful Moni ? tor to she , to recall she from a error , whereinto through ignorance , not wilfulness , she be fall . in Ireland , the deputy , at the entry of the spring , draw his force together and drive tir-oen from where he have fortify himself ; Carew , precedent of Munster , take the titular earl lurk in a cave , and receive intelligence , that the Spaniard , invite by tir Oen , have a purpose to land in Munster , yet can not persuade the deputy they have any design for ire ? land ; but in the midst of September , certain news be bring , the Spa ? niard be in sight , who want wind to carry their fleet to cork , put in to Kinsale , the three and twenty of September , and land their soldier without resistance . Richard Percy , have but few soldier to defend the town , be command to come away , and leave Kinsale to the Spaniard , in ? to which they enter with ensign display , and by the magistrate and inhabitant , be bid welcome . D'Aquila , who command the Spaniard , publish a declaration , wherein he show , that queen Elizabeth be depose from her king ? dom by sentence of the pope , her subject absolve from their allegi ? ance ; and that the Spaniard be now come to deliver Ireland from the jaw of the devil . tir Oen join his force with they , so as they be now six thousand foot , and five hundred horse , and promise themselves assure victory , the english be not near so many . the four and twen ? ti of December , a battle be join ; where , after a long fight , the victo ? ry incline to the english . tir Oen , oh donell , and the rest , cast away their weapon , and save themselves by flight . Alphonso oh Campo , chief leader of the Spaniard , together with three other captain , be take prisoner , and six ensign-bearer , twelve hundred be slay , nine colour take , whereof four belong to the Spaniard : of the english not many be slay , but a great number wound . after six day , D'Aquila send letter to the deputy by a drummer , request that some person of account may be send to he , with who to confer ; sir William godolphine be send , to who he complain of cow ? ardise , and ( he fear ) treachery of the irish ; and therefore , although he want nothing to hold out the siege , and do daily expect great force from Spain , yet be willing to make a composition : whereupon , at last it be agree , the Spaniard shall yield up Kinsale to the deputy , as all ? so the castle and fort at Baltimore , bere-haven , and castlehaven , and shall depart with life and good , and colour display . the english , at a reasonable price , shall furnish they with ship and provision into Spain ; and that they shall not carry arm against the queen of England , till they be arrive in Spain , etc page 111 and now the Spaniard be drive out of Ireland , the queen , to pre ? vent their come again , send out sir Richard Levison , and sir William m••son , with eight ship of her own , and some small ship of war , to attempt something upon the coast of Spain . on the nineteenth of march , levis•n hoist sail , and Monson afterward , have in vain tarry behind , for some dutch ship to join with they . Levison in the mean time light ? ed upon the spanish navy of eight and thirty ship , which bring the treasure from America , and set upon they , but to no purpose . when Monson be come with the rest of the fleet , they have certain notice , that a mighty indian caraque of sixteen hundred tun , and rich lade , be upon the coast of Portugal . there indeed they find it , but it lie close under a fort , attend with eleven galley ; and the caraque it self appear ? ed as big as a castle ; yet they resolve to fire it , if they can not take it . the next day , they thunder so violent against the galley , that within seven hour the marquess of saint cross , together with Portugal galley which he command , withdraw themselves ; two of they be take and fire ; and in they be great store of powder , which be go for the Low-countries . and now Levison signify to the captain of the caraque , that the galley which they trust to , be drive away , and therefore , if they now refuse mercy , they must expect none hereafter . after much speech to and fro , it be at last agree , that the caraque , with the Ord ? nance and merchandise , shall be yield up . thus the english , have a fair wind , return homeward with a booty , to the value of a million of ducat , by the Portugal account , and not past five of their man lose in the voyage . at this time there arise a contestation among the popish clergy here in England ; for the Jesuit and the secular priest , make bitter invective in their write , one against the other . the original of the priest quar ? rell be , that Blackwell , one whole at the beck of the jusuite , be set over they as arch-presbyter , who first of all despoil they of their fa ? culty ; and when they appeal to the pope , cause they to be declare schismatics and heretic . they in sundry book extol the queen very high , as one that deal mild always with the catholic , till such time as they set all in a combustion in England ; and by their treason , cause ? sed most severe law to be enact against the catholic . Parsons they traduce , as a bastard , a equivocator , and a traitor . whether they contend thus in good earnest , or in jest only , be hard to say ; but the bishop of London politic nourish the contention ; and all he gain , be this , that the queen and her council , find they dangerous to the come ? mon-wealth , both the one and the other , upon penalty of the law , be by proclamation command to depart out of the kingdom pre ? sent . in France , the martial Byron , for enter into dangerous attempt against the public peace , be arraign , and lose his head . his confession bring some other into danger ; and among they , the duke of bulloign , of the protestant religion , that when he be cite , he dare not appear , but flee in ? to Germany . hereupon the king of France send to queen Elizabeth , complain that the duke hold his marriage unlawful , and the pope this ? pensation nothing worth , pronounce his son illegitimate ; have destine the prince of Conde to the succession of the crown , and conspire the de ? struction of the prime of the nobility . the queen , by her Legier Ambas ? sadour , advise the king not too credulous to entertain those report , as doubt these suggestion may proceed from some of the spanish facti ? on . hereupon the king grow very angry , say , the queen hold a better opinion of the duke than he deserve , and that he be one of the chief architect of Essex his treason ; and be question by the king about it , page 112 be not able to deny it . about this time also , the duke of Savoy , by can ? ning slight , and open force , practise against the state of Geneva ; and the queen relieve they with a great sum of money , gather among the clergy and Laity all over England . and now the earl of Tyrone , perceive himself in a desperate estate , re ? solve to sue for mercy , and promise at last to submit his life and for ? tune to the queen pleasure , absolute without condition . hereupon , be admit to the presence of the deputy , at the very entry of the room , he fall on his knee ; and then pass on a few step , prostrate he ? self again , say , i confess and crave pardon for my great fault , against God , and a most bountiful prince , my dread sovereign : i fly to the queen mercy , as a sacred anchor , permit she to dispose of my life and fortune at her pleasure . upon this his submission , the deputy come ? mand he to go aside , and the next day take he along to Dublin with he , mean to bring he into England , that the queen may deal with he accord to her royal pleasure : but before he can come into Eng ? land , the queen die . her taxation . in a parliament hold the first year of her reign , a subsidy be grant , of two shilling eight penny the pound of good , and four shilling of land , to be pay at two several payment , of every person spiritual and temporal . in her six year , in a parliament hold at Westminster , one subsidy be grant by the clergy , and another by the Laity , together with two fifteenth and ten . in her eight year , in a parliament then hold , there be offer to her four subsidy , upon condition she will declare a successor ; but she refuse their offer , and direct remit ? t the four subsidy , which they have grant , say , it be all one , whether the money be in her subject coffer , or in her own . in her thirteenth year , in a parliament then hold , towards her charge of re ? press the northern rebellion , there be grant she by the clergy , a subsidy of six shilling in the pound : and by the temporalty , two fif ? teen , with a subsidy of two shilling and eight penny in the pound . in her six and thirty year , a parliament be hold , wherein be grant by the clergy , two whole subsidy , and by the Laity , three , beside six fifteen and ten ; but it be put into the act , that this great Contribu ? cion , the like whereof have not be know in former age , shall not be draw into example . in her forty year , in a parliament at Westminster , be grant she by the clergy , three entire subsidy ; and by the Laity , as many , with six fifteenth and ten . in her two and forty year , to furnish her self with money towards the irish war , she delegate certain commissioner , to confirm the crown land to the possessor , that hold any off controvert title , and to take money for the confirmation , there ? by to take away the trouble by concealer , who at this time be very busy . of her lavv and ordinance . in a parliament hold in her first year , a act be make , that every person shall go to divine service upon Sunday and holiday , or else pay twelve penny to the poor . also it be enact , that bishop shall not let the land of the church , long than for one and twenty year , or three life , except to the queen or her successor . in her three year , proclamation be make , that the teston , coin for twelve penny , and in the reign of king Edward embase to six penny , shall not be currant but for four penny ; the groat , but for two penny ; and the piece of two penny , but for a penny : and not long after , all the say base money be call in , and fine sterling money be allow for they , after the rate . page 113 for Ireland also , she coin sterling money ; where nine penny in England , go for twelve penny there . the queen be the first that bring cer ? tain county to deliver provision at a certain rate , that so they may be free from the purveyor : also the first that grant allowance to judge for their circuit . in her six year , in a parliament then hold , it be make treason to refuse take the oath of supremacy ; yet with this livre ? mitation , that by it the blood shall not be dishonour , nor good con ? fiscate ; nor the oath to be require of any baron of the kingdom . also this year , by a common council in London , it be enact , that all such citizen as from thenceforth shall be constrain to sell their house ? hold-stuff , lease of house , or such like , shall first cause the same to be cry through the city , by a man with a bell , and then to be sell by the common outcryer appoint for that purpose , and he to receive one far ? thing upon the shilling for his pain . in her three and twenty year , she repress by proclamation excess in apparel , gold chain , and cloak which man wear down to their heel . the length of sword be limit ? t to three foot , and dagger to twelve inch , beside the hilt . building likewise in the suburb be restrain , inmate forbid , and express charge set forth , that no dwell house shall be new build within three mile of any of the city gate , under pain of imprisonment , and loss of the material . in her time be set on foot by sir Thomas smith , the law make for the serve of college with provision , to the great benefit of those scholastical society . in her two and forty year , she set forth proclamation against the transportation of gold or sil ? ver , wrought or unwrought , accord to the former act of parliament in that case provide . this year also she found the company of the east India merchant , and allow they ample privilege . in her three and fourtieth year , all monopoly be call in by proclamation . in her four and twenty year , severe law be make against papist , some inflict ? ing death , some fine and imprisonment . in her eight and twenty year , a proclamation be set forth , prohibit to sow wo•d within eight mile of any of the queen house , and four mile off any city or town corporate . affair of the church in her time . on Sunday the first of January , next after the queen come to the crown , by virtue of her proclamation , the english litany be read accord as be use in her grace chapel , in all church through the city of London , and likewise the epistle and gospel of the day , begin to be read at mass-time in the english to•gue . also in a parliament hold in her first year , the first fruit and ten be restore to the crown , and the supreme government over the state ecclesiastical , and the book of commonprayer , and administration of the sacrament in the english tongue be restore , and by degree the protestant religion be esta ? blish . the bishop that refuse the oath of supremacy , be all remo ? ve , and protestant bishop place in their room . it be enact also , that all person shall go to divine service upon Sunday and holiday , and a fine of twelve penny impose upon every one that shall be absent , and the same to be give to the poor . in her four year , the queen be solicit by pope Pius , to send her orator to the council of Trent , which she refuse , as not acknowledge it a lawful council . in a Parlia ? mean hold in her eight year , it be enact , and by a general consent declare , that the election of the archbishop and bishop in England , together with their consecration , confirmation , and investiture ( which some person slanderous call in question ) be lawful and canonical , and that they be right , and accord to the act and statute of the page 114 kingdom , choose and consecrate . in her eleven year , there arise in England two contrary faction in religion : on the one side , Thomas Har ? ding , Nicholas Sanders , and other divine that have flee out of England , begin to exercise the Episcopal jurisdiction upon the queen subject , which they have derive from the sea of Rome : on the other side , Col ? man , Burton , Hallingham , Benson , and other , make profession of the pure religion , will allow of nothing but what be direct take out of the scripture , open condemn the receive discipline of the church of England , together with the church liturgy , and the very call of bishop , as savouri•g too much of the romish religion , protest in the pulpi•s , that it be a impious thing to hold any thing common with the church of Rome ; and use all diligence to have the church of England reform in every point , accord to the rule of the church of Geneva . Theise , although the queen come ? mand to be commit to prison , yet it be incredible how upon a sudden their follower increase , know by the envious name of pu ? ritan . this sect so mighty increase , that in her sixteenth year , the queen and kingdom be extreme trouble with some of the clergy , who breathe out nothing but Evangelicall parity , cry down the ecclesiastical form of government ( as a thing pollute with roman dr•ggs ) and set forth book likewise , entitle , the admonition to the parliament , and the defence of the admonition : they refuse to resort to the divine service public in use , and frame to themselves other rite . whereupon , the queen , to suppress they , who by no mean she like , command every where the severity of the law touch the uniformity of commonprayer , to be put in execution , and those book , upon pain of imprisonment , to be deliver into the hand of the bishop , or some of the queen council . and this year be take at mass in their several house , the lord Mor ? ley lady and her child , the lady Guildford , and the lady brown , who be thereof indict and convict , suffer the penalty of the law in that case provide . until the twenty year of queen Eliza ? beth reign , the papist in England be merciful connive at , while they solemnize their own rite within their private house ( though that also be against the law ) but when as that thunderbolt of excommunicate the queen come abroad , then be the law enact against those who bring into the kingdom any agn•s dei , or hall ? lowed bead , or reconcile any of the queen subject to the see of room ; yet for six whole year together after this law be make , it be not execute upon any papist , till Cuthbert main , a priest , and a obstinate maintainer of the pope authority against the queen , be ex ? ecute at Launston in Cornwall , and the gentleman good that harbour he confiscate , and himself adjudge to perpetual imprisonment . in her three and twenty year , diverse priest and Jesuit come into England ; among who , Robert p••sons , and Edmund Campian , Englishman and Jesus ? ite , be now bind for England , to promote the catholic cause ; at which time a proclamation be set forth , that whosoever have any child beyond the sea , shall by a certain day call they home ; and that no per ? son shall receive or harbour any seminary priest or Jesuite . at this time also , there arise up in holland a certain sect , name themselves , the family of l•ve , who persuade their follower , that those only who be adopt into that family , be elect , and no other can be save , but be all re ? probate , and damn , and that it be lawful for they to deny upon oath whatsoever they please , before any magistrate or whosoever , that be not of their family . many of their book be print , under these title , the gospel of the kingdom , the lord sentence , the prophesy of the spirit of love , page 115 the publication of peace upon earth , by the author H. N. but who this au ? thor be , they will by no mean reveal : at last ) he be find to be hen ? ry Nicholls of Leyden , who blasphemous preach , that he be partaker of the divinity of God , and God of his humane nature : all which book be by proclamation command to be burn . in a parliament hold the eight and twenty year of her reign , some , out of a desire of a re ? formation , begin to pick quarrel at the clergy , desire to pass law for the restraint of bishop in their grant of faculty , confer of holy order , eccles•asticall censure , and the oath ex officio . they come ? plain likewise of the nonresidency of minister , and the like . but the queen ; who always hate innovation ( which for the most part change for the worse ) will give no ear unto they ; conceive beside , that these proceed in par•iament in ecclesiastical affair , derogate from her prerogative . in her six and twenty year , the queen give a special charge to Whitgift archbishop of Canterbury , to settle a uniformity in the ecclesiastical discipline , accord to the law , which through the connivance of bishop , and perverseness of the Puritan , lie now almost gasp , wh•reupon , he provide three article , to which every minister shall subscribe : the first , that the queen have supreme authority over all person bear within her dominion , of what condition soever they be ; and that no other prince , or prelate , or potentate , have , or aught to have any jurisdiction , civil or ecclesiastical , within her realm and dominion . the second , that the book of commonprayer , and of the ordination of bishop , priest and deacon , contain nothing contrary to the word of God , but may lawful be use ; and that they will use that , and none other . the three , that the article agree on in the synod hold at London , in the year 1562 , and publish by the queen authority , they do allow of , and believe they to be consonant to the word of God . it be incredible , what reproach the archbishop incur by set forth these article , both from factious minister , and from some also of the nobility ; yet by his patience and constancy , he bring at last peace to the church , make this his motto , vincit qui patitur . neither do these at home only disturb the peace of the church , but other also from abroad , as Robert brown , a young student of divinity in Cambridge ; from who come the sectary call brownist ; and Richard Harrison , a petty schoolmaster . Theise presume to judge matter of religion by their own pri ? vate spirit , by book set forth in Zealand , and disperse at this time over England , condemn the church of England for no church , and ensnare many in the net of their new schism . neither can they be restrain , though their book be prohibit by the queen authority , and sound ? lie confute by sundry learned man ; and one or two of the ringleader execute at saint Edmund berry . in her one and thirty year , these Puri ? tan flame break forth again , book be write by the name of Martin mar-prelate , and a demonstration of the discipline , by Penry a•d ••dall , against the government of bishop ; and nothing will please they , but the di ? scipline of Geneva : many abettor they have , knightly and Wigstone , knight , beside Cartwright ( the father of they ) Snape , king , Pradlow , Payn , and other ; who though call in question , fine and imprison , can ne ? ver be reclaim . in her six and thirty year , the queen cause the seve ? rity of the law to be execute upon Henry Barrow and his sectary , for di ? sturb the church , and the public peace , by scatter of their monstrous opinion , condemn the church of England as no christian church , and derogate from th• queen authority in cause ecclesiastical . page 116 work of piety in her time . this queen convert Westminster abbey into a collegiate church , and there ordain a dean , twelve prebendary , a master , usher , and forty scholar , Vicars , singing-man , and twelve almsman . in her three year , the merchant-taylor , found a notable grammar-school , in the parish of S. Laurence Pountney in London . also this year , William Harper , mayor of of London , found a free-school in the town of Bedford , where he be bear . in her seven year , on the seven of June , sir Thomas Gresham lay the first stone of the royal exchange in Cornhill , which in November the year after , at his own charge be finish , be the year 1567. in her ten year , the citizen of London build a new conduit at Walbrook cor ? ner , near to Dowgate , the water whereof be convey out of the Thames . also this year , sir Thomas Roe mayor of London , cause to be enclose with ? in a wall of brick , one acre of ground , near unto b•dlam , without bishops-gat• , to be a place of burial for the dead of such parish in London as lack convenient ground within their parish : he also build a conveni ? ent room in Paul churchyard , on the south side of the cross , to receive a certain number of hearer at the sermon time . sir William Peter , have himself be bear at Exeter in devon-shire , he give to Exeter college in Oxford , a hundred pound land a year : he also build at Ingerstone in Essex , almshouse for twenty poor people , and give they some come ? petent maintenance . sir Thomas Gresham have his dwell house in bread-str•et London , which he dedicate to the profession of the liberal science , erect there lecture of divinity , civil law , physic , geomitry , Astro ? nomy , music , and rhetoric , allot to the professor very competent allowance . in her seventeenth year , die Matthew park•r , archbishop of Canterbury , who found a grammar school in Rochdale in the county of Lancaster : he also procure to corpus christi college in Cambridge , their ? teen schollarship , and build two chamber for scholar , and the inward library of the same college , and procure to it the patronage of saint mary Abchurch in London , with many other work of like kind . sir Nicholas bacon , lord keeper give for six scholar to be find in ben•t college in Cambridge , three pound , six shilling and eight penny a piece for ever . Edmund Grindall archbishop of Canterbury , found a free-school in cum ? berland , where he be bear , and give many pension to both university . Frances , countess of Sussex , sister to sir Henry Sidney , found Sussex-Sidney college in Cambridge : as likewise sir Walter Mildmay , chancellor of the exchequer , found Emmanuell college in the same university . sir tho ? mass Bodley erect and furnish the famous public library at Oxford . Alexander Nowell dean of Pauls , endow brazen nose college in Oxford , where he be bring up , with two hundred pound per annum , and die in the year 1602. sir Roger manhood , chief baron of the exchequer , build seven almshouse in Canterbury , give to every almsman four pound year : and our worthy countryman William Lambard build a almshouse at Gr•enwich , which he call , the college for the poor of queen Elizabeth . casualty in her time . in the first year of her reign , die sir Thomas Cheyney , lord warden of the cinque-port , of who it be report for certain , that his pulse do beat more than three quarter of a hour after he be dead , as strong as if he have be still alive . in her three year , there be find near keswrick in Cumberland , a most rich vein of pure and native brass , which have lie neglect a long time : also the stone call lapis Calaminaris , which be of great use in brass work , be first bring into England at this time , and that in most plentiful manner . likewise this queen be the first that cause gunpowder to be make in England , which before be have from foreign part , and at dear rate . in her three year , the spi•e of the cathedral page 117 church of Pauls , be five hundred and twenty foot from the ground , and two hundred and sixty from the square steeple where it be place , and be make of wooden material , but cover with lead , be with light ? ning burn down , together with the roof of that large church , and that within the space of five hour ; the roof be after re-edify , but the spire be yet want . the queen give towards it a thousand mark in money , and a thousand load of timber ; and the city grant a Benevo ? •••ce , and three fifteen ; and the clergy also contribute towards it . all ? so this year there be many monstrous birth : a mare bring forth a foal with two head , and a long tail grow out between the two head . a sow farrow a big with two body , eight foot , and but one head a manchild be bear at Chichester in Sussex , have arm and leg like to a anatomy , the breast and belly monstrous big , about the neck a great collar of flesh and skin , grow like the ruff of a Shir• . in her six yeer• upon the return of the army from Newhaven , the pesti•ence war bring into England , but especial into London ; where in o•e year there die one and twenty thousand and five hundred . this year also , in the month of December , be drive on the shore at Grimseby in Lincolnshire a monstrous fish , in length nineteen yard , his tail fifteen foot broad , and six yard be ? tween the eye . twelve man stand upright in his mouth to get the oil . in her seven year ; on the one and twenty of De•ember begin a frost , so extreme , that on newyear even people pass over the Thames on foot ; some play at football , some shot at prick , as if it have be firm ground . yet this great frost , the three of January at night begin to thaw , and by the five day , there be no ice at all to be see ; which sudden thaw cause great inundation . in her eight year , within the space of ten month , there die in London seven alderman , namely , Edward bank , Richard cham ? berlain , sir Martin bow , sir Richard Mallory , sir William H•wet , sir tho ? mass white , and Richard Lambert , one of the sheriff for that year . the same year also , in the town of ossestry in wale , two hundred house , in the space of two hour , be consume with fire . in her ten year , be a ? ken in Suffolk , at Downham bridge near to Ipswich , seventeen monstrous fish ; some of they be seven and twenty foot in length : and in the same year , many dutch fly into England , to avoid the persecution of the duke D'Alva , be the first that bring into England the art of make bay , say , Serges , and such weave stuff , both woollen and linen . in her time a rich vein of copper be find in the earl of Nor•humberlands ground , which she by her prerogative seize upon . in her thirteenth year , a prodigious earthquake happen in the east part of herefordshire , at a little town call Kinnaston . on the seventeenth of February , at six of the clock in the evening , the earth begin to open , and a hill with a rock under it ( make at first a great bellow noise , which be hear a great way off ) lift it self up a great height , and begin to travel , bear along with it the tree that grow upon it , the sheepfold , and flock of sheep abide there at the same time . in the place from whence it be first more ? ve , it leave a gape distance forty foot broad , and fourscore ell long ; the whole field be about twenty acre . pass along , it overthrow a chap ? pell stand in the way , remove a ewe-tree plant in the churchyard , from the west into the east : with the like force it thrust before it high ? way , sheepfold , hedge and tree , make till ground pasture , and again turn pasture into tillage . Having walk in this sort from Saturday in the evening , till Monday noon , it then stand still . in her fifteen year , in the month of November , a new star , or rather a meteor ( but that it be find to be above the moon ) be see in Cathedra Cassiopeae , exceed in ? piter in brightness , and in that place be carry with the diurnal motion of the heaven sixteen month together , though after eight month it be page 118 perceive to grow less and less . in her sixteenth year , be a great dearth , so as Wheat be sell at five and six shilling the bushel , and other thing in proportion . in her seventeenth year , a vast mighty whale be cast up ? on the isle of thanet in Kent , twenty ell long , and thirteen foot broad from the belly to the back bone , and eleven •oot between the eye . one of his eye be take out of his head , be more than a cart with •ix horse can draw ; the oil be boil out of the head , be parmasittee . this year also , the river Thames ebb and flow twice within a hour : and in the month of November , the heaven seem to be all on fire . also on the four and twenty of February , be a great frost , after a flood which be not great , there come down the river of Severn such a swarm of fly and beetle , that they be judge to be above a hundred quarter ; the mill thereabouts be dam up with they for the space of four day , and then be cleanse by dig they out with shovel . in her thre• and twenty year , in the begin of April , about six a clock after noon , happen a earthquake not far from York , which in some place , strike the very stone out of building , and make the bell in church to jangle . the night follow , the earth tremble once or twice in k•nt , and again the first day of May . in her six and twenty year , be the year 1583 , the like prodigy happen in dorsetshire , as in the year 1571 have happen in herefordshire ; a field of three acree in Blackmore , with the tree and fence , move from its place , and pass over ano•her field , travel in the highway that go to Herne , and there stay . in her eight and twenty year , tobacco be first bring out of the west Indies into England , by Ralph lane . in her five and thirty year , there be so great a drought , that not only the field , but the spring themselves be dry up , and many cattle every where die for want of water . the river of Thames likewise do so fail , that a horseman may ride over at London bridge . in her six and thirty year , be a great plague in London , so as there die this year , in London and the suburb , seventeen thousand eight hundred and ninety , beside the lord Maior , and three alderman ; and Michaelmas term be hold at saint Albon . of her persona•e and conditon . she be of stature indifferent tall , slender and straight , fair of comple ? xion , her hair incline to pale yellow , her forehead large and fair , her eye lively and sweet , but short sight ; her nose somewhat rise in the midst ; the whole compass of her countenance somewhat long , yet of ad ? mirable beauty , but the beauty of her mind be far more admirable : she have be a subject , which teach she to rule ; she have be in misery , which teach she to be merciful ; and indeed , never prince rule with more Ju ? stice , and with her justice mingle more mercy . she have more valour in she then be fit for a woman , but that she be a ruler over man ; and more humility in she then be fit for a prince , but that she mean to be a Presi ? dent to woman . she delight in nothing so much , as in the love of her Peopl• , which she procure by ordain good magistrate , and forbear imposition . her way not to need they , be frugality ; and her way to have they when she need they , be liberality . she make honour in her time the more honourable , by not make it common ; and indeed , know ? king it to be a influence from her self , she keep it , as her self , a virgin , and will not prostitute it to unworthy person . she decline be a mother of child , to the end she may be a mother of her country ; and indeed , no mother ever love her child more , than she do her people ; and therefore never child love a mother more , than her people do she . she cove•ed not so much to be a owner of riches , as of rich subject ; for she think money do as well in their coffer , as in her own : and indeed , page 119 •he never want it , when they have it ; and they always have it , when she ••eded it . never prince have a wise coun•ell than she , yet never prince •eeded it less ; for she be her self a counsellor to her counsel . in sum , whatsoever may in flattery be say of a wise , just , merciful , religious , and learned prince , may true be say of she ; in all which , if ever she have a ••uall , yet she never certain have a superior . in play her game of •ortune , she love not a aftergame ; for she like prevention , better than remedy . she be admirable in express her mind , both by speech and writing : and if collection can be make of her apophthegm , and extemporal oration , it will certain excel any thing extant in that kind : and for her write , sir Henry Savile affirm , that he have see some translation of she , which far exceed the original . never prince keep great state with less stateliness : her pensioner and guard be always the tall and goodly gentleman and yeoman of the kingdom : her maid of honour , and other woman about she , the fair and most beautiful lady of the realm ; and yet her self a Diana among her nymph ; insomuch that a great lord of France be entertain at court , and the queen ask he how he like her lady , make answer , it be hard to judge of star , in presence of the sun of her death and burial . it be now the year 1602 , when she feel some infirmity of old-age and sickness , retire her self at the end of January , to Ri•hmond ; at which time , in a sad omen , she command the ring to be file off her fin ? she , wherewith she be solemn at the first inaugurate into the kingdom , and since that time have never take it off , it be grow into the flesh in such manner , that it can not be draw off without fill . at then be ? ginning of her sickness , the almond of her jaw begin to swell , and her appetite by little and little fail she ; withal she give her self whole to sadness and heaviness , which some impute to her care for the loss of the earl of Essex ; other , because she hear , that diverse of the nobility seek the favour of the king of Scot , adore he as the sun rise , and neglect she : but howsoever , in march a kind of benummednesse seize upon she , with a deep melancholy , so as she will sit silent , refrain her meat , and not admit of any conference , but with the archbishop of canter ? bury , with who she pray •ervently , till such time as her speech fail she , which fail she a day before she die . she be in this case , it be think fit the admiral and secretary shall go to she , to know her mind concern a successor ; to who she give this answer ; my throne have be the throne of king , i will not a mean person shall succeed i . the secretary request she to speak more plain , i will ( say she ) have a king succeed i ; and what king , but the king of Scot , my near Kins ? man ? after this , the archbishop exhort she to think of God , that do i ( say she ) nor do my thought ever wander from he . and when her tongue no long serve she , it be evident by the lift up of her hand and eye , that her thought be fix upon he . and so on the four and twenty day of march , be the last day of the year 160• , she yield up her soul to God , when she have live threescore and nine year , six month , and see ? venteen day ; reign four and forty year , four month , and seven day . her body be embalm , wrap in lead , and bring to Whitehall , from whence on the eight and twenty of April follow , in great solemnity , it be carry into the collegiate church of S. Peter at Westminster , and there inter in the vault of her grandfather , king Henry the seven , in his mag ? nificent chapel , where our renown sovereign king Iames have build she a princely monument , inscribe with epitaph to her eternal glory . at her funeral be say to be mourner in black , to the number of on• thousand and six hundred person . page 120 man of note in her time . the ocean be not more boundless , than the number of man of note in her time ; but though all of they can be reckon , yet some of they must not be omit . and to begin with sates-man : a exquisite statesman for his own end , be Robert earl of Lèicester ; and for his con ? try good , sir William Cecill , lord B•rleigh ; as also sir Francis Walsingham , that great underminer of conspirator . famous seaman , be the earl of Cumberland , the lord Thomas Howard , afterward earl of Suffolk : and of mean rank , sir John Hawkins , sir Martin forbys•er , sir Walter Raleigh , Cavendish , Preston , Ryman ; and , to name the worthy last , sir Francis Drake , who though he be but a short square body man , yet his great act have make the Spaniard believe that he be some goodly personage . great commander by land , be Robert Earl of Essex , the lord Willoughby , the lord grey of Wilton , sir Francis Vere , sir Roger Williams , Baskervile , savage ; and the honour of his family , and our english nation , sir John Norris . learned gentleman and writer , be sir Thomas Chaloner , employ by queen Elizabeth as her ligier in Spain , who write five book of the resto ? ring of the english commonwealth , in elegant verse , while ( as he say ) he live in a stove in winter , and in a barn in summer : Roger Askam , bear in yorkshire , notable skilful in the greek and latin tongue , who have sometime be schoolmaster to queen Elizabeth , and her secretary for the latin tongue ; but take too great delight in game and cockfighting , he both live and die in mean estate , yet leave behind he sundry monument of wit and industry . sir Thomas smith , bear at saffron Walden in Essex , sometime secretary to king Edward the 6 , who write a imperfect work of the english commonwealth , a singular book of the orthography of the english tongue , and another of the pronunciation of the greek ; the first man that set on foot the law for serve the college with provision ? on . sir Henry Savill , provost of Eaton , and reader to queen Elizabeth , who set forth all saint Chrysostom work in greek , and by translate of Cornelius Tacitus , , deserve as much of the english tongue , as he of the latin : but above all , the admirable sir Philip Sidney , who by write in a light Argu ? mean , show how excellent , and beyond all comparison he can have do in a grave . learned divine be John jewel , bear in devonshire , a student in corpus christi college in Oxford , in queen Mary time a exile , by queen Elizabeth make bishop of Salisbury , who write a Apolo ? gie for the protestant doctrine , and die at scarce fifty year of age , in the fourteenth year of queen Elizabeth . John Whitaker , master of S. John college in Cambridge , who learned answer all the book of Bellarmine . Bilson , bishop of Winchester , sometime fellow of new college in ox ? ford , who , among his other learned work , have write notable of Christ descent into hell . Richard Hooker , preacher at the temple , who with too much meekness smother his great learning , yet have something disco ? vex it in his five book of ecclesiastical discipline , and die in the year 1599 Alexander Nowell , dean of Pauls , who forbear deep work , set forth a catechism , accord to the doctrine of the english church , and die in the year 1602. after such man , it may be think ridiculous to speak so stage player ; but see excellency in the mean thing deserve remember , and Boscius the comedian be record in history with such commendation , it may be allow we to do the like with some of our nation . Richard bourbidge , and Edward Allen , two such actor , as no age must ever look to see the like : and , to make their comedy complete , Richard tarle ? ton , who for the part call the clown part , never have his match , never will have . for writer of play , and such as have be player they ? self , William Shakespeare , and Benjamin Johnson , have special leave their name recommend to posterity . page 121 the reign of king James Iames the four king of Scotland , marry Margaret elder daughter of Henry the 7 king of England , by who he have Iames the 5 , who have one only child mary Q. of Scot , who have one only son Iames the 6 , who from Iames the four have undoubted right to the kingdom of Scotland• and from Margaret , king Henry the 7 old daughter ( the male line be clean extinct ) unquestionable title to the crown of England : whereupon Q. Eliz. be dead about 10 a clock in the morning , king Iames the 6 , king of Scotland be the very same day ( m. secretary Cecill himself read his title , and Q. Eliz. will ) proclaim king of Eng. Scot . and Ireland , by sound of trumpet , first at white-hall , and then in Cheapside , in presence of all the lord and the counsel , and other of the nobility , with a general acclamation of all sort of people , that we may true say , sorrow be never more deceive than at this time ; for where upon the death of Q. Eliz. it be expect there will be nothing for a long time but sorrow and lament . now that very sorrow be swallow up of joy , her death bring with it not other alteration but only of sex , in all other point in a manner the same , the like wisdom , the like learning , the like justice , the like religiousness in they both : only better in this , that we change a queen of 70 year old , who we can not look to keep long , for a king of 36 , who we may well hope to enjoy many year . Q. Eliz. be not soon dead• but sir Robert carry a young son of the late lord Hunsdon , post away unsent , to king ia•es in Scotland , inform he of the ac ? cident• for bring which news , the king afterward reward he with make he a ba•on of the realm , and lord of Leppington . but though it be sufficient for the king information that he hear the news by sir Robert carry ; yet it be not sufficient for the lord of the counsel in discharge of their duty , if he hear it not from they , and therefore within a very few day , as soon as they can pro ? vide fit man , they send first sir Charles Percy and mr. Thomas Somerset , and after they sir Thomas lake clerk of the signet , a man well acquaint with the state of the kingdom , both to acquaint he with the general applause of all the re ? alm , to receive he for their sovereign , and also inform he in what term the state of the kingdom stand , that so he may not come altogether a stranger when he come into it . Q. Elizabeth indeed have leave he not only a kingdom , but a kingdom without encumbrance ; no war abroad , no sedition at home , and not only so , but a kingdom furnish with all the fruit of peace , plenty of all thing necessary , and of all necessary thing ; the chief a wise Cousell , for the left sir Thomas e ? gerton L. chanselor , Thomas L. Buckhurst , L. treasurer : Charles E. of Nottingham , L. admiral and sir Rob. Cecill principal secretary . four such man that the mean ? est of they be sufficient to sit at the helm of any kingdom . yet to these page 122 and ? ? ? other beside ( all wh•• the king now by his letter authorize to ex ? erc•••••eir several place , •s former they have do ) he add certain new one of his own choose , as namely the E. of Northumberland , and Cumberland• the lord Th• . Howard , and then after the lord Henry Howard ; the one the brother , the other the son of the late duke of Nor•olk , who have suffer so much , that at last , he suffer for the queen his mother . but although the call of these two last to such place , be do ( no doubt ) out of •avour to that house ; yet one of they be know , the other doubt to be a papist , it be present apprehend , as a fa•vour to that sid• ; and the catholic be not a little confident of his good in ? clination to they all in general . and it be indeed but necessary they shall at this time have such a conceit , for in the late Q. sickness , a little before her death , pope Clement the 8 , have write two brieve to the catholic in England , to add ? mit of none to succeed in the kingdom , when that miserable woman shall hap ? pen to dye ( so he pl•ased to s•il• the most glorious Q. that ever live ) but such a one , of who good inclination to the see of room , they shall at least be well persuade . and now king Iames have settle the government of his kingdom of Scotland , and make convenient preparation for his journey : on the 5 of April 1603 , he set forward , and ride that day from Edinburgh to dunglasse , and from then•• the next day to ••rwick ; who have stay two days• the 8 of April he r•de to With•rington• a house of sir Robert carry , from thence the 9 to Newcastle , wh•re he stay Sunday and hear the Bish. of Durham preach , and so joyful w•re the townsman of his be there , that all the time of his stay they bear the charg• o• his household . the 13 of April he set forward to Durham , and from thence the 14 to walt•orth , the 15 towards York , where his train increase to such a multitude , that he be fain to publish a inhibition of the people resort , and flock to he . at York it be a question to who it belong to bear the sword before the K• in that place , for both the E. of Cumberland claim it , as he ? r•ditary to his house , and the precedent of the north claim it as belong to his place , but it be adjudge to George E. of Cumberland , who accord do it••rom York the 18 day the king r•de to Grimston , to a house of sir Edw. Stanhopes , the 19 to P••f•• and so to Duncaster , where he lodge at the sign of the bear and Sun• the 20• of Aprill•e ride towards Worsuppc . a house of the E. of shrew ? ••ri•s ; from thence the 21 to ne••rk upon Trent , where a cutpurse be take in the fact , be by the king warrant ha ? ge , a most unseasonable delinqe ? nt , who will force the king to commit justice at a time when he intend nothing but mercy , the as to beaver castle , a house of the E. of rutlands , hunt all the way as he ride : from beaver the 23 to Burleigh , who have stay 2 or 3 day , the 27 he remove to hitchinbr••k , a house of sir Oliver cromwell' , where the head of the university of Cambridge meet him• from thence he ride towards Royston , and as he pass through Godmanchester a town close by Huntington , the bailiff of town present he with 70 teem of horse , all trace to fair new Ploughs• at which the king wonder , they say , it be their ancient custom so to do , when any king of England pass through their town , and by which as be the king te ? nant they hold their land at Royston he lodge that night at m. Chesters house , at his own charge , which he have not do before , since his come into Eng. the •0 of April he ride to Stand•• , a house of saint Thomas Sadlers , where he stay Sunday , and hear the Bish. of London preach . the 2 of may he remove to Bros ? bourn , a house of S•Henry cock , cofferer to the late Q. and now to the king where ••t he the lord keeper , the l•treasurer , the lord admiral and diverse other lord : the 3 of may he come to theobald , a house of sir Robert cecil ; when all the lord of th• late queen most honourable privy counsel ; present themselves , and th•r• the lord keeper make a grave oration . at this house , the four of ? ? ? , the king make diverse nobleman of Scotland , of his privy coun ? sell here in England ; namely the duke of L•n•x , the earl of Marre , the lord ? ? ? , sir •••rg• ? ? ? , treasurer of Scotland , saint Iames Elphingston his secretary page 123 and the lord of kinlosse make afterward mr. of the roll . Saturday the se ? •••th of may , he ride towards London , where by the way , the sheriff swyn•er ? ••• and the alderman meet he ; and by their orator mr. Richard Martin ; make he a eloquent oration ; and than he ride on to the charterhouse nee•e Smithfield , a house belong to the lord Thomas Howard , where he stay four day : and at his depart from thence make the lord Zouche• and the lord Burgley , of his privy counsel . but we must here omit , that from the king first set forth of Scotland• as he be in all place receive with most royal entertainment and rich present ; so he again carry himself most of ? fable , and distribute his favour in most plenteous manner : in some place , discharge all prisoner , but such as lie for treason or murder : but special in confer the order of knighthood , of which sort the first he make , be mr. John Peyton , son to sir John Peyton , lieutenant of the tower . after he diverse scots in sundry place at theobald , eight and twenty ; ( of which number the compiler of this work , though the unworthy be one ; ) at charterhouse above fourscore : and not many day after , no few than at least a hundred , and before the year go about , God know how many hundred ; that one will wonder what the king will do with so many milite , have no war to•ard . but it wa• indeed fit to give a vent to the passage of honour , which during queen Eliza ? beth reign have be so stop , that scarce any county of England have knight enough in it to make a Iury. before we go further , it will not be amiss , to show what great man atten ? dead king Iames out of Scotland ; as namely the duke of Lenox , the earl of Marre , the lord hame and many other great lord : and many other who he afterward make great lord , as bring in his special favour ; first sir George hame , make afterward earl of Dunbarre : then sir Thomas Erskin , make earl of Kelly ; then sir John Ramsey make earl of Holdernesse ; ( which two last have the fortune to come first in to his rescue against the gowry ) then sir Iames hay , make afterward earl of Carlile ; and then sir Richard Preston make earl of Kil ? dare in Ireland ; but who great fortune by marry the heir of that earl ? dome , be afterward the occasion of his great misfortune ; for come out of Ireland he be unfortunate cast away and drown . but though king Iames be now safe come himself to London ; yet he ac ? count himself but half come , until his queen and child be come to he ; and therefore there be now appoint to go to conduct they , of lord , and earl of S•ssex , the earl of Lincoln , the lord Compton , the lord Norris , and sir George Carow knight , lord precedent of Munster : of lady the countess of Worcester , the countess of Kildare , the lady Anne Herbert daughter to Henry earl of Pembroke ; the lord Scroope lady , the lady rich wife to the lord rich , and the lady Walsingham , one of the late queen bedchamber : but all ? though these only be appoint to go , yet many other lord and great la ? die go of themselves to attend her majesty , as the countess of Bedford , the lady Hastings , the lady Cecill , the lady Hatton , the lady Harington , and diverse other : and with this princely attendance , the queen with two of her child , namely prince Henry of the age of nine year , and the lady Elizabeth on the eleven of June come to York : where rest themselves some few day , on the seven and twenty of June they come to Easton in Northamptonshire , a house of sir George fermor , where the king meet they at dinner : and afterward they ride together to a house of sir John Fortescue , and so to London . the king young son , Charles duke of Albany come not at this time , as be not three year old , and therefore not think able to endure such a journey , but the year follow fall sick of a favour , doctor Atkins one of the king physician be send to conduct he , who in six week cure he of his favour ; and the first week of October bring he safe to Windsor , where the king then lie ; for which service he be so well reward , that together with the gayn•s of he usu ? all page 124 practice• he grow to a great wealth then be usual for physician . king Iames have distribute the mean order of knightho•d very plentiful ; now he think fit to raise his distribution to a high degree , and thereupon on the twenty of May , he make sir Robert Cecil baron of Esindon ; sir Robert Sidney ba ? run of Penshurst ; sir William knoll baron of grey ; and sir Edward Wooten ba ? run of Morley : and not long after he make the lord Henry Howard earl of North-Hampton ; and Thomas Sackvile lord Buckhurst , he make earl of Dorset . the king have by this time find the love and affection of his own people ; but the affection of neighbour prince towards he stand yet in suspense , when now to take away that doubt come first in the begin of June , a ambassador from the palsgrave of Rhyne ; present after another from the state of holland and Zealand ; another from the archduke of Austria ; another from the king of Spain ; from the seignory of Venice another ; another from the duke of Florence ; and last on the eight of June , mon•ieur de Rhosny from the king of France : all congratulate his happy come to the crown of England , for entertainment of which ambassador , and all other that shall come after ; the king have erect a office by the name of master of the ce ? remony , allow he two hundred pound a year fee , and the first that have the place be sir Lewis Lewkenor : a gentleman , who beside other good part be very skilful in the neighbour language . upon the seventeenth of May this year , be make fourteen sergeant at law : whereof eleven have receive writ the last year of queen Elizabeth : namely , Thomas Coventry , Robert Haughton , Laurence Tanfield , John Crooke , Thomas foster , Edward Philips , Thomas Harris , Iames Altham ; Henry hub ? bard ; Augustine Nicholls ; and Robert Perker ; to who the king add three new ; John Shirley ; George snygge ; and Richard Hutton , who all keep their feast together in the middle temple hall one will think that by this time , all offence against queen Elizabeth have be forget : but king Iames more tender of wrong do to she than to he ? self , will not suffer Valentine Thomas so to escape ; who after he have lie many year prisoner in the tower , be on the four of •une arraign at the king bench-barre ; and for conspiracy against the late queen and some of her counsel , be on the seven of June after six a clock at night , draw to S••Thomas water , and there hang and quarter . about this time the honourable Charles lord montj•y , return out of Ireland ; bring alone with he huge oh Neale , earl of Teroen ; at who come to the king , the lord Montjoy be swear of the king privy counsel , and the earl of Teroen who have be the cause of so much english blood shed , be yet pardon ; and proclamation make , that by all man he shall be use with respect and honour . all this while the king have move within his own sphere , and have do no ? thing out of the realm ; his first employment abroad be now in June , to his brother the king of Denmark , to who he send in embassage the earl of rut ? land upon two occasion : the one to be godfather to his son , who be name Christianus , the other to present he with the order of the gar•er , upon the like employment ; soon after , he send the lord spen•er to Frederick duke of Wirtenberg ; which lord , see the say prince invest with the garter , and after honourable entertainment return home . it be now a time that every man may sit under his vine : and enjoy the happiness of a peaceable government : when sudden like a storm in a fair summer day , break forth a treason of a strange composition : for where in all treason ? s common they be all of some one faction in this , there be people of all sort ; priest and layman , papist and protestant , noblement , knight and gen•lement ; that one will think it shall be a well manage treason , and yet be the shallow that be ever set on foot ; so shallow , that it can scarce page 125 be observe , either what the author of it ail , or what it be they will h•ve do . Indeed the great favour which king Iames at his first come to the crown , show to the earl of South-Hampton , be like to breed no good blood in those that be his opposite ; and it be say ( how true i know not ) that as the king have send to enlarge the earl of South-Hampton , and appoint he to meet he upon the way : so when he hear of a intention that the lord Cobham and sir Walter Ralegh have to meet he ; he send they word they shall spare their labour . but why there it be so or no , it seem they find some •ause of discontentment , and discontentment will never want complyce ; and by this mean be the composition of this t•eason make up , and thereupon be apprehend Henry lord Cobham , and George brook his brother , Thomas lord grey of Wilton , sir Walter Ralegh , sir Griffith Markham , and sir Edward Parham knight , Bartholomew Brookesby and Anthony Copley gentleman , William Watson and William Clerke priest : but though they be apprehend in July , yet they come not to their arraignment till November follow ; for by reason of the sickness , which be then hot in London , the term be put off till crastino Martini , and then to be keep at Winchester in hampshire , only the court of the exchequer , ward , livery and the duchy of Lancaster be keep in the king manor at Richmond in the county of Surrey ; and so in the four of November follow , all the foresay delinquent be remove from the tower of London and other prison , by strong guard to Winchester , and there arraign ; who indictment be for conspire , baptize to kill the king . 2 to raise rebellion . 3 to alter religion . 4 to subvert the state . 5 to procure invasion by stranger . concern the first point , it be prove , that the lord grey intend to obtain the levy of two thousand man , for defence of the Low-countries , and with they to seize u•on the king and prince , and take the lord of the counsel in their chamber . for the other point , it be prove , that the lord Cobham and sir Walter Ralegh , meet at saint , martins in the field ; and there consult about raise sedition , move rebellion , alter religion , sub ? vert the state , and to set up the lady Arbella . and particular for the point of subvert the state : it be prove , that Watson be design to be lord chancellor , George brook lord treasurer , sir Griffin Markham secretary , and the lord grey to be master of the horse , and earl martial of England , and for effect of these treason , it be prove that Waston the priest have thou ? vised oath in writing , by which all party be bind to keep they secret . and for the last point , it be prove , that sir Walter Ralegh be appoint to treat with count Aramberg for six hundred thousand c•owns , and the lord Cobham to go to the archduke and to the king of Spain , to persuade they to assist the lady Arbella . Theise thing be prove against they , on the day in which they be several indict , the most which be reply in mitigati ? on of their fault , be first by Waston , who affirm it can not be treason , be ? cause the king be not yet crown ; and then by the lord grey , that it be but a verbal matter and never take effect , and therefore can be no treason , but these assertion be both refute ; they be all ( except sir Edw• Parham , who only be acquit ) on their several day of indictment , find guilty of trea ? son ; and have judgement accord . the priest Watson and Clerk be execute ? de at Winchester , the nine and twenty of November : George brook be behead ? ed the five of Decemb. but then the hand of justice stayed• and this be the course which the king hold in show mercy . after the death of the three before name he sign three other warrant for the execution of the late lord Cobham , the lord page 126 gr•y ; and sir Griffin Mark•h•m , on a certain day then follow ; but before that day come he private frame another warrant , write with his own hand to the sheriff ; ( who be then sir Benjamin Tichburne , ) by which he countermand the former warrant : and that there may be no notice take of it : he send it by mr. John gybbe : a scotchman : and one utter unknown to all the company , appoint he to deliver it so , that it may not take effect , till after their several confession , and at the very point of their execution , which be accord perform : at which time it be a wonderful thing to see how the delinquent fall on their knee , lament their misdoing , and most of all how they extol the king un ? speakable mercy . but though thus pardon : yet be they carry back to the tower , where the l : grey not long after die , and in he be extinct that barony , which have former bro•ght forth many valorous and worthy man . sir Griffin Markha ? after some time be set at liberty and pass beyond sea , where he live long after in mean account . the lord Cobham likewise be afterward discharge of imprisonment , but deprive of his estate , live diverse year after in great penury ; and in he end that noble family , which have flourish in great honour many age . sir Walter Ralegh be keep in the tower , where to his great honour he spend his time in writing , and have be a happy man if he have never be release . but such be our state , that no man fortune be understand , whether it be good or bad , until it be discover by the event . but in this mean time many thing have passed• for his majesty have defer the feast of saint George until his be at some of his own house : hold now the say feast at Windsor , the second of July where the prince be install knight of the garter ; as also the duke of Lenox , the earl of South-Hampton , the earl of m•rre , and the earl of Pembroke ; and at the same time be elect the king of Denmark , and the duke of Wirtenberg : though their invest have be speak off before . and now be preparation make for the king coronation , and for a preparative unto it , h• first restore the earl of South-Hampton , and then raise in honour these follow : sir Thomas Eger•on lord Chancellour• he make baron of Elsemere ; sir William Russell , baron of Thorn•ugh ; sir Henry grey baron of Grobye ; sir John Peter baron of Writtle ; sir John Harington , baron of Exton ; sir Henry Denvers , ba ? run of Da•sey ; sir Thomas Gerard baron of gerad brome in the county of staff ? ford ; and sir Robert Spenser , baron of Wormeleyton . after this he confer inferior order ; and make knight , all the judge and sergeant at law , all civilian and clerk of the signet : all his gentleman usher and diverse other : and last make knight of the bath threescore and two , most of they noble man son , and the rest gentleman of special worth . Theise thing do , on the five and twenty of July be saint Iames day ; the king and queen be together crown , and anoint at Westminster by the hand of John Whitegift archbishop of canter ? bury , in presence of the nobility and other , namely sir Robert Lee lord major of London , in a gow•e of crimson velvet , his brethren the alderman in gown of scarlet , and twelve principal citizen admit to attend on they : all other city ? zen stay from pass thither , either by water or by land , by reason of the sick ? ness ; and the first of A•gust follow , all suitor be by proclamation forbid ? den to repay•e to the count till the winter follow . at this time the king forget no• a deliverance he have former have , which though it be have in Scotland , yet he will have notice of it take in England , which be his deliverance from the conspiracy of the go•ries , on the five day of August three ye••es before , and thereupon Friday be the five of August be by command ? mean appo•••ed to be keep holy day with morning prayer , sermon , and evening prayer th•t day , and bonfire •t night which be then ; and after during his life solemn o••erved . king Ia••• have in hi• a• it be two person ; one as he be king of Scotland ; and in this he be in perfect amity with •he king of Spain• , another as he be king page 127 o•England , and in this he have some difference with Spain ; but he , as rex pa ? cific•• , ••oke the best from both , and be altogether for the olive branch , and thereupon when at his come into England , he find letter of mart grant against Spaniards : he first cause they all to be call in , and then cons•nted to a treaty of per•it reconcilement : in which treaty handle at London , the 18 o•August 16•4 : the commissioner for the king of England be Thomas Earle of Dorset , Charles earl of Nottingham , Charles earl of Devonshire , Henry earl of North-Hampton and Robert Viscount Cranbourne : for the king of Spain , John de Velasco constable of Castille , John de Tassis earl of Villa Media ? •a , and Alexander Robidius professor of the law in the college of Milan : for the archduke , Charles count of Aramberg , John Richardo• precedent of the privy counsel , and Lodowick Verreikin principal secretary : by who a peace be conclude and contain in many article . the summer follow ? king , the king of Spain send don John de Velesco constable of Castille and duke of Fryas , also Pedraca de la syerra , his great chamberlain : accompany with diverse marquis , earl and baron , who come into England , be by the earl of Devonshire on the nineteenth of August bring to the court , where the king in his chapel in the presence of the •ommissioners and other en ? glish lord , ( the duke of Fryas hold the king hand between his ) take his oath upon the holy bible , religious to observe and keep all the article of the peace and league agree upon , and in march follow , be now the three year of king Iames , Charles earl of Nottingham , lord high admiral of en ? gland be send into Spain to take in like manner the king of spaine oath : who accompany with three baron , and many knight , gentleman and other , to the number of six hundred and fifty , the fifteen of April arrive at groin , from whence he be conduct to Valledolid , three hundred mile off , where the king of Spain then keep his court , entertain in all place as he pass , at the king of spaine charge , with so great provision and such demonstration of love and gladness : that it plain show the Spaniard be as glad of our friendship as we of they . the lord ambassador be come to court : he cause Thomas Knoll esquire , to deliver the present send from the king of Eng ? land , which be siz goodly horse , with saddle and saddle clothes very rich embroider , whereof three for the king , and three for the queen : two cross ? bow with sheaf of arrows• four fowl piece , inlay with plate of gold : and a couple of lime hound , of singular quality : which the king and queen in very kind manner accept , and then on the thirtyth of may , the lord ambassador be send for , the king come forth into a large room : where ha ? ve a little table set before he , and a bible very reverent lay upon it , to ? gether with a crucifix : the archbishop of Toledo read the oath , at the read ? king whereof , the lord ambassador hold the king hand between he and the king kneel down , lay his hand upon the book , and after his oath , subscri ? bed to the article former conclude . while the E. of Nothingham be thus employ in Spain , the right honourable Edward earl of Hartford , be likewise send emb•ssador to Albertus and Isabel , archduke of Austria , to take their oath , for confirmation of the say article of peace , which be take at Bru ? xell the first of May with great state and solemnity : after which , as the earl bestow on the archduk servant , to the full sum of three thousand poun ; so the archduke at his departy , bestow upon the earl , a jewel worth nine hundred pound , and a suit of arm worth three hundred , and bear his charge all the time of his stay at Brussels . and now be king Iames , true rex pa ? cificus , piece and amity with all prince of Christendom , which few of his ancestor ever be a little before this , in the month of August , in the year 1604 , the strong town of Ostend in Flanders , after above three year siege , and the slaughter of a hundred and twenty thousand man of both side , and in defence whereof , sir page 128 Francis Vere general , and his brother sir Horatio Vere have show great va ? lour , be by the marquis Spinola take ; for which service , the king of Spain make he duke of Santa Severina , and lord general of all his force in the low-countrye . it be now the three year of king Iames his reign , when he keep saint George feast at Grenwich , and there make two new knight of the garter ; na ? mely , the high and mighty prince duke Ulrick , heir of Norway , and brother to our gracious queen anne : and the right noble lord Henry Howard , earl of North-Hampton . and upon the Saturday follow , in the hall at Grenwich , be rich hang with arras , he create three earl , one viscount and four baron : namely , sir Robert Cecil Viscount Cranbourne , he create earl of sa ? lisbury : Thomas Cecil , lord Burley his elder brother , he create earl of ex ? ceter , and sir Philipe Herbert , young brother to the earl of Pembroke , he ere ? ated earl of Montgomery : then Robert Sidney baron of Penshurst , lord Cham ? berlaine to the queen , he create Viscount Lisle : sir John Stanhope , vice ? chamberlain to the king , he make lord Stanhope of Harington : sir George Carew Vicechamberlaine to the queen , he make lord Carew of Clopton• ma ? star Thomas Arundel of Devonshire , he make lord Arundel of wardez : and master William Cavendish , he make lord Cavendish of Hardwick . about this time a strange fancy possess the brain of a profess physiti ? on , one Richard haidock of new college in Oxford , who pretend to preach at night in his sleep , in such sort , that though he be call aloud or stir and pull by the hand or foot , yet will make no show of either hear or feel : and this he do often , in the presence of many honourable person , that come to hear he ; so as within a short time , his fame be spread through the land , by the name of the sleep preacher . at length the king command he to be bring to the court , where his majesty sit up the most part of a night to at ? tend the event : when at last , haidock make a show to be a sleep , begin to pray ; then take a text , make his division ; apply it to his purpose , for in his preach his use be to inveight against the pope , against the cross in baptism and against the last canon of the church of England ; and have end his sermon seem to continue sleep . his majesty have well observe the manner of his carriage ; after a few day , call ? lead the say haidock before he , and in conference with he ( as he have indeed a admirable sagacity in discover of fiction ) make he confess , that all he do be but imposture : and thereupon to fall upon his knee , and ask forgive ? ness , which the king grant , upon condition , that in all place he shall o ? pen acknowledge his offence ; because many be bring into belief , that his nightly preach be either by inspiration or by vision . we may not here think it unworthy the relate , see king Iames think it not unworthy the see , thereby to observe the nature of the lion , and make a solemn matter of it : for on Monday the 3 of June ( take with he the duke of Lenox , and diverse earl and lord ) he go to the lion tower and cause two lion a male and a female , to be put forth , and then a live cock to be cast before them• which they ( as be their natural enemy ) present kill and suck his blood . then a live lamb to be put down to they , which the generous lion ( as have respect to its innocency ) never offer to touch , though the lamb be so bold to go close unto they . then the king cause those lion to be take away and another lion to be put forth , and two mastiff to be put into he , who present fly upon the lion and turn he upon his back , and though the lion be superior to they in strength , yet it seem they be his match in courage and so much superior , as that they be the first assailant , with who otherwise , perhaps the lion will not have offer to meddle . on Friday the 4 of January in the king second year , Charles duke of Albany page 129 the king second son be then but 4 year old , be create duke of York ; •hich , because it be do with extraordinary solemnity , be not unworthy to ha•e the manner of it , here relate . first be appoint knight of the bath , the duke of Albany himself , than the lord Willowby , the lord Chandois , the lord C•mpton , the lord Norris , William Cecill , son and heir to the viscount Cranbourne , Allan Percy , brother to the E. of Northumberland , Thomas Somerset see ? cond son to the earl of Worcester , Francis manner brother to the earl of rut ? l••d ; Thomas Howard second son to the earl of Suffolk , and John Harington son and heir to the lord Harington , the earl of Oxford and Essex be esquire to the duke of Albany ; all the knight take their lodging that night in the first gatehouse go to king street ; where they sup , and have bath pro ? vide for they . the next morning be Saturday , they go out into the park in their hermit weed , the minstrel play and the herald go be ? before they into the court , and so into the chapel , where every knight with his squire go to the altar , and there offer ( the deane of the chapel , in a rich cope , hold the basin . after this they go up into their lodging , and •here new attire themselves in robe of crimson taffeta , with hat and white feather , and so go back to the great chamber : where by the king they be gird with the sword , and have gild spur put upon they . this do , they be solemn serve at dinner , and after go again to the chapel , and there offer their sword . the next day be Sunday and twelve day in robe of purple Sattin• with doctor hood on their shoulder and hat with white fea ? there|be , they issue out of the revestry , with the duke of Albany ( be then to be make duke of York ) into the hall , where the king sit under the cloth of e ? state , and then the herald go before , the knight of the bath follow , and then the earl of Suffolk , lord Chamberlain come alone , then follow Henry Howard earl of North-Hampton and Charles blunt earl of Devonshire , carry the robe of estate , for the duke of York , after who Wriothsley earl of South-Hampton carry the coronet , George Clifford earl of Cumberland , the golden rod , the earl of Worcester the cap of estate , and the earl of Nottingham bear the duke of Albany in his arm , support by the earl of Dorset and Northumberland , who all come in this order before the king ; the duke of Albany be after the patent read create duke of York , with the robe and coronet put on he and the golden rod , deliver into his hand : all which perform , they go to dinner , and the solemnity end . about this time on the fifteen of June , Thomas Dowglas a scotchman , be commit to the tower and have iron put upon he , be send hither , but three day before , from the count palatine of the Rhyne . his offence be , that he have counterfeit the king privy seal to diverse prince of Germany ; one to the archbishop of Collen , another to the archbishop of Tryer , another to the duke of Cleve , another to the archbishop of Moguntia , and a five to the count palatine of the Rhyne• whereof be examine and convict ; he be draw on a hurdle into Smithfield , and there hang and quarter : and now be a second parliament appoint to be hold at Westminster , on the nineteenth of march follow , when four day before the day of sit ; the king , the queen and prince ride solemn in great state through the city of London , where in diverse place be erect pageant : present give , o? ration make and all demonstration of love and observance ; and then the parliament beginning , the king make a long and love speech to the house , wherein he signify the •auses of his calling it ; but in the time , when it shall have proceed , there be sudden discover a plot of treason ( •o damnable and foul , that posteri•y will hardly think it true , when they shall hear it ) the ••ot be , to blow up with gunpowder , both house of parliament at a time , wh•n the king , prince and all the nobility shall be sit in the upper house , and all the knight and burgess in the low . page 130 the principal contriver of this plot be Robert Catesbie , a gentleman of great account in Northamptonshire , descend from that Catesby who have be a special counseller of king Richard the three , to who family the divine providence have now ordain to give a disastrous period . This Catesby not able to perform the work himself alone , draw in many to assist he , as namely , Thomas Percy , Thomas winter , John grant , Ambrose Rookwood , John Wright , Francis Tresham , Guido Fawkes , and at last sir Edward Digby , all earnest papist , and all bind by oath , and by receive the sacrament to be secret ; for effect of this plot , they hire a house close adjoin to the upper house of parliament , where they be to dig through a wall , for the fit place of their powder . about Candlemasse they have wrought the wall half through : when sudden they hear a noise in the next room which make they fear they have be discover : but send Guy Fawkes ( who go now under the name of John Johnson , as master Percy man ) to see what the matter be , he bring word , that it be a cellar where sea-cole have be lay , and be now a sell , and the room offer to be let for a yearly rent . this room therefore as most fit for their purpose , be right under the parliament house , master Percy present go and hire , lay ? ing into it twenty barrel of powder , which they cover with billet and faggot , for be discover . thus the first part of the plot be put in a good readiness . it now remain to consider what be to be do , when the blow shall be give : for though the king and prince may be slay , yet the duke of York , and the lady Elizabeth shall still be safe , and so they shall be no near their end than now they be . this work therefore for surprise the duke of York , Percy undertake , and for surprise the lady Elizabeth , they agree upon a match of hu•ting near to Dunchurch , under colour whereof they will draw company together , and surprise she at the lord Haringtons house in war ? wick-shire , where she then lie , and then proclaim her queen , and so be sure to have all thing do , as they will themselves . thus far their bloody plot go fair on , and have perhaps go on so still , if they have continue only bloody ; but now a tenderness of heart take some of they , lest their friend shall perish together with the rest , and this tenderness overthrow they ; for to prevent such promiscuous slaughter , a letter be frame , and send to the lord Mounteagle , son and heir to the lord Morley , bring he by one of his footman , which he receive from a unknown man in the street . the letter be this . my lord , out of the love i bear to some of your friend , i have a care of your preservation ; therefore i will wish you , as you tender your life , to forbear your attendance at this parliament ; for God and man have con ? cur to punish the wickedness of this time : and think not slight of this ad ? vertisement : for though there be no appe•r•ce of any stir ; yet i say , they shall receive a terrible blow this parliament , and yet shall not see who hurt they . this council be not to be contemn , because it may do you good , and can do you no harm ; for the danger be past , as soon as you have burn this letter ; and i hope you will make good use of it . my lord have read the letter , though much perplex , yet go pre ? sent to the court at white-hall• ( the king be then a hunt at Royston ) a•d deliver it to the earl of salis•••ie , principal secretary of state , and the earl have read it , acquaint first the lord Chamberlaine with it , and then the lord admiral , the earl of W•rcester and Northampton , who as soon •s the king be return from Hunting• acquaint he with it : the earl of ? ? ? tell hi• , th•• he think it must be write either by a fool , or by a mad ? ? ? , because of those word , for the d••ger be past as soon as you •ave ? ? ? thi• letter ) •or i• the da•g•r-w•re so so•ne pass , what need ? ? ? warni•g• but th• ? ? ? consider it more deep , apprehend present some violent ? ? ? ; and th•t it must be some sudden danger page 131 ? ? ? blow up with powder ; and thereupon command , than diligent search ? ? ? be make in the parliament house , and all other room and lodging ? ? ? adjoyning• which search be make by the lord Chamberlaine , accom ? ••ny•• with the lord mount••gle , who enter the cellar under the upper ? ? ? • find there great store of faggot and billet ; which be answer to ? … ? mr. p•rcie's own provision ; but then ( it be consider why such sto•e ? ? ? be lay in for mr. Percy , who use to make but little stay in Towne• and •hereu•on more diligent search be make , there be find under the billet one of the barrel of powder ; and after that all the rest , be six and thirty ; •og•ther with other instrument fit for their purpose , and then spy then ? ? ? F•wkes to stand suspicious , they apprehend he , and find in his pocket a piece of touchwood ; a tinder box to light the touchwood , and a watch , which mr. Percy have buy the day before , to try the short and long burn of the touchwood , which he have prepare to give fire to the train of powder . the plot be thus discover , yet the most of the confederate meet at Dunchurch , as they have agree ; where they divulge many detestable untruth against the king and state : signify withal , that they be there meet for advancement of the catholic cause ; hope thereby to have draw many to join with they in their rebellion : but this avail they no••ing : for first sir Richard Verney high sheriff of warwickshire chase they from thence ; and then sir Richard welsh , sheriff of Worcestershire , know they to be enter into master Littleton house at Walbach , beset they round , where Cate••i• and Percy issue forth , be both slay with one shot of a musket ; and after they , both the Wrights , John and Christopher be likewise slay out ? right ; Thomas winter be take alive ; all which time , Francis Tresham remain still about the court , offer his service for their suppression : but be suspect , be examine , and send to the tower , where he confess all , and within a few day after die of the strangu•ie . on the seven and twenty of January follow , a commission be direct to diverse lord and judge of both bench , for trial of the rest of the confederate : namely , of Thomas winter , Guydo Fawkes , Robert key , Thomas bate , Robert wint•r , late of Hooding ? tun in warwickshire esquire , John grant , late of Yorthbrook , in the county of Warwick esquire , Ambrose Rookwood , late of Staningfield in Suffolk esquire , sir Edward Digby , late of Gotthurst , in buckinghamshire , knight , who be all condemn , and have judgement to dye , and on the Thursday follow sir Edward Digbie , Robert winter , grant and Bates , be accord draw , hang and quarter , at the west end of Paul church in London , and on the Friday , the other four ; namely , Thomas winter , key , Rookwood , and fawk be execute in the parliament yard at Westminster . of all who , none be so much lamen ? t as sir Edward Digbie , and indeed worthy ; for he be a goodly personage , and of excellent part , and have it seem be cunning draw in , and bind to secrecy by oath , when he little think of any such treason . the seven of November the earl Northumberland , upon suspicion of be acquaint with the plot , be first command to keep his house , and after a while come ? mit to the tower . and thus be this great plot discover , and the plotter punish , to the great rejoice of all people : insomuch , that even the king of Spain and archduke ambassador make bonfire , and throw money amougst the people in token of joy . and at this time , on the four of January , the spanish ambassador deliver a present to the king from the king his master : namely six jennet of Andalusia , with saddle very rich embroider , and saddle-clothe of cloth of tissue : one of which jennet be snoe white , and have a main which reach to the ground . but this be a present send before any knowledge have of the powder treason : but as soon as that be know , there be present another present send from the queen of Spain to the queen of England• of purpose to congratulate the king happy delive ? •ance page 132 from the intend powder treason ; and the present be bring by D•• io•n de Mendosa , which be a roave of murry satin , embroider all over with amber leather ; and upon the leather , in every s•ame and skirt twice embroider about with gold ; the forepart whereof be set with eight and forty tag three inch long of beat gold , hollow within , and fill with ambergris ; also two large chain of amber-greece• two carcanet of ambergris , a velvet cap with gold button , curious enamele , and a girdle suitable to the Bu•tons ; all which be present together in a large ves ? sell of gold , in form of a •ason , so as it seem there be none rejoice more for the overthrow of this plot for the catholic cause , than the catholic king himself . and now king Iames , not to be unmindful to the lord Monteagle , for be the mean of discover this treason , he give unto he in fee farm of crown land 200 l. a year to he and his heir , and 500 l. a year beside , during his life : and not to be unthankful to God for the deliverance , he cause the five of November , be the day of the discovery , to be keep holy , with prayer and thanksgiving to God , which be then solemn perform , and have be since , and be likely for ever to be continue . but in the midst of this great joy , there be sudden spread a rumour of grea ? ter sorrow , for on Saturday the two and twenty of march , news be bring to the court for certain , that the king be slay at ok , twenty mile from London , stab with a envenome knife ; whereupon the court gate be present shut , and double guard set in all place about London , and all man mind be infinite distract ; but within two hour all these cloud be clean disperse , and the sun begin to shine out again ; and it be certain know , that the king be safe , and in perfect health : for which a Procla ? mansion be present set forth to signify it to the people ; and that afternoon the king come himself to Whitehall , where thousand of people , ravish with joy , come flock to see he ; and so general be the rejoice , that the spanish ambassador , give sir Lewis lewk••r , mr. of the ceremony , a chain of gold of good value for bring he the news : though afterward it be think by some , that this rumour be but politic devise to make the parliament and people more tender of the king safety , and by make they more sensible what a treasure they have of his life , to make they more willing to part with their trea ? sure for his live , as indeed this parliament they do , give more subsidy than be usual . the eight and twenty of march follow , Henry garvet provincial of the english Jesuit , be arraign in Guildhall , for conceal the foresay treason , where he have judgement to be hang , draw , and quarter , and ac ? cord on the three of May , be draw from the tower to the west end of Paul church , and there execute . at his death , he confess his fault , ask forgiveness , and exhort all catholic never to attempt any treason against the king or state ; as a course which God will never prosper . on Tuesday the twenty of May , be install at Windsor knight of the garter , Robert Cecill , earl of Salisbury , and Thomas Howard Viscount Byndon ; both of they honourable attend , but the earl of Salisbury beyond ordinary proportion . there be yet a fag end of the late powder treason behind to be examine : whereupon two baron of the realm ; namely , Henry lord Mordant , and Edw. lord Sturton , be bring from the tower , to the star-chamber : and there , not charge indeed with any point of the treason , but only reflect , be ? cause they neglect to appear at the parliament , accord to their summons , for which neglect only , without any further charge , they be fine to pay to the king , the lord Mordant ten thousand mark , and the lord Sturton six thousand , and to be prisoner during the king pleasure . but on the 27. of June h••rie earl of North•mberla•d be likewise bring from the tower to the page 133 ? ? ? chamber , and more direct charge with circumstance concern then ? ? ? , special in regard of Thomas Percy , who he have admit to be ? ? ? of the king gentleman pensioner , without minister unto he the oath o• Supremacy• know he to be a recusant ; for which , and some misprision , he be fine to pay to the king thirty thousand pound , to forfeit all his offi ? ••• , and to be keep prisoner during the king pleasure , as indeed he continue m•ny year , and at last release , be yet confine . it be now the 4. year of king Iames his reign , and be a time of princely •i•itation ; for this summer , the 17. of July , Christianus king of Denmark , bro ? ther to the queen , have be long expect , with eight ship come into the river of Thames , and anchor before gravesend ; to who the next day , king Iames , with prince Henry , and diverse of his lord go by barge , and conduct he to London , where he stay till the twelve of August follow : in which time , he be entertain with all the magnificence that can be de•vised ; the king and he ride in great state through the city ; where pageant in many place be erect ; and a•ter he have be show the chief place about London• as namely , the old exchange , the tower , the monument at west ? minster , and have go up to the top of Pauls , have be feast by the king , by the earl of Salisbury four day together at theobald , have see tilt , fen ? ce , wrestle , and many other pastime , on the twelve of August , conduct by the king , the queen , and prince , with many other great lord , he depart to his ship , and in eight day arrive at home : a happy thing when prince can converse together like private person , and be not keep asunder with jealou ? sie of state . after the king of Denmarks departure , on the 23. of September , arrive at Lon ? don Francis prince of Vaudemount , three son to the duke of Lorraine , accom ? pany with seven earl , ten baron , forty gentleman of quality , and sixscore common person ; who all the five and twenty of September go by coach to the king at Hampton court , where fourteen day together they be feast and royal entertain , and then return . but these festival be follow with a little disturbance ; for in may , the year after , great assembly be gather together in Northamptonshire , Warwick ? shire , and leicestershire , throw down enclosure , at first , without any parti ? cular head : but at last rise up a base fellow , call John Reynolds , who they name captain pouch , because he have a great leather pouch hang by his side , who affirm to the company , that in that pouch he have sufficient to de ? fend they against all comer : but when he be afterward apprehend , and his pouch search , there be nothing find in it but a piece of green cheese . Proclamation be make , command they to surcease their this ? order : but this prevail nothing , till the king send Henry earl of hunt ? tun , Thomas earl of Exeter , Edward lord zouch , and sir Edward co•ke lord chief justice of England to suppress they by force of arm , and to punish the leveller accord to the nature of their offence ; some by death , as for treason ; some by fine , as for rout : but captain pouch be make exampler . on Friday , the twelve of June , his majesty attend with diverse lord , dine with the lord major , sir John wat , who after dinner present he with a purse full of gold , and humble beseech his majesty , that he will be please to be free of his company , the clothworker : to which , the king gracious condescend ; and thereupon call to sir William stone , master of the company , and say , stone give i thy hand ; and now i be a clothworker : and in token of my special favour to this fraternity , i do here give to this company a brace of buck yearly for ever , against the time of the election of the master and warden : at which time also many lord and gentleman be make free of the clothworker . page 134 on Thursday the 16. of July , the king and prince with many lord , dine at merchant t•l•rs-hall , where the master and warden of that society , present the king with a purse of gold , give he humble thanks for grace their fraternity with his •oyall presence• and therewithal show he a roll , wherein be register the name of seven king , one queen , 17 , prince , and duke , two duchess , one archbishop ; one and thirty eearle , threescore and six baron , seven abbot , seven priors , with a great number of knight and esquire , who have be free of that company ; which his majesty graci ? ous accept , but tell they , that he himself be already free of another company : but the prince his son shall be free of they , and that he will see the garland put on his head : whereupon the master present the prince also with a purse of gold , which he gracious accept , and say , that not only himself will be free of the merchant Tailors• but the lord also that be with he shall do the like , all which be perform with great so ? lemnity . the four of July this year , sir Thomas •nevet be call by write to the parliament by the name of baron of Estrick , the next day sir Iulius Caesar , Chan ? celor of the exchequer be swear a privy counsellor ; and the sixteenth of November fallow sir •ervis Clyfton knight , be call to the parliament by write , by the name and title of baron of Layton Brameswold , who only daugh ? ter and heir , be soon after marry , to eysme steward , baron of Aubigny in France , sole brother of the duke of L•nox ; who he afterward succeed in that dignity . about this time , huge earl of Tervon , most ungrateful and utter for ? getfull of the king great clemency to he , together with te•rconell : huge baron of Dungaunon , and diverse other irish lord , flee into the part beyond sea , with a purpose to solicit foreign prince against the king , and to offer the kingdom of Ireland to the pope , which be present signify to the realm by proclamation . on the eleven of April this year , George Iervis a seminary priest , and the three and twenty of Iune• follow : Thomas G•rnet a Jesuit , be both ex ? ecute at Tyburn ; Thom•• Garnet have the favour offer he to be pardon , if he will but take the oath of allegiance , which he refuse . the nineteenth of April at Whitehall , die Thomas earl of Dorset lord tre ? asurer , who death ( because he die sudden as he sit at the counsell-table ) be by some untoward interpret ; but be dead and his head open , there be find in it certain little bag of water , which whither by the strain of his study the night before , in which he sit up till eleven a clock , or otherwise by their own maturity , sudden break and fall upon his brain , cause his sudden death . so certain it be that death come not always by determinate step ; but sometime per saltum , and we all carry about we the cause of sudden death , though unsensible of they till we be unsensible . this lord be of ex ? cellent part , and in his place exceed industrious , and i have hear many chequer man say , there never be a better treasurer , both for the king pro ? fit and the good of the subject . the twentieth of May at Windsor , be make two knight of the ga•ter , George earl of dun•arre , and fillip earl of Mo••g•mery ; but the earl of Dunbarra , within a year or two after leave both his honour and his life ; but not his life with ? out honour , have be a faithful servant , and a wise counsellor to the king , and be honorable inter in the church at Westminster . about this time be many famous english pirate that stick not some of they to turn Turks and live in great state at Tunis , of who the chief be w•rd , bishop , sir Francis Verney and Gl••••le , who after many depredation and outrageous act at sea , partly the king of Spain suppress , and partly the king of Eng. and 19 of their associ•tes be take , be hang a•wapping . page 135 also at this time , in the strand on the north side of Durham house , where ••ood a old long stable : Robert earl of Salisbury now lord treasurer of Eng ? •••d , cause to be erect a stately building ; which upon Tuesday the ten of April , in the year 1609 , be begin to be rich furnish with ware ; and the next day after , the king , the queen , and prince , with many great lord and lady come to see it : and then the king give it the name of britteine •urse . on the eight of May this year , the king by proclamation prohibit all for ? rein nation , that after August they shall not fish upon any of the coast of England , Scotland or Ireland , nor the isle adjacent , without the special licence from the commissioner in that behalf ordain . at this time the make of alum , which heretofore with great charge , have be fetch from foreign part , be by diverse that labour in it , and now last by sir John Burchier , bring to perfection in England , and thereupon the king prohibit upon pain of confiscation , any alum to be bring from beyond the sea , and take the whole traffic thereof to himself . and now the king accord to a ancient custom , have aid of his Sub ? ject through England : for make his elder son prince Henry knight , which yet be levy with great moderation , and the prince to show himself worthy of it : perform his first feat of arm at barrier , with wonderful skill and courage : be not yet full sixteen year of age . it be now the eight year of king Iames his reign ; be the year 1610 , when prince Henry be come to the age of seventeen year ; it be think fit , he shall be initiate into royalty : and thereupon the thirty of May this year , he be create prince of wale in most solemn manner ; which be this ; garter king at arm , bear the letter patent , the earl of Sussex the robe of purple velvet , the earl of Huntington the train , the earl of Cumberland the sword , the earl of Rutland the ring , the earl of Derby the rod , the earl of Shrewsbury the cape and coronet , the earl of Nottingham and North-Hampton support the prince : be in his Surcoate only and bareheaded : and in this manner be conduct to the king , attend on by the knight of the bath , five and twenty in number , all great man , and great man son : the earl of Salisbury principal secretary , read the letter patent : the prince kneel all the while before the king : and at the word accustom , the king put on he , the robe , the sword , the cape and the coronet , the rod and the ring , and then kiss he on the cheek , and so the solemnity end . after this , it be think fit , he shall keep his court by himself : and there ? upon sir Thomas Chaloner , a learned gentleman , who have before be his go ? vernour , be now make his lord Chamberlaine , sir Edw. Philips his chancellor , and all other officer assign he , belong to a prince court : wherein he show himself so early ripe for majesty , that he seem to be a king , while he be yet but prince : and all man eye begin to fix upon he . king Iames have long since shut up the gate of Janus , and be in peace with all prince abroad ; his only care now be how to keep peace at home ; and to this end , the three first day of June , in his own person he hear the difference between the ecclesiastical and the temporal judge , argue thou ? ch protection out of the kings•bench and common-plea , to this end , the eight , nine , and ten of June , he hear the manifold complaint of the abuse of the victualler , and other officer of his navy royal ; to this end , the 4 of June , 1610 , he once again by proclamation , command all roman priest , Semina ? rise and Jesuit , as be the chief incendiaries of trouble , to depart this king ? dome by the 5 of July next , and not to return upon pain of severity of the law : also all recusant , to return home to their dwelling , and •ot to ramaine page 136 in London , •o• to come within ten mile of the court , without special licence ; a•••r which proclamation , the o•th of allegiance be present minister to all sort of people , and their name certify to the lord of the counsel , that ref••ed to take it ; and this he the rather do out of consideration of the bloody fact , commit late by one revill•ck , upon the person of the renow ? ned king of France , Henry the four , and whereas queen Elizabeth in her 43 year have grant her letter patent to continue for 15 year , to the east India Mer ? chant , now upon their humble petition , the king be please to enlarge their pate••s , give they a charter to continue for ever , enable they thereby to be a body corporate and politic , which so encourage the merchant , that they build a ship of twelve hundred •un , the great that be ever make in this king ? dome by merchant ; which the king and prince honour with go to leap ? ford to see it ; and then name it , the trade increase : and at this time give to sir Thomas smith , ( governor of that company ) a fair chain of gold , with a jewel , wherein be his picture . but this great ship have be in the read sea , and return to banthem , be there lose and most of her man cast away . but then the king himself build the goodly ship of war , that be e ? ver build in England , be of the burden of 1400 tun , and carry threescore and four piece of great ordnance , which he give to his son prince Henry , who name it after his own dignity , the prince . and now whereas a parliament have be hold this year , and be prorogue to a certain day ; the king perhaps , not find it to comply with his design , or for some other cause know to himself , on the last day of December , under the gr••t s•ale of England , dissolve it . before this time , one sir Robert c•rre , a gentleman of Scotland or of they bour ? d••• , be a hunt with the king , chance with a fall off his horse to break his leg ; upon which mischance , he be force for some day to keep his bed , in which time the king be sometime please to come and visit he : and then it be first perceive that the king have begin to cast a eye of favour upon he : and indeed •ro• that time forward ( as he be a very fine gentleman and very wise ) many great favour be heap upon he : so as on easter Monday , in the year 1611 , he be create Viscount Rochester . on the two and twen ? ti of April , 1612 , be swo•ne a privy counsellor . on the four of no ? vember 1613 , be create earl of So•erset , and the ten of July follow , make lord Chamberlaine . b•• this sunshine of fortune last not long ; yet not by any inconstancy in the king , but by the earl own undeserving , which thus fall out : the right honourable Robert earl of Essex , have before this time marry the beautiful lady Francis Howard , daughter of Thomas earl of Suffolk , who upon ca•ses •u ? dicial hear , be afterward divorce and leave free to marry any other . of ? te• which divo•ce , this great favourite ( the earl of Somerset ) take she for wife ; th• king g•acing their marriage with all demonstration of love and favour ; and the lord grace it with a stately masque that night , and a few day after , the bride and bridegroom , accompany with most of the nobility of the king ? dome be •easted at merchant tailor hall , by the lord major and alder ? man . but see how soon this fair we••her be overcast : for it happen , that one sir Th•mas ••erb•ry , a very ingenious gentleman , and the earl special f••••d , who have write a witty tre•tise of a wife : and it seem , not think th• lady in all point answerable to his description , have be a earnest dissw ? a••• of the M•••• , and to ••rengthen his di••wasion , lay perhaps some unjust ? ? ? up•• the lady ? ? ? , which so incense they both against he ; that ? … ? can not give they sati•••ction , than to take away his life : so ? … ? say : improbe ? … ? r , quid non mortalia pectora cogis ? page 137 ? ? ? this , they find pretence to have the say sir Thomas commit to the ••wer , and there by their instrument effect their revenge : some say by a ••••oned tansy send he to eat , some by a poison glister minister unto ? ? ? , but howsoever effect it was• for which fact sir Iervis Elvis then lieu ? •••••• of the tower , and three or fou•e other of inferior condition be put to death , the lady and earl themselves be arraign and condemn : but •horough the king great clemency have their life spare , but in such a sort spa ? •ed• as be to they no less grievous than death it s•lf , be never after suffer to see the king face , nor to come near his court . this favourite be thus out of favour , there be place make for entertain ? king another ; for indeed king Iames be of so sociable and love a nature , that he can not be long well without a alter idem ; a bosom friend with who to communicate his Internos sensus , and upon who shoulder he may sometime lay a burden , which he be not willing to beat himself ; and this new friend be mr. George Villers , a gentleman of a good house , but a young brother , but of so delicate a composure of body , and withal of so excellent pa•ts of mind , as if nature have frame he of purpose to be a king favourite . and indeed never any man be partaker of the royal influence like to he , make first a knight , and gentleman of the king bedchamber , soon after make a viscount and master of the horse ; a while after erect earl of buck ? ingham , than marquis of Buckingham , and make lord admiral : last , make duke of Buckingham , the great title of honour that a subject be capable of• and yet his title not great than his power : for all matter of grace pass from the king by he , and to grace he the more , his mother ( who after his fa ? there|be death ) have marry a young son of the lord Comptons , be create countess of Buckingham , his sister who have marry a gentleman of no ex ? •raordinary family : have her husband make earl of Denbigh , his two bro ? there|be be make , one of they viscount Berbach ; the other earl of Anglesey ; beside many other of his friend and kindred high advance ; for this lord affect not a advancement that shall be only personal , but rather be in common to all his family , and be not of the disposition of some , who like to great oak , love to keep all that be near they underwood ; though it be in truth both against nature and policy to stand alone , when they will be less sub ? ject to the violence of wind , if more stand together . and though never any man have just cause to be envy than he , yet never any man be less envy ? ed ; because though his honour make he great , yet they make he not swell , but he retain the like temper of affable carriage after his advancement , as he have do before . but before all these favour be heap upon he , many other great pas ? •ages have intervene ; for first , after the death of Thomas earl of Dorset , Robert earl of Salisbury have be lord treasurer , and after he Thomas earl of Suffolk . but this lord , though of a most noble disposition : yet as have have his train up another way , seem less ready in discharge the place , and whether for this , or for his lady take too much upon she by his indulgence ; the staff be soon after take from he ; after who there come in , such a se ? quence of treasure as no age before have ever seene• all wise and able man indeed ; but yet in who the office seem a employment , rather to ennoble the officer than to enrich the king . for first sir Henry Montague be take from the king bench : and on the four of December 1620. make lord trea ? sure , and present upon it earl of Manchester , and before the year go a ? bout put off . after who sir Lionel Cranfield , from master of the ward be make lord treasurer , and short after , earl of Middlesex : and then not only put off , but fine to pay the king fifty thousand pound : after he sir Iames lee from chief justice of the king bench be make lord treasurer , and soon after earl of Marleborough ; and then have make a good return of his place , page 138 p•• i• off himself . after he sir Richard W•ston , from chancellor of the ex ? •he•••r be make lord treasurer , and soon after earl of Portland : so as with ? in the compass of little more than four year , four Treasurer• in a row be make four• Earles ; enough to make a prescription for all treasurer hereafter , to claim a right of be make Earles , which yet i speak not as derogate from those worthy man who memory i reverence , but as observe , fa ? taq•e f•rtunasque virum ; so rare as that there be never any precedent of the like . also the five and twentieth of June , 1612. the lord s•nquer a nobleman of Scotland , have in a private revenge suborn Robert Carlile , to murder John tu•ner a master of fence , think by his greatness to have bear it out ; but th• king respect nothing so much as justice , will not suffer nobility to be a shelter for villainy , but accord to the law ; on the nine and twentieth of June ; the say lord sanquer have be arraign and condemn by the name of Robert Cr•ight•• esquire ; be before Westminster hall gate execute , where he die very penitent . about this time , the king in special favour for the present plantation of english colony in Virginia , grant a lottery to be hold at the west end of Paul ; whereof one Thomas Sharplys a tailor of London have the chief prize , which be four thousand crown in fair plate . at this time also the corpse of Mary late queen of Scotland , the king mo ? there be translate from Peterborough , to saint Peter church in Westminster , and from thence be carry to the chapel royal there ; where it be inter in a royal tomb , which the king have erect for she . about this time also sir Robert Shirley , three son of sir Thomas Shirley of Sussex knight , who sixteen year pass have betake himself to travail : and have serve diverse Christian prince for the space of five year ; but chief Rodolphus the roman emperor ; who for his service , make he a earl of the empire , he afterward go into Persia , and serve the persian ten year , who make he general of the artillery : and hold he in so great account , that he give he the lady Teresia in marriage , who sister be one of the queen of Persia , after which the persian employ he to sundry prince of Europe ; and se•t he in special embassage into England to king Iames , to who he deliver his letter , and show his commission , all which signify the persian great love and affection to his majesty : with frank offer of free commerce to all his highness subject , through all the persian dominion : after a year stay here , in which time his lady lie in of a son , to who the queen be god-mother , and prince Henry god-father ; he leave the child here in England , and then with his lady depart into Persia . it be now the year 1612. and the ten of king Iames his reign , when the illustrious prince Frederick count Palatine of the Rhyne ; with who a treaty of marriage have be before , with the lady Elizabeth : on the sixteenth of October arrive at Gravesend ; to who the duke of Lenox and diverse oh ? the lord be send by the king , who conduct he to white-hall , and from thence into the great b••quetting-house , where the king , the queen , prince Henry , and the lady Elizabeth entertain he in all kind manner , and after by barge conduct he to Essex house , appoint for his lodging . it be many ye•res since any king daughter have be marry in England ; which now happen , and to so illustrious a prince ; be just cause of triumph and re ? joyceing• but see the misery of humane affair ; joy can no soon be set forth , but sorrow will be sure to follow she at the heal , as now indeed it hap ? pen : for on the nine and twenty of October , the prince palatine , with all the great lord of the kingdom in most jovial manner , dine at guild-hall : prince H•••• who wa• also invite and expect , can not come , be new fall exce•ding sick of a popular malignant favour , which reign that year page 139 in most part of this land : whereof on the six of November , between seven •nd eight a clock at night , at his court of saint Iames he die . but he be infinite belove of the people , and one that have give great hope of pro ? •ing a heroic prince . it cause suspicion in many man head , that his death be not without violence offer to nature ; some say , by bunch of grape give he to eat : some by glove of a poison perfume , give he •or a present : but these be but idle rumour and conceit : it seem the divine providence have ordain it shall be say of he ; hanc tantum terris •••endent fata nec ultra• esse sine•t : who death will have give a great blow to the happiness of this kingdom , if there have not be another prince leave of a mild spirit perha•s , but so accomplish with all excellent endowment , that there can be no great want of prince Henry , as long as there be leave prince Charles . the corpse of prince Henry , who die at the age of eighteen year , eight month , and seventeen day , be draw in a chariot to the abbey church at westmin•ter , and there inter in the chapel Royall• on the seven of December follow . this accident something appeal the general joy , but yet triumph go on . upon saint Thomas day , the palsgrave and grave Maurice be elect knight of the garter ; and the seven and twenty of December , the palsgrave be betroth to the lady Elizabeth . on Sunday , the seven of February , the palsgrave in person be install knight of the garter at wind•or , and at the same time be grave Maurice install by his deputy , count Lod•wick of nas ? saw . on the fourteenth of February , be Shrove-Sunday , and saint Valentine day , this happy marriage of the palsgrave with the lady Elizabeth be so ? lemnize in the chapel at Whitehall : the bride be lead to church by two bachelor , her brother prince Charles , and the earl of Northampton , lord privy seal : she be attire all in white , have a rich crown of gold upon her head , her hair hang down at length , curious be•e• with pearl and precious stone , her train support by twelve young lady in white garment : the king give she in marriage , the archbishop of Canterbury marry they , the bishop of bath and Wells preach the bridal sermon : which end , the bride be lead home by two marry man , the duke of Lenox , and the earl of N•ttingham , lord admiral . this marriage be solemnize the first night with a stately masque of lord and lady : the second night with a magni ? ficent masque of the gentleman of the middle temple , and Lincoln inn : the three night with a sumptuous masque of the gentleman of the inner temple , and Graees inn , provide indeed then , but be not perform till the saturday night follow , by reason the concourse of people be so great , it will have hinder the show . after this , the lord major and alderman give the bride a chain of oriental pearl , value at two thousand pound : and now when all thing have be do for honour their marriage , which either love and observance can device , or art and magnificence can perform : on the ten of April , the bridegroom with his bride take leave of the king and queen at Rochester , ( who have by barge conduct they thither ) and there take ship : on the nine and twenty of April they arrive at fl•shing ; from whence the duke of Lenox , the earl of Arundel , the viscount Lisle , and the lord Harington , wait upon they to their chief city of Heydelburgh ; in all place as they pass , be receive with all state and magnificence : but then on the fourteen of June , the english lord return home , the lord Harington die by the way at worm , who corpse be bring over , and bu•ied in England and here it will not be amiss , to show of what extent and largeness the palsgrave country is• because of the iniquity of some that seek to disgrace it . it be in length about two hundred english mile , take the low and upper country . in the low he have six and twenty wall town , beside a infinite number of fair village , and two and twenty page 140 house of residence . in the uper , not so many wall town , and how ? ses , but those that be general fair than in the low , especial Amberg , and New-market . but it be now time to look home ; in the year 1609. the king have care for the quietness of Ireland , have grant to the city of London the present possession and plantation in the province of Ulster : whereupon afterward in the year 1612. they send thither about three hundred person , of all sort of handicraft man , chief to inhabit the two city of londonderry and coleraigne : where they ordain alderman cockaine for their first Gover ? nou_r_ . and for the advance of this , or the like plantation in Ireland , king Iames about this time begin a new order of knight , which be call Baro ? ne•s , because they take place next to baron young sonnes• and he ap ? point certain law , to make they capable that shall be admit . first that they shall maintain the number of thirty foot soldier in Ireland , for three year , after the rate of eight penny a day , and to pay the wage of one whole year , upon the pass of their patent : then that they shall be gentleman of blood of three descent ; and last , shall have land of inn ? heritance , in possession or immediate reversion , to the value of a thousand pound per annum : and to keep the order from swarm , he stint it with ? in the number of only 200. and as the issue shall fail , the order to cease . but he that will look , how well the end of the institution , and the law of it have be observe shall perhaps find it to be here , as it be in the order of saint Michael in France , into which at first• there be none admit , but prince and eminent person : but afterward , all sort of man , without any difference , be admit , that it come almost to be doubt , whether the dignity of the order do more grace the person , or the meanness of the person disgrace the order : and indeed , when the law of a institution be not in some measure observe , it seem to make a kind of nullity in the collation . about this time , on Sunday the •4 . of October , a exemplar penance be impose upon sir peck•all br••kas knight , which be to stand at Paul cross in a white sheet , hold a stick in his hand , have be former convict before the high commissioner , for many notorious adultery with diverse woman . this year 1614 in the month of July , Christianus king of Denmark , ( out of his love to his sister , and king Iames ) come the second time into England ; but as be now secure of himself , private , and with a small company , so as he come to the queen at Somerset house unexpected , and before any knowledge be have of his come ; but king Iames be then in progress in bedfordshire , and hear of it , come present back , and after he have entertain he here , with hunt , haw ? king , run at ring , bear-baiting , play , fire-works• and fence , on the first of August prince Charles bring he aboard his ship , who then take his leave , and return home . in October this year be a call of sergeant at law , be 11. in number , namely , George wild , Will tow , Rich• Bawtrie , Henry Finch , Th•• chamberlain , Francis Mo•r• , Thomas Attow , John mo•re , Francis Harvie , Charles Chibbourn , and Tho. Richardson ; and in trenity term before there have two other be call , namely , sir Randal Cre• of Lincol•s inn , and sir Robert Hitcham of Gray inn , knight . about this time a ambassador come from the young emperor of Russia to king Iames , desire his continual love and amity , and to be a mean of make attoneme•• , between he and the king of Swethland , and withal present he with a rich present of fur : which be no small honour to the king of great Britain to have so great a potentate as the emperor of Russia a solicit he to be his mediator . though king Iames out of all natural goodness be addict to peace , yet out of providence he neglect not to be prepare for war , and thereupon in the year 1610. have grant privilege to a society call of the military page 141 garden ; and this year 1614 , cause a muster of man to be present before he , which be perform to his great like , and to the great commendation of the city . about this time a memorable act be perform by m. Hug. Middleton , city ? zen and goldsmith of London , and bear in den•igh-shire , who have a act of parliament for his warrant , with infinite cost and indefatigable labour , bring water to the city of London , from the two great spring of Chadwell and be ? well in hartfordshire , have cut a channel from thence to a place near isle ? tun , whither he convey it , to a large pan , and from thence in pipe of young elm to all place of the city : for as the Poeth say : ? in non-latin alphabet ? . Nothing be so commodious for the life of man , as water . another memorable act be about this time do on the north side on Lon. call Morefields , which be before environ with deep stink ditch and noisome common shower , be now , not only make fair and sweet , but so level ? lead into walk and let with tree , that it be the pleasant place of all the city . the next year be 1615 , another memorable act , for the benefit and beau ? ty of the city of London , be perform ; for Smithfield , which be before a rude dirty place , be now pave all over , and strong rail sequester the mid ? dle part of it , be set up , to make it a fair walk place , and fit for market or any other use . the lady Arbella a near kinswoman of the king , have sometime before , without the king privity , secret marry master William Seymour , young son of the earl of Hartford , now earl of Hartford himself ; for which they be both commit to the tower : and now this year , on the seven and twenty day of Sep. she end her life there , and be bury in the chapel royal at Westminster . this year also in July , be install knight of the garter , Francis earl of Rutland , sir George Villers master of the horse , and sir Robert Sidney vis ? count Lis•• : and in another kind of honour , the earl of Arundel , the lord Carews , and doctor Andrews bishop of Ely , be swear privy coun ? sellour . Wales by the death of prince Henry , have be a good while without a prince , and now to supply that place , prince Charles be create prince of Wales : in joy whereof , the town of Ludlow in Shropshire , and the city of London , perform great triumph : and the more to honour his creation : there be make five and twenty knight of the bath ; all the lord or baron son , and yet more to honour it , there be forty select gentleman of the inn of court , that perform a solemn joust at Barries , with great magnificence . this year be a censure of diverse great delinquent , for first sir Edward Cook• , be upon displeasure discharge from be lord chief justice of the king bench ; and two day after his discharge , sir Henry montag•e the king sergeant at law , be place in his room : next to he the lord Egerton , why ? there disable by sickness or age , to exercise the place , or upon displeasure also , have the sele take from he , which be deliver to sir Francis bacon the king attorney , he make first lord keeper ; and the lord Egerton die soon after , lord chancellor . not long after he sir Henry Yelverton the king at ? tourney , for add new privilege to the londo•ers charter , without the king privity , be in displeasure put from his place ; and in his room be pla ? ce sir Thomas Coventry , the king solicitor . but awhile after , sir Henry •el ? verton , be make a puny judge of the common plea ; have indeed the re ? putation of a excellent lawyer . and yet this work of censure stay not here , for much about this time ; Thomas earl of Suffolk lord treasurer of England , have the staff of his office take from he ; which be soon after deliver to sir Henry Montag•• lord page 142 chief justice of the king be•ch . if sir John Benet , judge of the prerogative court , have make a little more haste , he mihght have make one in this number of delinquent : but he come short three or four year ; and then be char ? ge by his own servant with bribery , he be put from his place and censure in the starre-chamber to pay twenty thousand pound : and in his room be place sir William bird a man of more integrity . though king Iames upon the death of queen Elizabeth , come to reside in England , yet •e forget not that Scotland be his native country ; and there ? before after he have spend some year in England , to acquaint himself with the state of the kingdom . in march this year one thousand six hundred and sixteent• , he make a journey into Scotland : for though he have leave very able man to sit at the helm there in his absence : yet he know , that as it be the ma ? sters eye , that make the horse fat : so it be the prince presence sometime that keep out many distemper in a state , that will otherwise creep in• and now , when in his stay six month there , he have see all thing well settle , both in the ecclesiastical state and in the temporal , and make it appear , that he reside not in England out of any neglect of Scotland ; but to the end , he migt be in the place of most conveniency to both kingdom : on the fifteen of September , he return to London , not more to the grief of the Scot to leave he , than to the joy of the english to receive he , so much be king Iames as a just and wise prince , belove of both the nation . now come to be relate a matter of special observation ; sir Walter r•w ? legh have live a condemn man many year in the tower , and now his de ? stiny bring he to his end ( by liberty ) which it can not do by imprison ? mean , for out of a longing for liberty ; he propound a project to the king , up ? on which ( as he be a well speak man and of a great capacity ) he set such cou ? lour of probability ; especial guild it over , with the gold he will fetch from a mine in Guyana ; and that without any wrong at all to the king of Spa•ne ( if he may be allow to go the journey ) that the king , if he give not credit that he can perform it , at least give way that he shall undertake it : and thereupon with diverse ship , accompany with many knight and gentleman ? leman of quality , he set forward on the voyage ; but when after long search , or show of search , no such place of treasure or no such treasure can be find , whether it be , that he think it a shame , to return home , with do nothing : or that his malus genius thrust he upon the design : he fall upon saint Th•m• , a town belong to the king of Spain : sack it , pillage it , and burn it : and here be the first part of his tragical voyage act , in the death of his elder son : the last part be act in his own death at his re ? turn . for gundomore the spanish lieger , do so aggravate this fact of he to the king , against he ; that it seem nothing will give satisfaction but raw ? legh head , without which he doubt there will follow a breach of the league between the two nation . Rawlegh excuse it , by say that he be urge to it by the Spaniard first assault of he ; and beside , that he can not come at the i , without win this town : but Gundomor be too strong a adversary for he ; and the king prefer the public peace , be ? before the life of one man , already condamned , give way to have the sentence of his former condemnation execute upon he ; and thereupon , bring to the king bench ba••e : he be not new arraign or indict , as be already m•rtuus in lege , but only have the former sentence aver against he , and so carry to the gatehouse , and from thence the next morning to the Parlia ? mean yard : a scaffold be there erect , upon which after fourteen year reprieval , his head be cut off : at which time , such abundance of blood issue from his v•i•es , that show he have stock of nature enough leave to have conti ? •ued he many year in life : •hough now above threescore year old , if it have not be take away by the hand of violence . page 143 and this be the end of the great sir Walter Rawlegh : great sometime , in the ••vour of queen Elizabeth , and next to drake the great scourge and hate of the Spaniard , who have many thing to be commend in his life ; but none more , than his constancy at his death , which he take with so undaunted a re ? solution that he may perceive , he have a certain expectation of a better life of ? te• it : so far he be from hold those atheistical opinion ; a aspersion whereof some traduce person have cast upon he . about this time king Iames make a progress to the university of Cambridge , who delight with the disputation and other scholastical exercise : he stay ? ed three whole day , and can have be content to have stay as many year : for next being a king , he be make to be a scholar . in the year 1619. be the seventeenth year of king Iames his reign , that knot of love which above twenty year have be tie , between he and his queen be by death dissolve ; for on Tuesday this year the second of march , queen Anne die at Hampton court , who corpse be bring to Denmark house , and from thence convey to Westminster : wherein the roy ? all chapel , with great solemnity it be inter : a princess very memora ? ble for her virtue , and not a little for her fortune , who beside be a queen , be so happy as to be mother , of such admire child , as she bring into the world . but the dissolve of this knot cast the king into a extreme sick ? ness ; and after some recovery , into a relapse : from which notwithstanding , it please God to deliver he , as have yet some great work to do . this year on Monday the three of May , one mr. Williams a barrister of the middle temple , be arraign at the king bench , for civil , and for wri ? ting book against the king : and upon Wednesday follow be hang and quarter at Charing cross . but a action of another nature be perform this year , the seventeenth of July ; not unworthy the relate , which be this ; that one Bernard Calvert of Andover , ride from saint George church in Southwark to Dover , from thence pass by barge to Calais in France , and from thence return back to saint George church the same day , set out about three a clock in the morning , and return about eight a clock in the evening , fresh and lusti• . in the year 1621. of parliament be hold at Westminster ; wherein two great example of justice be show ; which for future terror be not unfit to be here relate : one upon sir Gyles Montpesson , a gentleman otherways of good part ; but for practise sundry abuse in erect and set up new inn and alehouse , and e•acting great sum of money of people , by pre ? tense of letter patent grant to he for that purpose , be sentence to be degrade ; and disable to bear any office in the commonwealth , though he avoid the execution by fly the land ; but upon sir Erancis Michael , a in ? stice of peace of Middlesex , and one of his chief agent , the sentence of de ? gradation be execute : and he make to ride with his face to the horse tail , through the city of London . the other example be of sir Francis bacon , vis ? count , saint Alban lord chancellor of England , who for bribery be put from his place , and commit to the tower : but after some few day enlarge : in who place doctor William deane of Westminster be make lord keeper . the count palatine , be now strengthen with the alliance of the king of great Britain , be think a fit man to be king of Bohemia , and accord be elect , by the state of that kingdom , but he be no soon invest in the crown ; but the emperor with great force assault he in Prague , and not only drive he with his wife and child from thence ; but take from he also his own patrimony the palatinate : so as though now a king he be fain to fly to the state of the low country for a place of residence , king Iames though he have never give his consent to the palsegra•es take upon he that kingdom , as foresee in his great judgement what the event will be : yet page 144 in this distress , he can no• forbear to take care of his daughter , and thereup ? on send sir Richard Wes•on the same that be after lord treasurer in embassage to the emperor to solicit the restore of the palatinate to the Palsegrave ; but he return without success ; the king have then conference with count Gund•mar the king of Spain ligier in England , what course may be take to procure the restore it : who make he answer , there can be no better course than to make a marriage , between his son the prince of Wales , and the infant of Spain which he say will easy be effect , if the prince may have leave to make a journey into Spain . king Iames though he consider the inveterate grudge between Spain and England , and as dangerous it may be• to put the heir of the kingdom into the Spaniard hand , yet ground himself upon the say : fide lem si putaveris , fancy : and draw on by the insinuate speech of count Gundomar , not perhaps without some indinction in the marquis of Buckingham , be content at last the prince shall go . and so prince Charles send his ship about , and take along with he only the mar ? quis of Buckingham ( who in the time of his be in Spain be create duke of Buckingham ) Endymion porter , and mr. Francis Cottington : ( two that be well acquaint with the language and affair of Spain ) he take his journey by the way of France , go to Paris , and secret in disguise to the court there , where he have the sight of that lady , that may well have stay he from go further , but yet on he go . in the mean time Gundomar a cunning man , and one that beside his master have end of his own , and can play his game no less for his own profit than his master honour ; as he have persuade the king of the facility of the match with Spain , so he persuade a certainty of it , especial among ca ? tholic lady , by which mean he bring no small store of grist to his own mill , receive from one lady three hundred pound to be make groom of the stool , when the spanish princess shall come ; off another a good round sum to be make mother of the maid , and of diverse other the like for other place . but the prince be arrive in Spain , be receive indeed with all the de ? monstration of love and kindness that can be devise , so as the charge of his entertainment be say to stand the king of Spain in nine and forty thou ? sand ducat ; but yet his acquaintance with the lady be much restrain , for in all the time of his stay in Spain , which be no less than eight month , be from February to October ) he see she but very seldom , and that at good distance , never speak with she but twice , and that before company , beside that his speech be limit , how much and what he shall say , far from any mean of tie the knot between they which be pretend , what the cause shall be be much in obscurity ; some thought that a difference between the duke of Buckingham , and the count Olivares , the king of spayne great favourite be a great hindrance of the proceed : but other , and more likely that the Spaniard indeed never real intend the match at all , but have draw the prince into Spain for other end : but what those end be , be no less uncertain ; ( one think it be do to hold the prince in a treaty of marriage with a daughter of Spain , till the daughter of France shall be be ? stow , thereby to keep he from that alliance , but other and more likely , that the king of Spain entertain this treaty with the king of great Brit ? tayne , mean to spin it out till he have compass some design in the Low-countries , and the palatinate , at least to make king Iames , most vigilant for those pa•ts . but when much time have be spend in protract , upon pretence of dif ? ficultity in obtain the pope dispensation , king Iames partly weary with delay , but chief anger with delusion , send to the prince , with all speed to return into England ; which the prince present signify to the king page 145 of Spain , and have his leave to depart ; but upon promise to continue the treaty of the marriage still . though it be say , the prince be go but a few day on his journey , when a post be send to have stay he , if he have be over ? take . but whether it be so or no , it be God providence that he come safe ? lie to his ship , and in they safe into England ; arrive at Portsmouth , where he be behold of the people , with no less gladness , than the sun after a long eclipse : and now his safe return do both justify king Iames his judge ? mean in suffer he to go , and the king of Spain justice , in suffer he to come back : and be cause , that the people begin to have a better opinion of the spanish faith , than they have before . but now it present break out , that this match with Spain can never take effect : for king Iames have re ? ceive declaration of the article touch the marriage , find many very strict and large for exercise of the catholic religion : but none at all for re ? stitution of the palatinate ; which make he so much discontent , that he present break off all treaty of the marriage ; and signify as much , not only to the king of Spain , but to diverse other prince of Christendom : upon which breach , two great point be present have in consultation : one for prepare force , for recover the palatinate by way of arm , which can not be do by a way of friendship : and for this purpose , a council of war be call , and a proposition resolve on both of man and money , for undertake the enterprise : as also a great contribution by way of benevo ? lence be collect ; towards which , the compiler of this work , give himself fifty pound : as many other far great sum , though the collection go not through the whole Land• by reason there be hope give of a peace ? able reconcilement : so as many that be not overhasty in their payment escape without contribute at all . the other point be for provide a fit wife for the prince , in some other place . it be say , the state of holland offe ? read a very great portion in marriage to the prince , if he will match with some lady of that country : but match be make in heaven , and there be a young lady of France destine to his bed : and for this purpose , the earl of Carlile , and the earl of Holland be send into France , to treat of a marriage with a young daughter , of the great Henry the four , king of France decea ? sed , and sister to the present king Lewis ; which marriage afterward take effect , but be not accomplish in king Iames his day ; who die soon after the agreement . it be now the year 1623. in which in Michaelmas term , there be a call of fifteen sergeant at law , who keep their feast in the middle-temple hall . some passage of small moment i confess be omit by i , in this reign of king Iames , as whereof , for want of know the particular , i dare not venture up ? on make the relation : which if some man will have do , the truth of our chronicle shall not have be mingle with so many falsity . of his taxation . in his second year , in the month of September , he send privy seal , to the wealthy citizen of London , for money to be borrow of they : and in October follow , the custom of merchandise , both outward and inward be raise , and then be let out to farm . in a parliament hold at Westminster , the three year of his reign , there be give he three entire subsidy , and six fifteen by the temporalty , and by the clergy four entire subsidy . this year also Henry lord Mordant , convict in the star-chamber , page 146 for diverse misprision , be fine to pay ten thousand mark , and Edward lord sturt•n for the like offence to pay six thousand mark , and Henry earl of Northumberland for offence lay to his charge , to pay thirty thousand pound , and some year after sir John Bennet , judge of the prerogative court be fine to pay twenty thousand pound . in his four year he repay threescore thousand pound to the citizen of London , which the Londoner have lend to queen Elizabeth , three year before her death ; a act by which he get more love , than he pay money . in his seven year he have aid througho•t England , for make his elder son prince Henry knight : which though levy with great moderation , bring he in great sum of more ? ney . in his eighteenth yea•e , in a parliament hold at Westminster , the temporalty give he two subsidy , and the clergy three : and in another parliament , in the year 1623. the temporalty give he three subsidy ; and three fifteen ; the clergy four subsidy . beside these subsidy he send abro•d many great privy seal , and have also a benevolence throughout the realm : not without some grudge , but without any just cause ; for it shall have be remember , that he take it not out of covetousness to gather wealth , but out of very necessity to supply want : for by his employ many Embassa ? dour in ordinary , many extraordinary , by his necessary bounty to his fol ? lower , and by his charge of keep several court ; none of all which he can avoid : he expense be far great than any of his predecessor have ever be , of his law and ordinance . the day of his remove from charterhouse , at his first come into Eng ? land , he cause proclamation to be make , that all monopoly and pro ? tection shall cease ; as likewise all oppression do by Salt-Peeter man , by purveier , and carter . on the 26. of May follow he set forth a Procla ? mansion , restrain all person under great penalty from kill of deer , or any kind of foul use for hawk . the seventeenth of May , proclamation be make against robbery on the border : and on the nineteenth of May , another for •niting the people inhabit about the border of England and •c••land , to live in love •nd qui•tnesse . in this first year , in a parliament •hen holden• it be enact , that neither archbishop , nor bishop , shall alienate , grant , or demise , or in any sort convey , no not to the king he ? self ••y of the honour , land , tenement , or hereditament , be parcel of the possession of his arch-bi••op , or bishopric : and if any be , it shall be utter void , and of no effect , notwithstanding any former law , act , or Ordi ? nance to the contrary . he then also , cause himself by proclamation to be en ? style king of great Britain , that the division of England and Scotland may be no more remember . in his second year , by his letter patent he incorpora ? t the fel•-makers of London , by the name of master , warden , and Commu ? nalty of the art or mystery of the feltmaker , grant they diverse privilege and liberty , for their good government of their corporation . in Novem. of his second year , be proclaim in London certain new piece of coin , both of gold and silver , with the true valuation and weight of they , accord to the mint of both nation , English and scottish . in a Parliamen• hold the 3. year of his reign , the oath of allegiance be devise and ordain , and soon after mi ? n••tred to all sort of people . this year also he m•de proclamation to redress the misemployment of l••ds , or good give to ? ? ? use . also this year , he set forth a Procla ? mansion for beari•g of ? ? ? in s•ips to be in this manner , that from thenceforth all the subject of gre•••ritt•••• shall bea•e in their main top , the redcross , co•monly call they ? ? ? Ge••ges cr•sse , and then ? ? ? cross , common ? lie call•d saint Andre••• cr•sse joyn•d toge•her , and the subject of South-Brit ? ••••• page 147 shall ca••y in their foretop only the red-•ro•se as they be wont ; and ? ? ? •ubjects of north-bri•••ine only the white-cro•se . in this •ourth year on they ? … ? he set •orth a proclamation , command all iesui•s , semin•ry ? … ? to depa•• the realm before the first of August follow and ? … ? return upon pa•ne of death , accord to diverse statute in that ? ? ? •rovided . in his second year he have set forth a proclamation against ? … ? increase of new building , which be little regard ; now in his four•• y••re he renew the say Proclamation• add withal that then ? ? ? and window of all new building shall be either of brick o• stone• ? ? ? ••sobeying whereof , many be call in the star-chamber , and there fined• ? … ? year , he give order for plant of mulberry tree ; and breed of ? ? ? worm , that England may be a country as well of silk as cloth : in his ••venth year , he institute the order of the baronet , which have much dege ? •••ated •ince his institution , and thereby have be devise for the benefit of ? ? ? , have cause but little contentment unto England . this year also the •ing himself in person come to the star-chamber , where he have appoint the ???-men to meet• and there , for the better keep of coin of gold within ? ? ? Realme• he raise the prize of they ; ordain the price call the unity , which go before but for twenty shilling , to be cur•ant now for tw• and twen•y , the double crown and all other piece to increase in the l•ke propor ? cion . in his fifteen year , he grant to the apothecary of London to be a cor ? poration for themselves , and their successor for ever ; and by letter pa•en•s make they a body politic and corporate . in his time by his appointment • strict decree pass in the star-chamber against duel and single comb•ts , and a strict law be make in parliament against stab with a dagger o• knife , make it to be wilful murder . affair of the church in his time . the king as a religious prince , desire nothing so much as to settle peace in the church , and hear of some dissension of his divine in point of religion , in the very first year of his reign , appoint a conference to be hold before himself at hamp•on court , to which be call diverse bishop , Deanes , and doctor of one side , and of the other , four eminent divine ; name ? lie , doctor Reynolds , doctor spark , mr. Knewstabbs , and mr. Chadderton : who all meeting before the king the 14 day of January : the king first signify , the cause of his call they together , and then tell they he be there ready to hear , what they can object or say against the present government of the church , whereupon doctor Reynolds be their foreman , redu•ed all matter dislike , or question to these four head . 1. first that the doctrine of the church may be preserve in purity , acco• ? ding to god word . 2. that good pastors might be plan•ed in all church•s to preach the same . 3. that the church government may be sincere administer , accord ? ing to the word of God . 4. that the book of common prayer may be fit to more encrea•e of piety . out of these head , he draw and move diverse point : one that confirmation may not be by bishop only , but that every pastor in his parish may con ? firm , but this be think to trench too much upon the jurisdiction of Bi•hop• , and to be a step to bring in a presbyterian government , which the king much mislike , and the bishop of Winchester challenge dr. Reynolds with a•• his lear ? ning to show , where ever he have read , that confirmation be at a•• use in anti ? ent time , by any other than by bishop . another motion of Doc•o•Reynolds be ; that there may be a new translation of the bible beca•se the pre ? send page 148 ? 1 page ? page 149 ? 1 page ? page 150 ? 1 page ? page 151 from sevenscore to two hundred , so he increase their pension , from two shilling a day , for three month in the summer , to seven groat a day for six month in the summer . then , where at his come , he find but only four judge in the court of law at Westminster , he add a five , with the like allowance as the former have ; beside many other pension of like nature . but the work of piety do by other in his time , be very many : whereof we may just set in the first place , the repair of Paul church , begin in his time , though not finish till many year after ; a work of as great cost and labour , as the first sound it : towards the furtherance whereof , though many well devote person contribute liberal : yet none be more industrious , than the learned doctor Laud , first bishop of London , and after archbishop of Canterbury ; who also be a bountiful benefactor to the college of saint John in Oxford , where he have his education . next to he his predecessor next before he , the worthy George abbot , archbishop of Canterbury , foum ? dead a fair almshouse at Croydon in Surrie : as likewise Robert the second earl of Dorset , found another in Sussex ; to the maintenance whereof , he give land to the value of three hundred pound a year . but of all the almes-hou ? ses that be ever found in Christendom , there be none i think can paral ? fall that of Thomas Sutton esquire . this man bear at snayth in Lincolnshire , have always live a bachelor , and by sundry employment , and parsimony , be grow to great wealth , buy of the right honourable , Thomas earl of Suffolk , his mansion house , call the charterhouse , near to Smithfield in London , and out of a pious mind convert it into a almshouse , by the name of suttons hospital , endouse the same with above three thousand pound of yearly rent : wherein be maintain fourscore poor man , with convenient lodging , diet , and allowance of money for apparel : also forty poor child with the like provision , and a grammar school , with a master and usher to teach they : overall who , he ordain a learned man to be master of the household , and to be choose by the governor , who he appoint for the present , by the authority of the king letter patent , to be George , archbi ? shop of Canterbury , Thomas lord Elsmore , lord chancellor , Robert earl of Salisbury lord treasurer , John bishop of London , la•ncel•t bishop of Ely , sir Edward cook , chief justice of the common pl•as , sir Thomas foster , a judge of the common plea , sir Henry Hubbard the king attorney general , doctor Overall Deane of Pauls , doctor mountain deane of W•stminster , Henry Thursby esquire , master of the chancery , Richard Sutton esquire , auditor of the imprest , ieff•rie nightingale esquire , John low gentleman , Thomas brown gentleman , and master of the household for the time be , to be all ? way one : and as any of these six•eene governor shall dye , the survi ? vers to make present addition of other . next to this , be a fair college in Oxford found by Nicholas will|be esquire , and call after his name . about this time also Edward Allin of Dulwich in Surrie , found a fair hospital at Dulwich for six poor man , and six poor woman , and for twelve poor child , from the age of four or six year , to be there maintain and teach till the age of fourteen or sixteen , and to have a schoolmaster with diet , and a con ? venient stipend . this man may be a example , who have get his wealth by stage-playing , convert it to this pious use• not without a kind of repu•a ? cion to the society of player . in this king time also , William Cambden , king at arm , found a history professor in Oxford , to which he give the manor of Bexley in Kent , which some year expire , will be worth four hundred pound a year . in his ten year , sir Baptist Hicks , one of the justice of peace in Middlesex , who be after make viscount C••bden , build a fair session house of brick and stone in saint John street , which by the justice be call after his name , Hicks hall , a great convenience for the justice ; who sit before in a common inn , call the castle . he also page 152 found a fair hospital of free stone at Cambden in gloucestershire , for six man and six wowoman , allow each of they a yearly gown , and two shilling six penny a week , with two room and a garden . in this king time , George patyn citizen and grocer of London , give to good use , three thousand a six hundred pound , whereof twelve hundred pound to the two vniversi ? tie , nine hundred pound for a almshouse , and a certain sum of money to buy two bell , and make a chime in bow-church . also Thomas Teasdale of Glympton in the county of Oxford gentleman , give five thousand pound to purchase land , for perpetual maintenance of seven fellow , and six scholar , to be place in baylyoll college in Oxford , and to be choose thither from time to time , out of the free-school of Abbington in berkshire : to which school he also give land for maintenance of a usher in this king time also , sir Mermaduke Darrell , be lord of Fulmer , a town in Buckingham shire , where be a old ruinous church , stand a mile distant from the town , pull down that old church , and at his own charge build a fair new one in the town , and furnish it with a font , a pulpit , and all ornament necessary . also Thomas Watson of Halstead , in the county of Kent , esquire , new build a fair chapel , on the north side of the parish church of Halstead , of free ? stone from the ground , and give to the church four new bell , and two pull ? pit . in his time also doctor Aylmer bishop of London , and Elizabeth countess doweger of Shrewesburie , give certain sum of money towards the better maintenance of sermon hereafter at Paul cross : as likewise Thomas Russell Draper give ten pound a year for ever , to be give to unbeneficed minister , that shall preach there : and to the same use , George bishop stationer of Lon ? don , give ten pound a year more . in this king time also , the citizen of London new build Algate , where pull down the old gate , they find many ancient R•ma• coin . on the fi••een•h of June , 1614 dye Henry earl of Northampton , who build from the ground a house near charingcross ; and die , be bury in the an•ient chapp•ll of dov•r castle , who in his life time found three fair hospit•lls , and endow they with large maintenance for ever , one at rise in Norfolk for twelve poor woman , and a governess , a second at Clun in shr•p-shire , for twelve poor man and a Governour• the three at Greenwich in •ent , for a governor , and twenty poor almsman . in this king time also , master Robert dowe of London merchant tailor , give a competant main ? tenance for ever , unto sepulcher parish , for the toll of the great bell , and for find some divine to come to the prison of new-ga•e , the midnight be ? before execution , and there to ring a hand bell , and put the prisoner in mind of their approach death , with a christian remembrance and exhortation ; and the next morning to toll the great bell , from six a clock till ten , and then to ring it out when the execution shall be pass . he also establish a free sing school , in Christ hospital : for the better education of the poor child there• beside many other good deed of alm . about the same time , Ro ? bert Peake of London goldsmith , give to sepulcher church a communion table of two yard long , and three quarter and a half broad , rich guild over , and at every corner emboss with pla•es of silver . in this king fourteen year , William Jones of London merchant , give about eight thousand pound to found a free-school in wal•s , where he be bear , with almshouse and pen ? sioner• in London : and a hundred pound a year for ever to a learned preacher in London : ord•yning all thing to be order by the company of Haberda ? sher , whereof himself be free . this year also the old ruinous gate , call Aldersgat• be q•ite take down , and new build from the foundation , to•wa•ds the b••••ing whereof , William par•et , merchant tailor of London , give a thousand pound . in this king time also , be erect a building near to Chel ? s•y• with a purpose to be a college for divine to study the controversy of page 153 religion : but upon the second thought , the cage indeed stand finish , but ? ? ? bird have ever yet be bring to sing in it ; and perhaps never will . if any other deed of alm , or public benefit be do in this king time , as perhaps there be many , the reader may be please both here and in oh ? the king Reignes• to add they , as he meet with they : for partly to this end , i have digest this chronicle into such several head and chapter . of casualty happen in his time . in his first year , on the seven and twenty of April , thirteen person be slay , by misfortune with gunpowder , at the gunpowder mill in ••driffe , and much other hurt do in diverse place . this year also , the plague in London be so great , that from the three and twenty of December , 1602. to the two and twen•ieth of December follow , there die in London , and the liberty , eight and th•rty thousand , two hundred and four and forty , whereof the plague thirty thousand , five hundred threescore and eighteen of they in one week , three thousand fourscore and ten , where the next year after , though the city be increase with great number of stranger , yet there die that year of all disease , within London and the li ? berty , but only four thousand , two hundred threescore and three person . in the second year of his reign , a strange accident happen , to the terror of all bloody murderer , which be this ; one Anne water entice by a lover of she , consent to have her husband strangle , and then bury he secret un ? there the dunghill in a cow-house ; whereupon the man be miss by his neighbour , and the wife make show of wonder what be become of he : it please God , that one of the inhabitant of the town , dream one night , that his neighbour Waters be strangle , and bury under the dunghill in a cow-house ; and upon declare his dream , search be make by the con ? stable , the dead body be find , as he have dream : and thereupon the wife be apprehend , and upon examination , confess the fact , be burn . and now what hope can murderer have of be conceal , when they be subject to be discover by any man dream . the nineteenth of January in his three year , a great porpoise be take at Westham ; in a small creek , a mile and a half within the land : and within few day after , a whale come up within eight mile of London , who body be see diverse time above water , and judge to exceed the length of the large ship in the river : but when she taste the fresh water , and scent the land , she return into the sea in his four year , be the year 1607. of mighty west wind bring in the sea in ? to the river of Severne , with such violence , that in some place of somersetshire and gloucestershire , the water in diverse town and village , grow high than the top of their house ; so as ( notwithstanding all course that can be take , there be drown in somersetshire 80. Persons , and damage do to the va ? lieu of twenty thousand pound . at Coventrie also , the seven of April so shall ? dame a flood come into the suburb and city , that in one hour it rise in some place above 3 yard in height , to the great damage and hurt of many , and that which be much strange , as it sudden come , so it sudden abate : so as in four hour and a half , it both come and go away . in his 6. year , be 1608. of frost begin in Decem. which continue till April follow , with such violence that not only the Thames be so freeze , that cart load be drive over as on dry land , but many fowl and bird perish , as also much herbage in garden , espe ? cial artichoke and rosemary be destroy . this year also the 11. of April a Malt-house in the town of saint Edmonds berry be by chance set on fire , con ? tinued burn till it have consume 160. house : but by the king boun ? tifulnesse , ( give 500 load of timber ) and the city of London relief , the page 154 town be forthwith new build , in a fair manner than it be before . in the year 1613• on the seventeenth of April , in the parish of st•ndish in Lancashire , a maiden child be bear , have four leg , four arm , two belly joy ? ned to one back : one head with two face , the one before , the other behind , like the picture of Janus this year also on the 26. of June , in the parish of christs-church in Hampshire , on John Hitchel a carpenter , lie in bed with his wife and a young child by they , be himself and the child both burn to death with a sudden lightning , no fire appear outward upon he , and yet lie burn for the space of almost three day , till he be quite consume to ash . this year also on the seven of August , the town of Dorchister be quite consume with fire , begin on the house of a tallow Chandler , destroy all the house , except a few near the church , and all their ware and good , to the value of two hundred thousand pound , yet not any man or woman perish . about the same time also , the playhouse call the globe upon the bank side near London , be quite consume with fire , by discharge a piece of ordnance , and yet no man hurt : and about four year after , a new build playhouse , near golding-lane , call the fortune , be by negligence of a candle , clean burn to the ground . in the year 1614 the town of St•atford upon Avon , be burn : and leave the water shall be behind in do of mischief , so great iundation be at this time in Norfolk and Lincolnshire , that the sea enter twelve mile into the land . in the year 1612 , on the 18. of Novemb. a blaze star bgan to be see in the southeast , about five a clock in the morning , the flame or stream whereof , incline towards the west . this comet , in the opinion of D. B•mbridge , the great mathematician of Oxford , be as far above the moon , as the moon be above the earth : what i• portend be only know to God : but the sequel of it be , that infinite slaughter and devastation follow upon it , both in Germany and other country . in the year 1622 , on Friday the 24. of October , a Roman catholic priest preach in the afternoon , at Hunsdon house in the black friar in London , in a upper chamber where there be assemble above 300 man and woman , when about the middle of the sermon , a great part of the floor break , and fall down with such violence , that it break down the next floor• un ? there it : in the fall whereof , be slay the preacher , and almost 100• of his au ? ditor , beside as many more hurt . in this king time course paper , common call ? lead white brown paper be first make in Engl. special in Surry , and about Windsor . of his wife and child . he marry Anne , the daughter of Frederick , the second king of Denmark , who marriage be there solemnize in the year 1589. by who he have bear in Scotland , two son , Henry who die before he , and Charles who suc ? ceed he in the crown ; and one daughter name Elizabeth , marry to Fre ? derick the fi•th of that name , count Palatine of the Rhine , by who she have many child , both son and daughter . king Iames have also by his wife queen Anne , two other daughter bear in England , the lady marie , and the la ? die Sophia , who both die young• the lady marry at about three year old , the lady Sophia the next day after she be bear , and be both of they bury with great solemnity , in the chapel royal at Westminster . of his personage and condition . he be of stature somewhat high than ordinary , of a well compact body , of a Ambourne hair , of a full and please vi•age• in his latter day en ? cline to be fat and bu•ley• of bodily exercise , he take most delight in hun ? ting• which yet ( some thought ) he use rather as a retire himself page 155 from the importunity of sta•e affair , than for any great pleasure he take in it . it be say , he have such a fashion in ride , that it can not so proper be say he ride , as that his horse carry he ; for he make but little use of his bridle , and will say , a horse never stumble , but when he be rein . he be of a admirable pregnancy of wit , and that pregnancy much improve by continual study from his childhood : by which , he have get such a promptness in express his mind , that his extemporal speech be little inferior to his premeditate write . Many no doubt have read as much , and perhaps more than he ; but scarce ever any concoct his read into judge ? mean as he do : by which he become so judicious , that though he can not prophesy , yet he can presage ; and his conjecture be little less than oracle . in all the liberal science , he be ( we may say ) a master of art : but in divinity , a doctor , as he make appear in the conference at Hampton court , and be see still by the learned write he have le•t behind he . and as for that part of the politic , which concern Monar ? chie , regere Imperio populos , which himself use to call king craft : in this he excel . he know how to take the inclination of the people at their first bind , and never suffer they to rise high , than he can well reach they : nor to grow strong , than he can either alter or divert they . he will be sure to keep his subject in a temper of contentment ; which if he can not do by preventive , he will by lenitive . he be so wise , that he can dissemble , without seem a dissembler : be free in open his mind , and yet keep counsel . he be as a provident pilot , that in a calm will provide for a storm : and you shall never find he commit the fault of non p•taram . he be both Marti and Mercurio ; but not tam morti quam Mercurio , as be of his temper who say , cedant arma Toga : and indeed , see peace be the end of both . it be not wisdom to seek it by arm , if it may be have by the gown , as it be in the aphorism , Consili• omnia experiri prius , quam armis sapientem decet . that which be bounty in he be a king , will have be frugality , if he have be a private per ? son , there be of both , one radical reason . of all the moral virtue , he be eminent for chastity ; in which the poet seem to include all vertu• : where he say ; Nulli fas casto sceleratum in sistere limen . by nulli casto , mean no virtuous person ; it be a manifest argument of he , be a excellent prince , that come next to the admirable queen Elizabeth , which be , in a manner to compare they together : yet there appear no in ? equality , that it may not untrue be say , king Iames be but the continuation of queen Elizabeth , the same virtue , though different sex : and now to express his character in a word , which worthy may be matter for many volume : he be to his wife a most loyal husband , to his child a most love father , to his servant a most bountiful master , to his subject a most just prince , to all prince near he a most peaceable neighbour ; that more just it may be say of he , than of who it be say ; quaete tam laeta telerunt saecula ? a prince af•e•Plato's own heart , for his learning , and which be infinite more worth , after god own heart , for his religiousness and piety . O• his death and burial . of his death , there be many scandalous rumour spread , and some be so impudent• as to write that he be poison , as the duke of Richmond , and the marquis Hambleton have be before : but king Iames be dead , and his body open , there be find no sign at all of poison , his inward part be ? king all sound , but that his spleen be a little faulty , which may be cause enough to cast he into a ague : the ordinary high way , page 156 especial in old body to a natural death : of this ague after a month angui ? sh , notwithstanding all the remedy that can be apply , he depart this life a•th••balds , on the 27 of march , in the year 1625 , in the 59 year of his age• when he have reign two and twenty year complete . his body for the great sta•e , be convey by torch light , from theobald to Denmark house ; who have test from the 23 of April , to the 7 of may : it be carry to Westminster , and there inter in the chapel royal with great solemnity , but with great lamentation : there be scarce any of the infinite multitude that be present , of who it may not be say , multa gemen , largoque humectat flumine vultum . of man of note in his time . military man of note , in a time of peace , as the whole reign of king Iames be , we have no reason to expect ; yet if we look among the voluntary that go to the school of war in the low-countrye ; we shall find a pair of brother , that may stand in comparison , with the great soldier in the most martial time , saint Francis Vere , who as another Hannibal , who with his own eye , can see more in the martial discipline , than common man can do with two ; and sir Horatio Vere ; who as another Philopoemen , contain in a very little body , a very great , both skill and courage . but for man of note in learning : as be in the time of a most learned prince , there be never great store ; of who these for example . in curiousness of preach , there be doctor a ? drewes bishop of Winchester ; who have leave to posterity , a century of such gol ? den sermon , that show , he as well deserve the name of Chrysostome , as he that have it . in multiplicity of read , there be doctor Reynolds of corpus christi college in Oxford ; who seem as it be , a live library ; and one will have thaught his memory to be a perfect index of all the book have ever be write . in knowledge of law there be sir Edward cook , chief justice of the king bench ; who have write such excellent commentary of the law , that he seem as another Bartholus or Baldus among we . in elegancy of writ ? king , there be sir Francis bacon , Viscount saint Alban ; who beside his pro ? founder book of Novum Organum , have write the reign of king Henry the 7 , in so sweet a style , that like manna , it please the taste of all palate . in the skill of a ? tiquity , there be William Camden , king at arm ; who have set forth the de ? scription of Britain , and the life of Q. Eliz. in so lively colour , that he seem to have bring Britain out of darkness into light , and to keep Q. Eliz. alive after her death . and to speak it in a word , the trojan horse be not full of he ? roick grecian , than king Iames his reign be full of man excellent in all kind of learning . and here i desire the reader leave to remember two of my own old acquaintance , the one be mr. John Dunne , who leave Oxford , live at the I•n•• of court , not dissolute , but very neat ; a great visitor of lady , a great from ? quen•er of play , a great writer of conceit verse ; until such time as king Iames take notice of the pregnancy of his wit , be a mean that he betake he to the study of Divinity• and thereupon proceed doctor , be make Deane of Paul ; and become so rare a preacher , that he be not only come ? dead , but even admire by all that hear he . the other be sir Henry Wootton• ( my old acquaintance also , as have be fellow pupil , and chamber fellow in Oxford diverse year together . ) this gentleman be employ by king Iames in embassage •o Venice ; and indeed the kingdom afford not a fit man , for ma•ching the capriciousnes of the italian w••s : a man of so able dexterity with his pen , that he have do himself much wrong• and the kingdom more , in lea ? ving no more of his write behind he . page 157 of the english plantation in the Indies , that w•re i• king Iames his time . AN• now we be come to a time , wherein we may very near say as much of king Iames , as be say of Agustus Caesar : super and Garamantus and Indos profert Imperium . in this better , that where Augustus do it by the violent way of arm , king Iames do it by the civil way of plantation : for in his day begin the great plantation of the english in the Indies ; and must be acknow ? ledged the proper effect of his peaceable government . the first plantation of the english in the Indies , be that which be now call Virginia , in memory of the virgin queen Elizabeth : but call before Wingandacoa . it be first this ? cover by sir Walter Rawlegh , in the year 1584 ; to who the first letter patent be grant for make a plantation there : but yet no colony be send thither , till the year 1606. it be a country in America , between the de ? agree of 34 , and 45 , of the north latitude : but that part of it which be plan ? t by the english , be under the degree of 37 , 38 , and 39 it be no island , as many have imagine , but a part of the continent adjoin to Florida . the first and chief town make here by the english , be call Iames town , in ho ? nou_r_ of the king most eexcellent majesty . it be a country abound with all sort of fish and foul ; so fruitful , that it yield thirty and sometime forty bushel of corn upon a acre : and that , ( which to we be more strange ) have three harvest in a year , the corn be sow , ripe , and reap , in little more than two month . Many• plantation have be attempt here before , but come to nothing : the first to any purpose be in the year 1607. under the conduct of captain Gosnoll , John smith , and mr. Edw. Maria Winkfield , who carry a colony thither of a hundred person ; but of these , many die of sickness , or slay by the savage , a new supply come in the year 1608. of a hundred and twenty person , under the conduct of captain nels•n . after which , be send another supply of threescore and ten person : and in the year 1609. a three supply come of five hundred person , under a patent grant to sir Thomas west , lord de la ware , but conduct thither by sir Thomas gate , gate , sir George Sommers , and other . in the year 1611. be a four supply of three hundred man under the conduct of sir Thomas gate . in the year 2612. two other supply be send of forty man in each ; and now be the lottery speak of before grant by the king , for further supply of this plantation . after this master Samuel Argall be appoint governor in in the year 16•8 . the lord de la ware come thither with a supply of two hun ? dread people ; but in his stay there , die . after this , in the year 1620. be send thither eleven ship , with twelve hundred and sixteen person , and now they found themselves into corporation . in the year 1621. sir Francis Wyatt be send thither governor , with thirteen hundred man , woman , and child , and now they found school , and court of justice ; and the plantation be extend a hundred and forty mile up , on the river of both side . but now when the english be secure , and thought of nothing but peace , the savage come sudden upon they , and slay they , three hundr•d and seven and forty man , woman and child . for r•pairing of which loss , the city of London send present over a supply of a hundred man . this massacre happen , by reason they have build their plantation remote from one another , in above thirty several place , which make they now , upon consulta ? cion , to reduce they all to five or six place , whereby they may better assist each other : since which time , they have always live in good security . and thu• much for Virginia . next be the plantation of the island call Bermuda , so call of a spanish page 158 ship , call Bermuda , which be there cast away , carry hog to the west in ? die , that swim a shore , and there increase . the first Englishman that enter this isle , be one Henry may in the year 1591 : but in the year 1610 , sir George S•mers be send thither , who die there , in memory of his name , the isle have ever since be call summer isle . in the year 1612. one mr. Moore land there with 60 person , and then build the chief town there call saint George , together with 8 to 9 fort . the same year a supply of 30 more person be send thither , and the year after 60 more , under one mr. Bartlet ; with a show to survey the land ; but with a purpose indeed to get from thence a great lump of ambergris , and no less than 80 po••d weight , that have be find and take up in the island some year before , and be there still retain . a while after this , come a ship call the blessing , with a hundred passenger ; and two day after come the star , with a 180 more ; and within 14 day after that again come thy ? there the Margaret and two frigate , with 130 passenger : so as now they begin to divide the coun••y into tribe , and the tribe into share . in the year 1616 , captain Da••el Tuckard be send from Virginia to be governor there , and now it begin indeed to be a plantation ; for now they begin to build they house : and now be send from thence into England , a ship freight with 30000 weight of tobacco , value there but at 2 s . 6 d . the pound , though sell here oftentimes for V•rinos at great rate . in the year 1619• captain Nathaniel butler be send governor , with new supply ; in who time they build they a church ; hold assize for criminal cause , twice a year ; and begin to have parliament as in England : and now in the ship call the magazin , come di ? verse gentleman of good fashion , with their wife and family : so as now their number , be no few than fifteen hundred people : disperse twenty mile in length . in the year 1622 , come Governou• m. John Bernard , bring with he a supply of a 140 person ; but he and his wife die present upon their come : m. John Harrison in the year 1623 be choose governor . Theise isle of Bermudas be in 32 degree of northern latitude : so as they be distant from Virginia , at least 500 league , and from Egland above three thousand three hundred . this country be of a most healthful air , abound with all sort of fowl , bird and fish ; and where great piece of amber-gr•ce be oftentimes find , which be value there at no less than three pound a ounce . and thus much concern the state of Bermuda , till the year 1624. next come the plantation of new England , concern which , we must first know , that king Iames in the year 1606 , grant two letter patent for Plan ? tation in Virginia , one to the city of London ; another to the city of Bristol , Exeter and Plymouth ; with power to plant colony any where between the degree of 38 and 44 , provide there shall be at least a 100 mile distance be ? tween the two colony . so as the first colony be from the city of London , and be that which be call Virginia . the second colony be from Bristol and the other town , and be that which be now call new England , and be situate between the degree of 41 and 45 : the very mean betwixt the north pole and the line . and now to speak a little of the country , there be on the sea coast , 25 excellent good harbour , in some whereof there be anchorage for 500 sail of ship of any burden . the earth as fruitful and the air as health ? full , as any part of the world : abound with all sort of grain , fowl and fish : many of such kind as a•e to we unknown , yet excellent meat : many voyage have be make for the perfect discovery of the country : many at ? tempt for settle a plantation there : many miscarriage and disaster in make the attempt : but all at last come to this , that in the year 1624 ( which be the limit of ou• narration ) there be a plantation settle ; though but a small one : but a few year after ( by the send forth of new supply ) increase to so many thousand , that if God continue to prosper it , as he have begin : the new England in a few age may prove as populous as the old ; and the king of Eng ? land page 159 likely to have as many and great crown in the Indies , than he have in his realm of great Britain and Ireland . but see of these and all other english plantation in the Indies , whereof there be many large discourse write by diverse author ; it shall be more than supperfluous to speak more of they in this place : it be sufficient to have show , that king Iames have the honour , to have they settle in his time , and under the influence of his peaceable go ? vernment . of the earl and baron make by king James . in former king reign , the make of earl and baron be but rare , and therefore they be fit set down , at the several time of their make ; but in king Iames his reign , there be so many make , that it may not be unfit , to set they down in a catalogue together . in his first year be make four earl and nine baron : namely , Henry Howard , young brother of the last duke of Norfolk , be make earl of north ? ampton : Thomas Sackvile lord Buckhurst , be make earl of Dorset ; and short after Charles Blount lord Montjoy , be make earl of Devonshire , and Thomas Howard baron of Walden , be make earl of Suffolk : Henry Grey be make lord grey of Groby , ( afterward by king Charles make E. of Stam ? ford ) Henry Danvers be make baron of Dansley , ( afterward by king Charles make earl of Danby ) sir John Peter of Essex , be make B. of Writtle : sir W. Russell be make baron of Thornaugh : sir Thomas Gerard be make baron of gerards Bromly in staffordshire : sir Robert Spencer be make B. of wormelay ? tun in the county of Warwick : sir Thomas Egerton be make B. of Elesmore : and sir Robert Cecill be create B. of henden in Rutlandshire : and sir John Harington be make baron of Ex•on . in his second year on the 20 of May be make four baron and one viscount : sir Robert Sidney be make baron of Penshurst : sir William Knowles , baron of Gray : sir Edw. Wotton , baron of Marley : and Mildmay Fanc , lord de Spencer ; and in August the same year , sir Robert Cecill baron of Essenden , be create Viscount Cranbourne . in his three year of the 4 of may , be create three earl , and one viscount , and four baron ; namely , sir Robert Cecill Viscount Cranbourne , be create E. of Salisbury• sir Thomas Cecill his old brother L. Burghley , be create E. of Exeter ; and sir Philip Herbert , young brother to the E. of Pembroke , be create E. of Montgomery : Robert Sidney baron of Penshurst , be create vis ? count of Lisle : sir John Stanhope , be make baron of Harington : sir George Carew , baron of Clopton : mr. , Thomas Arundel of Devonshire• baron of Warder and master William Cavendysh , baron of Hardrick• in his four year , on the four of July , sir Thomas kneve•t , be call by writ to the parliament , by the name of b•ron of Estrick• and be thereby baron of that title : and on the seven of September , sir Iervys Clifton be likewise call by writ to the parliament , by the name of baron of Layton bromsensold , and be thereby baron of that title . in his nine year , upon Easter-munday , sir Robert Carre be create Viscount Rochester : and in his ten year , an the four of November , be create earl of Somersett . in his eleven year , Lewis steward duke of Lenox , be make earl of rich ? mond , and after , duke of Richmond . page 1560 in his thirteenth year , on the 29. of iu•e , sir Iames h•y of Scotland be create baron of Sawley , and about three year after , be make Viscount Doncaster , and sir •obert Dor•er be create ba•on of wing , ( afterward by king Charles , make earl of Car•arvan . ) in his fourteenth year , on the 9 of July , sir John Hollis be create baron of Haughton , and sir John Roper of Ken•• be make baron of Tenham : and on the 17. of August , sir George Villiers be create baron of Whadden and vis ? count Villiers , and on the 7. of November , Thomas Egerton L. Elsemore , be create Viscount Brackley ( and he die soon after , his son John be create earl of Bridgewater , William L. Knowles be create Viscount Wallingford ; and sir Philip Stanhope be create baron of Shelford : on the 5 of January , the viscount Villiers be create earl of Buckingham , and on the three of march , sir Edward Noell of rutlandshire ; be make baron of Rydlington . in his fifteen year , on newyear day , sir George Villiers earl of Buckingham be create marquis of Buckingham , and on the 12 of July , sir Francis bacon lord chancellor , of England , be create baron of Verulam , and not long after , viscount saint Alban . also in the summer of this year , the king crea ? t four earl and one countess : namely , the viscount Lisle be make earl of Leycester , the lord Compton be make earl of Northampton , the lord rich be make earl of Warwick , the lord Cavendish be make earl of Devonshire , and the lady Compton wife to sir Thomas Compton , and mother of the marquis of Buckingham be create countess of Buckingham . in his sixteenth year , on the 25 of November , sir John Digby vice chamberlain to the king be create baron of Shirbourne , by patent to he and his heir male . in his seventeenth year , in the month of June esme steward lord d' Aubigny ; young brother duke of Lenox , be create earl of march ; Iames marquis Hammilton be create earl of Cambridge , and sir John Villiers brother to the marquis of Buckingham be baron of st•k and Viscount Purbeck . in his eighteenth year , William C•vendish be create Viscount Mansfield ; ( afterward by king ch•rl•s m•de earl of Ne•castle ) and on Monday the four of dec•mber ; sir Henry M••tague , be first make lord treasurer , be create baron of Kimbolton , and Viscount M••devile , and not long after , earl of Manchester , and sir John Ramsey Viscount Haddington of Scotland , be create earl of Holdernesse , and William Fielding be create baron of Newhen••• and Viscount Fielding . in his ninteenth year , Henry Cary be make lord carry of L•ppington , ( after ? ward by king Charles make earl of Manmouth , sir Edward Montague old brother to the viscount M••devile be make baron of Boulton , the lord Darci• of Essex , be create Viscount Colchester , ( afterward by king Charles make earl r•vers ) the lord Hu•sdo• be create Viscount Rochfort , ( after ? ward by king Charles , make earl of d•ver ) sir Lionel Cranfield , master of the ward , be create baron of Cranfield in bedfordshire , and sir Thomas Howard• second son to Thomas earl of Suffolke• be create baron churl ? tun , and Viscount Andover , ( afterward by king Charles make earl of barkshire . in his twentyth year , in the month of September , the viscount Doncaster , be create earl of Carlile , the viscount Fielding be create earl of denhigh , the lord Digby be make earl of Bristol , the lord Cranfield , be create earl of Middlesex , and sir Henry rich be make baron of Kensington . in his one and twentyth year , the marquis of Buckingham , be then in Spain with prince Charles , have his patent send he to be duke of Buckingham , Will ? liam grey be create baron of work , Elizabeth the widow of sir Moyle Fynch of Kent , be create Viscountesse Maidestone , ( afterward by king Charles make countess of winchels . page 1561 •his two and twenty year , the earl of Clanricard of Ireland , be create vis ? count Tunbridge in Kent ( afterward by king Charles make earl of saint Alban ) sir John Hollis baron of Haughton be create earl of Clare , sir ? … ? ri•h baron of Kensington be create earl of Holland , the lord ? … ? baron of say and seal , be make Viscount say and seal : sir ? … ? •ane be create earl of Westmoreland , Oliver lord saint John of blet ? ••• ? ? ? make earl of Bullinbrook , sir Christopher Villers brother to the duke of B•ckingham , be make earl of Anglesey , and sir Iames Ley be make ? … ? ( afterward by king Charles make earl of Marlborough . ) also this year•• sir Francis leak be make baron of Deincourt , and sir Richard Ro ? berts be make lord Roberts of Truro in Cornwall . and this be the number of all the earl and baron make by king Iames• but in his time also begin another sort of nobility to be make in England , which have none of the privilege of english baron , but have only title to be call lord , of some place either in Scotland or Ireland , although they possess not a foot of land in either : of which •o•t , the num ? ber be great , i forbear to rehearse they , lest i shall be te ? dious , or otherwise be think to encroach too much up ? on the herald office . it be sufficient to have show , that king Iames advance so many in honour , that in a kind it may be say of he , as be say of au ? gustus Caesar , that he leave room of marble , which he find build of brick . page 162 the beginning of the reign of king Charles . king Iames be decease on the 27 day of march in the forenoon , the same day in the afternoon , Charles prince of Wales his only son , then live , be proclaim king of Great-Brittain , France and Ireland , with the general ac ? clamation of all sort of people , as be a prince of admi ? rabble endowment both of mind and body . he be now about the age of 25 year , whereof , the most part of one he have spend in Spain ; where , although he be frustrate of the end for which he go , yet it give he a tincture of travail and expe ? •ience , more worth perhaps , than the end he go for : for by this mean he attain•• to a great degree of that , which make Ulysses so famous : quod mores hominum multorum vidit and urbe . the first thing he do after his coronation , be to proceed in the marriage agree ? ed upon in his father time , with the beautiful and virtuous lady Henrieta Maria , young daughter of the great Henry the 4• king of France ; after which marriage , we have only to say , that he be happy in the wife of his bosom : happy in his hopeful issue : happy in the love of his people : happy in the peace and tran ? quility of his Kingdomes• and happy in the continu•nce of all these happiness , for 15 year together , and may have so continue still , if it have not be for , discordia demen viperiu•s crinem vitti• innexa cruentis . but of that which happen afterward , i dare not take upon i to be a Regi ? star : neither be it indeed safe to begin a narration , which i must be fain to break off in amaz•ment , as have nothing leave i to say , but omnia in malu•••ere ; and so far from any appearance of humane remedy ; that our only an ? chor must be this : in te D••in• sper•m•• , non confundamur in aeternum : quid enim nisi v•a supersunt• yet our hope be , it will be but a fit , and the storm once pass , page 163 fair weather again , and fair perhaps than it be before , and then with joy we shall resume our stile . laetumque choro Poeana canemus : in the mean time comfort our self with the word of the prophet David ; many be the trouble of the righteous , but the lord deliver he out of they all . Carolus en rex magnus in armis , major in ermis . quid mirum ? Imperio magnus , amore magis . finis . 