THe long and wonderful voyage of Frier John de Plano Carpini, sent ambassadour by Pope Innocentius the iiii. An. Do. 1246 to the great CAN of Tartaria; wherin he passed through Bohemia, Polonia, Russia, and so to the citie of Kiow upon Boristhenes, and from thence rode continually post for the space of sixe moneths through Comania, over the mighty and famous rivers of Tanais, Volga, and laic, & through the countries of the people called Kangittae, Bisermini, Kara-Kitay, Naimani, & so to the native countrie of the Mongals or Tartars, situate in the extreme Northeaster ne partes of all Asia: and thence backe againe the same way to Russia, and Polonia, and so to Rome ; spending in the whole voyage among the sayd Tartars one whole yeere & above foure moneths : Taken out of the 32. booke of Vincentius Beluacensis his Speculum historiale.{n}LIBRI XXXII.{n}Ascelinus.{n}Tartarorum species.{n}Tonsura.{n}Habitus.{n}1	97	o{n}Temperantia.{n}Castitas.{n}Sordes,{n}Temulentia,{n}101{n}25-{n}102{n}103{n}Chingis salutatur Imperator. Cathaynorum lite ree & religio.{n}104{n}105{n}Burithabeth regio.{n}107{n}Interitus.{n}Nepotes.{n}Duces.{n}109{n}Barchin civitas.{n}51 VideMecho-vium, lib. 1. ca. 3.{n}110{n}+	impugnare: nec postea reversi sunt in terram suam usque{n}Tartarorum militaris disciplina.{n}1	113	H{n}Tartaros{n}Ferri temperamentum.{n}Lituani.{n}117{n}Legationis mandata.{n}[I- +7-1{n}118{n}Qualiter recepti sunt apud Bathy magnum Principem. Cap. 22.{n}119{n}Bathy audit legatos.{n}120{n}Qualiter recedentes a Bathy per terram Comanorum{n}121{n}A.D.{n}I246.{n}Burin.{n}Oceanus ab Aquilone. Syban, frater Bathy.{n}Nigri Cathayni.{n}Mare parvum.{n}Plures insula.{n}Terra{n}125{n}Qualiter in imperium sublimatus fuit. Cap. 27.{n}126{n}127{n}Studium{n}1	129	1{n}Chingay internuntius.{n}I3I{n}Novemb. 13.{n}Bathy.{n}133{n}[The voyage{n}The voyage of Johannes de Plano Carpini unto the Northeast parts of the world, in the yeere of our Lord, 1246.{n}Of the first sending of certaine Friers Predicants and Minorites unto the Tartars, taken out of the 32. Booke of Vincentius Beluacensis his Speculum Historiale: beginning at the second Chapter.{n}Ascellinus.{n}[I- 54-1{n}Bout this time also, Pope Innocentius the fourth sent Frier Ascelline being one of the order of the Predicants, together with three other Friers (of the same authoritie whereunto they were called) consorted with him out of divers Covens of their order, with letters Apostolicall unto the Tar{n}tars campe : wherein hee exhorted them to give over their bloudie slaughter of mankinde, and to receive the Christian faith. And I, in verie deede, received the relations concerning the deedes of the Tartars onelie, (which, according to the congruence of times, I have above inserted into this my woorke) from a Frier Minorite, called Simon de Sanct. Quintin, who lately returned from the same voyage. And at that verie time also, there was a certaine other Frier Minorite, namely Frier John de Plano Carpini, sent with certaine associates unto the Tartars, who likewise (as himselfe witnesseth) abode and conversed with them a yeere and three moneths at the least. For both he & one Frier Benedict a Polonian being of the same order, and a partaker of all his miserie and tribulation, received straight commaundement from the Pope, that both of them shoulde diligently searche out all things that concerned the state of the Tartars. And therefore this Frier John hath written a litle Historic (which is come to our hands) of such things, as with his owne eyes hee sawe among the Tartars, or which he heard from divers Christians worthy of credit, remaining there in captivitie. Out of which historic I{n}134{n}thought good by way of conclusion, to insert somewhat for the supply of those things which are wanting in the said Frier Simon.{n}Of the situation and qualitie of the Tartars land, By Johannes de Plano Carpini. Chap. 3.{n}THere is towards the East a land which is called Mon-gal or Tartaria, lying in that part of the worlde which is thought to be most North Easterly. On the East part it hath the countrey of Kythay and of the people called Solangi: on the South part the countrey of the Saracens : on the South east the land of the Huini : and on the West the province of Naimani : but on the North side it is invironed with the Ocean Sea. In some part thereof it is full of mountaines, and in other places plaine and smoothe grounde, but everie where sandie and barren, neither is the hundreth part thereof fruitefull. For it cannot beare fruite unlesse it be moistened with river waters, which bee verie rare in that countrey. Whereupon they have neither villages, nor cities among them, except one which is called Cracurim, and is said to be a proper towne. We our selves sawe not this towne, but were almost within halfe a dayes journey thereof, when we remained at Syra Orda, which is the great court of their Emperour. And albeit the foresaid lande is otherwise unfruitfull, yet is it very commodious for the bringing up of cattell. In certaine places thereof are some small store of trees growing, but otherwise it is altogether destitute of woods. Therefore the Emperour, and his noble men and all other warme themselves, and dresse their meate with fires made of the doung of oxen, and horses. The ayre also in that countrey is verie intemperate. For in the midst of Sommer there be great thunders and lightnings, by the which many men are slaine, and at the same time there falleth great abundance of snowe. There bee also such mightie tempestes of colde windes, that sometimes men are not able to sitte on horsebacke. Whereupon, being{n}A description of Tartaria.{n}The North Ocean.{n}The intemperature of the aire.{n}What Orda{n}neere unto the Orda (for by this name they call the signifieth.{n}*35{n}Like unto Frobishers men.{n}Their tabernacles.{n}habitations of their Emperours and noble men) in regarde of the great winde we were constrained to lye groveling on the earth, and could not see by reason of the dust. There is never any raine in Winter, but onely in Sommer, albeit in so little quantitie, that sometimes it scarcely sufficeth to allay the dust, or to moysten the rootes of the grasse. There is often times great store of haile also. Insomuch that when the Emperour elect was to be placed in his Emperiall throne (my selfe being then present) there fell such abundance of haile, that, upon the sudden melting thereof, more then 160. persons were drowned in the same place : there were manie tentes and other thinges also caried away. Likewise, in the Sommer season there is on the sudden extreame heate, and suddenly againe intol-lerable colde.{n}Of their forme, habite, and maner of living. Chap. 4.{n}THe Mongals or Tartars, in outward shape, are unlike to all other people. For they are broader betweene the eyes, and the balles of their cheekes, then men of other nations bee. They have flat and small noses, litle eyes, and eye liddes standing streight upright, they are shaven on the crownes like priests. They weare their haire somewhat longer about their eares, then upon their foreheads: but behinde they let it growe long like womans haire, whereof they braide two lockes binding eche of them behind either eare. They have short feet also. The garments, as well of their men, as of their women are all of one fashion. They use neither cloakes, hattes, nor cappes. But they weare Jackets framed after a strange manner, of buckeram, skarlet, or Baldakines. Their shoubes or gownes are hayrie on the outside, and open behinde, with tailes hanging downe to their hammes. They use not to washe their garments, neither will in any wise suffer them to bee washed, especially in the time of thunder. Their habitations bee rounde and cunningly made with wickers and staves in manner of 136{n}a tent. But in the middest of the toppes thereof, they have a window open to convey the light in and the smoake out. For their fire is alwayes in the middest. Their walles bee covered with felt. Their doores are made of felte also. Some of these Tabernacles may quickely be taken asunder, and set together againe, and are caried upon beastes backes. Other some cannot be taken insunder, but are stowed upon carts. And whithersoever they goe, be it either to warre, or to any other place, they transport their tabernacles with them. They are very rich in cattel, as in camels, oxen, sheep, and Their cattell. goats. And I thinke they have more horses and mares then all the world besides. But they have no kine nor other beasts. Their Emperors, Dukes, & other of their nobles doe abound with silk, gold, silver, and precious stones. Their victuals are al things that may be eaten : Their for we saw some of them eat lice. They drinke milke in victuals. great quantitie, but especially mares milke, if they have 55-1 it: They seeth Mill also in water, making it so thinne, that they may drinke thereof. Every one of them drinkes off a cup full or two in a morning, and sometime they eate nought else all the day long. But in the evening each man hath a litde flesh given him to eate, and they drinke the broath thereof. Howbeit in summer time, when they have mares milke enough, they seidome eate flesh, unles perhaps it be given them, or they take some beast or bird in hunting.{n}Of their manners both good and bad. Chap. 5.{n}THeir manners are partly prayse-worthie, and partly Their detestable : For they are more obedient unto their obedience.{n}lords and masters, then any other either clergie or laie-people in the whole world. For they doe highly reverence them, and will deceive them, neither in wordes nor deedes. They seidome or never fall out among themselves, and, as for fightings or brawlings, wounds or manslaughters, they never happen among them. There Their are neither theeves nor robbers of great riches to be d”ttr>ence.{n}137{n}Their insolencie against strangers.{n}found, and therefore the tabernacles and cartes of them that have any treasures are not strengthened with lockes or barres. If any beast goe astray, the finder thereof either lets it goe, or driveth it to them that are put in office for the same purpose, at whose handes the owner of the said beast demaundeth it, and without any difficultie receiveth it againe. One of them honoureth another exceedingly, and bestoweth banquets very familiarly and liberally, notwithstanding that good victuals are daintie and scarce among them. They are also very hardie, and when they have fasted a day or two without any maner of sustenance, they sing and are merry as if they had eaten their bellies full. In riding, they endure much cold and extreme heat. There be, in a maner, no contentions among them, and although they use commonly to be drunken, yet doe they not quarell in their drunkennes. Noe one of them despiseth another but helpeth and furthereth him, as much as conveniently he can. Their women are chaste, neither is there so much as a word uttered concerning their dishonestie. Some of them will notwithstanding speake filthy and immodest words. But towards other people, the said Tartars be most insolent, and they scorne and set nought by all other noble and ignoble persons whatsoever. For we saw in the Emperours court the great duke of Russia, the kings sonne of Georgia, and many great Soldanes receiving no due honour and estimation among them. So that even the very Tartars assigned to give attendance unto them, were they never so base, would alwaies goe before them, and take the upper hand of them, yea, and sometimes would constraine them to sit behinde their backes. Moreover they are angrie and of a disdainefull nature unto other people, and beyond all measure deceitfull, and treacherous towards them. They speake fayre in the beginning, but in conclusion, they sting like scorpions. For craftie they are, and full of falshood, circumventing all men whom they are able, by their sleights. Whatsoever mischiefe they entend to practise against a man, they{n}138{n}keepe it wonderfully secrete, so that he may by no meanes provide for himselfe, nor find a remedie against their conspiracies. They are unmanerly also and uncleanly in taking their meat and their drinke, and in other actions. Drunkennes is honourable among them, and when any of them hath taken more drinke then his stomacke can well beare, hee casteth it up and falles to drinking againe. They are most intollerable exacters, most covetous possessours, and most nigardly givers. The slaughter of other people is accompted a matter of nothing with them.{n}Of their lawes and customes. Chap. 6.{n}MOreover, they have this law or custome, that Punishments whatsoever man or woman be manifestly taken °f adultery.{n}in adultery, they are punished with death. A virgine likewise that hath committed fornication, they slay together with her mate. Whosoever be taken in of theft. robberie or theft, is put to death without all pi tie. Also, of secretes if any man disclose their secrets, especially in time of disclosed. warre, he receiveth an hundreth blowes on the backe with a bastinado, layd on by a tall fellow. In like sort when any inferiours offend in ought, they finde no favour at their superiours handes, but are punished with grievous stripes.{n}They are joyned in matrimony to all in general, yea, Lawes of even to their neare kinsfolkes except their mother, matrimome-daughter and sister by the mothers side. For they use to marrie their sister by the fathers side onely, and also the wife of their father after his decease. The yonger brother also, or some other of his kindred, is bound to marry the wife of his elder brother deceased. For, at the time of our aboad in the countrey, a certaine duke of Andreas duke Russia named Andreas, was accused before duke Baty for °f^ussia-conveying the Tartars horses out of the land, and for selling them to others : and although it could not be prooved, yet was he put to death. His yonger brother and the wife of the party deceased hearing this, came & made their supplication unto the forenamed duke, that{n}139{n}the dukedome of Russia might not be taken from them. But he commanded the youth to marrie his deceased brothers wife, and the woman also to take him unto her husband, according to the custome of the Tartars. She answered, that she had rather die, then so haynously transgresse the law. Howbeit, hee delivered her unto him, although they both refused as much as they could. Wherefore carying them to bed, they constrained the youth, lamenting and weeping, to lie downe and commit incest with his brothers wife. To be short, after the death of their husbands, the Tartars wives use very seidome to marrie the second time, unlesse perhaps some man takes his brothers wife or his stepmother in mariage. They make no difference betweene the sonne of their wife and of their concubine, but the father gives what he pleaseth unto each one : For of late the king of Georgia having two sonnes, one lawfully begotten called Melich; but the other David, borne in adulterie, at his death left part of his lande unto his base sonne. Hereupon Melich (unto whome the kingdome fell by right of his mother, because it was governed before time by women) went unto the Emperour of the Tartars, David also having taken his journey unto him. Nowe both of them comming to the court and proffering large giftes, the sonne of the harlot made suite, that he might have justice, according to the custome of the Tartars. Well, sentence passed against Melich, that David being his elder brother, should have superioritie over him, and should quietly and peaceably possesse the portion of land granted unto him by his father. Whensoever a Tartar hath many wives, each one of them hath her family and dwelling place by her selfe. And sometime the Tartar eateth, drinketh and lieth with one, and sometime with another. One is accompted chiefe among the rest, with whom hee is oftener conversant, then with the other. And notwithstanding (as it hath bin said) they are many, yet do they seidome fal out among themselves.{n}140{n}Of their superstitious traditions. Chap. 7.{n}BUt by reason of certain traditions, which either they or their predecessors have devised, they accompt some things indifferent to be faults. One is to thrust a knife into the fire, or any way to touch the fire with a knife, or with their knife to take flesh out of the cauldron, or to hewe with an hatchet neare unto the fire. For they think by that means to take away the head or force from the fire. Another is to leane upon the whip, wherewith they beate their horses : for they ride not with spurs. Also, to touch arrowes with a whip, to take or kill yong birds, to strike an horse with ye raine of their bridle, and to breake one bone against another. Also, to powre out milke, meate, or any kinde of drinke upon the ground or to make water within their tabernacle : which whosoever doth willingly, he is slaine, but otherwise he must pay a great summe of money to the inchanter to be purified. Who likewise must cause the tabernacle with all things therein, to passe betweene two fiers. Before it be on this wise purified, no man dare once enter into it, nor conveigh any thing thereout. Besides, if any man hath a morsell given him, which he is not able to swallow, and for that cause casteth it out of his mouth, there is an hole made under his tabernacle, by which hee is drawen forth and slaine without all compassion. Likewise, whosoever treads upon the threshold of any of their dukes tabernacles, he is put to death. Many other things there be, like unto these, which they take for heinous offences. But to slay men, to invade the dominions of other people, and to rifle their goods, to transgresse the commaundements and prohibitions of God, are with them no offences at all. They know nothing concerning eternall life, and everlasting damnation, and yet they thinke, that after death they shall live in another world, that they shall multiply their cattell, that they shal eate and drinke and doe other things which living men performe here upon earth. At a new moone, or a full moone, they begin all enterprises{n}141{n}A.D.{n}I246.{n}Ridiculous traditions.{n}The Tartars{n}■worship the moone.{n}that they take in hand, and they call the moone the Great Emperour, and worship it upon their knees. All men that abide in their tabernacles must be purified with Their custome fire : Which purification is on this wise, They kindle two of purifying.	flreSj anJ pitch two Javelines into the ground neere unto{n}the said fires, binding a corde to the tops of the Javelines. And about the corde they tye certaine jagges of buckram, under which corde, and betweene which fires, men, beastes, and tabernacles do passe. There stand two women also, one on the right side, and another on the left casting water, and repeating certaine charmes. If any man be slaine by lightning, all that dwell in the same tabernacle with him must passe by fire in maner aforesaid. For their tabernacles, beds, and cartes, their feltes and garments, and whatsoever such things they have, are touched by no man, yea, and are abandoned by all men as things uncleane. And to bee short, they thinke that all things are to be purged by fire. Therefore, when any ambassa-dours, princes, or other personages whatsoever come unto them, they and their giftes must passe betweene two fires to be purified, lest peradventure they have practised some witchcraft, or have brought some poyson or other mischiefe with them.{n}[I. 57-1{n}The people of Tartaria.{n}The original y the exploits of Chingis.{n}Of the beginning of their empire or government. Chap. 8.{n}THe East countrie, whereof wee have entreated, which is called Mongal, is reported to have had of olde time foure sortes of people. One of their companions was called Yeka Mongal, that is the great Mongals. The second company was called Sumongal, that is, the Water-Mongals, who called themselves Tartars of a certaine river running through their countrey named Tartar. The third was called Merkat, and the fourth Metrit. All these people had one and the same person, attire of body and language, albeit they were divided by princes and provinces. In the province of Yeka Mongal, there was a certaine man called Chingis. This man{n}142{n}became a mighty hunter. For he learned to steale men, & to take them for a pray. He ranged into other countries taking as many captives as he could, and joining them unto himselfe. Also hee allured the men of his owne countrey unto him, who followed him as their captaine and ringleader to doe mischiefe. Then began he to make warre upon the Sumongals or Tartars, and slewe their captaine, and after many conflicts, subdued them unto himselfe, and brought them all into bondage. Afterward he used their helpe to fight against the Merkats, dwelling by the Tartars, whom also hee vanquished in battell. Proceeding from thence, he fought against the Metrites, and conquered them also. The TheNaimani. Naimani hearing that Chingis was thus exalted, greatly disdeined thereat. For they had a mighty & puissant Emperour, unto whom all the foresaid nations payed tribute. Whose sonnes, when he was dead, succeeded him in his Empire. Howbeit, being young and foolish,{n}they knew not howe to governe the people, but were The discord of divided, and fell at variance among themselves. Now brethren. Chingis being exalted, as is aforesaid, they neverthelesse invaded the forenamed countries, put the inhabitants to the sword, and carried away their goods for a pray. Which Chingis having intelligence of, gathered all his subjects together. The Naimani also, and the people called Karakitay assembled and banded themselves at a certaine straight valley, where, after a battell foughten they were vanquished by the Mongals. And being thus vanquished, they were, the greater part of them, slaine ; and others, which could not escape, were carried into captivi tie. In the land of the foresayd Karakytayans, Occoday Cham, the sonne of Chingis Cham, after he was Occoday created Emperour, built a certaine citie, which he called Cham-Chanyl. Neare unto which citie, on the South side, there is an huge desert, wherein wilde men are certainely reported to inhabite, which cannot speake at all, and are destitute of joynts in their legges, so that if they fall, they cannot rise alone by themselves. Howbeit, they are of{n}143{n}discretion to make feltes of Camels haire, wherewith they clothe themselves, and which they holde against the winde. And if at any time, the Tartars pursuing them, chance to wound them with their arrowes, they put herbes into their wounds, and flye strongly before them.{n}Of the mutuall victories betweene them, and the people of Kythay. Chap. 9.{n}Hay than & T)Ut the Mongals returning home into their owne Paulus jj countrey, prepared themselves to battell against the VthemUS Cal1 *Kythayans : Which their Emperour hearing, set forward * Cathayans. against them with his armie, and they fought a cruell battell, wherein the Mongals were overcome, and all their nobles in the armie, except seven, were slaine. And for this cause, when they, purposing to invade anie region, are threatned by the inhabitants thereof to be slaine, they doe, to this day, answere : in old time also our whole number besides being slaine, we remayned but seven of us alive, and yet notwithstanding we are now growen unto a great multitude, thinke not therefore to daunt us with such brags. But Chingis and the residue that remained alive, fled home into their countrey : And having breathed{n}New victories, him a little, he prepared himselfe to warre, and went forth against the people called Huyri : These men were Chris-{n}Letters. tians of the sect of Nestorius. And these also the Mongals overcame, and received letters or learning from them : for before that time they had not the arte of writing, and nowe they call it the hand or letters of the Mongals. Immediately after, hee marched against the countrey of Saruyur, and of the Karanites, and against the land of Hudirat; all which he vanquished. Then returned he home into his owne countrey, and breathed himselfe. Afterward, assembling his warlike troupes, they marched with one accord against the Kythayans, and waging warre with them a long time, they conquered a great part of their land, and shut up their Emperour into his greatest citie : which citie they had so long time besieged, that they began to want necessary provision for their{n}144{n}armie. And when they had no victuals to feede upon, Chingis Cham commaunded his souldiers, that they should eate every tenth man of the companie. But they of the citie fought manfully against them, with engines, dartes, and arrowes, and when stones wanted they threw silver, and especially melted silver : for the same citie abounded with great riches. Also, when the Mongals had fought a long time and could not prevayle by warre, they made a great trench underneath the ground from the armie unto the middest of the citie, and there issuing foorth they fought against the citizens, and the remnant also without the walles fought in like manner. At last, breaking open the gates of the citie, they entred, and putting the Emperour, with many other to the sworde, they tooke possession thereof and conveighed away the golde, silver, and all the riches therein. And having appointed certaine deputies over the countrey, they returned home into their owne lande. This is the first time, when the Emperour of the Kythayans being vanquished, Chingis Cham ob-tayned the Empire. But some parte of the countrey, because it lyeth within the sea, they could by no meanes conquere unto this day. The men of Kytay are Pagans, having a speciali kinde of writing by themselves, and (as it is reported) the Scriptures of the olde and newe Testament. They have also recorded in hystories the lives of their forefathers : and they have Eremites, and certaine houses made after the rftanner of our Churches, which in those dayes they greatly resorted unto. They say that they have divers Saints also, and they worship one God. They adore and reverence CHRIST JESUS our Lorde, and beleeve the article of eternall life, but are not baptized. They doe also honourably esteeme and reverence our Scriptures. They love Christians, and bestowe much almes, and are a very courteous and gentle people. They have no beardes, and they agree partly with the Mongals in the disposition of their countenance. In all occupations which men practise, there are not better artificers in the whole worlde.{n}I	145	K{n}Silver cast at the enemie in stead of stones.{n}Part of Cathay in the sea.{n}The letters, bl the religion of the Cathayans.{n}Their excellent workmanship.{n}Their countrey is exceeding rich, in corne, wine, golde, silke, and other commodities.{n}Thossut Can son of Chinas.{n}The stratagem of the king of India.{n}Of their warre against India major and minor. Chap. 10.{n}A Nd when the Mongals with their emperour Chingis Cham had a while rested themselves after the fore-sayd victorie, they divided their armies. For the Emperour sent one of his sonnes named Thossut (whom also they called Can, that is to say, Emperour) with an armie against the people of Comania, whom he vanquished with much warre, and afterward returned into his owne country. But he sent his other sonne with an armie against the Indians, who also subdued India minor. These Indians are the blacke Saracens, which are also called /Ethiopians. But here the armie marched forward to fight against Christians dwelling in India major. Which the King of that countrey hearing (who is commonly called Presbiter John) gathered his souldiers together, and came foorth against them. And making mens images of copper, he set each of them upon a saddle on horsebacke, and put fire within them, and placed a man with a paire of bellowes on the horse backe behinde every image. And so with many horses and images in such sorte furnished, they marched on to fight against the Mongals or Tartars. And comming neare unto the place of the battell, they first of all sent those horses in order one after another. But the men that sate behind laide I wote not what upon the fire within the images, and blew strongly with their bellowes. Whereupon it came to passe, that the men and the horses were burnt with wilde fire, and the ayre was darkened with smoake. Then the Indians cast dartes upon the Tartars, of whom many were wounded and slain. And so they expelled them out of their dominions with great confusion, neither did we heare, that ever they returned thither againe.{n}146{n}How being repelled by monstrous men shapen like dogs, they overcame the people of Buri-thabeth. Chap. 11.{n}BUt returning through the deserts, they came into a certaine countrey, wherin (as it was reported unto us in the Emperours court, by certaine clergie men of Russia, and others, who were long time among them, and that by strange strong and stedfast affirmation) they found certaine report of cer-monsters resembling women : who being asked by many wmen a„d interpreters, where the men of that land were, they dogs. answered, that whatsoever women were borne there, were indued with the shape of mankinde, but the males were like unto dogges. And delaying the time, in that countrey they met with the said dogges on the other side of the river. And in the midst of sharpe winter, they cast themselves into the water : Afterward they wallowed in the dust upon the maine land, and so the dust being mingled with water, was frozen to their backes, and having often times so done, the ice being strongly frozen upon them, with great fury they came to fight against the Tartars. And when the Tartars threwe their dartes, or shot their arrowes among them, they rebounded backe againe, as if they had  lighted upon stones. And the rest of their weapons coulde by no meanes hurt them. Howbeit, the Dogges made an assault upon the Tartars, and wounding some of them with their teeth, and slaying others, at length they drave them out of their countries. And thereupon they have a Proverbe of the same matter, as yet rife among them, which they speake in jesting sorte one to another ; My father or my brother was slaine of Dogges. The women which they tooke, they brought into their owne countrey, who remayned there till their dying day. And in travelling homewardes, the sayd armie of the Mongals came unto Theregion of the lande of Burithabeth (the inhabitants whereof are Burtthabeth-Pagans) and conquered the people in battell. These people have a strange or rather a miserable kinde of{n}custome. For when anie mans father deceaseth, he The manners assembleth all his kindred, and they eate him. These of the people. men have no beards at all, for we saw them carie a certaine iron instrument in their hands, wherewith, if any haires growe upon their chinne, they presently plucke them out. They are also very deformed. From thence the Tartars armie returned to their owne home.{n}Another expedition of Chinas.{n}How they had the repulse at the Caspian moun-taynes, and were driven backe by men dwelling in caves. Chap. 12.{n}MOreover Chingis Cham, at the same time when he sent other armies against the East, hee himselfe marched with a power into the lande of Kergis, which notwithstanding, he conquered not in that expedition, and as it was reported unto us, he went on forward even to the Caspian mountaines. But the mountaines on that part where they encamped themselves, were of adamant, and therefore they drew unto them their arrowes, and weapons of iron. And certaine men contained within those Caspian mountaynes, hearing, as it was thought, the noyse of the armie, made a breach through, so that when the Tartars returned unto the same place tenne yeeres after, they found the mountaine broken. And attempting to goe unto them, they could not: for there stood a cloud before them, beyond which they were not able to passe, being deprived of their sight so soone as they approched thereunto. But they on the contrary side thinking that the Tartars durst not come nigh them, gave the assault, & when they came at the cloud, they could not proceed for the cause aforesaid. Also the Tartars, before they came unto the said mountaines, passed for the space of a moneth and more, through a vast wildernes, & departing thence towards the East, they were above a moneth travelling through another huge desert. At length, they came unto a land wherin they saw beaten waies, but could not find any people. Howbeit, at the last, diligently seeking, they found a man & his wife, whom they presented before{n}148{n}Chingis Cham : and demanding of them where the people of that countrey were, they answered, that the people inhabited under the ground in mountains. Then Chingis Cham keeping still the woman, sent her husband unto them, giving them charge to come at his command. And going unto them, he declared all things that Chingis Cham had commanded them. But they answered, that they would upon such a day visite him, to satisfie his desire. And in the meane season, by blinde & hidden passages under the earth, assembling themselves, they came against the Tartars in warlike manner, and suddenly issuing forth, they slewe a great number of them. This people were not able to endure the terrible noise, which in that place the Sunne made at his uprising : for at the time of the Sunne rising, they were inforced to lay one eare upon the ground, and to stoppe the other close, least they should heare that dreadfull sound. Neither could they so escape, for by this meanes many of them were destroyed. Chingis Cham therefore and his company, seeing that they prevailed not, but continually lost some of their number, fled and departed out of that land. But the man and his wife aforesaid they caried along with them, who all their life time continued in the Tartars countrey. Being demaunded why the men of their countrey doe inhabite under the ground, they sayd, that at a certeine time of the yeare, when the sunne riseth, there is such an huge noyse, that the people cannot endure it. Moreover, they use to play upon cymbals, drums, and other musicall instruments, to the ende they may not heare that sounde.{n}A fabulous narration of the sun rising.{n}Of the statutes of Chingis Cham, of his death, of his sonnes, and of his dukes. Chap. 13.{n}BUt as Chingis Cham returned out of that countrey, his people wanted victuals, & suffered extreme famin.{n}Then by chance they found ye fresh intrails of a beast: which they tooke, & casting away the dung therof, caused it to be sodden, brought it before Chingis Cham, & did The tawe eat therof. And hereupon Chingis Cham enacted ; that Chingis.{n}149{n}neither the blood, nor the intrails, nor any other part of a  beast which might be eaten, should be cast away, save onely the dunge. Wherefore he returned thence into his owne land, and there he ordayned lawes and statutes, which the Tartars doe most strictly and inviolably observe, The death of of the which we have before spoken. He was afterward Chingis. slaine by a thunderclap. He had foure sonnes : the first ts sonnes. called Occoday, the second Thossut Can, the third{n}Thiaday : the name of the fourth is unknowen. From these foure descended all the dukes of the Mongals. The His graund- first sonne of Occoday is Cuyne, who is now Emperour : children. h;s brothers be Cocten and Chyrinen. The sonnes of{n}Thossut Can are Bathy, Ordu, Siba, and Bora. Bathy, next unto the Emperour, is richer and mightier then all the rest. But Ordu is the seignior of all the dukes. The sonnes of Thiaday be Hurin and Cadan. The sonnes of Chingis Cham his other sonne, whose name is unknowen, are Mengu, Bithat, and certaine others. The mother of Mengu was named Seroctan, and of all others most honoured among the Tartars, except the Emperors mother, and mightier then any subject except Bathy. The Tar-	These be the names of the dukes : Ordu, who was in{n}tarian dukes. Poland and in Hungarie : Bathy also & Hurin & Cadan, and Siban, and Ouygat, all which were in Hungarie. In like maner Cyrpodan, who is as yet beyond the sea, making war against certaine Soldans of the Saracens, and other inhabitants of farre countries. Others remained in the land, as namely Mengu, Chyrinen, Hubilai, Sinocur, Cara, Gay, Sybedey, Bora, Berea, Corrensa. There be many other of their dukes, whose names are unknowen unto us.{n}Of the authoritie of the Emperour, and of his dukes. Chap. 14.{n}The absolute	r “{n}and lordly	A yT Oreo ver, the Emperour of the Tartars hath a{n}‘Tartarian^	dominion over all his subjects. For no{n}Emperour over man ^are abide in any place, unles he hath assigned him his subjects. to be there. Also he himselfe appointeth to his dukes{n}150{n}where they should inhabite. Likewise the dukes assigne places unto every Millenarie, or conducter of a thousand souldiers, the Millenaries unto each captaine of an too. the captaines unto every corporali of ten. Whatsoever is given them in charge, whensoever, or wheresoever, be it to fight or to lose their lives, or howsoever it be, they obey without any gainsaying. For if he demandeth any mans daughter, or sister being a virgine, they presently deliver her unto him without all contradiction : yea, often times he makes a collection of virgines throughout all the Tartars dominions, and those whom he meanes to keepe, he retaineth unto himselfe, others he bestoweth upon his men. Also, whatsoever messenger he sendeth, or whithersoever, his subjects must without delay finde them horses and other necessaries. In like sorte, from what countrey soever tribute payers, or ambassadours come unto him, they must have horses, carriages, and expenses allowed them. Notwithstanding ambassadours comming from other places do suffer great misery, and are in much wante both of victuals, and of apparel: especially when they come to any of the dukes, and there they are con-strayned to make some lingering abode. Then ten men Their are allowed so little sustenance, that scarcely two could barbarous live thereof. Likewise, if any injuries be ottered them, towar^s they cannot without danger make complaint. Many gifts ambassadours. also are demaunded of them, both by dukes and others, which if they doe not bestow, they are basely esteemed, and set at nought. And hereupon, wee were of necessitie enforced to bestowe in giftes a great part of those things which were given us by well disposed people, to defray our charges. To be short, all things are so in the power and possession of the Emperour, that no man dare say, This is mine, or, this is my neighbours ; but all, both goods, cattell and men are his owne. Concerning this matter also he published a statute of late. The very same authority and jurisdiction, doe the dukes in like sorte exercise upon their subjects.{n}I51{n}The title of Barchin.{n}[I. 61.J Orna.{n}Of the election of Emperour Occoday, and of the expedition of duke Bathy. Chap. 15.{n}AFter the death of Chingis Cham aforesayd, the dukes assembled themselves and chose Occoday his sonne to be their Emperour. And he, entering into consultation with his nobles, divided his armies, and sent duke Bathy his nephew against the countrie of Altisoldan, and against the people called Bisermini, who were Saracens, but spake the language of Comania. The Tartars invading their countrey, fought with them and subdued them in battel. But a certeine citie called Barchin resisted them a long time. For the citizens had cast up many ditches and trenches about their citie, in regard whereof the Tartars could not take it, till they had filled the said ditches. But the citizens of Sarguit hearing this, came foorth to meete them, yeelding themselves unto them of their owne accord. Whereupon their citie was not destroyed, but they slue manie of them and others they carried away captive, and taking spoyles, they filled the citie with other inhabitants, and so marched foorth against the citie of Orna. This towne was very populous and exceeding rich. For there were many Christians therein, as namely Gasarians, Russians, and Alanians, with others, and Saracens also. The government of the citie was in the Saracens hande. It standeth upon a mighty river, and is a kinde of porte towne, having a great marte exercised therein. And when the Tartars could not otherwise overcome it, they turned the said river, running through the citie, out of his chanell, and so drowned the citie with the inhabitantes and their goods. Which being done, they set forward against Russia, and made foule havocke there, destroying cities and castles and murther-ing the people. They layd siege a long while unto Kiow the chiefe citie of Russia, and at length they tooke it and slue the citizens. Whereupon, traveiling through that countrey, wee found an innumerable multitude of dead mens skulles and bones lying upon the earth. For it was{n}a very large and a populous citie, but it is nowe in a maner brought to nothing : for there doe scarce remaine 200. houses, the inhabitants whereof are kept in extreame bondage. Moreover, out of Russia and Comania, they proceeded forward against the Hungarians, and the Polonians, and there manie of them were slaine, as is aforesaid : and had the Hungarians manfully withstood them, the Tartars had beene confounded and driven backe. Returning from thence, they invaded the countrey of the Morduans being pagans, and conquered The them in battell. Then they marched against the people Morduans-called Byleri, or Bulgaria magna, & utterly wasted the Bulgaria countrey. From hence they proceeded towards the mag™-North against the people called Bastarci or Hungaria Hungaria magna, and conquered them also. And so going on mag™-further North, they came unto the Parossitae, who having Parossita-. little stomacks and small mouthes, eate not any thing at all, but seething flesh they stand or sitte over the potte, and receiving the steame or smoke thereof, are therewith onely nourished, and if they eate anie thing it is very little. From hence they came to the Samogetae, who live Samogeta:. onely upon hunting, and use to dwell in tabernacles onely, and to weare garments made of beastes skinnes. From thence they proceeded unto a countrey lying upon the Ocean sea, where they found certaine monsters, who in The North all things resembled the shape of men, saving that their ocean-feete were like the feete of an oxe, and they had in deede mens heads but dogges faces. They spake, as it were, Northerne two words like men, but at the third they barked like monsters. dogges. From hence they retired into Comania, and there some of them remaine unto this day.{n}Of the expedition of duke Cyrpodan. Chap. 16.{n}AT the same time Occoday Can sent duke Cyrpodan Kergls.{n}with an armie against Kergis, who also subdued them in battell. These men are Pagans, having no beardes at all. They have a custome when any of their fathers die, for griefe and in token of lamentation to{n}153{n}drawe as it were, a leather thong overthwart their faces, from one eare to the other. This nation being conquered, duke Cyrpodan marched with his forces Southward against the Armenians. And travailing through certain desert places, they found monsters in the shape of men, which had each of them but one arme & one hand growing out of the midst of their breast, and but one foote. Two of them used to shoote in one bowe, and they ran so swiftly, that horses could not overtake them. They ran also upon that one foote by hopping and leaping, and being weary of such walking, they went upon their hand and their foote, turning themselves round, as it were in a circle. And being wearie of so doing, they ran againe according to their wonted manner. Isidore Cyclopedes. calleth them Cyclopedes. And as it was told us in court, by the clergie men of Russia, who remaine with the foresayd Emperour, many ambassadours were sent from them unto the Emperours court, to obtaine peace. From thence they proceeded forth into Armenia, which they Armenia 13 conquered in battell, and part also of Georgia. And the Georgia	other part is under their jurisdiction, paying as yet every{n}conquere .	yeare unto them for tribute, 20000. pieces of coyne called{n}Yperpera. From thence they marched into the dominions of the puissant and mighty Soldan called Deurum, whom also they vanquished in fight. And to be short, they went on farther sacking and conquering, even unto the The Soldan of Soldan of Aleppo his dominions, and now they have subdued that land also, determining to invade other countries ’ beyond it : neither returned they afterward into their owne land unto this day. Likewise the same armie The Caliph of marched forward against the Caliph of Baldach his Baldach. countrey, which they subdued also, & exacted at his handes the daylie tribute of 400. Byzantines, besides Baldakines and other giftes. Also every yeare they send messengers unto the Caliph moving him to come unto them. Who sending back great gifts together with his tribute beseecheth them to be favourable unto him. Howbeit the Tartarian Emperour receiveth al his gifts,{n}*54{n}& yet still nevertheles sends for him, to have him come.{n}How the Tartars behave themselves in warre.  Chap. 17.{n}/^•Hingis Cham divided his Tartars by captaines of The military ten, captaines of an 100. and captaines of a 1000. discipline of{n}And over ten Millenaries or captains of a 1000, he tfie ^artars‘ placed, as it were, one Colonel, and yet notwithstanding over one whole armie he authorised two or three dukes, but yet so that all should have especiall regard unto one of the said dukes. And when they joine battel against any other nation, unles they do all with one consent give backe, every man that flies is put to death. And if one or two, or more of ten proceed manfully to the battel, but the residue of those ten draw backe & follow not the company, they are in like maner slaine. Also, if one among ten or more bee taken, their fellowes, if they rescue them not, are punished with death. Moreover they are enjoined to have these weapons following. Two long bowes or one Their good one at the least, three quivers full of arrowes, & one weapons. axe, and ropes to draw engines withal. But the richer sort have single edged swords, with sharpe points, and somewhat crooked. They have also armed horses with their shoulders and breasts defenced, they have helmets and brigandines. Some of them have jackes, and caparisons for their horses made of leather artificially doubled or trebled upon their bodies. The upper part of their helmet is of iron or steele, but that part which com-passeth about the necke and the throate is of leather. Howbeit some of them have all their foresaide furniture of iron framed in maner following. They beate out many thinne plates a finger broad, and a handful long, and making in every one of them eight little holes, they put thereunto three strong and streight leather thongs. So they joine the plates one to another, as it were, ascending by degrees. Then they tie the plates{n}155{n}Their experience & cunning in warns.{n}Their maner of passing over rivers.{n}unto the said thongs, with other small and slender thongs, drawen through the holes aforesayd, and in the upper part, on each side therof, they fasten one small doubled thong unto another, that the plates may firmely be knit together. These they make, as well for their horses caparisons, as for the armour of their men : And they skowre them so bright that a man may behold his face in them. Some of them upon the necke of their launce have an hooke, wherewithal! they attempt to pull men out of their saddles. The heads of their arrowes are exceedingly sharpe cutting both wayes like a two edged sworde, and they alwaies carie a file in their quivers to whet their arrowheads. They have targets made of wickers, or of small roddes. Howbeit they doe not (as we suppose) accustome to carrie them, but onely about the tents, or in the Emperours or dukes guardes, & that only in the night season. They are most politique in warres, having bene exercised therein with other nations for the space of these 42. yeres. When they come at any rivers, the chiefe men of the company have a round and light piece of leather, about the borders whereof making many loopes, they put a rope into them to drawe it together like a purse, and so bring it into the rounde forme of a ball, which leather they fill with their garments and other necessaries, trussing it up most strongly. But upon the midst of the upper parte thereof, they lay their saddles and other hard things, there also doe the men themselves sit. This their boate they tye unto an horse tayle, causing a man to swimme before, & to guide over the horse, or sometime they have two oares to row themselves over. The first horse therefore being driven into the water, all the other horses of the company followe him, and so they passe through the river. But the poorer sort of common souldiers have every man his leather bag or sachell well sowen together, wherin he packs up all his trinkets, and strongly trussing it up hangs it at his horses tayle, and so passeth over, in maner aforesaid.{n}t56{n}Howe they may be resisted. Chap. 18.{n}IDeeme not any one kingdome or province able to resist them : because they use to take up souldiers out of every countrey of their dominions. And if so be the neighbour province which they invade, wil not aide them, utterly wasting it, with the inhabitants therof, whom they take from thence with them, they proceed on to fight against another countrey. And placing their captives in the forefront of the battell, if they fight not couragiously, they put them to the sworde. Wherefore, if Christians would withstande them, it is expedient, that the provinces and governours of countreies should agree in one, and so by common counsell, should give them resistance. Their souldiers also must be furnished with strong hand-bowes & cros-bowes, which they greatly dread, & with sufficient arrowes, with maces also of good iron, or an axe with a long handle or staffe. When they make their arrow heads, they must (according to ye Tartars custome) dip them red-hot into water mingled with salte, that they may be strong to pierce the enemies armour. They that wil may have swords also & lances with hooks at the ends, to pull them from their saddles, out of which they are easilie removed. They must have helmets likewise & other armour to defend themselves & their horses from{n}Counsel how to wage warre against the Tartars.{n}A notable temper of iron or steele.{n}the Tartars weapons & arrowes, & they that are unarmed, must (according to ye Tartars custome) march behinde their fellowes, and discharge at the enemie with  long bowes and cros-bowes. And (as it is above said of the Tartars) they must orderly dispose their bandes and troupes, and ordeine lawes for their souldiers. Whosoever runneth to the pray or spoyle, before the victorie be atchieved, must undergoe a most severe punishment. For such a fellow is put to death among the Tartars without all pitie or mercie. The place of battel must be chosen, if it be possible, in a plaine fielde, where they may see round about, neither must{n}*57{n}all be in one company, but in manie and severall bandes, not very farre distant one from another. They which give the first encounter must sende one band before, and must have another in a readynesse to relieve and second the former in time convenient. They must have spies also on every side to give them notice when the rest of the enemies bandes approch. For therefore ought they alwayes to send forth band against band & troupe against troupe, because the Tartar ever practiseth to gette his enemie in the midst and so to environ him. Let our bands take this caveat also, if the enemie retire, not to make any long pursuit after him, lest peradventure (according to his custome) he might draw them into some secret ambush : for the Tartar fights more by policie then by maine force. And againe, lest our horses bee tired : for we are not so well stored with horses as they. Those horses which the Tartars use one day, they ride not upon three or foure dayes after. Moreover, if the Tartars draw homeward, our men must not therefore depart and casseir their bandes, or separate themselves asunder: because they doe this upon policie, namely to have our armie divided, that they may more securely invade and waste the countrey. And in very deede, our captaines ought both day and night to keepe their armie in a readines : and not to lie out of their armour, but at all assayes, to bee provided for battell. For the Tartars like divels are alwaies watching and devising howe to practise mischiefe. Furthermore, if in battell any of the Tartars be cast ofF their horse backes, they must presently bee layd holde on and taken, for being on foote they shoote strongly, wounding and killing both horses and men.{n}* Johannes de	Of the journey of frier *John unto the first{n}plano Carpini	guard of the Tartars< Chap{n}WE therefore by the commaundement of the sea apostolique setting foorth towards the nations of the East, chose first to travel unto the Tartars, because 158{n}we feared that there might be great danger imminent The journey of upon the Church of God next unto them, by their frfr invasions. Proceeding on therefore, we came to the Legate°™ king of Bohemia, who being of our familiar acquaintance, advised us to take our journey through Polonia and Russia. For we had kinsfolkes in Polonia, by whose assistance, we might enter into Russia. Having given us his letters, hee caused our charges also to be defrayed, in all his chiefe houses and cities, till we{n}came unto his nephew Boleslaus duke of Slesia, who Boleslaus duke also was familiar and well knowen unto us. The like favour he shewed us also, till wee came unto Conradus duke of *Lautiscia, unto whome then (by Gods especiall *Mazovla. favour towards us) lord Wasilico duke of Russia was come, from whose mouth we heard more at large concerning the deedes of the Tartars : for he had sent ambassadours thither, who were returned backe unto him.{n}Wherefore, it being given us to understand, that we must bestow giftes upon them, we caused certaine skinnes of bevers and other beastes to be bought with part of that money, which was given upon almes to succour us by the way. Which thing duke Conradus and the * duches Grlmslaua. of Cracow, and a bishop, and certaine souldiers being advertised of, gave us likewise more of the same skins. And to be short, duke Wasilico being earnestly requested by the duke of Cracow, and by the bishop and barons, on our behalfe, conducted us with him, unto his owne land, and there for certaine daies, enterteined us at his owne charges, to the ende that we might refresh our selves a while. And when, being requested by us, he had caused his bishops to resort unto him, we reade before them the Popes letters, admonishing them to returne unto the unitie of the Church.{n}To the same purpose also, we our selves admonished them, and to our abilitie, induced as well the duke as the bishops and others thereunto. Howbeit because duke Daniel the Daniel brother of Wasilico aforesaid (having as then taken his brother unto journey unto Baty) was absent, they could not at that time, ast tc°' make a finall answere. After these things duke Wasilico{n}159{n}sent us forward with one of his servants as farre as Kiow the chiefe citie of Russia. Howbeit we went alwayes in The danger of our lives by reason of the Lituanians, who did Lithuanians. often invade ye borders of Russia, even in those verie places by which we were to passe. But in regard of the foresayd servant, wee were out of the Russians daunger, the greatest part of whome were either slaine, or caried into captivitie by the Tartars. Moreover, at Danilon wee were feeble even unto the death. (Notwithstanding wee caused our selves to bee carried in a waggon through the snowe and extreme colde.) And being come unto Kiow, wee consulted with the Millenary, 8c other noble men there concerning our journey. They told us, that if wee carried  those horses, which wee then had, unto the Tartars, great store of snowe lying upon the ground, they would all dye : be cause they knew not howe to digge up the grasse under The fodder of the snow, as the Tartarian horses doe, neither could there the Tartarian bee ought found for them to eate, the Tartars having neither horses. hay nor strawe, nor any other fodder. We determined therefore to leave them behind at Kiow with two servants appointed to keepe them. And wee were constrayned to bestow gifts upon the Millenary, that we might obtaine his favour to allowe us poste horses and a guide. Wherefore beginning our journey the second daye after the feast of the Purification, wee arrived at the towne of Canow, which was immediatly under the dominion of the Tartars. The governour whereof allowed us horses and a guide unto Mich^as the another towne, wherein wee found one Michaeas to be ma iduus.	governour, a man full of all malice and despight. Who{n}notwithstanding, having received giftes at our handes, according to his maner conducted us to the first guarde of the Tartars.{n}How he and his company were at the first received of the Tartars. Chap. 20.{n}WHerefore, the first Saturday next after Ash Wednesday, having about the Sunnes going downe, taken up our place of rest, the armed Tartars came rushing upon 160{n}us in uncivil and horrible maner, being very inquisitive of us what maner of persons, or of what condition we were : & when we had answered them that we were the Popes Legates, receiving some victuals at our handes, they imme-diatly departed. Moreover in the morning rising and proceeding on our journey, the chiefe of them which were in the guard met with us, demaunding why, or for what intent and purpose we came thither ? and what busines we had with them ? Unto whom we answered, We are the legates of our lord the Pope, who is the father & lord of the Christians. He hath sent us as well unto your The contents. Emperour, as to your princes, and all other Tartars for °fthe this purpose, because it is his pleasure, that all Christians should be in league with the Tartars, and should have peace with them. It is his desire also that they should become great or in favour with God in heaven, therfore he admo-nisheth them aswel by us, as by his own letters, to become Christians, and to embrace the faith of our Lord Jesu Christ, because they could not otherwise be saved. Moreover, he gives them to understand, that he much mar-veileth at their monstrous slaughters & massacres of mankind, & especially of Christians, but most of al of Hungarians, Mountaineirs, 8c Polonians, being al his subjects, having not injuried them in ought, nor attempted to doe them injurie. And because the Lord God is grievously offended thereat, he adviseth them from henceforth to beware of such dealing, & to repent them of that which they had done. He requesteth also, that they would write an answere unto him, what they purpose to doe hereafter, and what their intention is. All which things being heard and understood, the Tartars sayd that they would appoint us poste horses and a guide unto Corrensa. And immedi- Corrensa. ately demanding gifts at our hands, they obtained them.{n}Then receiving the same horses, from which they dismounted, together with a guide wee tooke our journey unto Corrensa. But they riding a swift pace, sent a * messenger before unto the sayd duke Corrensa, to signifie the message, which we had delivered unto them. This marches.{n}1	161	L{n}The maner of saluting the Tartarian princes.{n}[I. 65.J{n}Duke Bathy y his power.{n}duke is governour of all them, which lie in guard against the nations of the West, least some enemy might on the sudden and at unawares breake in upon them. And hee is said to have 60000. men under him.{n}How they were received at the court of Corrensa. Chap. 21.{n}BEing come therefore unto his court, hee caused our tent to bee placed farre from him, and sent his agents to demaund of us with what we would incline unto him, that is to say, what giftes we would offer, in doing our obeisance unto him. Unto whome wee answered, that our lord the Pope had not sent any giftes at all, because he was not certaine that wee should ever bee able to come at them : for we passed through most dangerous places. Notwithstanding, to our abilitie, we will honour him with some part of those things, which have bene, by the goodnes of God, & the favour of the Pope, bestowed upon us for our sustenance. Having received our gifts, they conducted us unto the Orda or tent of the duke, & we were instructed to bow thrise with our left knee before the doore of the tente, and in any case to beware, lest wee set our foote upon the threshold of the sayd doore. And that after we were entred, wee should rehearse before the duke and all his nobles, the same wordes, which wee had before sayde, kneeling upon our knees. Then presented wee the letters of our lord the Pope : but our interpreter whome we had hired and brought with us from Kiow was not sufficiently able to interpret them, neither was there any other esteemed to bee meete for the same purpose. Here certaine poste horses and three Tartars were appoynted for us to conduct us from hence with al speede unto duke Bathy. This Bathy is the mightiest prince among them except the Emperour, & they are bound to obey him before all other princes. We began our journey towards his court the first tuesday in Lent, and riding as fast as our horses could trot (for we had fresh horses almost thrise or foure times a day) we posted from morning till night, yea very often in{n}162{n}the night season also, and yet could we not come at him before Maundie thursday. All this journey we went through the land of Comania, which is al plaine ground, and hath foure mighty rivers running through it : The first is called J Neper, on the side whereof towards Russia, duke Corrensa & Montii marched up and downe, which{n}Montii on the other side upon the plaines is greater then he. The second is called J Don, upon the banke whereof t Tanais. marcheth a certain prince having in mariage the sister of{n}Baty, his name is Tirbon. The third is called J Volga, which is an exceeding great river, upon the bankes whereof duke Bathy marcheth. The fourth is called J laec, upon which two Millenaries doe march, on each side of the river one. All these, in the winter time, descend down to the sea, & in summer ascend backe by the bankes of the said rivers up to the mountains. The sea last named is the II Great sea, out of which the arme of S. George proceedeth, which runneth by Constantinople. These rivers do abound with plenty of fishes, but especially Volga, & they exon-{n}\Bha.{n}|| Pontus Euxinus. He is deceived,{n}erate themselves into the Grecian sea, which is called Mare Neper y Don{n}major. Over Neper we went many daies upon the ice. run into Mare Along the shore also of the Grecian sea we went very dan-{n}gerously upon the ice in sundry places, & that for many int0 daies together. For about the shore the waters are frozen three leagues into the sea. But before we came unto{n}Caspian sea.{n}Bathy, two of our Tartars rode afore, to give him intelligence of all the sayings which we had uttered in the presence of Corrensa.{n}How we were received at the court of the great prince Bathy. Chap. 22.{n}MOreover, when we came unto Bathy in the land of Comania, we were seated a good league distant from his tabernacles. And when we should be conducted unto his court, it was tolde us that we must passe between two fires. But we would by no means be induced thereunto. Howbeit, they said unto us: you may passe through without al danger: for we would have you to doe it for 163{n}A ceremony of passing be-tweene two fiers.{n}none other cause, but only that if you intend any mischiefe against our lord, or bring any poyson with you, fire may take away all evill. Unto whom we answered, that to the end we might cleare ourselves from all suspition of any such matter, we were contented to passe through. When therefore we were come unto the Orda, being demanded{n}Eide gay.	by his agent Eldegay with what present or gift we would{n}do our obeisance? Wee gave the sameanswere which we did at the court of Corrensa. The gifts being given and received, the causes of our journey also being heard, they brought us into the tabernacle of the prince, first bowing our selves at the doore, & being admonished, as before,{n}Bathy heareth not to tread upon the threshold. And being entred, we the Legates. Spake unto him kneeling upon our knees, & delivered him our letters, and requested him to have interpreters to translate them. Who accordingly on good friday were sent unto us, and we together with them, diligently translated our sayd letters into the Russian, Tartarian, and Saracen languages. This interpretation was presented unto Bathy, which he read, & attentively noted. At length wee were conducted home againe unto our owne lodging, howbeit no victuals were given unto us, except it were once a litle Millet in a dich, the first night of our{n}He behaves comming. This Bathy caries himselfe very stately & himselfe hke magnificently, having porters and all officers after the a ,ns' maner of the Emperour, and sittes in a lofty seate or throne together with one of his wives. The rest, namely, as well his brethren and sonnes, as other great personages sit underneath him in the midst upon a bench, and others sit downe upon the ground, behinde him, but the men on the right hand and the women on the left. He hath very faire and large tentes of linnen cloth also, which were once the kings of Hungaria. Neither dare any man come into his tent (besides them of his owne family) unles he be called, be he never so mighty and great, except perhaps it be knowen that it is his pleasure. Wee also, for the same cause, sate on the left hand; for so doe all ambassadors in going: but in returning from the Emperour, we were{n}164{n}alwaies placed on the right hand. In the middest stands his table, neare unto the doore of the tent, upon the which there is drinke filled in golden and silver vessels. Neither doth Bathy at any time drinke, nor any other of the Tartarian princes, especially being in a publique place, but they have singing and minstrilsie before them. And alwaies, when hee rides, there is a canopie or small tent caried over his head upon the point of a javeline. And so doe all the great princes of the Tartars, & their wives also. The sayd Bathy is courteous enough unto his owne men, and yet is hee had in great awe by them : he is most cruel in fight: he is exceedingly prudent and politique in warre, because he hath now continued a long time in martiall affaires.{n}‘Their custome of drinking at the sound of musicke.{n}How departing from Bathy, they passed through  the land of Comania, and of the Kangittas.{n}Chap. 23.{n}MOreover, upon Easter even we were called unto the tent, and there came forth to meete us the foresaid agent of Bathy, saying on his masters behalfe, that we should go into their land, unto the Emperor Cuyne, deteining certaine of our company with this pretence, that they would send them backe unto the Pope, to whom we gave letters of al our affaires to deliver unto him. But being come as farre as duke Montii aforesaid, there they were kept untill our returne. Upon Easter day, having said our praiers, and taken a slender breakfast, in the company of two Tartars, which were assigned unto us by Corensa we departed with many teares, not knowing whether we went to death or to life. And we were so{n}They travelled post from Easter day to the 22. of July Eastward of Volga.{n}feeble in bodie, that we were scarce able to ride. For all that Lent through, our meat was Millet onely with a little water and salte. And so likewise upon other fasting dayes. Neither had we ought to drinke, but snowe melted in a skillet. And passing through Comania we rode most earnestly, having change of horses five times or oftener in a day, except when we went through deserts, for i65{n}The land of the Kangitta.{n}Jeroslaus duke of Russia.{n}then we were allowed better and stronger horses, which could undergoe the whole labour. And thus farre had we travailed from the beginning of Lent untill eight dayes after Easter. The land of Comania on the North side immediately after Russia, hath the people called Morduyni Byleri, that is, Bulgaria magna, the Bastarci, that is, Hungaria magna, next unto the Bastarci, the Parositae and the Samogetae. Next unto the Samogetae are those people which are sayd to have dogges faces, inhabiting upon the desert shores of the Ocean. On the South side it hath the Alani, the Circassi, the Gazari, Greece and Constantinople ; also the land of Iberia, the Cathes, the Brutaches who are said to be Jewes shaving their heads all over, the landes also of Scythia, of Georgia, of Armenia, of Turkie. On the West side it hath Hungaria, and Russia. Also Comania is a most large and long countrey. The inhabitantes whereof called Comani the Tartars slewe, some notwithstanding fled from them, and the rest were subdued under their bondage. But most of them that fled are returned againe. Afterward wee entred the lande of the Kangittae, which in many places hath great scarcetie of waters, wherin there are but fewe inhabitants by reason of the foresayd defect of water. For this cause divers of the servants of Jeroslaus duke of Russia, as they were traveiling towards him into the land of Tartaria, died for thirst, in that desert. As before in Comania, so likewise in this countrey, wee found many skulles and bones of dead men lying upon the earth like a dunghill. Through this countrey we were traveiling from the eight day after Easter untill Ascension day. The inhabitants therof were Pagans, and neither they nor the Comanians used to till the ground, but lived onely upon cattell, neither built they any houses but dwelled in tents. These men also have the Tartars rooted out, and doe possesse and inhabite their countrey, howbeit, those that remained are reduced into their bondage.{n}166{n}How they came unto the first court of the new Emperour. Chap. 24.{n}MOreover, out of the land of the Kangittas, we entered Thelandofthe into the countrey of ye Bisermini, who speake the Bisermini.{n}language of Comania, but observe the law of the Saracens. In this countrey we found innumerable cities with castles ruined, & many towns left desolate. The lord of this country was called Soldan Alti, who with al his progenie, Alti Soldanus. was destroyed by the Tartars. This country hath most huge mountains. On the South side it hath Jerusalem Huge moun-and Baldach, and all the whole countrey of the Saracens. tamesIn the next territories adjoyning doe inhabite two carnail brothers dukes of the Tartars, namely, Burin and Cadan, Burin and the sonnes of Thyaday, who was the sonne of Chingis Cadan-Can. On the North side thereof it hath the land of the{n}blacke Kythayans, and the Ocean. In the same countrie Syban the brother of Bathy remaineth. Through this countrie we were traveiling from the feast of Ascension, until eight daies before the feast of S. John Baptist. And then we entred into the land of the blacke Kythayans, in which the Emperour built an house, where we were called in to drinke. Also the Emperours deputy in that place caused the chiefe men of the citie and his two sonnes to{n}The North ocean.{n}Syban brother unto Bathy.{n}The blacke Kythayans.{n}daunce before us. Departing from hence, wee founde a certaine small sea, upon the shore whereof stands a little A small sea. mountaine. In which mountaine is reported to be a hole, from whence, in winter time such vehement tempests of winds doe issue, that traveilers can scarcely, and with great danger passe by the same way. In summer time, the noise in deede of the winde is heard there, but it pro-ceedeth gently out of the hole. Along the shores of the foresaid sea we travailed for the space of many dayes, which Many dayes. although it bee not very great, yet hath it many islandes, and wee passed by leaving it on our left hande. In this{n}lande dwelleth Ordu, whome wee sayde to bee auncient Orducap. 13. unto all the Tartarian dukes. And it is the Orda or{n}court of his father which hee inhabiteth, and one of his 167{n}The first court of the Emperour.{n}The land of 'Naymani.{n}The 22. of July.{n}wives beareth rule there. For it is a custome among the Tartars, that the Courts of Princes or of noble men are not dissolved, but alwayes some women are appointed to keepe and governe them, upon whom certain gifts are bestowed, in like sort as they are given unto their Lords. And so at length we arrived at the first court of the Emperour, wherein one of his wives dwelt.{n}Howe they came unto Cuyne himselfe, who was forthwith to be chosen Emperour. Chap. 25-{n}BUt because we had not as yet seene the Emperour, they would not invite us nor admit us into his Orda, but caused good attendance and entertainement, after the Tartars fashion, to be given unto us in our owne tent, and they caused us to stay there, and to refresh our selves with them one day. Departing thence upon the even of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, wee entered into the land of the Naymani, who are Pagans. But upon the very feast day of the saide Apostles, there fel a mightie snowe in that place, and wee had extreame colde weather. This lande is full of mountaines, and colde beyonde measure, and there is little plaine ground to bee seene. These two nations last mentioned used not to till their grounde, but, like unto the Tartars, dwelt in tents, which the sayde Tartars had destroyed. Through this countrey wee were travailing manie dayes. Then entered wee into the lande of the Mongals, whome wee call Tartars. Through the Tartars lande wee continued our travaile (as wee suppose) for the space of some three weekes, riding alwayes hastily and with speede, and upon the day of Marie Magdalene we arrived at the court of Cuyne the Emperour elect. But therefore did we make great haste all this way, because our Tartarian guides were straightly commaunded to bring us unto the court Imperiali with all speede, which court hath beene these many yeeres, ordained for the election of the Emperour. Wherefore rising earely, wee travailed untill night without eating of any thing, and oftentimes wee{n}168{n}came so late unto our lodging, that we had no time to eate the same night, but that which we should have eaten over night, was given us in the morning. And often changing our horses, wee spared no Horse-fleshe, but rode swiftly and without intermission, as fast as our horses could trot.{n}How Cuyne enterteined the Minorite Friers. Chap. 26.{n}BUt when wee were come unto the court of Cuyne, hee caused (after the Tartars manner) a Tent and all expenses necessarie to bee provided for us. And his people entreated us with more regarde and courtesie, then they did anie other Ambassadours. Howbeeit wee were not called before his presence, because hee was not as yet elected, nor admitted unto his empire. Notwithstanding, the interpretation of the Popes letters, and the message which we delivered, were sent unto him by the foresaid Bathy. And having stayed there five or sixe dayes, hee sent us unto his mother, under whome there was main-teyned a verie solemne and royall court. And being come thither, we saw an huge tent of fine white cloth pitched, which was, to our judgement, of so great quanti tie, that more then two thousand men might stand within it, and round about it there was a wall of planks set up, painted with divers images. Wee therefore with our Tartars assigned to attende upon us, tooke our journey thither, and there were all the Dukes assembled, eche one of them riding up and downe with his traine over the hilles and dales. The first day they were all clad in white, but the second in skarlet robes. Then came Cuyne unto the saide tent. Moreover, the third day they were all in blew robes, and the fourth in most rich robes of Baldakin cloth. In the wall of boardes, about the tent aforesaid, were two great gates, by one of the which gates, the Emperour only was to enter, and at that gate there was no gard of men appointed to stand, although it stood continually open, because none durst go in or come out the same way : all that were admitted, entred by another gate, 169{n}The curtesie of Cuyne towards Ambassadors.{n}The tent roial.{n}A general assemblie.{n}at which there stood watchmen, with bowes, swords, & arrowes. And whosoever approched unto the tent beyond the bounds and limit assigned, being caught, was beaten, but if he fled, he was shot at with arrowes or iron. There were many that to our judgement, had upon their bridles, trappers, saddles, and such like furniture, to the value of 20. markes in pure gold. The foresaid Dukes (as we thinke) communed together within the tent, and consulted about the election of their Emperor. But all the residue of the people were placed farre away without the walles of board, & in this maner they staied almost til noone. The banquet of Then began they to drink mares milk, & so continued the Nobles. drinking til even tide, and that in so great quantity, as it{n}was wonderfull. And they called us in unto them, and gave us of their ale, because we could not drink their mares milke. And this they did unto us in token of great honor. But they compelled us to drink so much, that in regard of our customary diet, wee coulde by no means endure it. Whereupon, giving them to under- stand, that it was hurtful unto us, they ceassed to compel JenslausDuke us any more. Without the doore stoode Duke Jeroslaus ofSusdal. of Susdal, in Russia, and a great many Dukes of the{n}Kythayans, and of the Solangi. The two sonnes also of the king of Georgia, the ligier of the Caliph of Baldach, who was a Soldan, and (as we thinke) above ten Soldans Ambassadors of the Saracens beside. And, as it was tolde us by the of sundry na- agents, there were more then 4000. ambassadors, partly tims' of such as paide tributes, and such as presented gifts, and other Soldans, and Dukes, which came to yeeld themselves, and such as the Tartars had sent for, and such as were governours of lands. All these were placed without the lists, and had drinke given unto them. But almost continually they all of them gave us and Duke Jeroslaus the upper hand, when we were abroad in their companie.{n}170{n}How he was exalted to his Empire. Chap. 27.{n}A Nd to our remembrance, we remained there, about{n}the space of foure weekes. The election was to our Thebegynnings thinking there celebrated, but it was not published and °f Cuyne his proclaimed there. And it was greatly suspected so to be, because alwayes when Cuyne came forth out of the tent, he had a noyse of musicke, and was bowed unto, or honoured with faire wands, having purple wooll upon the tops of them, and that, so long as he remained abroad: which service was performed to none of the other Dukes.{n}The foresaid tent or court is called by them Syra Orda. Syr a Orda. Departing thence, wee all with one accord rode 3. or 4. leagues unto another place, where, in a goodly plaine, by a rivers side, betweene certaine mountaines, there was another tent erected, which was called the golden Orda. For ‘The golden there was Cuyne to be placed in the throne Emperiall, Crda. upon the day of the Assumption of our Ladie. But, for T5-the abundance of haile which fell at the same time, as is above said, the matter was deferred. There was also a tent erected upon pillars, which were covered with plates of golde, and were joyned unto other timber with golden nailes. It was covered above with Baldakin cloth, but doth. there was other cloth spread over that, next unto the ayre. Wee abode there unto the feast of Saint Bartholomew, what time there was assembled an huge multitude standing with their faces towards the South. And a certaine number of them beeing a stones cast distant from the residue, making continuall prayers, and kneeling upon their knees, proceeded farther and farther towards the South. Howbeit wee, not knowing whether they used inchantments, or whether they bowed their knees to God or to some other, woulde not kneele upon the grounde with them. And having done so a long time, they returned to the tent, and placed Cuyne in his throne imperiali, and his Dukes bowed their knees before him. Afterwarde the whole multitude kneeled downe in like maner, except our selves, for wee were none of his subjects.{n}171{n}Of his age and demeanour, and of his seale. Chap. 28.{n}THis Emperour, when hee was exalted unto his government, seemed to bee about the age of fourty or fourty five yeeres, He was of a meane stature, very wise and politike, and passing serious and grave in all his demeanour. A rare thing it was, for a man to see him laugh or behave himselfe lightly, as those Christians report, which abode continually with him. Certaine Christians of his familie earnestly and strongly affirmed unto us, that he himselfe was about to become a Christian. A token and argument whereof was, that hee reteined divers Cleargie men of the Christians. Hee had likewise at all times a Chappell of Christians, neere unto his great Tent, where the Clearkes (like unto other Christians, and according to the custome of the Graecians) doe sing publiquely and openly, and ring belles at certaine houres, bee there never so great a multitude of Tartars, or of other people in presence. And yet none of their Dukes doe the like. It is the manner of the Emperour never to talke his owne selfe with a stranger, though he be never so great, but heareth and answeareth by a speaker. And when any of his subjects (howe great soever they bee) are in propounding anie matter of importaunce unto him, or in hearing his answeare, they continue kneeling upon their knees unto the ende of their conference. Neither is it lawfull for any man to speake of any affaires, after they have beene determined of by the Emperour. The sayde Emperour, hath in his affaires both publike and private, an Agent, and Secretary of estate, with Scribes and all other Officials, except advocates. For, without the noyse of pleading, or sentence giving, all things are done according to the Emperours will and pleasure. Other Tartarian princes do the like in those things which belong unto them. But, be it known unto al men, that whilest we remained at the said Emperors court, which hath bin ordained and kept for these many yeeres, the 172{n}saide Cuyne being Emperor new elect, together with al his princes, erected a flag of defiance against the Church of God, & the Romane empire, and against al Christian War™ in-. kingdomes and nations of the West, unlesse peradventure ^iQ^tians (which God forbid) they will condescend unto those j things, which he hath injoined unto our lord the Pope, L & to all potentates and people of the Christians, namely, that they wil become obedient unto him. For, except Christendom, there is no land under heaven, which they stand in feare of, and for that cause they prepare themselves to battel against us. This Emperors father, namely Occoday was poisoned to death, which is the cause why they have for a short space absteined from warre. But their intent and purpose is (as I have above said) to subdue the whole world unto themselves, as they were commanded by Chingis Can. Hence it is that the Emperor in his letters writeth after this maner : The power of God, & Emperour of all men. Also, upon his seale, there is this posie ingraven: God in heaven, and Cuyne Can upon earth, the power of God : the seale of the Emperour of all men.{n}Of the admission of the Friers and Ambassadours{n}unto the Emperour. Chap. 29.{n}IN the same place where the Emperour was established Cuyneheareth into his throne, we were summoned before him. And the Legates.{n}Chingay his chiefe secretary having written downe our names, and the names of them that sent us, with the name of the Duke of Solangi, & of others, cried out with a loude voice, rehearsing the said names before the Emperour, and the assembly of his Dukes. Which beeing done, ech one of us bowed his left knee foure times, & they gave us warning not to touch the threshold. And after they had searched us most diligently for knives, and could not find any about us, we entred in at the doore upon the East side : because no man dare presume to enter at the West doore, but the Emperour onely. In like maner, every Tartarian Duke entreth on the West side into his tent. Howbeit the inferiour sort doe not{n}173{n}greatly regard such ceremonies. This therefore was the first time, when we entred into the Emperours tent in his presence, after he was created Emperour. Likewise all other ambassadours were there received by him, but very fewe were admitted into his tent. And there were preGifts presen- sented unto him such abundance of gifts by the saide ted unto him. Ambassadours, that they seemed to be infinite, namely in{n}Samites, robes of purple, and of Baldakin cloth, silke girdles wrought with golde, and costly skinnes, with other gifts also. Likewise there was a certaine Sun Canopie, or small tent (which was to bee caried over the Emperours head) presented unto him, being set full of precious stones. And a governour of one Province brought unto him a companie of camels covered with Baldakins. They had saddles also upon their backs, with certaine other instruments, within the which were places for men to sitte upon. Also they brought many horses & mules unto him furnished w‘ trappers and caparisons, some being made of leather, and some of iron. And we were demanded whether we would bestow any gifts upon him or no ? But wee were not of abilitie so to doe, having in a maner spent all our provision. There were also upon an hill standing a good distance from the tents, 500. Cartsful more then 500. carts, which were all ful of silver and of of treasure.	gold, and silke garments. And they were all divided be-{n}tweene the Emperour and his Dukes, and every Duke bestowed upon his owne followers what pleased him.{n}Of the place where the Emperor and his mother tooke their leaves one of another, and of Jeroslaus Duke of Russia. Chap. 30.{n}A tent of T'XEparting thence, we came unto another place, where purple.	a wonderfull brave tent, all of red purple, given by{n}the Kythayans, was pitched. Wee were admitted into that also, and alwaies when we entred, there was given unto us ale and wine to drinke, & sodden flesh (when we would) to eate. There was also a loftie stage built of boords, where the Emperours throne was placed, being 174{n}very curiously wrought out of ivorie, wherein also there thnne of was golde and precious stones, and (as we remember) lvme-there were certain degrees or staires to ascend unto it.{n}And it was round upon the top. There were benches placed about the saide throne, whereon the ladies sate towarde the left hand of the Emperour upon stooles, (but none sate aloft on the right hande) and the Dukes sate upon benches below, the said throne being in the midst. Certaine others sate behinde the Dukes, and every day there resorted great companie of Ladies thither. The three tents whereof we spake before, were very large, but the Emperour his wives had other great and faire tentes made of white felt. This was the place where the Emperour parted companie with his mother : for she went into one part of the land, and the Emperour into another to execute justice. For there was taken a certaine Concubine of this Emperour, which had poysoned his father to death, at the same time when the Tartars armie was in Hungarie, which, for the same cause returned home. Moreover, upon the foresaide Concubine, and deatJl of many other of her confederats sentence of judgement was Gccoda^ re~ pronounced, and they were put to death. At the same 6 ' time Jeroslaus the great Duke of Soldal, which is a part Or of Russia, deceased. For being (as it were for honours  sake) invited to eate and drink with the Emperours mother, and immediatly after the banquet, returning unto his lodging, he fel sicke, and within seven dayes, died. And after his death, his body was of a strange blew colour, and it was commonly reported, that the said Duke was poisoned, to the ende that the Tartars might freely and totally possesse his Dukedome.{n}How the Friers comming at length unto the Emperour, gave, and received letters.{n}Chap. 31.{n}TO be short, the Tartars brought us unto their Emperor, who when he had heard of them, that we were come unto him, commanded that we should 175{n}Cuyne dissem-bleth with the Legates.{n}return, unto his mother. For he was determined the next day, (as it is abovesaid) to set up a flag of defiance against al ye countreis of the West, which he would have us in no case to know. Wherefore returning, we staied some few dayes with his mother, and so returned backe again unto him. With whom we continued for the space of one whole moneth in such extreme hunger and thirst, that we could scarce hold life and soule together. For the provision allowed us for foure dayes, was scantly sufficient for one day. Neither could we buy us any sustenance, because the market was too farre off. Howbeit the Lorde provided for us a Russian goldsmith, named Cosmas, who being greatly in the Emperours favour, procured us some sustenance. This man shewed unto us the throne of the Emperour, which hee had made, before it was set in the proper place, and his seale, which he also had framed. Afterward the Emperor sent for us, giving us to understand by Chingay his chief Secretary, that wee should write downe our messages & affaires, and should deliver them unto him. Which thing we performed accordingly. After many daies he called for us againe, demanding whether there were any with our Lord the Pope, which understood the Russian, the Sarracen, or the Tartarian language ? To whom we answered, that we had none of those letters or languages. Howbeit, that there were certaine Saracens in the land, but inhabiting a great distance from our Lord the Pope. And wee saide, that wee thought it most expedient, that when they had written their mindes in the Tartarian language, and had interpreted the meaning therof unto us, we should diligently translate it into our own tongue, and so deliver both the letter and the translation thereof unto our Lord the Pope. Then departed they from us, and went unto the Emperour. And after the day of S. Martine, we were called for againe. Then Kadac principal agent for the whole empire, and Chingay, and Bala, with divers other Scribes, came unto us, and interpreted the letter word for word. And having written{n}176{n}it in Latine, they caused us to interprete unto them eche sentence, to wit if we had erred in any word. And when both letters were written, they made us to reade them over twise more, least we should have mistaken ought. For they said unto us : Take heed that ye understand all things throughly, for if you should not understand the whole matter aright, it might breed some inconvenience. They wrote the said letters also in the Saracen tongue, that there might be some found in our dominions which could reade and interprete them, if need should require.{n}How they were licensed to depart. Chap. 32.{n}A Nd (as our Tartars told us) the Emperour was purposed to send his ambassadors with us. Howbeit, he was desirous (as we thought) that we our selves should crave that favour at his hands. And when one of our Tartars being an ancient man, exhorted us to make the said petition, we thought it not good for us, that the Emperor should send his ambassadours. Wherfore we gave him answere, that it was not for us to make any such petition, but if it pleased the Emperour of his owne accord to send them, we would diligently (by Gods assistance) see them conducted in safetie. Howbeit, we thought it expedient for us, that they should not goe, and that for divers causes. First, because we feared, least they, seeing the dissentions and warres which are among us, should be the more encouraged to make warre against us. Secondly, we feared, that they would be insteade of spies and intelligencers in our dominions. Thirdly, we misdoubted that they would be slaine by the way. For our nations be arrogant and proud. For when as those servants (which at the request of the Cardinali, attended upon us, namely the legates of Almaine) returned unto him in the Tartars attire, they were almost stoned in the way, by the Dutch, and were compelled to put ofF those garments. And it is the Tartars custome, never to bee reconciled unto such as have slaine their Ambassadours, till they have revenged themselves. Fourthly, least they should bee taken from us{n}i	177	M{n}The Legates are loath to have any Ambassadours sent from the Tartars to the Christians.{n}They are rewarded with{n}The sore journeys of the Legates in returning.{n}Bathy.{n}by mayne force. Fiftly, because there could come no good by their ambassade, for they were to have none other commission, or authoritie, but onely to deliver their Emperours letter unto the Pope, and to the Princes of Christendome, which very same letters wee our selves had, and we knew right well, that much harme might ensue thereof. Wherefore, the third day after this, namely, upon the feast of Saint Brice, they gave us our passe-port and a Letter sealed with the Emperours owne seale, sending us unto the Emperours mother, who gave unto eche of us a gowne made of Foxe-skinnes, with the furre on the outside, and a piece of purple. And our Tartars stole a yarde out of every one of them. And out of that which was given unto our servant, they stole the better halfe. Which false dealing of theirs, we knew well inough, but would make no words thereof.{n}How they returned homewards. Chap. 33.{n}THen taking our journey to returne, we travailed all{n}Winter long, lying in the deserts oftentimes upon the snow, except with our feete wee made a piece of ground bare to lye upon. For there were no trees, but the plaine champion field. And oftentimes in the morning, we found our selves all covered with snow driven over us by the winde. And so travailing till the feast of our Lordes Ascension, we arrived at the court of Bathy. Of whom when wee had enquired, what answere he would send unto our Lord the Pope, he said that he had nothing to give us in charge, but onely that we should diligently deliver that which the Emperour had written. And, having received letters for our safe conduct, the thirteenth day after Pentecost, being Saterday, wee were proceeded as farre as Montii, with whome our foresaide associates and servants remained, which were withheld from us, and we caused them to be delivered unto us. From hence wee travailed unto Corrensa, to whom, requiring gifts the second time at our hands, we gave none, because we had not wherewithal!. And hee appointed us two{n}178{n}Comanians, which lived among the common people of the Tartars, to be our guides unto the citie of Kiow in Russia. Howbeit one of our Tartars parted not from us, till we were past the utmost gard of the Tartars. But the other guides, namely the Comanians, which were given us by Corrensa, brought us from the last garde unto the citie of Kiow, in the space of sixe dayes. And there we arrived fifteene dayes before the feast of Saint John Baptist. Moreover, the Citizens of Kiow having intelligence of our approch, came foorth all of them to meete us, with great joy. For they rejoyced over us, as over men that had bene risen from death to life. So like wise they did unto us throughout all Russia, Polonia, and Bohemia. Daniel and his brother Wasilico made us a royall feast, and interteined us with them against our willes for the space of eight dayes. In the meane time, they with their Bishops, and other men of account, being in consultation together about those matters which we had propounded unto them in our journey towards the Tartars, answered us with common consent, saying : that they would holde the Pope for their speciali Lord and Father, and the Church of Rome for their Lady & mistresse, confirming likewise al things which they had sent concerning this matter, before our comming, by their Abbate. And for the same purpose, they sent their Ambassadours and letters by us also, unto our Lord the Pope.{n}