A branch of a letter from M. John Merick, Agent unto the Moscovie company in Russia, closed up in the Mosco the 14. of March, Anno 1597. touching the death of Pheodor Ivanowich late Emperour of all Russia, &c.{n}10. Febr.{n}1597-{n}Aving thus farre proceeded with this my answere unto the chiefest points of your worships letters received, my desire was to have sent one unto you long since, as you may perceive by || the first date : but by reason I could not get leave, I have deferred it of till this instant, for{n}that there was none suffered to passe out of the land. The causes may be judged, for that it pleased God to call out of this world, the Emperour his Majestie, who departed about the 7. of January: and ever since hath bene a mourning time, & no suites for any matter could be heard. But it hath bene a very dead season. Yet (thankes be to God) through the wise government of Lord Boris Pheodorowich the Lord Protector{n}448{n}unto the saide late Emperour, since his death all things have bene very quiet without any dissention ; as the like in such a great kingdome I have not heard of. And now through the providence of Almightie God, and by surrender of the late Empresse Irenia Feodoruna, and the common consent of the Patriarch, Nobles, Bishops, and the whole Cleargie, with the whole Commons besides, choise is made of none other but of the said Lord Protector, L. Boris Pheodorowich to Pnnce Bons be Emperour, and great duke of all Russia, who was most unwilling to receive the kingdome, but the people consent chosen would make no other choise, nor have any other. So Emperour of that with much adoe and entreatie, it hath pleased his Rusia. Majestie to take upon him the kingdome, and he is absolute Emperor to him and his heires. And certainly God hath done much for this Countrey, and hath made the people greatly happy, in that he hath provided and appointed so famous and worthy a Prince : whose excellent government and experience these foureteene yeeres hath bene manifest to all Russia. God graunt his highnesse a most prosperous and long raigne, with his Lady the Empresse, the Prince his sonne, and the Princesse his daughter. All men do rejoyce both Russe and strangers for this most famous Emperour.{n}The Coronation is thought shalbe on the Assension day next, til which time I cannot depart from Mosco : which is a litle before the time that ordinarily I doe take my journey from hence. And touching his Majesties favour towards me on your behalfe, especially for her Majesties sake, as in foretime it was extraordinary, and so specially shewed to mee, as to none the like : so hath his highnesse promised the continuance thereof, with further favour as shalbe desired. Whereof I have no doubt : for dayly I do finde the same.{n}