A letter written from Manuel the Emperour of Constantinople, unto Henrie the second King of England, Anno Dom. 1177. wherein mention is made that certaine of king Henries Noble men and subjects were present with the sayd Emperour in a battell of his against the Soldan of Iconium. Recorded by Roger Hoveden, in Annalium parte posteriore, in regno Hen. 2. fol. 316, & 317.{n}312{n}313{n}314{n}The same in English.{n}IN the yeere 1177, Manuel the emperour of Constantinople having fought a field with the Soldan of Iconium, and vanquished him, wrote unto Henry the second king of England in maner following.{n}Manuel Comnenus in Christ the everliving God a faithful emperour, descended of the linage of Porphyrie, crowned by Gods grace, high, puissant, mighty, alwayes most sovereigne, and governour of the Romans ; unto Henry the most famous king of England, his most deare friend, greeting and all good successe. Whereas our imperiali highnesse thinketh it expedient to advertise you our welbeloved friend of all our affaires : We thought it not amisse to signifie unto your royall Majestie certaine exploits at this present atchieved by us. From the beginning therefore of our inauguration{n}315{n}our imperiali highnes hath mainteined most deadly feod and hostility against Gods enemies the Persians, seeing them so to triumph over Christians, to exalt themselves against the name of God, and to usurpe over Christian kingdomes. For which cause our imperiali highnesse hath in some sort encountered them heretofore, and did as it pleased God to give us grace. And we suppose that your Majestie is not ignorant, what our imperiali highnesse hath often performed for their ruine and subversion. For even now, being urged thereunto, we have determined to leade a mighty army against them, and to wage warre against all Persia. And albeit our forces be not so great as we could wish they were, yet have we according to the time, and the present state of things, strongly invaded them. Wherefore our Majestie imperiali hath gathered our armies together : but because we had in our army sundry carts laden with armour, engines, & other instruments for the assault of cities, to an exceeding weight we could not make any great speed in our journey. Moreover, while our imperiali highnesse was yet marching in our owne dominions, before any barbarous enemy had fought against us : our people were visited with the most grievous disease of the fluxe, which being dispersed in our troups destroyed and slew great numbers, more then the sword of the enemy would have done. Which mischiefe so prevailing, did woonderfully abate our forces. But after we had invaded the Turkish frontiers, we had at the first very often and hot skirmishes, and the Turks came swarming to fight against our imperiali troups. Howbeit by Gods assistance those miscreants were altogether scattered and put to flight by our souldiers. But as we approched unto that straight passage which is called by the Persians Cibrilcimam, so many bands of Persian footemen and horsemen (most whereof came from the innermost parts of Persia, to succour their Allies) encountred our army, as were almost superiour unto us in number. Wherefore the army of our{n}316{n}Imperiali highnesse, by reason of the straightnesse and difficultie of the way, being stretched ten miles in length ; and the first not being able to helpe the last, nor yet contrarywise the last to rescue the first, it came to passe that they were very farre distant asunder. And in very deed the foremost troupes were much separated from the guard of our imperiali person, who forgetting their fellowes behind, would not stay any whit for them. Because therefore the Turkish bands knew full well by their former conflicts that it was bootlesse for them to assaile the forefront of our battell, and perceiving the narownesse of the place to be a great advantage, they determined to set upon our rereward, and did so. Wherefore our passage being very straight, and the infidels assayling us upon the right hand and upon the left, and on all sides, and discharging their weapons as thicke as hailestones against us, slew divers of our men and horses. Hereupon, the slaughter of our people still encreasing our majestie imperiali deemed it requisite to stay behind, and to succour our bands in the rereward, and so expecting them we sustained the fierce encounter of many thousand Persians. What exploits our Imperiali person atchieved in the same skirmish, I hold it needlesse at this time to recount: your majestie may perhaps understand more of this matter by them which were there present. Howbeit our Imperiali highnesse being in the middest of this conflict, and enduring the fight with so great danger, all our hindermost troups, both Greekes, Latines, and other nations, retiring themselves close together, and not being able to suffer the violence of their enemies weapons, pressed on so hard, and were caried with such maine force, that hastening to ascend the next hill for their better safegard, they urged on them which went before, whether they would or no. Whereupon, much dust being raised, which stopped our eyes and utterly deprived us of sight, and our men and horses pressing so sore one upon the necke of another, plunged them-{n}317{n}selves on the sudden into such a steepe and dangerous valley, that treading one upon another, they quelled to death not onely a multitude of the common souldiours, but divers most honourable personages, & some of our neere kinsmen. For who could restraine the irresistable throng of so huge a multitude ? Howbeit our Imperiali highnesse being environed with such swarmes of Infidels, and giving and receiving wounds (insomuch that the miscreants were greatly dismaied at our constancie) we gave not over, but by Gods assistance wonne the field. Neither did we permit the enemie to ascend unto that place, from whence we skirmished with him. Neither yet spurred wee on our horse any faster for all their assaults. But marshalling all our troupes together, and delivering them out of danger, we disposed them about our Imperial person ; and so we overtooke the foremost, and marched in good order with our whole army. Nowe the Soldan perceiving that notwithstanding the great damages which we had sustained, our Imperial highnes provided to give him a fresh encounter, humbly submitting himselfe unto us, and using submisse speaches, made suite to have peace at our hands, and promised to fulfill the pleasure of our majestie Imperiali, to doe us service against all commers, to release all our subjects which were captives in his realme, and to rest wholy at our commaund. Here therefore we remained two dayes with great authoritie; and considering that wee Iconitmin cou^ attempt nought against the citie of Iconium, having tended ^have ^ost our warrelike engines both for defence and for bene besieged, batterie, for that the oxen which drew them were slaine with the enemies weapons, falling as thicke as haile-stones: and also for because all our beasts in a maner were most grievously diseased; our majestie Imperial accepted of the Soldans petition, league, and oath being made and taken under our ensignes, and granted our peace unto him. Then returned we into our owne dominions, being greatly grieved for the losse of our deere kinsmen, and yeelding unto God most humble 318{n}1190. thanks, who of his goodnesse had even now given us the victory. We are right glad likewise that some of your Certaim noble majesties princes and nobles accompanied us in this mtnofthektng action, who are able to report unto you all things which	fa{n}have happened. And albeit we were exceedingly grieved Emperor in for the losse of our people; yet thought it we expedient his battell to signifie unto you the successe of our affaires, as unto ^gfl^tthe&ol-our welbeloved friend, & one who is very neerly allied anoflcmwm-unto our highnesse Imperial, by reason of the con-sanguinitie of our children. Farewell. Given in the moneth of November, and upon the tenth Indiction.{n}