A relation of the Haven of Tecuanapa, a most convenient place for building of ships, situate upon the South sea not farre from Nicaragua, which was sent unto the viceroy of Mexico or to the king of Spaine: wherein are described the rivers of Ometepec, Tlacamama, and Tlacolula falling into the said Haven, with the townes, people, and mountaines adjoyning to the said rivers, and other things fit for the building and victualling of ships.{n}He Port and small harbour of Tecuanapa hath in the driest time of Sommer in the chanell little lesse then one fathome at low water, and at full sea one fathome and an halfe: in the time of raine, with the increasing of the land-water it hath three fathoms and more. It lyeth toward{n}the West, and there the Bishopricks of Guaxacan and Tlarcali are separated. From hence toward the point called Punta de Intla and Dordaci there is a Bay 2. leagues distant, which though it be no special harbour, yet upon an extremity ships may come and ride there, as in times past they have done. This Bay on the right hand toward the North maketh a lake somewhat large towards the midst of the chanell, and in some parts deepe, but specially on the side of Cuahintla, but on either side it is but shallow. As you passe betweene the sea & certaine great and large woods of orenge trees, and trees of other nature which grow along the sea coast, which are of no great bredth, al the countrey appeareth very open: howbeit on the side of Cuahintla the mountaines have many creeks and a small lake called Tulaningo, and the countrey cannot be travelled, except you take the way betweene the sea and the end of this lake, which may be about two leagues of sandy way.{n}466{n}And on the North side there is another small creeke. And going by the sands side one quarter of a league, you come to the way that leadeth unto Quacapotla a Quacapotla. mansion of Intla.{n}The river of Ometepec being the principal river river of which commeth to this haven hath his head in the moun- ®metetec-taines of Xicayan de Touer about 24. leagues from this haven, from divers brooks which come out of the mountaines of Cacatepec, and beneath a towne called Suchistlahuaca litle more then 3. leagues all the brooks joyne together: and from that place you may passe downe to the sea with Canoas and Lighters : and you might come farther but for the fall of a furious streame or current which runneth between two great rocks, passing from Cocahulapa a mansion of Ometepec unto Yanguitle a mansion of the said Ometepec. These inconveniences being past (which in my judgement may be about one league) the river is more navigable, so that you may sayle in the same about 12. leagues. During the space of which 12. leagues, about a league and a halfe distance from the waters side, and in many other parts of the same river it hath great quantitie of woods which use to grow in hot soiles, fit for shiptimber, as Huber-trees, & Suchicuhitil, whereof they of Nicaragua make great profit. Also there be white Nicaragua. okes and Tehegurtes in great quantitie, and many other kinds of timber: and in the mountaines there be firre-trees, okes, and cork-trees, which easily may bee caried downe the river, because they may be cut some 2, 3, 4, and 5. leagues from the river, and may be brought downe to the waters side with the service and helpe of those that dwell in the townes thereabout.{n}At the head of these brooks where the river beginneth is the towne which is called Xicaian, belonging to the Xicalan. heires of Francis de Touer y de Guillen, containing about 350. Indians of rude speech and of little policie, being 24. leagues from the sea, little more or lesse.{n}467{n}The place it selfe is hot, although the mountaines round about be cold.{n} A little from this is the towne of Aioanapa possessed Aioanapa. by heires of perez Gomez, having in it about 300. Indians of the selfe same speach and qualitie. The countrey is more subject to heate then cold; yet hath it neere it cold countreys and mountaines. It is distant from Xicaian de Touer 4. leagues, and from the sea 20. leagues.{n}Sixe leagues downeward toward the South is the towne Zuchistlahuaca. of Suchistlahuaca on the said river, and the inhabitants are of the same speach and qualities. The countrey is more subject to heate then cold. It is in the charge of Gonzalvo Fernandez a citizen of Mexico, and hath about 150. Indians, and is 15. leagues distant from the sea.{n}Ometepec. From this towne unto the towne of Ometepec are 6. leagues. The place is very hot, and in the same government, and is situate betweene certaine hils one league from the river: he and his followers have under them about 700. Indians, which speake the Ayacastecan, Amusgan, and Niciecan tongues, and this place is from the sea nine leagues.{n}Ihualapa. From this towne unto Ihualapa are two great leagues: it is in the government of the heires of Laurence de Castro, of the foresaid temperature, and the people use the said language, and are of the like stature: and it standeth three leagues from the river, and from the sea ten leagues.{n}These are the best townes, and of the best traffique that are upon all this coast. The Indians are rich in Cacao and victuals, and in these townes doe the Indians Niciecan. of Niciecan principally trade. And in the towne of Ihualapa the chiefe Alguazil of the province is resident for the most part of the yeere.{n}Pio a frontier More lowe beneath the river of Tlacolula, about a towne against league or a league and an halfe from the towne of the Mexicans. Ometepec is the towne called Pio, which was wont to be 468{n}a towne of Tlacolula, and was a frontier towne against the Mexicans. There be in it about 50. Indians of the ancient inhabitants: one Graviel de Chiavez a citizen of Mexico hath the governement thereof: it is 4. leagues from Ihualapa, and 6. from the sea.{n}A little below this is the towne of Huehuatlan in the Huehuatlan. selfe same governement standing one league from the river on certaine high hils : it hath 10. Indians, and is from the sea 5. leagues.{n}And one league from this towne stands the towne of Cuahucapotla a mansion of Anda or Intla: it hath to the Cuahucapotla. number of 15. Indians; it standeth one league and a halfe from the river, and 4. leagues from the mouth thereof.{n}At the fountaines or heads of the rest of the brooks is the towne of Cacatepec being in the government of Cacatepec. Raphael de Treyo: he and his tenants have under them some 700. Indians of Niciecan: it is from the sea some 22. leagues.{n}The river which is called Tlacamama commeth from tf the mountains of Atoyaque and Amusgos, which are Tlacamama-some 17. leagues from the sea. There it maketh a formed river, so big, that it is navigable to the sea with canoas and lighters: I say from a litle below Tolistla-huaca a mansion of Xicaian. It is navigable 8. moneths in the yeere, and the other 4. not, because that the sands of the plaines do soke and drink up the water in such wise, that there remaineth so little, that there is no passage: howbeit in small lighters timber may bee brought downe this river one league from the place where it is cut, unto the place that I have spoken of; whereas bigger vessels may bee made; for nigh unto that place other brooks and running waters doe joyne and meet, which make it a maine river. It hath nigh unto it in the mountaines of Atoyaque, Cacatepec, and Amusgos many woods of pine-trees, cork-trees, and okes of great bignesse: and beneath those mountaines in the warme countrey, neere unto the rivers there is much{n}469{n}timber of those sorts which I mentioned before to be about the river of Ometepec, which may easily be cut and carried downe unto Tecuanapa in the time before specified.{n}This river hath likewise townes adjoyning to it; the first at the foote of the mountaines is the town of Atoiaque. Atoiaque belonging to the king, & to the heires of Pronetto: their language is Niciecan, the countrey hot, the people politique, & it is from the sea 15. leagues. It hath about 200. Indians.{n}One league from this towne, and 14. from the sea Xicaian. is the towne of Xicaian belonging likewise to the king, and to the heires of Pronetto. They are Niciecan people and very comely, and in a hot countrey. It hath by account 300. Indians. There are resident in it the Vicar and Justice; it is from the river a league and a halfe.{n}A league from this towne, and 14. from the sea is Pinotespan. situate the mansion of Pinotespan subject to Tututepec, which hath with the manors subject unto it 500. Indians.{n}Two leagues from the towne, and one from Xicayan, and 13. from Tecuanapa, and 3. from the river is the The towne of towne of Tlacamama: the people are very comely and Tlacamama. pOiit;que. it containeth some 100. Indians, and be-longeth to the king.{n}More toward the South 5. leagues from the river, and two from this towne, and 14. from the sea is the towne called Pinotespan del Rey: They are handsome people,  but of slow speach: this towne conteineth about 100.{n}Indians like unto the former. They be wealthie, because A lake having they make great quantitie of salte; for they have a hard salt	saite groweth under the water, (a thing{n}the water.	repugnant to nature, that two contraries doe grow{n}and are conserved together) whereout they take it in breaking it with stones upon the ground under the water.{n}It hath also the towne of Amusgos, which is in the 47°{n}government of Fernando de Avila, which may be from Tecuanapa 18. leagues. They speake the Amusgan tongue. The countrey is hotte: it standeth on the high way from Nicieca: it hath 400. Indians, few more or lesse.{n}These are all the townes of account situate neere this river.{n}Neere upon this river are two farmes, the one belonging to Pedro Bravo, and the other to him that maketh this relation unto your Excellencie, which may be from the sea some 8. or 9. leagues all plaine ground. And in this territorie there is but one towne called Quesala situate upon the river, and 6. leagues from the sea; which in times past hath beene a great towne, and nowe hath but three Indians onely, and it is from the farmes 3. leagues.{n}The mansion house of Don Mattheo is more toward the South, standing in a large mountainous and waste countrey, which aboundeth with cattell being 3. leagues from the river; and as farre from Tecuanapa, as from the place where all the cattell is; and the sea that way is from it but one league.{n}A little below this mansion about 4. leagues, and 7. leagues from the sea, is a garden of Alonso Pedraza which beareth Cacao.{n}And 2. leagues from this garden and 6. leagues from the sea standeth the towne of Cuahintlan belonging to the king, a towne of 19 housholds, but very rich, for they gather much Cacao and the best in that countrey. They speake the Tlapanecan tongue. This towne hath the sea that way within halfe a league.{n}And this coast from Cuahintlan to Tecuanapa, and the coast which runneth to Huatulco is a coast of much pearle, for in olde time the Indians gathered much pearle there.{n}And 2. leagues from Cuahintlan and 4. from Tecuanapa is a garden of Cacao in the landes of Francisco Maldonado, which is called Cacahu-Atoyaque.{n}471{n}Quesala.{n}Cuahintlan del Rey.{n}Huatulco or Guatulco in 15. deg. and 50. minutes.{n}The provinces of Tututepec and Tlapa.{n}These are the things worthy of relation from the head-springs of this river of Tlacamama unto the sea: and this foresaid river entreth into the river of Ometepec 5. leagues from Tecuanapa.{n}The river of Tlacolula springeth within the boundes of Chilsiztlahuaca subject to Comastlahuaca a towne of Suchistlahuaca, neere which are many mountaines. This river is navigable little more then 2. leagues before it entreth into the river of Ometepec, where it is 5. leagues from the sea.{n}Hard by it is the towne of Tlacolula abovenamed; and 3. leagues from it is the towne of Azoyoque an olde manour of Tlapa. The towne of Chilsiztlahuaca hath but 3. Indians; and the towne of Azoyoque hath more then 300. Indians. But because in this haven must bee the building of ships, the provinces of Tlapa and Tututepec may stand them in great stead; the province of Tututepec being neighbour to the river of Tlacamama, and the province of Tlapa to the river of Tlacolula. For they may, as I have sayd, carrie the timber in lighters or rafts downe the rivers, and may use the Indians in the townes thereabout to fell, and draw the same out of the cold mountaines; for in the warm countreyes the most is plaine ground, whereas with very fewe men and oxen it may be brought unto the place where it should be imbarqued.{n}There may come flat bottomes, and canoas unto the townes thereabout, and lade themselves with victuals: For they have already come by that river to the rode of Ometepec, & made there provision at the mansion of Don Mattheo, and at the farmes, at that time when his Majestie did people the plaines which are betweene these rivers, conteining a large and voyde countrey sufficient for the erecting of 20. manours, being a countrey well furnished with water and pasture without any danger or perill, according to the description hereunto annexed.{n}This small harbour of Tecuanapa being seene and viewed, seemeth very commodious for to build shippes 472{n}in, by reason of the great abundance of mountaines full Tecuanapa a of good timber for that purpose, with the commodities of most fit har-rivers, and with the service and victuals from the townes p^idMpsfior thereabout, which be very good for coast townes.	South sea.{n}The desire of him that made this relation, hath bene with zeale to serve your excellencie ; who therewithal! desireth the Lord God to give the successe.{n}