The damage which may be done bypassing by the river of Jenero into the South sea.{n}The opinion of Don Alvaro Ba^an, Marques of Santa Cruz, and high Admirall of Spaine, touching the armie of sir Francis Drake lying at the Isles of Bayona in Galicia, written in Lisbon the 26 of October after the account of Spaine in the yere 1585.{n}THat which it seemeth unto me, that the English army may doe, if they seeke to passe unto the West Indies, and enter into the South sea (as Francis Drake hath done once before) with their thirty ships and galeons, and many pinnesses and shalops with oares, which they have with them, and 5000 men of warre, which they of Bayona thinke to be in the fleete, is as followeth.{n}They may take their course to the river of Jenero, which is on the coast of Brasil in 23 degrees to the 92{n}South of the Equinoctial line. It is an haven capable of many ships and very safe, where there is water, wood and flesh: and likewise Drake may have corne of Maiz in a towne two or three leagues from the sayd haven, which is called S. Vincente.{n}And because the course is by the Isles of Madera, the Canaries, and Cape verde, he may sacke those Islands, the time serving him for that purpose.{n}From Bayona to the Isle of Madera, with the Northerne winds which now wil begin to blow, when the Westerne winds be past, which presently doe blowe because that it beginneth to raine on the coast of Spaine, the fleete may run in 6 daies, and from thence to the Canaries in foure, and from the Canaries to the Isles of Cape Verde in eight, which all together make eighteene dayes: and he may stay as much time more as shall serve him to sacke the Islands in.{n}He may saile from Cape Verde to the river of Jenero in 40 dayes, which in the whole amount unto two moneths. So that the fleete remaining all this moneth of October on the coast of Galicia, it may come to the river of Jenero in the end of December.{n}At the entry of the bay of the river of Jenero there is a flat low Island where a fort may very easily be made, wherein above 500 men may be left: and placing his artillery therein, he may keepe the haven, & the fort wil be able to hold out all assault, because that on the Southwest and Northeast sides are two chanels whereby the ships come into the haven: wherein Francis Drake may repaire his army, and leave there some people, and depart with so much of the rest as shal seeme good unto him to enter into the South sea, & go on upon his voyage to the streight of Magelan, which is 550 leagues from the foresaid haven, and standeth in 52 degrees & a halfe toward the South, and may enter by the streight into the South sea all the moneth of February, & so may to goe to the citie of Lima, otherwise called the citie de los Reys, which standeth on the sea coast{n}93{n}Madera.{n}The Isles of Cape Verde.{n}The river of Jenero.{n}A fort may bee builded on an Island in the mouth of the river of Jenero.{n}The streight of Magelan. The citie of Lima easie to bee taken, though it have 2000 inhabitants.{n}1585.	having two thousand inhabitants in it. But in respect that they be no warlike people nor exercised in armes, and because the place is open and without fortresse & artillery, he may take and sacke it, and make himself{n}The ships in the South sea may be burnt.	master on the land, & afterward taking those ships which are in that sea, our people can have no succour of ships out of Spaine, but by the streight of Magelan, which{n}Panama may be taken. The second course which indeede Drake tooke.	is a long way about. It is also very credible that he will be able to take Panama. If he seeke not to take this course he may divide his army into two parts, & sacke the Isle of S. Domingo, Puerto Rico, the coast of Tierra firma unto Cartagena and Nombre de Dios.{n}	And from the river of Chagre, which is fifteene leagues from Nombre de Dios, he may send his footemen in shalops with oares and in the vessels which carrie goods up and downe the river, whereof there are above fiftie there, and passe up to the lodging of the Crosses, called{n}Panama being an open place is easie to be taken. Havana easie to be taken.	in Spanish Venta de Cruzes, which is five leagues from Panama, which because it is an unwalled towne may easily be taken. And Havana also will bee in great danger, which albeit it have a fortresse, yet it is but little and weake, and bringing his great ordinance on shore hee may take the same with great facilitie. And besides these domages which he may do, according to this discourse, it will not be the least to cut ofF{n}The Indian fleete may be taken.	the navigation of the Indies, to take the West Indian fleet, if they chance to be there. What course is to be taken to prevent these mischiefes. r I ''O dispatch Caravels with all possible diligence to the A viceroyes and governours of the Indias, advertising them of the newes of the English army, that they may be provided, and make themselves ready for them. Albeit, considering the number of ships which have bene set 94{n}1585. foorth out of England, I assure my selfe, that some part Sir Barnard of them are gone out of those parts unto Newfoundland Drake tooke For the Queene hath taken carefull order to send to intercept the ships of the fishermen that goe to Baccalaos. Jugali And it is likewise to be thought that shee hath done fishers re-the like for the intercepting of the fleet of the Indies, turningfrom{n}And considering that according to our intelligence out of England, above fourescore shippes, and the army of Drake His’lntM-have bene set foorth from thence, it is meete that his gence was too majestie should prepare another army to seeke the English as s‘Me fleete, and to fight with it, commanding that the Galeons which belong to the crowne of Portugall, and those of his Admiralty. majestie which lye in the river of Sivill bee prepared to send against them, and to give them the Carena, that they may bee in a readinesse for any voyage howe long soever it bee: And likewise to arrest a Galeon of the Duke of Florence, which is very well armed and furnished with great ordinance, and passed lately from Alicante toward Cadiz, and to make up the number of fortie great shippes, Fortie great which are to be had in Biscay and Guipuscoa: and that beeing rigged, armed and set in good order, they bee r ' victualled for eight moneths, and that foorthwith there bee levied a thousand mariners of Catalunna and Genoa to bee divided among the Fleete, and bee conducted, as they were for the Fleete of Ter^era: furthermore that sixe G8?- Ter-thousande souldiers bee levied, giving commaundement ^^Marques to presse a greater number, to the ende that these may ofSantaCruz. bee able men for service.{n}Moreover it is needfull for this armie that 20. pataches be brought from Biscay, and 20. Azabras from Castro. That the pataches bee from 50. to 60. tunnes : and that the Azabras bee like those which were in the expedition to Terser a.{n}That sufficient provision be made of artillerie, powder, match, and lead, and harquebuzes, muskets, and chosen pikes for the keeping of the coast.{n}It is also meete to provide another army of two ships Another army of 400. tunnes apiece, and other foure of 200. tunnes, SM es‘{n}and foure pataches and a thousand souldiers, besides mariners.{n}The Indian Having seene and considered that the Englishmen with ^hened merchants ships onely that traverse these seas have with 4. ships made such havocke in two moneths, and that it is to bee ofwarre. thought that they will doe the like against the fleetes which goe and come from the Indies: it is expedient, that as by order in time of peace the fleete hath an Admirall and Viceadmirall, that now it should have two more at the least in eche Fleete: and neverthelesse they are to bee wafted home with an armie.{n}In mine opinion all these provisions ought to bee made onely in regard of the English army, and the rest of the ships which have bene set out of that kingdome.{n}But in case that Don Antonio should come with an armie, and should seeke to invade this kingdome, these provisions following would be needefull.{n}What pro- r ■ 5Hat warning be given to the Conde de Beneventa, to ^ma^lf^on the Marques de Soria, to the Conde of Altamira, Antonio should to the Conde of Monterey, to the Marquesse of Zerraluo, come with an and to the rest of the Lordes and Knights, which are to have order to bee in a readinesse, against hee come unto this kingdome.{n}That the people also be trained of the cities of Toro, Zamora, and Salamanca, to bee ready to succour the countrey betweene the rivers of Doro and Minno: and  the people of Estremadura and Sivilla are likewise to bee trained to be ready to succour the citie of Lisbon, and the countrey about the same.{n}Also that the castles of this citie, river and territorie be victualled and provided of gunpowder, match and lead, and all things else belonging to the artillerie, as I have An armie of recluested in the relations which I sent unto his majestie 14. gallies to the 7. of March of this present yeere 1585.{n}be provided. That the gallies be furnished for foure moneths: and{n}that sixe more bee brought from Spaine to this river of Lisbon with an hundred and twentie souldiers for ech gallie, that they may be devided among the eight gallies which remaine here.{n}And in case it fall out that the armie of the English goe not for the Indies, but occupie themselves upon this kingdome, (for there may be English ships, which may attend the one and the other) we shal be enforced to make another armie, besides that for the Indies, of twelve ships, foure pataches, and a thousand five hundred souldiers.{n}In mine opinion all this is meet for his majesties service to be foreseene to be made ready with great diligence and care, and to provide money needfull for the same, without neglecting the one or the other, but that all these things be done without delay : Referring my selfe in all things to those of wiser judgement. Written in Lisbon the 26 of October, 1585.{n}Another army of 12. great ships, 4 pataches, andi$oo souldiers.{n}