An excellent ruttier for the Islands of the West Indies, and for Tierra firma, and Nueva Espanna.{n}F a man depart from the barre of S. Lucar in Summer time, hee must steere Southwest until hee hath sight of Punta de Naga, which is in the Isle of Tenerif. The markes to know it be these. An high point sloping to the sea, & at the Easter point it hath two down falles{n}like particions, and they shew to be separated from the maine of the Island & stand in 28 degrees & a halfe. And if thou wilt have sight of the Grand Canaria, and findest thy selfe with Punta de Naga, thou shalt then steere Southwest and by South, and so thou shalt have sight of Canaria which standeth in 28 degrees. And thou must come to ankor on the Southeast side{n}280{n}of the Island. But I advise thee, if it be in winter time, that thou keepe another course, and that as followeth.{n}The course that a man must keepe departing in winter for the Indies from Sant Lucar.{n}DEparting from Sant Lucar in winter thou shalt goe West and by South keeping along the coast, because if thou goe farre from the coast, thou shalt meete with the wind off the sea untill thou be as high shot as Cape Cantin, which is a low flat cape with the sea. Cape Cantin. And thou shalt see a great wood before thou come at A great wood this cape, called Casa del Cavallero. And from thence before you thou shalt steere thy olde course, that is Southwest and by South for the Isles of Alegranza, and Lancerota; and ' when thou art North and South with Alegranza, thou shalt steere thence Southwest, and so thou shalt see the Canaria, which is a round high land, and standeth in twentie eight degrees.{n}What thou must doe if a contrary wind take thee fiftie leagues off the shore.{n}WHen thou art fifty leagues shot on thy way into the sea Southwest ofF, and there thou chance to meete with a contrary winde ofF the sea, and if it force thee to put roome, then thou shalt steere Northeast and by East, and shalt hall with sight of Cabos del Plata, which shew when thou art a seaboord so farre as thou mayest descrie them, to be like two points of white sand: and if it be cleere thou shalt see within the land certain high hilles lying Northwest and by West called las Sierras de Zahara, and being three leagues from land thou shalt have thirtie fadomes water, and sand: And from thence to the bay of Cadiz thou shalt goe along Northwest by the coast: and if thou be in thirtie or forty fadomes, thou shalt have oaze ; but if thou bee in lesse then thirtie fadomes, thou shalt have other sounding ; which if it chance, then thou art against S.{n}281{n}The bay of Cadiz.{n}San Pedro. Pedro. And if it bee by day thou shalt see the Ermi-San Sebastian. tage of gant Sebastian, which seemeth to be a shippe under sayle. And thou shalt goe into the bay taking{n}Los Puercos. heede of the Puercos, give them a good birth off. And if thou chance to bee benighted when thou fallest with the bay, and wouldest goe into the bay, thou shalt carie thy lead in thy hand, and be sounding: and finding thy selfe in rockie ground, thou shalt steere North because of shunning the Puercos: and yet give them not TheDiamant. too great a birth because of The Diamant, and so thou mayest goe in, sounding when thou thinkest good. And being benighted and then not East and West with the bay, and if thou doest not goe into it, then make the largest boord thou canst keeping off till day.{n}The Canaries.	If thou be at the Canaries and wouldest sayle to Nueva{n}Espanna, thou shalt sayle foure and twenty houres South because of the calmes of Fierro. And from thence thou shalt goe Westsouthwest, untill thou finde thy selfe in twenty degrees. And then thou must goe West and The Isle De- by South, which is the course for the Isle Deseada. And seada in the from Deseada thou shalt goe West and by North, be-Westcause of the variation of the compasse. And falling with * degrees of	Deseada, thou shalt finde it to rise low with the sea:{n}latitude.	and it standeth in 15 degrees. And the eastermost part{n}is the sharpest, and smaller then the West point.{n}And if thou art going for Tierra firma, thou shalt goe West and by South untill thou come to Dominica, and there on the Northwest side is a river, where thou Markes to	mayest water. The marks to know it bee a certaine{n}know Domi- high land full of hilles. And seeing it when thou art mca by. farre ogr to the	it maketh in the middest a{n}partition; so that a man would thinke it devided the Island in two parts. And this Island standeth in 14 degrees and a halfe.{n}I advise thee that if thou wouldest goe for Nueva Guadalupe.	Espanna, and so doest passe betweene Guadalupe and{n}Monserate.	Monserate to the Westward, that being thus open off{n}the entrance betwixt them thou shalt go Westnorthwest, 282{n}and so shalt have sight of Santa Cruz, which standeth Santa Cruz. in seventeene degrees and a halfe. And the markes to know it be these. It is an Island not very high, and lyeth East and West, and at the East end it is lower then at the West end.{n}And going forward on thy course thou shalt runne Westnorthwest, and so thou shalt goe to have sight of the Isle of San Juan de Puerto rico, which is an Island S. Juan de lying East and West, and standeth in eighteene degrees. P^to rico. And the markes be these. That on the West end it is lowest, and the Eastermost is the highest. And if thou fall with the middest of the Island, then thou shalt goe a long it to the West unto Cabo Roxo, which is Cape Roxo. the end of the Isle. And from thence the coast runneth  North to Punta Aguada. Cape Roxo hath certaine red cliffes. Thou must steere West and by South from Cape Roxo to find Mona, and so thou shalt have sight of Mona. Mona. And the marks thereof be these, it is a low land lying East and West: and on the East end it is highest, it hath a slope towards the sea, and standeth in 18. degrees, rather lesse then more. And if it be by day, then thou shalt runne West and shalt see Saona: Saona. which is an Island lying without Hispaniola, and lyeth East and West, and is full of trees ; and hath certaine sandy bayes. And if it bee cleere weather thou shalt see within the land of Hispaniola certaine hie hils called las Sierras de Yguey. And being benighted upon Mona, Las Sierras de then thou shalt steere West and by South, because of certaine shoalds that lye ofF Saona: but having day light and no sight of land, thou shalt loofe up Northwest and so passe by it, and as thou goest along the coast of Hispaniola, and seest the sea to be cast up into the aire, then thou shalt be about 10 leagues ofF the harbour of Santo Domingo, and these mountings up are called{n}The Spoutes.	ar The spoutes.{n}But I advise thee, that if thou bee benighted when Santo thou fallest with Santo Domingo, then thou must keepe Domingo. the hils called Sierras de las minas viejas to the North-{n}283{n}Puerto Hermosa.{n}west. And if thou wouldest goe into Santo Domingo, and meetest there with a forcible Northerly wind, then the best way is to runne East till it be day. And having daylight thou shalt cast about, and so thou must ply to wind-ward untill the Northerly wind be done: and when it is past, make all the saile thou canst to hale with the sight of Calle de las J Damas: and when thou hast sight thereof thou shalt lye with thy stemme with a sandie Bay, which lyeth on the other side: and thou must take in thy maine saile, and go so till thou bring thy selfe open with the midst of the river; and so having opened the river, thou must go with great care in the middest of the same, with all thy sailes up, except thy maine saile, and thou must have thy boat out, if it be needefull to sound or to tow thy ship, if she cast too much to the loofe, for the currents will cast here to the loofe: wherefore bee sure to have thy boat out to helpe thy steerage: and this is the way whereby thou must worke.{n}The course from Santo Domingo to go for Nueva Espanna.{n}I Advise thee that if thou wilt goe from Santo Domingo for Nueva Espanna, thou shalt goe Southwest and by South, and so thou shalt have sight of Punta de Nizao, which is a low point, and is the end of the hilles called Sierras de las minas Viejas, and towards the Northwest of them thou shalt see a lowe land, and to goe into Hocoa thou shalt stirre from this poynt of Nizao Westnorthwest, and thou shalt see the point of Puerto Hermoso, and the Bay that it maketh: and thou must be sure to keepe neere the shore to find a good road, and feare not to go neere the land: for all is deepe water, and cleare ground, and let not fall thine anker til thou be past all the rivers; and beware of the land, for if thou ride much without, thy anker wil come home, because it is rocky and flatte ground. And thou must be ready, that when thine anker commeth home, 284{n}thou have thy moarings readie in thy boat to carry on shore with foure or five men, and if thou thinke good, thou mayest let them fall on land with a rope. And when thou art come to’ anker thou mayest send on shore to moare, so shalt thou be best moared.{n}The course from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna.{n}GOing from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna thou shalt stirre Southwest: and this way thou shalt find the{n}Isles Beata, and Alto velo: Beata hath these marks: Beata, and the It is a low land with the sea, and full of trees: and mar^s ^of-on the East side an high land or cliffe; and Alto velo Alto velo, and hath these markes. A blacke round land, and the Easter- ma^s most part thereof is highest, and it hath a downefall.{n}When thou art North and South with * then thou shalt go West, untill thou be so farre shot as the Frailes: and from thence goe West and by North, Frailes. and keeping this course thou shalt have sight of Cape Tiburon. And if by keeping this course thou have sight of a little Island, thou mayest make account it is the Isle of Baque: and it is hard to the land, and The Isle of from thence thou shalt go West, keeping thy selfe out untill thou double a poynt that maketh as it were a great Bay, and then thou must go West and by North, till thou come to Cape Tiburon, that hath a round blacke Cape de land, and in some part thereof certaine white cliffes. Tiburon.{n}I advise thee that when thou art against Cape de Tiburon, thou stirre Northwest, and so thou shalt have sight of Cuba, which lyeth East and West: and thou Cuba. shalt see certaine hilles which are called Sierras del Cobre, and in the highest of them is the harbour of S. Iago de S. Iago de Cuba: and finding thy selfe so, thou mayest runne West unto Cape de Cruz. And before thou seest Cape de{n}Sierras de Tarquino. {n}selfe. And if thou chance to have the water troubled, as though thy ship did raise up the sand from the 285{n}Cruz thou shalt see the hils called Sierras de Tarquino, and from these hils to Cape de Cruz the land waxeth lower and lower, and it is lowest of all at the Cape it{n}Cape de Cruz in 19, deg. and better.{n}Los Jardines.{n}The Isle de Pinos.{n}Cape de Corrientes. Cape de Sant Anton in 22. degrees.{n}ground, be not afraid: for this place is called The nine fathoms: for thou shalt find no lesse water upon it, and it is the shallowest water that thou shalt have.{n}Thou must marke that Cape de Cruz maketh an ende of the coast that commeth from the East to the West, and beginneth the course that goeth North and South, and standeth in 19. degrees, rather more then lesse.{n}From Cape de Cruz thou must stirre Westnorthwest: and this way thou shalt have sight of the Isle de Pinos, and if thou have faire weather, then thou must goe Northwest, and by West, because of the currents that will set thee out to sea. And keeping this course thou shalt have sight of an high land. I tell thee it is the marke of the Isles called los Jardines, and is commonly called the land of Zagueio: and then thou shalt goe West and by South: and if it bee by night, then goe Westsouthwest untill thou have brought thy selfe out from The Jardines. And being by day thou shalt keepe off the land, and shalt goe Westnorthwest, and so thou shalt see the Isle de Pinos.{n}The markes to know the Cape de Santo Antonio.{n}THe headland called Capo de Santo Antonio is a lowe land, and full of trees, and upon the Cape it selfe it hath two or three thicke woods, and the coast lyeth Northwest and Southeast. And thou must also take good heed that thou have sight on the same coast of a white sandie Bay; and it is on the same coast that lyeth Northwest and Southeast. And these be the markes from Punta de las Arenas, or The poynt of the sands, to the Cape of Saint Anthonie, and from the Cape de Corrientes to Punta de las Arenas thou shalt have a great Bay, being so long, that if thou be not very neere the shore thou canst not see land, it is so low. And if thou see not the land well, it will shew to be a tuft of trees. And the Cape of S. Anthony standeth in 22. degrees.{n}286{n}A ruttier that a man must keepe from Dominica to Martinino, and so to Tierra firma.{n}I Advise thee that going from Martinino or Dominica, if thou wouldest goe for Margarita, that thou stirre South and by West, because of the great currents that goe here, and set Northwest. And by this course thou shalt find the Testigos, which be 4 or 5 Islands: and The Testigos. if thou wilt not goe so much to windward, then thou shalt see Frailes, which bee three small Islands. And Frailes. if thou wilt goe into the harbour of Manpater, it is presently in doubling of the point on the East side to the Southward. And being minded to go for puerto de Puerto de Juan Griego, which lieth on the Northside, then go Juan G™?.0-neere the land, and along the coast of the West, and presently thou shalt have sight of puerto de Juan Griego;{n}it standeth in 11. degrees.{n}I advise thee that going from Matalino, which standeth in 13. degrees, if thou wouldest goe to Cartagena, thou shalt goe West and by South, and by this way thou shalt have sight of the Isles of Curazao and Aruba, Curasao. which stand in 12. degrees: from these Islands thou Aruba-shalt go West; and when thou art North and South with Monjes, thou shalt see them to be three little Monjes three white Hands, and they are white because of the multitude an^s‘ of birds that are there: they stand in a triangle. From thence thou shalt goe West, if it be by day, and so shalt have sight of Coquebacoa that standeth in 12. Coquebacoa. degrees. And being by night, then goe Northwest: and by day thou shalt cast to goe for the land againe Westsouthwest. Coquebacoa hath a certaine poynt not very high, and within this poynt thou shalt see in the inland certain hilles which bee called las Sierras de Avite.{n}Going from this poynt of Coquebacoa thou shalt run West, and shalt run along the coast, and shalt go to have the sight of Baya honda and Portete, which is a low honda. land even with the sea.	Portete.{n}287{n}Rio de Palominos.{n}Morn her-moso. Rio grande.{n}Isla de Arenas. Samba or hamba.{n}The Cape de la Vela lieth with a redde shewe not very high; and without this Cape about a league there is a little coppled rocke. A man may be bold to go betwixt this rocke and the maine.{n}And going from this Cape to have sight of Cape del Aguja thou must stirre Southwest, and thou shalt have sight of the Ancones which lye at the ende of the hilles called Sierras Nevadas. And then presently thou shalt see the Cape del Aguja: the marks whereof are these: It is a low Cape, and upon it is a coppie not very high, and there beginneth the high land of the Sierras Nevadas, or snowy mountaines.{n}Take this for a warning that if thou goe for Cape de la Vela by night by the course abovesayd, and commest into a whitish water, then sound and thou shalt find 40. fathoms, and thy sound will be certaine smal sandy white oaze, and some smal weeds. And then thou mayest make account that thou art North and South with the river called Rio de Palominos, which commeth out of the midst of the Sierras Nevadas. And being benighted thou shalt go Westnorthwest, or West and by North until day: and being day then thou mayest hale in with sight of the land Southwest, because thou mayest be sure to come right in with it.{n}If thou goe from Cape del Aguja for Cartagena, if it bee by day, thou shalt goe West and by South, and shalt goe to have sight of Morro Hermoso, that is The faire mountaine, which lyeth to the Westward of Rio grande. And being alone, and with a good ship of saile, and drawing towards night, then thou must come to anker behind Morro hermoso: and after the first watch thou must set saile, and go out West and by North, because thou must be sure to keep a seaboord from the Island de Arenas, which lyeth 2 leagues to seaward right against Samba.{n}And if thou goe from Cape del Aguja by night, thou shalt goe West and by North : and so thou shalt goe without the force of the water of Rio Grande. And 288{n}being by day thou shalt goe along the coast, and shalt see Morro hermoso, which, as I have sayd, lyeth to the West of Rio Grande, and hath for markes, a face of a blacke land not very hie, and it is round. And if thou depart by day from Morro hermoso, thou must goe West, and must take heede,as I sayde before, of the Isle de Arenas, which lyeth North and South of Samba. Samba hath for a marke as it were a gallie towed. And going this way by day, thou shalt see El buio del Gato, which is an high El Buio <kl land with certaine white cliffes to the seaward : and also Gat0‘ more to the West thou shalt see the poynt called Punta Punta de la de la Canoa, which is a low land even with the water : cmoa' and there endeth the coast which lyeth East and West.{n}And the Bay that goeth to Cartagena beginneth here, Cartagena. and lyeth Northeast and Southwest.{n}And take this for a warning, that if thou be benighted against Samba, thou shalt take in thy sailes, & lye off to the offward until midnight without any saile abroad until midnight: and from midnight forward thou shalt lye so into the land without sayle : and if in the breake of day thou see no land, then goe Southwest, and if this way thou have sight of certaine white cliffes, make account it is Buio del Gato. Take this for a warning, if thy ship bee great come not nigh the land in the Bay: I meane thou mayest not with a great ship come nigh the land from the poynt de la Canoa untill thou come to Cartagena, because in many places there are not above 3 or 4 fathoms at the most. In all this Bay there is no hie land but the Gallie, which is right over the harbour of Cartagena.{n}And if it chance that any man come for this place that The land never was here before, then let him looke for a little °f hill like a towed gallie lying East and West, and all Carta&na-the land is low, and seemeth to be full of trees. Having these sights, then make account thou art against Cartagena, and to goe in thou hast nothing to be afraid of: but keepe thyselfe hard aboord the poynt The poynt of of Ycacos : and then when thou commest to double the Acatos.{n}x	289	T{n}A shoald halfe a league to the sea.{n}The Isle of Cares.{n}Sal Medina.{n}Cabeza de Cativa.{n}Rio de{n}Francisco.{n}The Isles of Cativa.{n}Punta de Samblas.{n}Sierras de{n}Santa Cruz.{n} poynt del Judeo, give a breadth ofF, because there is a shoald.{n}I advise thee that if thou be benighted, when thou art at The poynt de la canoa, and wouldest enter into Cartagena by night, that thou take good heede of a shoald that lyeth halfe a league to the sea, and so thou shalt goe in 8 fathoms, and sandie ground. And when thou findest thy selfe in deepe water, as in 30 fathoms and more, then the harbour will bee open before thee. And if thou have any fresh Northerne winds, then loofe up to the seaward, and lye with thy stemme Eastsoutheast, and so thou mayest goe in East through the middest of the chanell: and though it bee by night, yet thou mayest goe in safely, because it is all cleere. And if the night be cleere thou shalt have sight of the Island called Cares, and it is an high land.{n}Comming from Cartagena to goe for Nombre de Dios in the time of the Northerne winds, thou must bring thy selfe to the offward of Sal medina: and thence stirre West till thou bring thy selfe North and South with Cabeza de Cativa; and then goe Southwest and by West, and thou shalt so fall with Rio de Francisco. It hath for markes a certaine land not very high, and within the land certaine high hils lying East and West. And on the West of the river of Francisco thou shalt see certaine cliffes that bee sixe leagues from Nombre de Dios, inclining toward the sea.{n}I advise thee that going this course above written ; if thou see 3 or 4 Isles lying lowe with the sea, and also lying East and West, thou mayest make account that they be the Islands de Cativa, and then runne West, and so thou shalt go along the coast. And if thou see by this way a poynt of low land, make account it is Punta de Samblas : and upon it thou shalt see a row of hie rockie hils, and they be the mountaines of Santa Cruz.{n}If thou come from Cartagena to go to Nombre de Dios in the time of the sea winds, when thou art out from Sal Medina, thou shalt goe West and by North, that thou 290{n}mayest have sea-roome, and take the Brisas or Northerne winds when they come : and goe till thou be North and South with the harbour of Nombre de Dios: and from thence goe Southwest, and if by this way thou see a row of high hils on a coast that lyeth Northeast and Southwest, make account they are Sierras de las minas Sierras de las Viejas, which minas Viejas lie North and South with the minas vteJas-harbour of Velo alto. Having kept this course abovesaid, Puerto de and having sight of the former marke, thou mayest a^0' account that thou art on the West side of Nombre de Nombre de Dios.	Dios-{n}Furthermore when thou hast sight of an high land, and thou bee North and South with it, and in the toppe thereof thou seest as it were a litle table, if it be highest toward the East, then make account that thou art North and South with Nombre de Dios, I say, with the harbour of Nombre de Dios, and this hill is called Sierra de Sierra de Capira. And if thou wilt goe into the harbour, thou must keepe thy prow right against this hill, and comming neerer to the shore, thou shalt see a ledge of rockes, and °f it is without, and thou mayest goe in what depth thou rocks-thinkest good, or at which place thou findest most water in. And to the West of the harbor thou shalt see two or isla de hs three Islands called Islas de los Bastimentos.	Bastimentos.{n}Take this for a warning, if thou come out of Nombre Tbe course to de Dios in the time of the Brisas or Northerne winds, and wouldest goe for Cartagena, thou shalt come out in the DioS to morning, and shalt go Northnorthwest untill 3 of the Cartagena. clocke at afternoone, and then cast about to the land, untill thou be hard aboord the shore, and so thou must go turning untill thou hast doubled Cabeza de Cativa: and having doubled it then ply to windward all that thou mayest: and if thou be Eastnortheast off it, then thou shalt have sight of the Hands of Baru, which are 3 or 4 Islands Islas de Baru. lying low, and are all full of trees: and then presently thou shalt have sight of the gallie that is over Cartagena, and it is like a gallie towed.{n}I advise thee, that if thou come for Cartagena in the{n}291{n}time abovesayde, and commest from Cabeza de Cativa, if the wind will not suffer thee to lye but West, then going thus if thou seest a great high Island full of mountaines, and on the North side thereof thou see a ledge of rocks two leagues into the sea, thou mayest be Islafuerte. sure it is Isla fuerte : but if thou see not the rocks, give them a good breadth : and if thou wilt come to nc s' anker, thou mayest ride well on the West side of them, betwixt the maine and them in fifteene fathomes; and the sounding is clay. And if thou wilt go betweene this and Islas de San the Islands of Saint Barnardo to goe into Cartagena, thou Bat nardo. mayest gOe safely. And if any man aske thee how thou knowest the Islands of Baru and San Barnardo, thou mayest answere truely, that the Isles of San Barnardo are full of high hilles, and certaine sandie bayes to seaward; and the sayd Isles have a good depth two or three leagues La Bacilla, to the sea : and this depth is called the Bacilla. And{n}these are all the markes for the Islandes of San Barnardo. And touching the Isles of Baru, they bee 3 or 4 little Islands and very even with the sea, and full of trees, and there is no good depth about them, but hard aboord them.{n}The shoalds ofSerrana.{n}Seranilla.{n}A ruttier from Cartagena to Havana in Cuba.{n}COmming from Cartagena to goe to Havana, thou must goe Northnorthwest untill thou be in foure-teene degrees : and then forwardes thou shalt goe with great care to anker every night, and when it is day set sayle. And this is to bee done in this place because of the shoalds of Serrana: and so thou mayest proceede with a care to anker when thou commest about Seranilla, or neere to it, which is in fifteene degrees and a halfe. And upon it thou shalt see a lowe flatte land lying Northeast and Southwest: and the sea beateth upon it round about, except that on the Southeast part it hath certaine shelves of sand, and on the West side it hath a certain litle coppie, which from sea seemeth to bee a shippe under sayle: and 292{n}being Northeast and Southwest off it, scant a league from the shoald commeth out on the West side a certayne shoald, whereupon the sea doth alwayes beate.{n}I advise thee that if thou canst not passe on the West side, then thou must goe betwixt the sayd little coppie that it is like a sayle and the shoald: for the passage is good. But if thou depart from the Serranilla to the Northwest, and seest a lowe land with the sea, and certaine white sandy bayes, and on the West side seest a low land, and on the Eastside a little coast lying East and West, thou mayest make account it is Cape de Corrientes.{n}And if thou goe from Cape de Corrientes for Cape de Santo Antonio, thou must goe Westnorthwest, and so thou shalt goe with the Cape. The marks be a low land full of trees with certaine white sandie bayes : and upon the Cape it selfe thou shalt see two thicke groves of great trees, and they be upon the Cape it selfe.{n}To go from the Cape de Sant Antonio for Havana in the time of the North winds, thou shalt goe Northwest untill thou be cleere of all the shoalds of the Cape, and then hale thy bowlines, and go as neere the wind as thou canst possibly, untill thou bring thy selfe unto 24. degrees, and there sound, and thou shalt find it the Tortugas, and thy sounding will be white sand.{n}Thou must take heede what is said in the Chapter before: for he that writ the same hath seene it, and bene witnesse to this: that comming from Seranilla, and stirring North and by East he had sight of an Island standing in 16. degrees, and it is on the shoalds of Cape de Camaron. And from thence, if thou have the wind large, goe Northeast and by East, because of the variation of the compasse, and thou shalt make thy way Eastnortheast, and thou shalt fall with Isla de Pinos. This I say, because the currents set sometime West: and so it fell out to bee true in March, Anno Domini 1582. I tell thee farther, that wee came out from this aforesayd Isle stirring North 293{n}Cafe de Corrientes.{n}Cape de San Antonio.{n}The Tortugas.{n}Seranilla.{n}An Island in 16. degrees. Baxos de Cabo de Camaron.{n}The variation of the compasse.{n}Isla de Pinos. The currents set here sometimes West.{n}The latitude of Cozumel in 19. deg. and one tierce.{n}Las Tortugas.{n}The little Isle called Vermeja. Marks of Villa Rica.{n}and by East, for the wind would not suffer us to lye neerer the East, and one evening at Sunne going downe we fell with a land, that had the same markes to our judgement with the Cape de Corrientes: and because night was at hand, we wrought to double Cape de Sant Antonio, stirring West: and about midnight we had land all high right a head, & the coast lying Southwest: and then we cast and lay Northeast till day: And being day, wee saw the land all a head, and we plied to windward to the East, and kept it a larboord till we had brought it Southwest. And to be short, we went here on land in the same place that we first fell with in the evening before: and it was an Island called Cozumel, lying on the coast of Yucatan. And this Island was the land which we saw first, seeming by the marks to be the Cape de Corrientes. Wee came to an anker about the middest of the Island, rather to the Norther then the Souther part: there we found a towne of Indians, who gave us all things which we needed for our money: and wee carried our Astrolabs on shore and tooke the height in 19. degrees and one tierce. A man may goe betweene this Island and the coast of Yucatan, and the Cape de Catoche at pleasure Northeast; and the water wil set in thy favour: and thou must go till thou be in 24. degrees, and so thou shalt have the sounding of the Tortugas. The course to be kept from the Cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna.{n}IF thou goe from the Cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna, and beeing late, thou shalt stirre Westnorthwest till thou be in the height of 24. degrees: and from thence thou shalt stirre something to the West, until thou bring thy selfe North and South with the litle Hand called Vermeja: and when thou art so, thou shalt go Southwest, & by this way thou shalt find Villa Rica, which is in 19 degrees & a halfe, and the signes be these. Thou shalt find a 294{n}ledge of high hils lying Northeast and Southwest. But if thou chance to fall with a coast that lyeth North and South, then thou mayest account, that it is about the low ground of Almeria which hath these markes. Th It is a land not very high, and it is full of little coppies. And if thou have cleare weather, thou shalt see within the land certaine high hils which are called the hils of Papalo.{n}And I advise thee that beeing so farre shotte as the poynt called Punta delgada, which is the ende of all those hilles of Villa Rica, thou mayest stirre thence South and by West, and thou shalt goe along the coast, and shalt see a lowe land, and with this land thou shalt fall, going for Saint Paul, and being so farre shotte as Saint Paul, if thou wilt goe into the harbour, thou must stirre Southwest: and this is the course that thou must keepe being shotte into the Bay. And thou shalt goe along the coast of the lowe land in sight thereof: and keeping this course thou shalt see on the other side a blacke hill, and it is called Monte de Carneros. Take this for a note, that it lyeth over the house of Buytron: and as thou doest come neerer to the poynt of rockes, thou must bee sure to keepe thy lead going, and shalt have foure fathomes and a halfe or five fathomes, and so thou mayest goe through the middest of the chanell. And comming against the castle, thou shalt give it some breadth off towards the Arrecife or rocke: and having doubled the castle, thou shalt goe from thence and shalt bring thy selfe to an anker hard by the Herreria, which is a cleane Bay, and thou shalt ride against the hospitali.{n}I advise thee that if thou be benighted when thou art neere to S. Paul, and meetest with a Northerly wind after midnight, that then thy best way is to bring thy selfe into thy coarses, and lye by, plying to windward, and to seaward in 20. fathomes which depth thou shalt have neere the shore, to the Northward: and being day, then goe in with the harbour as thou canst best, observing what is abovesaid.{n}295{n}Las Sierras de Papalo.{n}Saint Paul.{n}Monte de Carneros.{n}Casa de Buytron.{n}The castle of S. Juan de Ullua.{n}The hospitali.{n}And I advise thee that if thou come from Villa Rica, and findest thy selfe in 20. degrees and a halfe, and seest no land, and seest that the water doth alter,  thou shalt sound 60. fathomes water: and if in this depth thou hast oaze, make account thou art East The river of anJ West with the river of Almeria. This course is mena. from the Cape of Santo Antonio to Nueva Espanna without or aseaboord the Alacranes or Scorpions.{n}Now followeth how to worke, if a man come betwixt the Alacranes and the maine.{n}IF thou goe from the Cape de Santo Antonio and wouldest goe for Nueva Espanna within the Alacranes or Alacranes, thou must stirre West and by South, and Scorpions.	wa^ thou shalt bring thy selfe in 20. fathoms;{n}and if thou keeping this course findest lesse water, then go West and by North, and that way thou shalt bring thy selfe into 20. fathomes againe, untill thou have brought thy selfe North, and South with the The triangle, triangle. And being North and South with the triangle, Surta or	then thou shalt be also North and South with Surta:{n}Zarza. from thence thou shalt go Southwest: and by this The high hils course thou shalt have sight of the high hils of S. ofS. Martin. Martin, which are certaine high hils lying Northwest and Southeast, and they have a partition in the midst, and to the Northwest they be highest: and on the Southeast part within the land, thou shalt see something an high land, called Pan de Minsapa, that is, the loafe of Minsapa, which is a round loafe not very high.{n}The hils of S. Martin stand in 18. degrees lesse one fift part.{n}I advise thee that when thou fallest with Saint Martin, and wouldest go with Saint John de Ullua, then thou shalt goe Westnorthwest: and this is the course that thou must keepe, if thou bee farre ofF at sea, I meane so ferre ofF as thou mayest well descrie the hils of S. Martin.{n}296{n}But if thou be neere to the land, then thou must goe Northwest and by West, and thou shalt so come along the coast, and thou shalt find the coast to bee low land: and comming this course thou shalt have sight of certaine little hilles not very high: then thou shalt fall with the poynt called Punta de Antoni Serro: and these hilles lye over the river of Medelin. And if when thou art East and West, with The Volcan or hill that casteth out fire, any man doe aske thee, where the harbour of Sant Juan de Ullua is, thou mayest truely answere, West and by South, and it standeth in 18. degrees and a halfe.{n}The course to be kept from Nueva Espanna to the maine of Spaine in Europe.{n}COmming from S. Juan de Ullua to goe for Spaine, thou shalt stirre Northeast untill thou be in 24. degrees: and so beeing thou shalt goe East untill thou bring thy selfe in the soundings of the Tortugas, and thy ground wil be white sand. I advise thee, that if it be by night, thou goe East; and finding the water to waxe shoalder, then goe Southwest, with a care to keepe thy lead going, untill thou loose ground, and come into great depth, because thou mayest fall to the North of the Tortugas. And going from this sound for Havana thou must stirre Southsoutheast, because of the currents that carrie thee to the East. And if by this way thou have sight of an hie land, that seemeth to be like a loafe, make account it is the loafe of Cabanas. And to the East of this loafe thou shalt see a land that hath a plaine. It sheweth to be low, even with the sea, and as smooth as the sea: and from this land to the East the land is lower and lower. And from thence to Havana thou must goe East. And if the wind will not let thee go that course, thou must turne up till thou be upon the harbour of Havana.{n}The marks of the poynt of Havana be these, that on the East side it hath an hie blacke land, which is sloping 297{n}Rio de Medelin.{n}S. Juan de Ullua in 18. deg. and a halfe.{n}The Tortugas.{n}The currents to the East.{n}Pan de Cabanas.{n}Havana.{n}The sholds of Mimbres, that is, ofOsiars.{n}The chattel! reachethtozi. degrees.{n}to the sea, with a litle white tower on the top thereof: and as thou goest into the port, thou must keepe neere the high blacke land, and when thou art hard to it, strike thy toppe sayles in signe of peace to the castle, least it shoote at thee.{n}What course the Spaniards keepe from Havana to Spaine.{n}IF from Havana thou wouldest set thy course for Spaine, thou must goe Northeast, and shalt so have sight of the Martyres, which stand in 24. degrees and a halfe. And the coast lieth East and West. The marks be these, it sheweth like heads of trees, and in some places certaine rocks with white sandy bayes. And if the wind be large, thou mayest go East and by South untill thou see the coast to lye Northeast and Southwest: and if the wind be scant, then go turning up: and take good heed that every evening at Sunne going downe thou have sight of the land, and so thou must do being in the chanell, untill thou bring thy selfe into the middest of the chanell: and thou must lye off from the going downe of the sunne, untill the ende of the first watch with thy coarses alone, without any more sayle; and from midnight forwards cast about, and lye the other way with the like sayle untill day: and thus thou must doe untill thou bring thy selfe into the chanel. And if being in the Chanel thou finde the winde large, thou shalt stirre Northeast, with a care to goe cleane off the sholds of the Mimbres or the Osiars. And if being in the Chanel thou meete with the wind at North, then thou must turne with a litle saile 4. glasses one way, and 4. another, as thou thinkest good. And if thou canst not beare sayle, then thou mayest goe with all thy sayles downe, except when thou wouldest cast about, thou mayest loose some small sayle to winde thy ship.{n}I advise thee, that when thou art come out of the Chanel, thou shalt be in 28. degrees. And if it be 298{n}in summer, thou shalt goe Northeast untill thou be in 39. degrees and J, which is the height of Flores: and thou shalt goe to the Northward of Bermuda. And if La Bermuda. thou thinke good to go in more degrees, to have the seawinds, thou shalt goe by the same height, as I have sayd: and if thou shalt finde the winde off the sea, thou hast no neede to goe in more heights: and from thence thou shalt goe East and by South: and thou must goe thus because of the variation of the Compasse. The variation And thus thou shalt find the isles of Flores and Cuervo, °ft,u which stand in 39. degrees J, and in 40. large. These ' markes be these.*{n}Thou mayest goe from betwixt Flores and Cuervo, Flores and and must goe East Southeast, and so thou shalt have Cuerv0-sight of the Island of Sayles, which is the Island of S. Saint George. George. And beeing at the land thou shalt goe along it, and when thou hast doubled a certaine litle Headland that lyeth in the East poynt, then thou shalt stirre East and by North, and East. And thus going, thou shalt have sight of Terzera, which is in 39. degrees. The Terzera. markes bee these.* And behinde a certaine blacke land something high, which is called el Brasil, standeth the Citie called Angra. Going from Terzera, thou shalt runne East Northeast, untill thou bring thy selfe Northwest, and Southeast with the Cape of Saint Vincent. The Cape of And thou mayest worke thus being in summer: for s-Vincent-alwayes thou shalt have the windes at Northwest. And beeing Northwest and Southeast with this Cape, thou shalt stirre Southeast and by East, and thou shalt so fall with the land 6. or 7. leagues to the windward off the The windes Cape on the coast, which lyeth North and South : then thou shalt goe along the coast to the South, untill thou ,1.{n}see the Cape. And the Cape standeth in 37. degrees: Themarkes of the markes be these. It is a Cape not very hie, and is CapeS. blacke, sloping to the sea.	And from	thence thou	shalt	Vincent.{n}double the Asagresal Southeast: and	so running,	thou{n}shalt then goe East unto	the Cape	of S. Mary:	and	Thfcape of{n}from this Cape goe East	Northeast,	and so thou	shalt	Saint Mary.{n}299{n}The course in winter from the chanel of Bahama.{n}The variation of the Compasse. Many lost upon Bermuda by negligence.{n}The Isle of S. Marie.{n}Faial.{n}The barre of S. Lucar.{n}Sierras de Monchico.{n}runne to have sight of Arenas Gordas: and then thou shalt see presently a little hill towardes the East which is called Cabeza de Pedro Garcia. And if thou be benighted, and comming into 8. or 9. fathoms, then I wish thee to come to anchor, untill it be day, and then call for a Pilote, that may by some meanes carie thee into harbour.{n}I advise thee, if in the Winter time thou bee shot out of the narrowest of the Chanel of Bahama, and wouldest goe for Spaine, that thou must goe East Northeast, untill thou be in 30. degrees rather lesse then more; and then thou mayest goe East and by South, because of the variation of the Compasse. And stirring hence East Southeast, thou shalt goe on the Southside of Bermuda: and must goe with great care, because many have bene lost heere about this Island, because of their negligence. And when thou art sure thou art past this Island, then goe East Northeast, untill thou bee in the height of seven and thirtie degrees: which is in the height of the Island of Saint Marie. And going thus, and not seeing Land, but seeing the Sea to breake, make account it is the rocks called las Hormigas. And if thou thinke good to goe to Faial, thou shalt goe till thou be in 38. degrees scant, and then thou shalt goe East, and so shalt have sight of Faial. The markes of it be these.*{n}Comming out from Faial, and leaving all the Islandes, then all goe East and by South untill thou bring thy selfe in 37. degrees, which is the height of Cape Saint Vincent: and then goe East, and thou shalt see the Cape having the markes aforesayd. And from Cape S. Vincent thou must goe East Southeast, till thou be Northeast, and Southwest, with the barre of S. Lucar: and then goe Northeast for the Barre.{n}Take this for a warning, that if going in 37. degrees thou have not sight of Cape S. Vincent, and hast sight of certaine hie hils, make accompt they are Sierras de Monchico.{n}300{n}I advise thee, that if thou stand in feare of men of To avoyde warre about the Cape of S. Vincent, then goe in 36 men tf^arre. degrees |. And finding thy selfe within the Cape, if thou see many signes of greene weedes, then cast about to the North Northeast, and by this way finding land, and the same shewing white, be sure it is the castle of The castle of Aimonte.	Aimmte'{n}A ruttier for the old Chanel from the East point of  Cuba by the North side thereof to Havana.{n}GOing from the Cape of S. Nicolas, thou shalt goe The cape of North Northwest, but thou must keepe to windward off- the poynt, that thou mayest weather it, & it is called the poynt of Mayaci: and it is a very low land Punta de and smooth: and above up within the land about a Mayaci. league it hath a long Hill, which is not very high but flat. And from that poynt to Baracoa is 7. leagues.{n}And being disposed to goe into Baracoa, keepe the Baracoa. weather-shore all along, untill thou open the Harbour.{n}And to knowe if thou bee open of the Harbour, looke upon the South side; and thou shalt see an Hill by it selfe, which maketh as it were a crowne upon it. And if thou come along, it maketh as it were a Fort with Ports about it: And this is the marke if thou come out of the Sea. And this Hill is North and South of the Harbour, over the Harbour of Baracoa. And if thou wilt goe in, thou must take heede of a Shoald which Asholdonthe lyeth on the East side, and thou must keepe the West East side °f side: and goe not much from the Shoald, because the Baracoa-foote of the Shoald that shooteth Westward hath 5. fathoms water. And when thou art within the Shoalds, thou must goe a litle within them, and then let fall an anchor: and looke that thou come not much on the East side, for it is shoaldie.{n}And comming out from Baracoa, being to passe through the old chanel, you shal set your course Northwest until you come with the Cayo de Moa, or Cayo de Moa. the shoald of Moa, untill you thinke you are Northeast{n}301{n}This worde Cayo in the Biskayne tongue signi-fieth a flat or a shoald.{n}Pracellas.{n}The Mosowes.{n}Camoloquea.{n}The Flats of Mee ala to be avoyded.{n}Cropeda a flat Island.{n}z. Rockes of stone.{n}Punta de Caucus. Matanzas.{n}and Southwest with it, or till you thinke you are gone 12. leagues: and you shal know that you are upon Cayo de Moa. For before you come at it by 2. leagues or more, you shall understand that it hath a poynt of lowe land, and upon the poynt it hath a Palme tree; which tree you shall see alwayes, before you see the point: and it is like a sayle. From thence to the Pracellas or Flats you shall stirre Northwest two parts of your way, that you have to runne from Cayo de Moa to the sayd Pracellas or Flats, and the one halfe part of the way North Northwest and by West. And this way you shall see the Pracellas or Flats in a cleane place of the shoald above the water, for all the breach of the sea. The Mosowes bee from the Pracell West, and you shall leave them to windward.{n}And if you will goe with the Pracellas or Flats, you shall finde 4. or 5. fathomes: and you may goe sure without danger a Northwest course untill you come in 7. fathomes. And if you will goe upon the Shoald, you shall goe upon that depth, untill you have runne 40. or 45. leagues: And from thence you shall set your course Southwest, till you see the Flattes of the maine land. You shall then see to the Westward a rocke divided into 3. partes, which is called the Camo-loquea. And looke that when you come from the Pracellas Southwest, you have certaine Flats before you: take heede of them that you fall not by night with them by foure leagues, for feare of the Mecala: and you shall set your course West Northwest untill day: and when it is day, you must beare close aboord the shore, and then you shall see a flat Island with many broken sands, which is called Cropeda, and lyeth but a little out of the trade way, somewhat to the Northward. Off that you shall see 2. Rocks of stone, which are the poynt of all the Flats: And two leagues from them on the mayne land you shall see a poynt which sheweth like broken land. This is called the poynt of Caucus. And from that poynt to Matanzas{n}302{n}on the Northside of Cuba are 12. leagues, and your course lieth West and by North: and then you must borrow upon the land all that you can, because of the currents: for the currents will cary you into the Chanell. And being at Matanzas, you must runne all along the shore, because of the currents. Remember that when The currents. you see one league before you a Rocke, and a Shoald, that hath upon it but 2. fathomes water; and your marke if you come out of the sea is an Hill, and the Hil is not very hie, it standeth East and West, and upon it are some little risings and they are not very high, and upon these risings stand two round homocks close together, you shall see the Teates of Havana. The Teates of{n}To know along the shore when you are against the ^avana-Harbour of Xaroca, the markes are these. A little to The harbour the Westward one league, you shall see along the shore °fXanca-a Hill that is broken, and that broken Hill is over the Harbour of Xaroca: and then a little more to the Westward a league, there is another broken Hill. And you shall see that North and South from these broken hils is a Flat off. And from that to Havana is 7. leagues: and it is all cleane ground, and you may goe along the shore till you come to Havana. To know Markes to the harbour of Havana, you shall see before you come ttie -at it one litle rocke ot stone not very hie, and smooth Havana. toward the sea: upon the rocke standeth a litle white tower, wherein they keepe watch. And then if you have the winde large, you shall see the harbour open, and then you may beare in with it.{n}Your shippe being of great burthen, when you are within, then keepe on the West side, because on the East  side, on the West end of the Rocke aforesayde, there lieth a ledge to the Westward which hath but three or foure fathoms J upon it. If your ship be of small burthen, you may run along the weather shore, untill you come right against the Castle; and then halfe the Bay over you may come to an anchor.{n}[How to{n}3°3{n}How to worke comming through the olde Chanell, if you be not minded to goe over the Pracellas or shoalds.{n}IF you will come through the olde Chanel, when you come as hie as the Shoalds, comming upon your Caio de Moa. course from the Caio de Moa, as I told you, keepe 2.{n}leagues from the Pracel or shoald: and then set our course West unto the low islands of the Firme land. And upon this course you shal ken the Flats on the Caio Romano, point of Caio Romano: and within it is one Flat higher then the other, and smooth upon, and in the middest it maketh as it were broken land; and when you are in the chanel in the day time, you must take heede you come not neere the shore by 2. leagues, and by your sounding no neerer then 3. fathoms. And you must take heede stil when ye night commeth to keepe 2. or three leagues off for feare of the shoalds. And in the night you must goe Northwest as is aforesaid. And also you must take heed that you keepe in the middle of the chanel, as nere as you can toward the shoald. And finding much wind & being benighted, from midnight till day stirre West Northwest, and when it is towards day, then you may edge towards the Flats as is aforesaid.{n}Alcane de Barasoga. Savano.{n}Basque.{n}The Flats of Mecala.{n}And as you stirre hence one day and one night from Caio Romano to the inwards of the Chanell, you shall see the firme land of Cuba, and other markes; and among the rest, a round hamocke, which you may easily know. It is called Alcane de Barasoga. And from thence to Savano and to Basque is 6. leagues, and likewise Havana 6. leagues. And from thence to crosse under the Fort is 45. leagues. And stirre hence upon your course aforesaid. And if you have gone from Barasoga 30. leagues, you shall see none of the Flats of Mecala: And give them a bredth off two or three leagues, and keepe your course West Northwest, as{n}3°4{n}aforesayd, untill it be day, and presently you may edge round to the Flats. And thus stirring, keepe your course untill you see the hilles of Camaloqua.{n}And looke that when you come from Caio de Moa, along the Pracel or shoald by night close by it, you shall not see what land it is, till it be day: and in the Morning you shall set your course as is aforesayd untill you see the shoald, and in seeing it, you may stirre on your course as is above mentioned, untill you come to Havana.{n}For to set your course from the point of Mance to Caio Romano, when you are North and South with the point of Mance, you shall stirre thence West Northwest, until you thinke you be Northeast and Southwest with the hill of Hama. And this hill is an high hill and smooth to the seaside. And from this hill to Caio Romano you shall stirre Northwest and by West: and upon this course you may be bolde to see Caio Romano. And the marke of this Flat is, that it maketh an hie land and smooth upon the top: and in the middest of it, it sheweth as it were broken. And when you come to it, you must take heede you come not neere it by 2. leagues, because it is fowle. And looke that you bring not yourselfe too neere the hill of Hama by night. For you must take heede of Caio Romano to keepe ofF it untill Morning: in the Morning you may goe your course untill you see it, and then set your course, as is abovesaid.{n}Take heede of that which is here sayd,for it hath title reason.{n}Sierras de Camahquea. Caio de Moa. Pracellas.{n}Havana.{n}Punta de Mance.{n}Sierra del{n}Hama.{n}Caio Romano.{n}The markes of the Flat of Caio Romano.{n}x{n}