The voyage truely discoursed, made by sir Francis Drake, and sir John Hawkins, chiefly pretended for some speciali service on the Islands and maine of the West Indies, with sixe of the Queenes ships, and 21 other shippes and barkes, containing 2500 men and boyes, in the yeere 1595. In which voyage both the foresayd knights died by sicknesse.{n}Ee brake ground out of the sound of Plimmouth on Thursday the 28 of August, and that night ankored againe in Causon bay, where we rode till Friday. Then we set sayle and stoode Southwest: and about three of the clocke the next morning the Hope,{n}wherein sir Thomas Baskervil went, strake upon the Edy stone, and shot oflr a piece, but after cleared her-selfe wel enough.{n}On Munday at sixe of the clocke in the morning the landes end bare Northwest and by North, and 226{n}LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS then we stoode away Southwest and by South for the coast of Spaine.{n}The 8 of September we tooke two small Flemish fliboats bound for Barbary; which we caried a while with us and afterward dismissed them without doing them any harme : only wee learned newes of them, and stayed them from discrying our fleete to the enemie.{n}The 26 we saw Forteventura, being one of the Islands of the Canaries.{n}The 27 being Saturday by breake ot day we nad over-shot the chiefe towne of Grand Canaria to the Northeast, and then stood about for it againe, and by nine of the clocke were at anker fayre before the fort to the Eastward of the towne some league. At one of the clocke wee offred to land one thousand and foure hundreth men in the sandie bay betwixt the fort and the towne : But by our detracting of the time they had made a bulwarke in the sandie bay and planted Ordinance : so that by reason thereof, and the great breach of the sea that went then on shore we were not able to land without endangering our whole forces, which our General would not doe. There were of Spaniards horsemen and footmen some 900, which played upon us out of their trenches, most of them being shot. At the time of our landing there went by commandement of our Generals within musket shot of the shore, & rode there at ankor some three hours, the Salomon, the Bonaventure, the Elizabeth Constance, the Phenix, the Juell, the Little John, the Delight, the Pegasus, the Exchange, the Francis, the caravell, and the two catches : But when the general sir Francis Drake gave over the landing being in his barge, the ships weighed being in some danger, and stoode off againe to the great ships. Then we went to the West end of the Island and there watered : where captaine Grimston going up the hill with 6 or 7 in his company was set upon by the herdmen, who with their dogs and staves killed the captaine and three or foure of his company :{n}227{n}the rest were sore wounded : the Salomons Chirurgian taken prisoner, who disclosed our pretended voyage as much as in him lay : so as the Viceroy sent a caravel of adviso into the Indies, unto all such places as wee did pretend to goe to. Howbeit they had intelligence from the king of all our voyage the eight of August, which was three weekes before we set foorth of England : as also by a Fleming that had seene all our provision at London.{n}The 28 being Sunday at ten of the clocke at night wee set saile, and stood away Southwest and Southsouthwest some 200 leagues, untill we came in the height of the Islands of Cape Verde, and then more Westerly for Martinino, one of the Islands of the West Indies, which we saw the 27 of October : but the night before we had a storme, in which sir Francis with foure or five other ships bearing on head of the fleete was Dominica, separated. Then we stood for Dominica, an Island full of inhabitants of the race of the Canibals, not past ten leagues distant from Martinino. In it groweth great store of Tabacco : where most of our English and French men barter knives, hatchets, sawes, and such like yron tooles in trucke of Tabacco.{n}Before we came to Dominica our general Sir Francis Drake altered his course, and went for Marigalante, which we had sight of the 28 day, and came to an anker on the Northeast side a saker shot off the shore in 13 fathomes water faire sholding. There the general went on shore in his barge, and by chance met a Canoa of Dominicans, to the people whereof he gave a yellow  wastcoate of flanell and an hankerchiefe ; and they gave him such fruits as they had, and the Dominicanes rowed to Dominica againe. They came thither to fetch some fruits which they sowe and plant in divers places of that Island, which they keepe like gardens.{n}The next morning by breake of day we weyed and stoode betweene the Todos Santos, which are 4 or 5 little Islands betweene Guadalupe and Dominica. There 228{n}is nothing upon these Islands but wood. We came to the Southeast side of Guadalupe and there ankered hard aboord the shore : the Southwest side of the Island is deepe water and good ankorage : where that day sir John Hawkins came to us againe standing up from the South side of Dominica. There we watered, washed our ships, set up our pinnesses, and refreshed our souldiers on shore.{n}The 30 captaine Wignol in the Francis, a barke of 3 5 tunnes, being the sternmost of sir John Hawkins fleete was chased by five of the king of Spaines frigats or Zabras being ships of 200 tunnes a piece, which came of purpose with 3. other Zabras for the treasure of S. Juan de Puerto rico : The Francis going roome with them, supposing they had bene our owne fleete, was by them taken in sight of our caravel. They left the Francis driving in the sea with 3 or 4 hurt and sicke men, and tooke the rest of our men into their ships, as the prisoners which wee tooke at S. Juan de Puerto rico told us.{n}The 4 of November we began to unlade the Richard, one of our victuallers, which was by the next day unladen, unrigged and then sunken. Then we stood Northwest & by North: and the next morning saw the Hands of Monserrata, Redonda, Estazia, S. Christopher and Saba. The biggest of these Islands is not past 8 leagues long. There is good ankorage in 8, 7, and 5 fadomes water faire white sand. Then we stood away Southwest, and on the 8 in the morning being Saturday came to an anker some 7 or 8 leagues off within certain broken Hands called Las Virgines, which have bene accounted dangerous : but we found there a very good rode, had it bene for a 1000 sails of ships in 14, 12, and 8 fadomes faire sand and good ankorage, high Islands on either side, but no fresh water that we could find : here is much fish to be taken with hookes and nets : also we stayed on shore and fowled. Here sir John Hawkins was extreme sicke; which his sicknes{n}229{n}The fight at S. Juan de Puerto rico.{n}began upon newes of the taking of the Francis. The 18 day wee weyed and stoode North and by East into a lesser sound, which sir Francis in his barge discovered the night before, and ankored in 13 fadoms, having hie steepe hils on either side, some league distant from our first riding.{n}The 12 in the morning we weied and set sayle into the sea due South through a small streit but without danger, and then stode West and by North for S. Juan de Puerto rico, and in the after noone left the 3 small Islands called The passages to the Southward of us, and that night came up to the Eastermost end of S. John, where sir John Hawkins departed this life : upon whose decease sir Thomas Baskervil presently went into the Garland. At 2 of the clocke we came to anker at the estermost side of the chiefe towne called Puerto rico in a sandie bay 2 miles off: where we received from their forts and places where they planted Ordinance some 28 great shot, the last of which strake the admirall through the misen, and the last but one strake through her quarter into the sterage, the general being there at supper, and strake the stoole from under him, but hurt him not, but hurt at the same table sir Nicholas Clifford, M. Browne, captaine Stratford, with one or two more. Sir Nicholas Clifford and master Browne died of their hurts.{n}Then wee set sayle and stood to the Eastward, and at midnight tacked about to the West, and in the morning came to an anker before the point without the towne, a little to the Westwards by the 3 Islands.{n}The 13 we rode still untill night, when in the beginning with twenty five pinnesses, boats and shallops manned and furnished with fire-workes and small shot wee went into the rode within the great castels, and in despite of them fired the five Zabras of frigats, all ships of two hundreth tunnes the piece or more, quite burning the Rereadmirall downe to the water, which was the greatest shippe of them all, and also mightily spoiled 230{n}LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d.{n}.	.	.	I595-{n}the admirall and viceadmirall, notwithstanding the castles and ships gave us a hundreth eighty and five great shot, besides small shot abundance. They had also sunke a great shippe in the mouth of the chanell and rafted it over with her mastes almost to the very fortes and castles, so as they thought it impregnable. The frigats had in each of them twenty pieces of brasse, and a hundreth barrels of powder. Their chiefe lading that they brought thither was silke, oyle, and wine. The treasure which they went to fetch, which was brought thither in a ship called the Vigonia, was conveyed into the strongest and surest castell of defence ; being, as one of the prisoners confessed, three millions of ducats or five and thirty tunnes of silver. Also they had sent all the women, children, and unable persons into the woods, and left none but souldiers and fighting men in the towne. The fight on our side was resolute, hote, and dangerous : wherein wee lost some forty or fifty men, and so many  were hurt. There was also great death of the Spaniards aboord the frigats, with burning, drowning, and killing, and besides some taken prisoners.{n}The 14 we rode stil, being within shot of the uttermost castell: but they fearing the next night we would come in againe, began to warpe up the other 4 frigats, beginning first with the Admirall : which whether by chance or their owne willes wee saw to sinke ; and as wee suppose so did they with all the rest, or else by stealth got up farther within their chiefest forces.{n}The 15 also we rode still, and at afternoone wee espied a caravell comming from the castell point: but before our pinnesses could fetch her up, she ranne on shore, where our boates could not come at her because of the breach, and also many of the Islanders came downe to guard her with shot. The beginning of this night we weyed, and stoode one houre to the East, and then tacked about to the West.{n}The 16 being Sunday, and the 17 also we were becalmed.{n}231{n}The 18 we ankered a little to the Southward of the Southwest point of the Island, giving the point a birth because of a shoald of sand that lieth some two cables length off: there we rode in foure, five, and sixe fadomes faire white sand, where wee set up more pinnesses, washed our ships, and refreshed our men on shore. Here the general tooke a pinnesse of Hispaniola with divers letters, signifying that two Englishmen of warre had done great hurt along their Island.{n}The 20 the general rowed to the Phenix, the Delight and the caravell, and caused them to wey and anker right against the mouth of a fresh river in two fadomes water in ozie sand to the Southward of the other ships some league or more. The general went into this river three or foure leagues up, and tooke horses in the countrey. Sir Thomas Baskervil rowed up the river, and stayed there all night, and went up into the land three or foure leagues.{n}The 23 wee discharged a barke called the Pulpit and burnt her: and at three of the clocke that afternoone, when we were ready to set saile, there came aboord the Defiance our Admiral, a Spaniard with his wife, who feared some great torment for not having repaired to the towne according to the Generals commandement of that Island, who had commanded that all able men of the fleete should repaire to the towne to defend it against us. Then we stood againe West and by North because of a ledge of rocks that lie sunke 4 or 5 leagues off the Southside of the Island.{n}The 25 we stood away southwest, and saw Mona Mona, being a lowe flat Island betweene Hispaniola and S. Juan de Puerto rico. That day the Exchange of captaine Winter spent her boult-sprite; and in the beginning of the night the Phenix was sent backe to seeke her: which by Gods help that night met with her, and kept her company until the next morning, then taking in a small cable from her for a towe: but by 9 that morning she spent her maine mast and split her foreyard, 232{n}LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS o.{n}.	1595-{n}breaking also her tow: so as they were faine to save some trifles out of her and the men, and to sinke the hull. Then we stood away South and South and by West after the fleete: and the 26 in the morning had sight of the fleete againe.{n}The 29 we had sight of the Island called Curazao The Isle of within eight leagues of the maine, and on the North- Curazao. west side came to an anker in very deepe water hard aboord the shore without any danger: but the general weyed presently and stoode away Northwest and by West, and Northnorthwest for the maine, and that night saw Aruba, being somewhat a lesse Island then the Aruba. other: we left it some three leagues to the Southward of us.{n}On Sunday morning being the last of November wee saw three or foure little Islands called the Monjes, Monjes. betwixt Aruba and the next North point of the maine. At 12 of the clocke we sawe the maine, where we saw a great current setting to the Westward, and also the water changing very white. The Phenix, the caravell, and one of the catches kept within, and at midnight came under Cape de la Vela, and made a fire, Cape de la whereby the rest of the fleete came to anker under ^ela-the Cape, where is a very good rode, faire sholding and sandie ground, fourteene, twelve, and tenne fadoms neere the shore. The Cape is a bare land without trees or shrubs, and falleth in eight or ten leagues Southeast and Northwest: and a saker shot ofF the point standeth a little Island like Mewestone neere Plimmouth, but somewhat bigger. In the morning the first of December wee imbarked all our souldiers for Rio de la Hacha, which is a towne twenty leagues Rio de la to the Westwards, one of the ancientest in all the maine, HacJia taken-although not very bigge: but it standeth in a most fertile and pleasant soyle. Our men tooke it by ten of the clocke in the night. The ships bearing all that night and the day before in 5 and 6 fadomes, the lesser ships in two fadomes and an halfe water: the{n}233{n}Phenix went so neere the shore by the Generals com-mandement, that shee strake on ground, but got off againe. There lieth to the Eastward of the towne a A shold of mile or thereabout a shold of sand: therefore give a san^‘ birth some halfe league or more before you come right against the town. There wee came to anker in two fadomes, but the great ships rode off in five and  sixe fadomes. There is a fresh river about a bow-shot Afresh river.	Eastward of the towne; whereinto our pin-{n}nesses could scarse enter by reason of a barre of sand in the rivers mouth, but within it is navigable for barkes of twenty or thirty tunnes some sixe or eight leagues up.{n}The sixth day the Spaniards came in to talke about the ransome of the towne, but not to the general his liking: and that night Sir Thomas Baskervil marched up into the countrey to over-runne those parts: and the general the same night with some hundreth and fiftie men went by water sixe leagues to the Eastward, La Rancheria and tooke the Rancheria a fisher towne, where they taken. drag for pearle. The people all fled except some sixteene or twenty souldiers, which fought a little, but some were taken prisoners, besides many Negros, with some store of pearles and other pillage. In the houses we refreshed our selves, and were all imbarked to come away, and then had sight of a brigandine or a dredger, which the general tooke within one houres chase with his two barges: she had in her Indie-wheat, which we call Maiz, and some silver and pearle, but of small value.{n}On Saturday the seventh, master Yorke captaine of the Hope dyed of sicknes, and then master Thomas Drake the Generals brother was made captaine of the Hope, and master Jonas Bodenham captaine of the Adventure, and master Charles Caesar captaine of the Amitie.{n}The tenth day the Spaniards concluded for the ransome of the towne for 24000 ducats, and one prisoner promised to pay for his ransome 4000 ducats.{n}234{n}The fourteenth day they brought in the townes ransome in pearles, but rated so deare as the general after conference with them, misliking it, sent it backe againe, giving them foure houres respite to cleere themselves with their treasure.{n}The sixteenth the governour came into the towne about dinner, and upon conference with the general told him plainely, that he cared not for the towne, neither would he ransome it: and that the pearle was brought in without his command or consent, and that his detracting of time so long was onely to send the other townes word, that were not of force to withstand us, whereby they might convey all their goods, cattell, and wealth into the woods out of danger. So the General gave the governour leave to depart according to promise, having two houres to withdraw himselfe in safety.{n}The seventeenth Sir Thomas Baskervil with the Eliza{n}beth Constance, the Phenix, the caravel with foure or five pinnesses went some five leagues to the Westward, & landing, marched some foure leagues up into the countrey to a place called Tapia, which he tooke & Tapia taken. burned certain villages and ferme houses about it. He had some resistance as he passed over a river, but had but one man hurt, which he brought aboord alive with him: he marched one league farther and burnt a village called Sallamca, and so returned with some prisoners, Sallamca the souldiers having gotten some pillage.	burnt.{n}The 18 the Rancheria, and the towne of Rio de la Hacha were burnt cleane downe to the ground, the Churches and a Ladies house onely excepted, which by her letters written to the general was preserved. That day wee set sayle and fell to lee-ward, to meete with Sir Thomas Baskervil.{n}The 19 we weighed and stood to leeward for Cape Cape de de Aguja, which the twentieth at sunne rising we saw. Aguja. It is a Cape subject much to flawes, by reason it is a very hie land: and within the cape lieth an Island within{n}235{n}the mouth of the sound, which hath a white cliffe or spot in the Westnorthwest part of the Island. The land all about the cape riseth all in homocks or broken steepie hils. A league Southwest within that, (for so falleth the land thereabout) there standeth on the top of a cliffe a watch-house: and a little within that a small Island: you may goe in betweene the maine and it, or to leeward if you lust: and hard within that is Santa Martha the rode and towne of Santa Martha, which at 11 of taken. the clocke we tooke, the people all being fled, except a few Spaniards, Negros & Indians,, which in a bravado at our landing gave us some 30 or 40 shot, & so ran away.{n}That night their Lieutenant general was taken and some little pillage brought in out of the woods: for in the town nothing was left but the houses swept clean. In all the main is not a richer place for gold: for the hops were mixt with the earth in every place, and also in the sand a little to the leewards of the towne. In the bay wee had a bad rode by reason of a small moone, for every small moone maketh foule weather all the maine along.{n}The 21, the general caused the towne to be burnt, and all the ships to wey, and stood out, many of the souldiers being imbarked where the general had appointed, in the small ships which rode neerest the shore. We lost that night the company of the Phenix, captaine Austin, Peter Lemond, and the Garlands pinnesse, which stood along the shore, and being chased off by gallies out of Carthagena Peter Lemond with nine of our men was taken, the rest came safe to our  fleete.{n}The 26 we saw the Hands some twelve leagues to the Eastward of Nombre de Dios standing in toward the shore, but toward night we stood to the oflin untill the next day.{n}Nombre de The 27 we came into the mouth of Nombre de Dios, Dios taken, and by one of the clocke tooke the towne, the people 236{n}being all fled except some too Spaniards, which kept the Fort, and played upon us, having in the fort some 3 or 4 small pieces of ordinance, and one of them brake in discharging at us. They gave us also a voley of small shot: but seeing our resolution in running upon them they all fled and tooke the woods.{n}The towne was bigge, having large streetes, houses very hie, all built of timber, but one Church very faire and large wrought all of timber likewise. Nothing was left in the towne of value: there was a shew in their shops of great store of marchandises that had bene there. There was a mill above the towne, and upon the toppe of another hill in the woods stood a little watch-house, where we tooke twentie sowes of silver, two barres of gold, some money in coyne, besides other pillage.{n}The towne was situated in a waterie soile, and subject much to raine, very unhealthy as any place in the Indies, having great store of Orenges, plantans, cassavy-roots, & such other fruits; but very dangerous to be eaten for breeding of diseases. To the Eastwarde of the towne within the bay runneth out a fresh river of excellent good water, with houses, and all about it gardens: halfe a league from hence due East into the countrey was an Indian towne, whither as we marched a little before our comming away with an hundred men they had broken downe a bridge to hinder our passage, where they lay in ambush with some twentie or thirtie small shot, and bowes and arrowes, set upon us, and killed Lieutenant Jones, hurt three or foure and so fled into the woods, ranne before us and fired their owne towne, and then fled farther into the woods: our men fired diverse other houses in pursuing them, and so returned againe: our general with Sir Thomas being in the Rivers mouth with thirtie or fortie men filling water about some myle from us.{n}The road of Nombre de Dios is a faire road: but on each side, as you come to ride before the towne, lyeth a ledge of rockes, but there is no danger because they 237{n}An Indian towne fired.{n}are in sight. You may ride betweene them in three or foure fadome water, and without if you will in eight or ten fadomes, where neither Castle nor Fort can annoy you. The name of Nombre de Dios was greater then their strength. For they had no Castle nor Fort, but onely the little fort aforesaid standing on the top of an hill, although they might have made it stronger if they would.{n}The 29 sir Thomas Baskervil with 750 armed men, besides Chirurgians and provand boyes, went for Panama.{n}The last of December the general burned halfe the towne, and the first of Januarie burnt the rest, with all the Frigats, Barks & Galiots, which were in the harbour and on the beach on shore, having houses built over them to keepe the pitch from melting.{n}The second of January sir Thomas returned with his souldiers both weary and hungry, having marched more then halfe the way to the South sea. The Spaniards played divers times upon us both outward and homeward in the woods, the way being cut out of the woods & rockes both very narrow, and full of myre and water. The march was so sore as never Englishman marched before. Having marched some ten leagues in a marvellous straite way, upon the top of an hill, through which we must needes passe, the Spaniards had set up a Fort and kept it with some 80 or 90 men, who played upon us as we came up, before wee were aware of them, and so killed some twentie or more of us, amongst whom was Captaine Marchant quarter-master general, and Ensigne Sampson, Maurice Williams one of her Majesties guard, besides diverse were hurt, as M. Captaine Nicholas Baskervil a valiant gentleman, with divers others. Then sir Thomas had perfect knowledge that they must passe two such Forts more, if he got that, besides Panama to be very strong, the enemie knowing of our comming long before.{n}Also our souldiers had no victuals left, nor any meanes 238{n}LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d. .	.	.	*596-{n}to get more: which considerations caused sir Thomas to returne and give over his attempt. As he marched thitherward he tooke an Indian and sent him to Nombre de Dios with letters of his returne and proceeding.{n}The 5 we set saile at 12 of the clocke, and stood to the Westward.{n}The 10 day we saw an Hand lying Westward some The lie of 30 leagues called Escudo, where wee came to anker Escudo. on the Southside in 12 fadoms water, faire sand and good ankorage. If you come into the Easterne point, give it a birth, because of a ledge of rockes, that lyeth out there from the end of the Island: comming to anker we sawe a roader, who seeing us, set sayle, but that night with our Pinnesses we tooke him, he had nothing in him but a little maiz. The men being examined by the general confessed him to be an Advisor sent from Nombre de Dios to all the ports along the coast Westward. This Hand lyeth 9 or 10  leagues from the maine, & is not past two leagues long full of wood, and hath great store of fresh water in every part of the Hand, and that very good. It is a sickly climat also, and given to much raine: here we washed our ships, and set up the rest of our Pinnesses.{n}The 15 day Captaine Plat died of sicknesse, and then sir Francis Drake began to keepe his cabin, and to complaine of a scowring or fluxe.{n}The 23 we set saile and stood up again for Puerto Bello, which is but 3 leagues to the Westwards of Nombre de Dios.{n}The 28 at 4 of the clocke in the morning our general The death of sir Francis Drake departed this life, having bene sir Francis extremely sicke of a fluxe, which began the night before Drake. to stop on him. He used some speeches at or a little before his death, rising and apparelling himselfe, but being brought to bed againe within one houre died. He made his brother Thomas Drake and captaine Jonas Bodenham executors, and M. Thomas Drakes sonne{n}239{n}his heire to all his lands, except one manor which he gave to captaine Bodenham.{n}The same day we ankored at Puerto Bello, being the best harbour we found al along the maine both for great ships and small. There standeth a saker shot off the shore at the Easterne point a little Hand: and there is betwixt the maine & that 5 or 6 fadomes: but the best comming in is the open mouth betwixt that Hand & another Hand that lyeth to the westward with a range of rocks.{n}In Puerto Bello were but 8 or 10 houses, besides a great new house which they were in building for the Governour that should have bene for that place: there was also a very strong Fort all to the waters side with flankers of great trees and stones filled with earth betweene: and had not our comming disappointed their pretence, they would have made it one of the strongest places in all the maine. There they ment to have builded a great towne. We found there three pieces of brasse ordinance sunke in the sea, which we weighed up, all the people were fled and their goods carried away.{n}Up within this bay there was a little village but of no force, where we found a great fresh river, our men rowing up some two leagues found pillage, as wine and oyle, and some small quantitie of yron. After our comming hither to anker, and the solemne buriall of our general sir Francis in the sea: Sir Thomas Baskervill being aboord the Defiance, where M. Bride made a sermon, having to his audience all the captaines in the fleete, sir Thomas commanded all aboord the Garland, with whom he held a Councell, & there shewing his Commission was accepted for General, & captain Bodenham made captaine of the Defiance, & M. Savill captaine of ye Adventure.{n}The 27 died captaine Josias of the Delight, and captaine Egerton a Gentleman of the Foresight, and James Wood chiefe chirurgion of the fleete out of the Garland.{n}240{n}The 28 died Abraham Kendall out of the Saker. At this place we watered againe, washed our ships & made new sailes, it being by the general and all the captaines agreed, that if we could by any meanes turne up againe for Santa Martha, we should, if not, to goe directly for England. Here also we tooke in some balast as our neede required.{n}The 6 of Februarie the Elizabeth of M. Wattes was discharged and sunke, and that day the Pegasus jolly was going on shore for water, carying no guarde : The Spaniards perceiving it came downe upon them, killed two of them, and tooke 2 or 3 prisoners, and so ranne up into the woods againe.{n}The seventh the Delight and captaine Edens frigat were discharged and sunke because they were old and leaked, and the Queenes ships wanted saylers.{n}That day our men being mustered we had sicke and whole 2000. And the next day we set on shore all our prisoners as Spaniards and Negros. But before at our first comming to Puerto Bello sir Thomas sent two of those Spaniards to Nombre de Dios and to Panama to fetch ransome for some of the chiefest prisoners, but they never returned againe. As we were setting saile there came one with a flagge of truce, and told the General that they had taken 18 of our men, and that they were well used, adding that if he would stay 8 or 10 dayes longer they should be brought from Panama. We supposed this to have bene but a delay to have kept us there while the kings forces had come about by sea, as they dayly expected. We set saile the 8 of Februarie, turning up for Santa Martha, and the 14 day we saw the Hands of Baru some 14 leagues to the Westward of Carthagena: The general that night told us he would stand in for the towne of Baru in the bay: but that night blew so much winde and continued that small moone, that the same night we lost the Foresight, and the next day standing againe to make the land which we had made, x	241	Q{n}we lost companie of the Susan Parnel, The Helpe, and the Pegasus. Then the next day we put over for Cape  S. Antonie, and gave over Santa Martha.{n}The Grand The 25 we saw the Hand of Grand Cayman some Cayman. leagues to the Northwestward of Jamaica, being a low sandie Hand, having many tortoyses about it.{n}The 26 we saw the hie land of Cuba to the Eastward of the broken Hands, to the East of the Hand of Pinos, and were imbayed in among those dangerous places. But perceiving it, we stood out againe Southsoutheast and so got cleere, and then stood away West The Ik of and by North for the He of Pinos, which we saw the Pinos. first of March. It is a low land with wood and fresh water to the Western end. If you come in with the middest of it you shall see rise up above the rest of the land 8 or 9 round homockes, and the Westermost hath three in one.{n}Being shot foorth with the West end, and standing in for to water we espied 20 sayle of ships about one in the afternoone. This was a third part of the fleete which the king sent for Carthagena, the rest of the fleete being gone for the Honduras. They were in all 60 sailes sent onely to meete our fleete, being commanded wheresoever they heard we were, to come upon us with all their three forces. This fleete which we met withall came standing for Cape de los Corrientes, and had bene refreshed at Havana.{n}As soone as they discried us, they kept close upon a tacke, thinking to get the winde of us: but we weathered them. And when our Admirall with all the rest of our fleet were right in the winds eye of them, sir Thomas Baskervil putting out the Queenes armes, and all the rest of our fleete their braverie, bare roome with them, and commanded the Defiance not to shoot, but to keepe close by to second him. The Viceadmirall of the Spaniards being a greater ship than any of ours, and the best sayler in all their fleete loofed by and gave the Concord the two first great shot, which she repayed 242{n}LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d.{n}.	1596.{n}presently againe, thus the fight began. The Bonaventure The fight bebare full with her, ringing her such a peale of ordinance tweene the and small shot withall, that he left her with torne sides. ^nSllsh The Admirall also made no spare of powder and shot.{n}But the Defiance in the middest of the Spanish fleete J thundering of her ordinance and small shot continued the fight to the end. So that the Viceadmirall with 3 or 4 of her consorts were forced to tacke about to the Eastward, leaving their admirall and the rest of the fleete, who came not so hotly into the fight as they did. The fight continued two houres & better. At sunne set all the fleete tacked about to the Eastward, we continued our course to the Westward for cape de los Corrientes, supposing we should have met with more of their consorts. In this conflict in the Defiance we had five men slaine, three English men, a Greeke and a Negro. That night some halfe houre after, their fleete keeping upon their weather quarter, we saw a mightie smoke Qne of the rise out of one of their great ships which stayed behind : punish great which happened by meanes of powder as we thinke, burnt. and presently after she was all on a light fire, and so was consumed and all burnt, as we might well perceive.{n}The next day being the second of March in the morning by breake of day we were hard aboord Cape de los Corrientes, which is a bare low cape, having a bush of trees higher than the rest some mile to the Eastward of the cape. All Cuba is full of wood on the Southside. The Spanish fleete which then were but 14 no more than we were, kept still upon our weather quarter, but dared not to come roome with us although our Admirall stayed for them. Assoone as we had cleered our selves of the Cape 3 of their best saylers came roome with the Salomon, which was so neere the land that she could not double the Cape, but tacked about to the Eastward, & so was both a sterne and also to leeward of all our fleete : But when we saw the Spaniards working, the Defiance tacked about to rescue her : which the Spaniards seeing, and having not forgotten the fight which she 243{n}made the night before, they loofed up into the middest of their fleete againe, and then all the fleete stayed untill the Salomon came up, and so stood along for Cape Zante Cape S. Antonio, which wee came in sight of by two Antonio. }n after noone, being a low cape also, and to the{n}Southwest a white sandie bay, where 3 or 4 ships may very well water. There is a good road for North & Easterly windes: there the Spaniardes began to fall a sterne. That night wee stood away a glasse or two Northwest, and Northnorthwest, and Northeast, and in the morning-watch South, and in the morning had sight of Cuba about the East part of the Organes, which are dangerous rocks lying 8 leagues off upon the North part of Cuba, presently assoone as you passe Cape S. Anthonie : then we stood to the Eastward of the land, the winde at Southsouthwest, and at 6 at night had foule weather, but after were becalmed all night. The 5 the winde came scant. The 7 we sawe a hie land like a crowne, which appeareth so 13 or 14 leagues to the Westward of Havana, and another place in Cuba called The Table, 8 leagues to the Eastward The Crowne. of the crowne. The land over Havana maketh two small mountaines like a womans breasts or paps. Here we found no great current untill we came to the Gulfe of Bahama.{n}The Cape of The io we saw the Cape of Florida being but Florida.	a reasonable low land and broken Hands	to the Southward of the Cape. And at two in the	afternoone we{n}	lost sight of the land 12 leagues to the	Northward of{n}the Cape. After we had disemboqued, we stood West till midnight, and were in 28 degrees, and then stood Northeast till the 13 at night, when we were in 31 degrees. And after the wind scanted with a great storme, in which we lost the Bonaventure, and the Little John, they bearing on head. Then we stood with our larbord tacked Eastsoutheast.{n}The 19 we were in 29 degrees our course Eastnortheast. The 21 we had a great stormie gale of winde 244{n}LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d.{n}J596-and much raine but large. And then all the rest of our fleete fell a sterne except the Hope, which bare a head: so that there kept no more with the Admirall, but the Defiance, the Adventure, and the Phenix.{n}The 28 we were in 39 degrees, and stood away for Flores, which the 8 of Aprill we saw, and the 9 came to an anker on the Southside, where we watered because the Defiance when we came in had but two buts of water. We bartered with the Portugals for some fresh victuals, and set here on shore at our comming away out of the Admirall our two Portugall Pilots ; which sir Francis Drake caried out of England with him.{n}The 10 being Easter-eve at night we set saile the winde serving us to lie some slent in our course. That night and Easter day we had much raine: the winde came up at Northeast, wee beate it up some 30 leagues to the Eastward, & then about to the West, and so againe to the East, and tryed, and the next boord to the West. On Thursday towards night, being the 16 wee had sight of Corvo againe, we tryed all that night: and on Friday towards night we came to an anker to the Westward of the point of Santa Cruz under Flores: but before midnight we drave, and set saile the next day standing away Northeast. About three of the clocke in the afternoone the winde came up againe at North. On sunday the 19 by two of the clocke in the afternoone we had made 20 leagues an East way: and then the winde came up a good gale at Northwest, and so Northeast with a flowne sheete we made the best way we could: but being dispersed by bad weather we arrived about the beginning of May in the West parts of England. And the last ships which came in together to Plimmouth were the Defiance, the Garland, the Adventure, and the Phenix.{n}