A letter of M. Henrie Lane to M. Richard Hakluit, concerning the first ambassage to our most gracious Queene Elizabeth from the Russian Emperour anno 1567, and other notable matters incident to those places and times.{n}Orshipfull sir, because I finde you have the successe and proceedings of Osep Napea the first ambassadour of the Russian Emperour to the Majesties of King Philip and Queene Marie, at what time and at his returne I was remaining in Russia, & do not finde that the{n}perfect knowledge of the first ambassage from thence to this our Sovereigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth is come to your hands, betweene whose Highnesse and the ambassadours I was interpretour, I thinke good to expresse it. In August Anno 1567 arrived at London with their retinue two especiall authorised messengers, named Stephen Twerdico, and Theodore Pogorella, with letters and presents to her Majesty, at that time being at Otelands, where divers of the chiefe merchants of the Russian company did associate them, and I there doing my duetie and office of interpretour, her Majestie gave them audience. First they rehearsed the long stile and Majesty of their Master, with his most friendly and hearty commendations to her Highnesse, and then they testified the singular great joy and pleasure that he conceived to heare of her most princely estate, dignitie and health: and lastly, they delivered their letters and presents. The presents sent unto her Majesty were Sables, both in paires for tippets, and two timbars, to wit, two times fortie, with Luserns and other rich furres. For at that time that princely ancient ornament of furres was yet in use. And great pitie but that it might be renewed, especiall in Court, and among Magistrates, not 98{n}onely for the restoring of an olde worshipfull Art and{n}Companie, but also because they be for our climate 7% use of wholesome, delicate, grave and comely: expressing dig- f^e* Micate nitie, comforting age, and of longer continuance, and ’	’{n}better with small cost to be preserved, then these new silks, shagges, and ragges, wherein a great part of the wealth of the land is hastily consumed.{n}grave and comely.{n}These ambassadours were appointed lodging and enter-teinement by the Moscovie company at their house then in Seething Lane, and were sundrie times after permitted to be in presence. And in May 1568 tooke their leave [I. 375.J at Greenwich, where they understood and had the Queenes Majesties minde, letters and reward. At the latter part of her talke, her Highnesse considering that our trade to Saint Nicholas since the beginning had bene ?he trade t0 offensive to divers princes, states, and merchants Eastward, used these speeches or the like: Who is or shall ^vers pr-inces be more touched by detractours, with flying tales and	states East-{n}untrue reports, then Princes and Rulers, to the breach of ward. love and unitie ? your Master and I in things that passe by word and writing, I doubt not will keepe and performe promises. If he heare the contrary of me, let him suspend his judgement, and not be light of credit, and so will I. These words they termed her Majesties golden speech: and kneeling downe, kissed her hand, and departed.{n}The letters that these two messengers brought, were delivered to me by my Lord Treasurour, being then Secretarie, to be translated, the copies whereof I had, but now cannot finde. The copie of the Queenes Majesties letter I send inclosed herewith unto your worship. I also have sent you a copy of a letter written from the king of Polonia to the Queenes Majestie, with other letters from some of our nation and factours, declaring the displeasure for our trafficke to the Russes from anno 1558 to the yere 1566, especially by the way of the Narve: in which yere of 1566, having general procuration and commission from the Company, I was in the Low{n}countrey at Antwerpe and Amsterdam, and sometimes in company with Polacks, Danskers, and Easterlings: and by reason I had bene a lidger in Russia, I could the better reply and prove, that their owne nations and the Italians were most guiltie of the accusations written by the king of Poland.{n}This king Sigismundus (whose ambassadours very sumptuous I have seene at Mosco) was reported to be too milde in suffering the Moscovites. Before our trafficke they overranne his great dukedome of Lituania, Smolensk won and tooke Smolensco, carrying the people captives to by the Russe. Mosco. And in the yere 1563, as appeareth by Thomas Alcocks letter, they suffered the Russe likewise in that Polotzko	Duchy to take a principali city called Polotzko, with{n}taken.	the iorj an(j peOple thereof. Likewise the said Sigis-{n}mundus and the king of Sweden did not looke to the protection of Livonia, but lost all, except Rie and Revel, and the Russe made the Narve his port to trafficke, not onely to us, but to Lubec and others, general. And still from those parts the Moscovites were furnished out of Dutchland by enterlopers with all arts and artificers, and had few or none by us. The Italians also furnished them with engines of warre, and taught them warrelike strata-gemes, and the arte of fortification. In the dayes of Sigismund, the Russe would tant the Polacks, that they loved their ease at home with their wives, and to drinke, and were not at commandement of their king. This Sigismund had to wife the daughter of Ferdinando, Charles the fifts brother, and he died without issue. Polotzko re- Since which time their late elected king Stephanus Batore tiered by t Russe jn better order, and recovered Polotzko Batore. againe in the yere 1579. Thus with my heartie farewell{n}I take my leave of your worship.{n}Your assured friend Henrie Lane.{n}