The discoverie made by M. Arthur Pet, and M. Charles Jackman, of the Northeast parts, beyond the Island of Vaigatz, with two Barkes: the one called the George, the other the William, in the yeere 1580. Written by Hugh Smith.{n}Pon Munday the 30. of May, we departed from Harwich in the afternoone, the winde being at South, and to the Eastward. The ebbe being spent we could not double the pole, and therefore were constrained to put in againe untill the next day in the morning, being the last{n}of May: which day wee wayed our ankers about 3. a clocke in the morning, the wind being West southwest. The same day we passed Orfordnesse at an East Sunne, and Stamford at a West Sunne, and Yarmouth at a West northwest sunne, and so to Winterton, where we did anker al night: it was then calme, and the flood was come.{n}The next day being the first of June, we set saile at 3. a clocke in the morning, and set our course North, the wind at the Southwest, and at Southsouthwest.{n}The 10. day about one of the clocke in the afternoone, wee put into Norway to a place where one of the headlands of the sound is called Bottel: the other headland is called Moile. There is also an Island called Kene. Heere I did find the pole to be elevated 62. deg. it doeth flowe there South, and it hieth 7. or 8. foote, not above.{n}The 11. day in the morning the winde came to the South and to the Southeast: the same day at sixe in 282{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580. the afternoone we set saile, and bare along the coast: it was very foule weather with raine and fogge.{n}The 22. day the wind being at West, we did hall the The North coast East northeast, and East. The same day at 6. in doubled. the morning we did double the north cape. About 3. in the afternoone wee past Skites beare nesse, and hald along the coast East, and East southeast, and all the same night wee hailed Southeast, and Southeast by East.{n}The 23. day about 3. in the morning we came to Wardhouse. Wardhouse, the wind at the Northwest. The cause of our comming in was to seeke the William, whose com-panie wee lost the 6. day of this moneth, and to send  letters into England. About one of the clock in the after noone the William also came into Wardhouse to us in good safetie, and all her company in good health.{n}The 24. the wind came to the East Northeast. This day the William was hald a ground, because she was somewhat leake, and to mend her steerage. This night about 12. of the clocke she did hale a flote againe.{n}The 25. day the wind was at East northeast.{n}The 26. day the Toby of Harwich departed from Wardhouse for London, Thomas Greene being master, to whom we delivered our letters.{n}The 27. day the wind was at South southeast, and the 28. also.{n}The 29. day about 6. in the afternoone, the wind came to the West northwest for the space of one houre, and presently to the East againe, and so was variable all the same night.{n}The 30. about sixe in the morning, the winde came to East southeast, and continued so all the same day.{n}The first of July about 5. in the afternoone, the wind July. was at Northnorthwest: and about 7. of the clocke we set saile from Wardhouse East and by South.{n}The second day about 5. in the morning, the wind was East, and East southeast, and we did lie to the shorewards. And about 10. in morning the wind came to South southeast, and we laid it to the Eastward: some-283{n}time we lay East by South, sometime East southeast, and sometimes East by North. About 5. in the afternoone we bare with the William, who was willing to goe with Kegor, because we thought her to be out of trie, and sailed very ill, where we might mend her steerage: whereupon master Pet not willing to go into harborough said to master Jackman, that if he thought himselfe not able to keepe the sea, he should doe as he thought best, and that he in the meane time would beare with Willoughbies Willoughbies land, for that it was a parcel of our land. direction, and would meete him at Verove Ostrove, or Vaigats, and so we set our course East northeast, the winde being at Southeast.{n}The 3. day the winde at Southeast we found the pole to be elevated 70. degrees, 46. minuts. The same night at 12. of the clocke we sounded, but had no ground, 50. leagues in I2o. fathoms, being fifty leagues from the one side from Kegor. our reckoning East northeast from Kegor.{n}The 4. day all the morning was calme. This day we found the pole to be elevated 71. degrees 38. minutes. This day at 9. in the afternoone the wind at Northeast with a gentle gale, we hald along Southeast by East.{n}The 5. day the wind at Northwest, we hald East and East by South : this day we saw land, but we could not make it, the wind being Northerly, so that we could not come neere to it.{n}The 6. day about 2. in the afternoone, the wind at North northwest, we halde East southeast with a faire and gentle gale : this day we met with ice. About 6. in the afternoone it became calme : we with saile and oares laide it to the Northeast part, hoping that way to cleare us of it : for that way we did see the head part of it, as we thought. Which done, about 12. of the clocke at night we gate cleere of it. We did thinke it to be ice of the bay of Saint Nicholas, but it was not J sight of as we f°und afterwards.{n}perfect land. The seventh day we met with more yce, at the East 284{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580. part of the other yce : we halde along a weather the yce to finde some ende thereof by East northeast. This day there appeared more land North from us being perfect land : the ice was betweene us and it, so that we could not come neerer to it.{n}The same morning at sixe of the clocke wee put into the ice to finde some way through it, wee continued in it all the same day and all the night following, the winde by the North Northwest. Wee were constrained to goe many pointes of our compasse, but we went most an Easterly course.{n}The eight day the winde at North northwest, we continued our course, and at five in the morning we sounded, and had 90. fadoms red oze. This day at foure in the afternoone we sounded againe, and had .84. fadoms oze, as before. At sixe in the after noone we cleared our selves of the ice, and hald along Southeast by South : we sounded againe at 10. a clocke at night, and had 43. fathom sandy oze.{n}The 9. day at 2. in the morning, we sounded againe, and had 45. fadoms, then there appeared a shadow of land to us East Northeast, and so we ran with it the space of 2. houres, and then perceiving that it was but fogge, we hald along Southeast.{n}This day at 2. in the afternoone wee sounded and 7^-	3-{n}had fiftie fadoms blacke oze. Our latitude was 70. mtn' degrees three minutes. At tenne a clocke at night wee sounded againe, and had fiftie fadoms blacke oze.{n}The tenth day the wind being at North northwest, we haled East and by North, which course we set, because  at ten of the clocke afore noone wee did see land, and then wee sounded having 35. fadoms blacke oze. All this day there was a great fogge, so that wee durst not beare with the land to make it, and so we kept an outwardly course. This day at 6. in the afternoone we espied land, wherewith we hailed, and then it grew calme : we sounded and had 120. fadoms blacke oze : and then we sent our boat a land to sound and prove the land.{n}285{n}The same night we came with our ship within an An Island. Island, where we rode all the same night. The same night wee went into a bay to ride neere the land for wood and water.{n}The malne The 11. day the wind came to the East southeast : land- this day about a league from us to the Eastwards, we saw a very faire sound or river that past very farre into the countrey with 2. or 3. branches with an Island in the midst.{n}The 12. of July the wind was East Southeast. This day about 11. a clocke in the morning, there came a great white beare down to the water side, and tooke the water of his own accord, we chased him with our boate, but for all that we could doe, he gote to land Bearebay. and escaped from us, where we named the bay Bearebay. This day at 7. in the after noone we set saile, for we had good hope that the winde would come Westerly, and with saile and oares we gate the sea. All the night it was calme with fogge.{n}The 13. day in the morning the wind was very variable with fog, and as it cleared up wee met with great store of ice, which at the first shewed like land. This ice did us much trouble, and the more because of the fog, which continued untill the 14. day, 12. of the clocke.{n}The 14. day in the morning we were so imbayed with ice, y* we were constrained to come out as we went in, which was by great good fortune, or rather by the goodnesse of God, otherwise it had bene impossible, and at 12. of the clock we were cleere of it, the wind being at South and South by West. The same day 70. deg. 26. we found the pole to be elevated 70. degrees, 26. mtn-	minutes : we lay along the coast Northwest, thinking{n}it to be an Island, but finding no end in rowing so long, The supposed we supposed it to be the maine of Nova Zembla. About ^embia^0™ 2‘ *n afternoone we laide it to the Southward to ' double the ice, which wee could not doe upon that boorde, so that we cast about againe and lay West along under the ice. About seven in the afternoone{n}286{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580. we gote about the greatest part thereof. About 11. a clock at night we brought the ice Southeast of us, and thus we were ridde of this trouble at this time.{n}The 15. day about 3. in the morning, the wind was at South southwest: wee cast about and lay to the Eastwards: the winde did Wester, so that wee lay South southwest with a flawne sheete, and so we ranne all the same day. About 8. in the after noone we sounded, and had 23. fadoms small grey sand. This night at twelve of the clocke we sounded againe, and had 29. fadoms sand, as afore.{n}The 16. day unto 3. in the morning we hald along East Southeast, where we found 18. fadoms red sand, then we hald along Northeast. In these soundings wee had many overfals. This day at 10. of the clocke we Many overmet with more ice, which was very great, so that we fab. coulde not tell which way to get cleere of it. Then the winde came to the South Southeast, so that we lay to the Northwards. We thought that way to cleere our selves of it, but that way we had more ice. About 6. in the afternoone, the wind came to the East. Then we lay to the Southwards that wee had 30. fadoms blacke oze. This day we found the pole to bee elevated 69. deg. 40. minutes, and this night at 12. a clocke we had 41. fadoms red sand.{n}The 17. day at 3. in the morning, we had 12. fadoms. At 9. we had 8. and 7. all this day we ran South and South by West, at the depth aforesaid, red sand, being but shallow water. At eight in the afternoone, the winde with a showre and thunder came to the Southwest, and then wee ranne East Northeast. At 12. at night it came to the South and by East, and all this was in the bay of Pechora.	The bay of{n}The 18. day at 7. in the morning we bare with the w*0™-headland of the bay, where wee founde two Islands. There are also overfals of water or tides. We went between the maine and the Island, next to the head, where we had about 2. fadoms and a halfe. We found{n}287{n}They had sight the pole elevated 69. deg. 13 minutes. This day we of Vaygatz.	sight of Vaigatz: the land of the maine of Pechora{n}did trend Southeast, we hald East southeast, and had 10. fadoms oze all the same day untill 4. in the after noone, then being calme, we ankered in 10. fadoms all the same night.{n}The 19. day at two in the morning we set saile, and ran South and South southwest all the same day at 8. 7. and 6. fadoms, this was ofF the South part of Vaigatz, this part of the land lieth North and South. This day at 4. in the afternoone we found shallow water sometime 4. fadoms, sometime 3. and 2. and a halfe, and one fadome and a halfe : there we ankered and sent our boate away to sound, and all to leeward we had 4. foote and 3. foote, and 2. foot, there was not water for the boate betweene Vaigatz & the other side : finding no more water, there was no other way  but to goe backe as we came in, having the wind Northwest, so at twelve at night we set saile.{n}The 20. day we plied to the Northwards, and got deepe water againe 6. and 7. fadoms.{n}The 21. day the winde by the Northwest, we hald along the coast North and North northwest, we had 8. and 9. and 10. fadoms.{n}The 22. day the winde came to the Southwest, wee bare along the coast of Vaygatz, as wee found it to lie North and by West, and North northwest, and North. The winde blewe very much with great fogge, we lacking An Island water and wood bare within an Island where wee founde having store of great store of wood and water, there were three or wood tS water. 9	j tt 1	•	1{n}roure goodly sounds. Under two points there was a crosse set up, and a man buried at the foote of it. Upon the said crosse Master Pet did grave his name with the date of our Lorde, and likewise upon a stone at the foote of the crosse, and so did I also, to the end that if the William did chaunce to come thither, they might have knowledge that wee had beene there. At eight in the afternoone the winde came to the North north-{n}288{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580.{n}west, we set saile and turned out of the Bay. The same night the winde came to the West, so that wee lay North along the land.{n}The 23. day at five in the morning, the wind came to the Southwest, a Sea boord we sawe a great number of faire Islands, to the number of sixe : a sea boord faire of these Islands, there are many great overfals, as great islands-streames or tides : we halde Northeast and East northeast as the lande did trend. At eight aforenoone the winde came to the Southeast with very much wind, raine and fogge, and very great store of ice a sea boorde : so we lay to the Southwest to attaine to one of the Islands to harbour us if the weather did so extremely continue, and to take in our boate, thinking it meete so to doe, and not to towe her in such weather. About twelve of the clocke it became very calme upon the sudden, and came up to the West Northwest, and Northwest by West, and then we tooke in our boate, and this done, there came downe so much winde, as we were not able to steere afore it, with corse and bonnets of each, we hald South with the land, for so the land did trend. This day all the afternoone we sailed under a great land of ice, we sailed betweene the land and it, being not able to crosse it. About twelve at night we found the ice to stretch into the land, that we could not get cleare to the Eastward, so we laide it to the shore, and there we founde it cleare hard aboord the shore, and we found also a very faire Island which makes a very good harbour, and within are 12. fadoms.{n}This Island is to ye Eastwards of Vaigatz, 4 or 5. -An Island to leagues. This land of the maine doth trend Southeast,	gr{n}and Southeast by East. It is a very faire coast, and	°r{n}even and plaine, and not full of mountaines nor rocks : you have but shallow water of 6. or 7. fadoms, about a league from the shore, all this morning we hailed East southeast. This day we found the pole to be elevated 69. degrees 14. minutes. About 12. a clocke we were constrained to put into the ice to seeke some{n}in	289	T{n}The William and the George meete againe.{n}way to get to the Northwards of it, hoping to have some cleare passage that way, but there was nothing but whole ice. About nine in the afternoone we had sight of the William, and when wee sawe her, there was a great land of ice betweene her and us, so that we could not come one to the other, but as we came neere to her, we sounded our trumpet and shot ofF two muskets, and she put out her flag upon her foretopmaste in token that she did see us : all this time wee did shorten our sailes, and went with our foresaile & mainetopsaile, seeking the best way through the broken ice, she making away the best that she could to follow us, we put out our flagge to answere her again with the like : thus wee continued all the afternoone till about 12. a clocke at night, and then we moared our ship to a piece of ice to tarie for the William.{n}The 25. day about five in the morning, the William came to us, being both glad of our meeting. The William had her sterne post broken, that the rudder did hang clean besides the sterne, so that she could in no wise port her helme, with all hands she did lighten her sterne, and trimme her head, and when we had brought her forward all that we could, wee brought a cable under her sterne, and with our capstaine did wind up her sterne, and so we made it as wel as the place would give us leave, and in the ende wee brought her to steere againe. Wee acknowledge this our meeting to be a great benefite of God for our mutuall comfort, and so gave his majestie thanks for it. All the night after we tooke our rest being made fast upon a piece of ice : the winde was at West Northwest, but wee were so inclosed with ice that we coulde not tell which way to passe. Windes wee have had at will, but ice and fogge too much against our willes, if it had pleased the Lord God otherwise.{n}The 26. day the wind was at West Northwest: we set saile to the Northwardes, to seeke if we could finde any way cleare to passe to the Eastward, but the further 290{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580. we went that way, the more and thicker was the ice, so that wee coulde goe no further. So about foure in the afternoon we were constrained to moare upon another piece of ice. I thinke we sailed in all a league this day, here we had 15. fadoms oze, and this oze is all the chanell over. All the same day after foure of the clocke,  and all the night we tarried there, being without all good hope, but rather in despaire. This day Master Jugman did see land East Northeast from us, as he did thinke, whether it were land or no, I cannot tell well, but it was very like land, but the fogges have many times deceived us.{n}The 27. day the winde was at Northwest. This day at nine in the morning we set saile to seeke the shore. Further into the ice we could not goe, and at seven in the afternoone we moared to a piece of ice, and the William with us, here we had 14. fathoms oze. At three in the afternoone we warpt from one ice to another. At nine in the afternoone we moared againe to a piece of ice untill the next day. All this night it did snow with much wind, being at West Northwest, and at Northwest, and by West.{n}The 28. day the winde came to the Southwest, and Southsouthwest: this day was a very faire day. At one in the afternoone master Pet and master Jackman did conferre together what was best to be done considering that the windes were good for us, and we not able to passe for ice, they did agree to seeke to the land againe, and so to Vaygatz, and there to conferre further. At Their return. 3. in the afternoone we did warpe from one piece of ice to another to get from them if it were possible : here were pieces of ice so great, that we could not see beyond them out of the toppe. Thus we warped until 9. in the afternoone, and then we moared both our shippes to a great and high piece of ice, untill the next morning.{n}The nine and twentie day the winde came to the Southwest, wee set saile at five in the morning to plie{n}291{n}The currant runneth with the winde.{n}into the shore if it were possible, we made many turnes among the ice to small purpose, for with the winde doeth the currant runne. This day by misfortune a piece of ice stroke of our greepe afore at two afternoone, yet for all this we turned to doe our best. The William beeing incumbered with ice, and perceiving that shee did litle good, tooke in all her sailes, and made her selfe fast to a piece of ice, and about foure in the afternoone she set saile to followe us. We were afraide that shee had taken some hurt, but she was well. At seven afore noone we tooke in all our sailes to tarie for the William, and made our shippe fast to a piece of ice : the William before she came to us tooke in all her sailes, and moared to another piece of ice, and thus we continued untill the next morning.{n}The 30. day the winde at Southeast, and by South, and at 9. in the morning we set saile, and sooner would have done if ye William had bene by us, but we did tary for her to know whether all was well with her: But as soone as we made saile, she did the like. All this day wee did our best to seeke our way as the ice would give us leave, sometime we lay South, sometime West, and sometime East, and thus we continued untill eight at night, and then being calme, wee made our ship fast to a piece of ice, and went to supper. In the meane time the wind with a faire gentle gale came up to the East, and East and by South, but there came downe a showre of raine with it, which continued the space of one houre : Which being done, it became calme againe, so that wee could doe no good all that night, but tooke our rest untill the next day.{n}The 31. the winde being at Southwest, we set saile to turne to windeward at three a clock in the morning. In this turning we did litle good, for the currant would not give us leave. For as the winde is, so is the currant. We did our best untill ten of the clocke, and then perceiving that we did no good, and being inclosed with ice, wee made our ships fast to a piece of ice :{n}292{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580.{n}All this day the William lay still, and did as much good as we that did labour all the fbrenoone. Thus we took our rest all the same day.{n}In the afternoone we set saile, the winde being at South & by East, we lay to the Westwards, as Southwest and Southwest and by South, and sometime to the Westward as wee might. Thus we continued until 9. at night, and then we could go no further for ice : so we with the William were constrained to make our ship fast to a piece of ice al the same night. This day we found the pole elevated 69. degrees 20. minutes, and here we had 17. fathoms oze.{n}The first day of August was verie calme in the August. morning, the winde beeing at West Northwest. About twelve the winde came to the West, and continued so all the same night with great fogge.{n}The second day the winde was at Southwest all day with rayne and fogge. All this day wee were inclosed with ice, so that we were forced to lye still. Here we had one and twentie fathoms oze. At sixe in the afternoone the winde was at West with very much foule weather, and so continued all the same night.{n}The third day the winde was at West, and West by North, and West Northwest, this day we lay still inclosed with yce, the weather beeing darke with fogge : thus abiding the Lords leasure, we continued with patience. And sounding we found 21. fathoms.{n}The fourth day we lay still inclosed with ice, the winde being at West Northwest, this ice did every day  increase upon us, yet putting our trust in God, we hoped to be delivered out of it in good time.{n}The fift day all the morning it rained with very much wind, being at South Southeast : about 3. in the after noone we set sayle, and presently it became calme for the space of one houre, then the wind came to the North Northeast, and here we had 33. fathoms : thus we made way among the yce Southwest, and Southsouthwest, & West, as we might finde our way for 293{n}A whole land the space of 3. houres : then we met with a whole °fyce- land of yce, so that we could go no further : here we moared our ship to tarie for a further opening. Here we found 45. fathoms oze, and all the night was very darke with fogge.{n}The sixt day having no opening of the yce wee lay still, the winde being at West, and West by South : here we had sixty three fathoms oze : all the same night the winde was at the West Northwest.{n}The 7. day the winde was at West, and West and by North all day. And all this day we lay still being inclosed with yce, that we could not stirre, labouring onely to defend the yce as it came upon us. Here we had 68. fathoms oze.{n}The 8. day was very faire & calme but foggy. This day towards night there was litle winde by the South Southwest : then the yce began a litle to open, and here we had 70. fathoms oze : all the night was foggy.{n}The 9. day the winde was at Northwest, and by West, all the afternoone we lay still because of the yce, which did still inclose us. This day we found 70. degr. 4. the pole elevated seventy degrees, 4. minutes, we had mtn-	63. fathoms oze : this night was a very fayre night,{n}Frost.	but it freezed : in the morning we had much adoe to{n}goe through the same : and we were in doubt that if it should have freezed so much the night following, The appearing we should hardly have passed out of it. This night ^i^e	was one star that appeared to us.{n}The tenth day the winde was at East Northeast with a very small gale. Wee with saile and oares made way through the yce : about five in the morning we set saile : sometime wee laye Southwest, and sometime South, and sometime West, as wee might best finde the way. About three in the afternoone the gale began to fresh : about sixe in the afternoone the winde was at Northeast with fogge. Here we had eighty eight Much snow, fathoms : we bare saile all the same night, and it snowed very much.{n}294{n}The eleventh day we were much troubled with yce, and by great force we made our way through it, which we thought a thing impossible : but extremity doth cause men to doe much, and in the weakenesse of man Gods strength most appeareth. This day we had 95. fathoms. At three in the afternoone the winde came to the Southwest, we were forced to make our shippe fast to a piece of yce, for we were inclosed with it, and taried the Lordes leasure. This night we had 97. fathoms.{n}The 12. day the wind was at the Southeast not very much but in a maner calme : at a 11. of the clocke the winde came to the West Southwest : all the day was very darke with snowe and fogge. At 6. in the afternoone we set saile the winde being at the North Northeast: all this night we bare away Southwest, and Southsouthwest, as well and as neere as the yce would give us leave : all this night we found the yce somewhat favourable to us, more then it was before, wherupon we stood in good hope to get out of it.{n}The 13. day at 7. in the morning, the winde was at the Northeast, and Northeast and by East : all this day we were much troubled with the yce, for with a blow against a piece of yce we brake the stocke of our ancre, and many other great blowes we had against the yce, that it was marveilous that the ship was able to abide them : the side of our boate was broken with our ship which did recule backe, the boate being betwixt a great piece of yce, and the ship, and it perished the head of our rudder. This day was a very hard day with us : at night we found much broken yce, and all this night it blewe very much winde, so that we lay in drift with the yce, & our drift was South, for the winde was at North all this night, and we had great store of snowe.{n}The 14. day in the morning wee made our shippe fest to a piece of yce, and let her drive with it. In the meane time wee mended our boate and our steerage : all this day the winde continued Northerly, and here 295{n}Great store of snowe.{n}They are thwart against Vaigats.{n}Sands.{n}wee had threescore and two fathoms. Thus we lay a drift all the same night.{n}The 15. day we set saile at 6. in the morning, the winde being at Northeast. At 9. aforenoon we entred into a cleare Sea without yce, whereof wee were most glad, and not without great cause, and gave God the praise. We had 19. fathoms water, and ranne in Southwest all the morning untill we came to 14. fathoms, and thence we hailed West, til we came to 10. fathoms, and then we went Northwest, for so the land doeth trend. At 12. of the clocke we had sight of the land, which wee might have had sooner, but it was darke and foggie all the same day : for when wee had sight of the lande, wee were not passing three leagues from it. This day we had the pole elevated 69 degrees 49 minutes. All day we ran along the coast in ten and nine fadoms, pepered sand. It is a very goodly coast and a bolde, and faire soundings off it, without sandes or rocks.{n}The 16 day the winde was at East : this day we were troubled againe with ice, but we made great shift with it : for we gotte betweene the shoare and it. This day at twelve of the clocke we were thwart of the Southeast part of Vaigats, all along which part there was great store of yce, so that we stood in doubt of passage, yet by much adoe we got betwixt the shoare and it : about 6 in the afternoone was found a great white beare upon a piece of ice : all this day in the afternoone it was darke with fogge. And all the night we haled North and North by West, and sometime North and by East, for so doth the land trend.{n}The 17 day in the morning we haled West, for so doth the land lie. The wind was at Southeast, and it was very darke with fogge, and in running along the shoare we fell a ground, but God be praised without hurt, for wee came presendy ofF againe. The William came to an anker to stay for us, and sent some of their men to help us, but before they came we were 296{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580. under saile, and as we came to the William we did stowe our boates, and made saile, we went within some of the Islands, and haled Westsouthwest.	The Islands.{n}About two of the clocke in the afternoone, we set our course Southwest and by South : so we ranne Southwest untill twelve at night, the wind came to the Northnortheast, and then we haled West.{n}The 18 day at 6 in the morning we had 16 fadoms red sand : at 6 in the morning 13 fadoms. At 10, 14 fadoms, and we haled Westnorthwest. At 12 a clocke the winde came to the East, and East by South, we haled West and by North all the same day and night. At 6 in the afternoone we had 17 fadoms red sand.{n}The 19 day the wind was at Eastnortheast : at 6 in the morning wee had 19 fathoms red sand: at 12 of the clocke the wind blew North and North by East, we had 17 fadoms of water, at 3 in the afternoone 15.{n}The 20 day the wind was at Northeast, and Northnortheast : at 7 in the morning we had 30 fadomes blacke oze : at twelve of the clocke we were upon the suddaine in shoale water, among great sands, and could find no way out. By sounding and seeking about, we came aground, and so did the William, but we had no hurt, for the wind was off the shoare, and the same night it was calme : all night we did our best, but we could not have her aflote. These shoales doe lie off Shoales off Colgoyeve : it is very flat a great way off, and it doth not high above 2 or 3 foote water : it floweth Northeast, and Southwest.{n}The 21 day the wind was at Southwest, and being very faire weather we did lighten our ships as much as was possible for us to doe, by reason of the place. The same high water, by the helpe of God, we got both a floate, and the wind being at the Southwest did help us, for it caused it to flow the more water.{n}This day we found the pole to be elevated 68 degrees 40 min. In the afternoone we both set saile to seeke way to get out of these sands, our boate a{n}297{n}The bay of Morzovets.{n}head sounding, having 6, 7, and 8 fadomes all within the sand which was without us. We bare to the Southward, and the William bare more to the Eastwards, and night being at hand the wind came to the Southeast, whereupon we layd it to the Southwards, lying Southwest, and South and by West, and ran to 19, and 12 and 14 fadoms, and presently we had but sixe fadoms, which was off the sands head, which we were a ground upon the day before. Then we cast about to the Eastwards for deepe water, which we presently had, as 10, 15, and 20 and so to 23 fadoms.{n}The 22 day at 8 in the morning, we cast about to the Southward, and this day in the morning we saw the William under our lee as far as we could see her, and with a great fogge we lost the sight of her, and since we have not seene her. Thus we ranne till we came to thirtie fadomes blacke oze, which we had at twelve of the clocke, and at three in the afternoone we had twenty and three fadoms, and then we ranne Westnorthwest, and West by North, all the same night following.{n}The 23 day we had at 6 in the morning 27 fadoms, at 8 a clocke 28 fadoms: at 9 the winde being at Eastsoutheast, we haled Westnorthwest: this day we had sight of the land of Hugri side. At twelve of the clocke we had thirty two fadoms sand. This day we ranne West and by North, and came to five fadoms off the bay of Morzovets. Then we layd it to the Northwards, so that we lay Northnortheast off. The wind after came to the North, and North by East, and we lay East and East by North, then we layd it to the Westward againe: and thus we lay till we came to fortie fadoms, and then we went Northwest till wee came to fourteene fadoms, and so to tenne fadoms. Then we cast about to the Eastwards and lay East, and East by North all the same night.{n}The 24 day at 8 in the morning we had 32 fadoms. We ran Northwest till we came to 11 fadoms, then we lay to the Northwards till 12 at night, and then we 298{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN a.d.{n}1580. came to forty fadoms, then the wind at Northeast we lay to the Westwards, and haled Northwest along.{n}The 25 at 4 in the morning we had 37 fadoms, wee ranne Northwest, the winde at Northnortheast very much.{n}The 26 day we ran with the same winde, and found the pole to be elevated 70 deg. 40 min.{n}The 27 at 7 in the morning we saw land, which we made to be Kegor, then we haled Northwest, and North by West to double the North Cape.{n}The 28 day at 3 in the morning we ran Northwest, and so all day. At night the wind came to the Southwest, and we ran Northwest all that night.{n}The 29 day we put into a sound called Tane, and the The towne of towne is called Hungon: we came to an ancre at 5 in Hungon. the afternoone, at 25 fadoms very faire sand. This sound is very large and good, and the same night we got water aboord.{n}The 30 day in the morning the winde at Northeast, and but litle, we set saile, and with our boate on head we got the sea about 12 of the clocke : the wind with a faire gale came to the East Southeast, and all this day and night we ran Westnorthwest.{n}The 31 day at 12 of the clocke we doubled the North They double Cape, the wind being at Eastsoutheast, we haled West North all the same day, and at night we ran Westsouthwest.	m{n}The 1 day of September the wind was at Northeast with very much fogge: all this day we ran Westsouthwest: at 2 in the afternoone the wind came North.{n}The second day at 3 in the morning we doubled Fowlnesse, & the wind was this day variable at all parts of the Compasse. In the afternoone we made but litle way: at 6 a clocke the winde came to the Southwest, and we went Northwest. At 9 in the night there came downe so much winde by the Westsouth west, that we were faine to lay it a hull, we haled it to Northwards for the space of 2 houres, and then we layd her head to the Southwards, and at the breake of day we saw land, which is very high, and is called by the men of the{n}299{n}The sound of Romesal.{n}countrey Foulenesse. It is within ful of small Islands, and without full of rocks very farre out, and within the rockes you have fayre sand at 20 fadoms.{n}The 3 day in the morning we bare with the sound aforesaid: Within it is but shoale water, 4 5 and 3 fadoms, sandie ground, the land is very high, and the Church that is seene is called Helike Kirke. It doeth high here not above 8 or 9 foote.{n}The 12 day at 3 in the afternoone, we put into a sound by Lowfoote, where it doeth flowe Southwest, and by South, and doth high 7 or 8 foote water.{n}The 13 day much wind at West: we had a ledge of rocks in the wind of us, but the road was reasonable good for all Southerly and Westerly winds. We had the maine land in the winde of us: this day was stormie with raine.{n}The 23 day at foure of the clocke in the afternoone we put into Norway, into a sound called Romesal, where it floweth Southsoutheast, and doth high 8 foote water: this place is full of low Islands, and many good sounds without the high mountaine land. Here is great store of wood growing, as firre, birch, oke, and hasell: all this night the wind was at the South, very much winde, with raine and fogge.{n}The 28 day in the morning the wind being at Eastnortheast we set saile at 8 of the clocke, and haled out of the bay Westsouthwest, and Southwest, having a goodly gale untill one of the clocke, and then the wind came to Southeast, and to the South with raine and fogge, and very much winde: at sixe of the clocke we came into a very good rode, where we did ride all the same night in good safetie.{n}The 29 day we put into a good sound, the wind by the Southwest: at three in the afternoone there came downe very much wind by the South, and all night with vehement Wastes, and raine.{n}The 30 day all day the wind was at Westsouth west. And in this sound the pole is elevated 63 deg. 10 min.{n}300{n}ARTHUR PET AND CHARLES JACKMAN AD.{n}1580.{n}The first day of October the winde was at South with October. very much winde, and vehement blastes.{n}The 7 day we set saile: for from the first of this moneth untill this 7 day, we had very foule weather, but specially the fourth day when the wind was so great, that our cables brake with the very storme, and I do not thinke that it is possible that any more wind then that was should blow: for after the breaking of our  cable, we did drive a league, before our ankers would take any hold: but God be thanked the storme began to slacke, otherwise we had bene in ill case.{n}The 7. day at night we came to an anker until the next day, which was the 8 day of the moneth, when as the winde grew great againe, with raine, whereupon we set saile and returned into the sound againe: and at our first comming to an anker, presently there blew so much winde, that although our best anker was out, yet the extremitie of the storm drove us upon a ledge of rocks, and did bruse our ship in such sort, that we were constrained to lighten her to save her, and by this meanes (by the helpe of God) we got ofF our ship and stopped our leakes, and moared her in good safetie abiding for a wind. We rid from this day by reason of contrary winds, with fogge and raine untill the 24 day, which day in the morning the wind came to the Northeast, and at 8 of the clocke we set saile. This sound is called Moore Moore sound. sound, where it higheth about 5 foote water, & floweth Southsoutheast. The next day being the 2 5 day wee put into a sound which is called Ultar sound, where was a ship of the king of Denmark put into another sound there by, being 2 leagues to the southwards of us, that came out of Island: ye wind was contrary for us at Southsouthwest.{n}The 12 day of November we set saile the wind being at the East Southeast, and past through the sound where the kings ship did lie: which sound is called Sloure sound. But as we did open the sound, we found the wind at the Southwest, so that we could doe no good, so 301{n}that we moared our ship betweene 2. Islands until the 18 day, and then the weather being faire and calme, we set saile, 8c went to sea hoping to find a faire wind, but in the sea we found the wind at the Southwest, and Southsouthwest, so that we were constrained to returne into the same sound.{n}The next day being the 19 the kings ship came out also, because she saw us put to sea, 8c came as farre out as we, and moared where we did moare afore: And at our returne backe againe, we moared our ship in an utter sound called Scorpe sound, because the kings ship was without victuals, and we did not greatly desire her company, although they desired ours. In this sound the pole is elevated 62 deg. 47 min. Thus we lay stil for a wind untill the 1 of December, which day we set saile at 6 a clocke in the morning, 8c at 4 in the afternoone we laid it to the inwards.{n}The 9 day we had sight of the coast of Scotland which was Buquhamnesse.{n}The 10 day we were open off the Frith.{n}The 11 day at 4 in the morning we were thwart of Barwike : at 6 we were thwart of Bamburch : the same day at 10 at night we were shot as farre as Hollyfoote. Then the wind came to the South and Southeast, so that we lay still untill the next day in the morning, and then we were constrained to put with Tinmouth. The same day at night wee haled aground to stoppe a leake, which we found to be in the skarfe afore. The wind continued by the Southeast 8c Southsoutheast untill the 20 day, and then we set saile about 12 at night, bearing along the coast.{n}The 22 day by reason of a Southeast wind, we thought we should have bene put into Humber, but the wind came to the West, so that we haled Southeast : and at 3 in the afternoone we haled a sea boord the sands, and had shoale water off Lymery and Owry, and were in 4 fadomes off them. The next day we haled as we might to sease Orfordnesse.{n}302{n}INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUSSIAN FLEET a.d.{n}1582.{n}The 24 day we came thwart of the Nase, about 8 in the morning.{n}The 25 day being the Nativity of Christ, we came to an anker betweene Oldhaven, and Tilberie hope. The same day we turned as high as Porshet.{n}The 26 day we turned as high as Ratcliffe, and praised God for our safe returne. And thus I ende, 1580.{n}The William with Charles Jackman arrived at a port in Norway betweene Tronden and Rostock in October 1580. and there did winter: And from thence departed againe in Februarie following, and went in company of a ship of the King of Denmarke toward Island: and since that time he was never heard of.{n}