A letter of Gerardus Mercator, written to M.  Richard Hakluyt of Oxford, touching the intended discoverie of the Northeast passage, An. 1580.{n}276{n}277{n}T. H. paratissimus{n}The same in English.{n}Sir, I received your letters the 19. of June : it grieved me much that upon the sight of them the time being spent, I could not give any convenient instructions : I wish Arthur Pet had bene informed before his departure of some speciali points. The voyage to Cathaio by the East, is doutlesse very easie and short, and I have oftentimes marveiled, that being so happily begun, it hath bene left of, and the course changed into the West, after that 278{n}more then halfe of your voiage was discovered. For A great gulfe beyond the Island of Vaigats and Nova Zembla, there u beyond foloweth presently a great Baie, which on the left side is inclosed with the mightie promontorie Tabin. Into the mighty rivers mids hereof there fall great rivers, which passing through descend. the whole countrey of Serica, and being as I thinke navigable with great vessels into ye heart of the continent, may be an easie means whereby to traffique for all maner of merchandize, and transport them out of Cathaio, Mangi, Mien, and other kingdoms thereabouts into England. But considering with my selfe that that navigation was not intermitted, but upon great occasion, I thought that the Emperor of Russia and Moscovie had hindered the proceeding thereof. If so be that with his grace and favour a further navigation may be made, I would counsell them certainly not first to seeke out the promontorie Tabin, but to search this baie and rivers The best aforesayd, and in them to picke and chuse out some c^se t0 convenient port and harborough tor the English discoveries. merchants, from whence afterward with more opportunitie and lesse perill, the promontorie Tabin and all the coast of Cathaio may bee discovered. And that there is such a huge promontorie called Tabin, I am certainly perswaded not onely out of Plinie, but also other writers, and some Maps (though somewhat rudely drawen :) and that the pole of the Loadstone is not farre beyond Tabin, I have learned by the certaine observations of the Loadstone: about which pole and Tabin I thinke there are very many rockes, and very hard and dangerous sailing : and yet a more hard and difficile passage I thinke it to bee this way which is now attempted by the West, for it is neerer to the pole of the Loadstone, to the which I thinke it not safe to approch. And because the Loadstone hath another pole then that of the world, to the which from all parts it hath a respect, the neerer you come unto it, the more the needle of the Compasse doeth varie from the North, sometimes to the West, and sometimes to the East, according as a man is to the Eastward or to the{n}279{n}Westward of that Meridian, that passeth by both the poles of the Magnes and the World.{n}This is a strange alteration and very apt to deceive the Sailer, unlesse hee know the unconstancie and variation of the Compasse, and take the elevation of the pole somtimes with his instruments. If master Arthur be not well provided in this behalfe, or of such dexteritie, that perceiving the errour he be not able to correct the same, I feare least in wandering up and downe he lose his time, and be overtaken with the ice in the midst of the enterprise. For that gulfe, as they say, is frozen every yere very hard. Which if it be so, the best counsel I could give for their best safetie, were to seeke some harborough in that baie, and those rivers whereof I have spoken, and by some Ambassador to make friendship and acquaintance with the great Can, in name of the Queenes majestie, which I beleeve will be gratefull to the mightiest Emperour in the world, yea most excellent for the length of the traffique, and great distance of The mouthes the places. I thinke from the mouthes of the mighty rivers Bautisus and Oechardus to Cambalu the chiefest andOechardus	c .	.	,	„	.{n}300. leagues seat °* the prince the Can, there are not past 300. from Cam- Germane miles, and to passe by Ezina a citie of the balu.	kingdom of Tangut, which seemeth to be but 100.{n}Germane miles from the mouthes of the sayd rivers, and is subject to the great Can.{n}I would gladly know how high the sea doeth flowe commonly in the port of Moscovia where your men do harborow, and in other Easterly places unto Tabin. And also whether the sea in this streight do flow alwaies one way to the East or to the West, or whether it do ebbe [I. 445-1 and flow according to the maner of the tides in the ^burvatims of °? the chanel, that is to say, whether it flow there she tides J s'xe houres into the West, and as may backe againe to depend great the East, for hereupon depend other speculations of speculations, importance. I would wish M. Frobisher to observe the same Westwards. Concerning the gulfe of Merosro and Canada, and new France which are in my mappes,{n}280{n}they were taken out of a certaine sea card drawn by a certaine priest out of the description of a Frenchman, a Pilot very skilfull in those partes, and presented to the worthy prince George of Austria, bishop of Liege: for the trending of the coast, and the elevation of the pole, I doubt not but they are very neere the trueth: For the Charte had, beside a scale of degrees of latitude passing through the middest of it, another particularly annexed to the coast of New France, wherewith the errour of the latitudes committed by reason of the variation of the compasse might be corrected. The historic of the voyage of Jacobus Cnoyen Buschoducensis throughout al Asia, Afirica, and the North, was lent me in time past by a friend of mine at Antwerpe. After I had used it, I restored it againe: after many yeeres I required it againe of my friend, but hee had forgotten of whom hee had borrowed it. The writings of Gulielmus Tripolitanus, and Joannes de Plano Carpini I never saw: onely I found certaine pieces of them in other written hand bookes. I am glad the Epitomie of Abilfada is translated, I would we might have it shortly.{n}Thus much Sir I thought good to answere your letters: if there bee any thing els that you would require of me, I will most willingly communicate it with you, craving this likewise of your curtesie, that whatsoever observations of both these voyages shall come to your hands, you would impart them to me, they shall all remaine with mee according to your discretion and pleasure, and whatsoever I gather of them, I will faithfully signifie unto you by letters, if happily they may yeeld any helpe or light unto this most excellent enterprise of navigation, and most profitable to our Christian common wealth. Fare you well most learned friend. At Duisburg in Cliveland, 28. of Julie, the yeere, 1580.{n}At Arthur his returne I pray you learne of him the things I have requested, and whether any where in his voiage, he found the sea fresh, or not very salt: for 281{n}I suppose the Sea betweene Nova Zembla and Tabin to be fresh.{n}Yours wholly to my power to be commanded, Gerardus Mercator.{n}May.{n}June.{n}Kene an Island, of Norway.{n}