The Queenes Commission under her great seale, [n. i. 157.] to her servant master William Hareborne, to be her majesties Ambassadour or Agent, in the partes of Turkie. 1582.{n}221{n}The same in English.{n}ELizabeth, by the clemencie of the most good and most great God, the only creator and governour of all things, Queene of England, France, and Ireland, invincible, and most mightie defender of the true faith, against all Idolaters falsly professing the name of Christ, to all and singuler persons, to whose sight and view these our present letters may come, greeting. Whereas the 222{n}COMMISSION TO WILLIAM HAREBORNE o. 1582.{n}most renowmed, and most invincible Prince Zuldan Murad Can, the most mighty governour of the kingdom of Turkie, and Monarch of the East Empire, hath entered into league and friendship with us, (which we for our part, as much as lieth in us, doe purpose solemnly, and inviolablie to keepe in all times to come) and whereas for the better countenancing and authorizing of the same, the foresayd renowmed Emperour hath graunted unto our subjects free libertie of traffique, in all the partes of his sacred Empire, with as ample and large a grant of privileges, as is given to other good Princes our neighbours and confederates, the grant of which privileges, we taking very thankfully, and acceptably, are certainely, and throughly determined to keepe and mainetaine, with the like goodnesse and curtesie of minde, desiring nothing more, then with an honourable respect to nourish, and deserve the benevolent affections of good Princes toward us: Know ye, that wee thinking well, and having good [II. i. 158.] confidence in the singular trustinesse, obedience, wisedome, and disposition of our welbeloved servaunt William Hare-borne, one of the Esquiers of our body, towards us, and our service, doe by these presents, make, ordaine and constitute him our true and undoubted Orator, Messenger, Deputie, and Agent. Giving and granting unto him power and authoritie, in our name, and for us, to confirme the foresaid league of friendship, to take into his hands, and to ratifie the grant of the privileges, and to com-maund, and enjoyne by the authoritie of our Majestie, all and singular our Subjects trading and dealing in any of the coastes and kingdomes of that Empire, that as long as they remaine in traffique with his subjects, they be obedient to the prescription and order of the foresayd privileges, applying themselves in all things, and through all things, to such dueties and services as appertaine to so great a league and friendship, and the offenders agaynst this our league to receive justice, and punishment accordingly. We further give unto him power and authoritie over all and singuler our Subjects, dealing, and{n}223{n}using traffique in any place or part whatsoever, subject to the governement of that Empire, to appoint the places of their traffiques, in what Haven or Citie it shall please him, and to prohibite them from all other places, and wheresoever their traffiques are appointed to bee kept, there to make and create Consuls or Governours, to enact lawes and statutes, by the vertue and tenor whereof all our foresayd subjects, and every one of them, shall both publikely and privately use and behave themselves, to correct and punish the breakers of those lawes : and last of all, to doe and fulfill all and singular things whatsoever, which shall seeme requisite and convenient for the honest and orderly government of our said subjects, and of the maner of their traffique in those parts. Promising assuredly, and in the word of a Prince, that whatsoever shall be done of our sayd Orator and Agent, in all, or in any of the premisses, not repugnant and contrary to our lawes, shall be accepted, ratified, and confirmed by us. In witnesse whereof, we have caused these our letters to be made patents, and our seale thereunto to be appensed. Given at our Castle of Windsore, the 20. day of November, in the yeere of Christ 1582. and of our raigne the 24.{n}