The voyage of the ship called the Marigold of M. Hill of Redrife unto Cape Briton and beyond to the latitude of 44 degrees and an half, 1593 Written by Richard fisher Master Hilles man of Redriffe.{n}He ship called the Marigold of 70 tunnes in burthen furnished with 20 men, wherof 10 were Mariners, the Masters name being Richard Strong of Apsham, the Masters mate Peter Langworth of Apsham, with 3 coopers, 2 butchers to flea the Morsses or sea{n}Oxen (whereof divers have teeth above a cubit long & skinnes farre thicker then any buls hide) with other necessary people, departed out of Falmouth the 1 of June 1593 in consort of another ship of M. Drakes of Apsham, which upon some occasion was not ready so soone as shee should have bene by two moneths. The place for which these two ships were bound was an Island within the streightes of Saint Peter on the backe side of Newfoundland to the Southwest in the latitude of fortie seven degrees, called by the Britons of Saint Malo the Isle of Ramea, but by the Savages and naturals of the Continent next adjoyning, Menquit: On which Isle are so great abundance of the huge and mightie Sea Oxen with great teeth in the moneths of April, May and June, that there have bene fifteene hundreth killed there by one small barke, in the yeere 1591. The two English shipps aforesayde, lost com-panie before they came to Newfoundland: and never came after together in all their voyage.{n}The ship of M. George Drake fell first with Newfoundland, and afterward very directly came to the Isle 157{n}The voyage of M. Drake of Apsham to Ramea.{n} The Isle of Ramea, or Menquit.{n}Ramea, though too late in the yeere to make her voyage: where shee found a shippe of Saint Malo three parts fraighted with these fishes: the men whereof enquiring whence our shippe was and who was the Master thereof, being answered that shee was belonging to Master George Drake of Apsham, fearing to bee taken as good prize being of a Leaguer towne, and at that time out of league with England, fled so hastily that present night that they left three and twentie men and three Shallops behinde them, all which our men seazed upon and brought away as good prises home.{n}Here our men tooke certaine Sea-oxen, but nothing such numbers as they might have had, if they had come in due season, which they had neglected. The shippe called the Marigolde fell with Cape Saint Francis in Newfoundland the eleventh of Julie, and from thence wee went into the Bay Rogneuse, and afterward doubled Cape Razo, and sayling toward the straight of Saint Peter (which is the entrance betweene Newfoundland and Cape Briton,) being unacquainted with the place, beate up and downe a very long time, and yet missed it, and at length over shot it, and fell with Cape Briton.{n}The English Here diverse of our men went on land upon the very men land upon Qapej where, at their arrivall they found the spittes of ape rtton.	Savages which had roasted meate a litle before.{n}And as they viewed the countrey they sawe divers beastes and foules, as blacke Foxes, Deere, Otters, great Foules with redde legges, Pengwyns, and certaine others. But having found no people here at this our first landing wee went againe on shipboorde, and sayled farther foure leagues to the West of Cape Briton, where wee sawe They goe on many Seales. And here having neede of fresh water tn“n~ we went againe on shore. And passing somewhat more ? ' into the land, wee founde certaine round pondes artificially made by the Savages to keepe fish in, with certaine weares in them made to take fish. To these pondes wee repayred to fill our caske with water. Wee had not bene 158{n}long here, but there came one Savage with blacke long The people of hayre hanging about his shoulders who called unto us, tfie ^trey weaving his handes downewarde towardes his belhe, using our men these wordes, Calitogh Calitogh : as wee drewe towardes him one of our mens musket unawares shot off: whereupon hee fell downe, and rising up suddenly againe hee cryed thrise with a loude voyce Chiogh, Chiogh, Chiogh. Thereupon nine or tenne of his fellowes running right up over the bushes with great agilitie and swiftnesse came towardes us with white staves in their handes like halfe pikes, and their dogges of colour blacke not so bigge Blacke dogs. as a greyhounde followed them at the heeles; but wee retired unto our boate without any hurt at all received. Howbeit one of them brake an hogshead which wee had filled with fresh water, with a great branche of a tree which lay on the ground. Upon which occasion we bestowed halfe a dousen muskets shotte upon them, which they avoyded by falling flatte to the earth, and afterwarde retired themselves to the woodes. One of the Savages, which seemed to bee their Captaine, ware a long mantle of beastes skinnes hanging on one of his shoulders. The rest were all naked except their privities, which were covered with a skinne tyed behinde. After they had escaped our shotte they made a great fire on the shore, belike to give their fellowes warning of us.{n}The kindes of trees that wee noted to bee here, were goodly Okes, Firre trees of a great height, a kinde of tree called of us Quickbeame, and Cherie trees, and diverse other kindes to us unknowne, because wee stayed not long with diligence to observe them: and there is great shewe of rosen, pitch, and tarre. Wee found in both the places where wee went on land abundance of Raspeses, Strawberies, Hurtes, and herbes of good smell, and divers good for the skurvie, and grasse very ranke and of great length. Wee sawe five or sixe boates sayling to the Southwestwardes of Cape Briton, which wee judged to bee Christians, which had some trade that way. Wee sawe also, while wee were on shore, the manner of their *59{n}A secret trade to the Southwest of Cape Briton.{n}a.d.	the ENGLISH VOYAGES{n}J593’	.	.{n}hanging up of their fish and flesh with withes to dry in the ayre: they also lay them upon raftes and hurdles and make a smoake under them, or a softe fire, and so drie them as the Savages use to doe in Virginia.{n}Soundings to While wee lay foure leagues South of Cape Briton Southwest wee sounded and had sixtie fathomes black ozie ground. ward of Cape sayling thence Westwarde nine or ten leagues ofF Briton. the shore, we had twenty foure fathomes redde sande, and  small whitish stones. Wee continued our course so farre to the Southwest, that wee brought our selves into the They sayle 50 latitude of fourtie foure degrees and an half, having sayled or 60 leagues fiftie{n}or sixtie leagues to the Southwest of Cape Briton. to t e out . we foun(i (he current betwene this Cape Briton and Cape Rey to set out toward the Eastsoutheast. In our West of Cape course to the West of Cape Briton we saw exceeding Briton.	great store of seales, and abundance of Porposes, whereof{n}Seales Spor-	we killed eleven. We sawe Whales also of all sortes{n}poses', Whales aswell small as great: and here our men tooke many and Cods. berded Coddes with one teate underneath, which are like to the Northeast Cods, and better then those of Newfoundland.{n}They continue From our arrivall at the haven of Saint Francis in New-on the coast foundland, (which was as is aforesayde the eleventh of JBriton West	we continued beating up and downe on the coast{n}wards full	of Arambec to the West and Southwest of Cape Briton{n}eleven weekes. untill the twentie eight of September, fully by the space of eleven weekes: and then by the perswasion of our Master and certaine others wee shaped our course homeward by the Isles of the Azores, and came first to Corvo and Flores, where beating up and downe, and missing of expected pray, we sayled by Tercera, and from thence to Saint Michael, where we sought to boorde a Portugall shippe, which we found too well appointed for us to bring along with us, and so being forced to leave them behinde and having wasted all our victuals, wee were constrained against our willes to hasten home unto our narrowe Seas: but it was the two and twentieth of December before wee could 160{n}get into the Downes: where for lacke of winde wee kept our Christmas with dry breade onely for dropping of our clothes. One thing very strange hapened in this voyage: to witte, that a mightie great Whale followed our shippe by the space of many dayes as we passed by Cape Razo, which by no meanes wee coulde chase from our ship, untill one of our men fell overboord and was drowned, after which time shee immediatly forsooke us, and never afterward appeared unto us.{n}A.D.{n}*593*{n}An huge Whale pursued their ship by the space of many dayes, till one of their men fell overboard.{n}