The Voyage of John Francis de la Roche, knight, Lord of Roberval, to the Countries of Canada, Saguenai, and Hochelaga, with three tall Ships, and two hundred persons, both men, women, and children, begun in April, 1542. In which parts he remayned . the same summer, and all the next winter.{n}Ir John Francis de la Roche knight, lord of Roberval, appoynted by the king as his Lieutenant general in the countreis of Canada, Saguenay, and Hochelaga, furnished 3. tall Ships, chiefly at the kings cost: And having in his fleete 200. persons, aswel men as women,{n}accompanied with divers gentlemen of qualitie, as namely with Monsieur Saineterre his lieutenant, l’Espiney his Ensigne, captain Guinecourt, Monsieur Noire fontaine, Dieu lamont, Frote, la Brosse, Francis de Mire, la Salle, and Roieze, and John Alfonse of Xanctoigne an excellent pilot, set sayle from Rochel the 16. of April 1542. The same day about noone we came athwart of Chefe de boys, where we were enforced to stay the night following. On Munday the seventeenth of the sayde Moneth wee departed from Chefe de-boys. The winde served us notably for a time: but within fewe dayes it came quite contrary, 283{n}Jacques Cartier stole away.{n}which hindered our journey for a long space: For wee were suddenly enforced to turne backe, and to seeke Harborough in Belle Isle, on the coast of Bretaigne, where wee stayed so long, and had such contrary weather by the way, that wee could not reach Newfound lande, untill the seventh of June. The eight of this Moneth wee entred into the Rode of Saint John, where wee founde seventeene Shippes of fishers. While wee made somewhat long abode heere, Jaques Cartier and his company returning from Canada, whither hee was sent with five sayles the yeere before, arrived in the very same Harbour. Who, after hee had done his duetie to our general, tolde him that hee had brought certaine Diamonts, and a quantitie of Golde ore, which was found in the Countrey. Which ore the Sunday next ensuing was tryed in a Furnace, and found to be good.{n}Furthermore, hee enformed the general that hee could not with his small company withstand the Savages, which went about dayly to annoy him: and that this was the cause of his returne into France. Neverthelesse, hee and his company commended the Countrey to bee very rich and fruitful!. But when our general being furnished with sufficient forces, commaunded him to goe backe againe with him, hee and his company, mooved as it seemeth with ambition, because they would have all the glory of the discoverie of those partes themselves, stole privily away the next night from us, and without taking their leaves departed home for Bretaigne.{n}Wee spent the greatest part of June in this Harbour of Saint John, partly in furnishing ourselves with fresh water, whereof wee stoode in very great neede by the way, and partly in composing and taking up of a quarell betweene some of our Countreymen, and certaine Portugals. At length, about the last of the aforesayde Moneth, wee departed hence, and entred into the Grand Baye, and passed by the Isle of Ascension: and finally arrived foure leagues Westward of the Isle of Orleans. In this place wee found a convenient Harbour for our shipping, where wee cast 284{n}1542. anchor, went a shoare with our people, and chose out a convenient place to fortifie ourselves in, fitte to command the mayne River, and of strong situation against all invasion of enemies. Thus towarde the ende of July, wee July. brought our victuals and other munitions and provisions on shore, and began to travaile in fortifying of our selves.{n}Of the Fort of France-Roy, and that which was done there.{n}HAving described the beginning, the middest, and the ende of the Voyage made by Monsieur Roberval in the Countreyes of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and other Countreyes in the West partes: He sayled so farre, (as it is declared in other bookes) that hee arrived in the sayde Countrey, accompanyed with two hundred persons, souldiers, mariners, and common people,, with all furniture necessary for a Fleete. The sayde general at his first arrivall built a fayre Fort, neere and somewhat Westward above Canada, which is very beautifull to beholde, and of great force, situated upon an high mountaine, wherein there were two courtes of buyldings, a great Towre, and another of fortie or fiftie foote long : wherein there were divers Chambers, an Hall, a Kitchine, houses of office, Sellers high and lowe, and neere unto it were an Oven and Milles, and a stoove to warme men in, and a Well before the house. And the buylding was situated upon the great River of Canada, called France prime, by Mon- France prime. sieur Roberval. There was also at the foote of the mountaine another lodging, part whereof was a great Towre of two stories high, two courtes of good buylding, where at the first all our victuals, and whatsoever was brought with us was sent to be kept: and neere unto that Towre there is another small river. In these two places above and beneath, all the meaner sort was lodged.{n}And in the Moneth of August, and in the beginning of Autist 1542. September every man was occupied in such woorke as eche one was able to doe. But the fourteenth of Septem- September 14. ber, our aforesayde general sent backe into France two{n}285{n}Shippes which had brought his furniture, and he appoynted for Admirall Monsieur de Saine-terre, and the other cap-taine was Monsieur Guinecourt, to carie newes unto the King, and to come backe againe unto him the yeere next ensuing, furnished with victuals and other things, as it should please the King: and also to bring newes out of France how the King accepted certaine Diamants which were sent him, and were found in this countrey.{n}After these two Shippes were departed, consideration was had how they should doe, and how they might passe out the Winter in this place. First they tooke a view of the victuals, and it was found that they fell out short:{n}The proportion and they were scantled so, that in eche messe they had{n}but two loaves weighing a pound a piece, and halfe a pound of biefe. They ate Bacon at dinner with halfe a pound of butter: and Biefe at supper, and about two handfuls of Beanes without butter.{n}On the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday they did eate dry Cod, and sometimes they did eate it greene at dinner with butter, and they ate of Porposes and beanes at supper.{n}About that time the Savages brought us great store of Aloses, which is a fish somewhat redde like a Salmon, to get knives and other small trifles for them.{n}In the ende many of our people fell sicke of a certaine disease in their legges, reynes, and stomacke, so that they seemed to bee deprived of all their lymmes, and there dyed thereof about fiftie.{n}The length of Note that the yce began to breake up in April.{n}Monsieur Roberval used very good justice, and punished every man according to his offence. One whose name was Michael Gaillon, was hanged for his theft. John of Nantes was layde in yrons, and kept prisoner for his offence, and others also were put in yrons, and divers were{n}They had whipped, as well men as women : by which meanes they women with lived in iet.{n}them.{n}