A letter of Francis Suares to his brother Diego Snares dwelling in Lisbon, written from the river of Jenero in Brasill in June 1596. concerning the exceeding rich trade newly begunne betweene that place and Peru, by the way of the river of Plate, with small barks of 30. and 40. tunnes.{n}Ir, we set saile from Lisbon the fourth of April 1596. and arrived here in this river of Jenero the twentie seventh of June next ensuing. And the same day the Visitadores did visit our ship with great joy, thinking that those commodities which wee brought with us,{n}had bene for the marchants of this countrey : but it prooved to the contrary.{n}The pilot brought with him in the sayd shippe two  pipes of wine which were taken from him, and solde Wine solde at by the Justice for foure and twenty reals every gallon. an excessive But I solde mine for two and thirty and sixe and thirty iate'{n}A rich trade from the river of Jenero by the river of Plate into Peru, iAc.{n}reals the gallon. If I had brought any great store of wine, I should have made a great gaine of it: for I should have gotten eight reals for one.{n}The next day in the morning wee went all on shore, and gave God thanks for our prosperous voyage, and good successe which he had sent us. And because the governour of this countrey was gone from this Towne to another house of his, three leagues up into the river beyond the place where we rode at anker, I desired the captaine of our shippe after dinner, that we might take the shippe boat, and goe to the place where the governour did lie. And so going up the river, we met with a canoa which was comming downe the river, and going aboord our shippe ; which canoa was laden with fresh victuals, and in the same was one Portugall, which met us, and tolde us that the governour of that captaine shippe had sent us a present, which we received very thankefully, and sent it aboord. And we went up the river, to the place where the governour did dwell; and comming to the place where we landed, hard by the rivers side, the governour came thither and received us very courteously. So we remained at his house two dayes, talking of many matters of Portugall: then we departed from him, and came downe the river.{n}Three dayes after, I hired a ware-house by my selfe, and landed my commodities. And now I am selling them as fast as I can ; and sell them very well, and to great profit: for I have solde all our hats. I would I had brought forty or fifty dozen, by reason of the great utterance of them up into Peru, and into the new king-dome of Granada, by the way of the river of Plate. For here is passage every three or foure moneths with barks of thirty and forty tunnes a piece, which are laden with sugars, rice, taffataes, hats, and other kindes of commodities of this countrey, which are caried up the sayd river of Plate in the sayd barks, and thence are conveyed up into Peru. And these barks are but tenne or twelve dayes going up the sayd river to Peru. And within foure and 40{n}five moneths after, the sayd barkes come downe this river againe laden with reals of plate, and bring downe from those places no other commodities but treasure. It is a woonderfull thing to beholde the great gaine and profit which is gotten in this river and in this countrey. I am ashamed to write it, fearing that I shall not be beleeved. For the imployment of one hundred ducats in Spaine, being brought hither, will yeeld twelve hundred and fif-teene hundred ducats profit. This trade hath beene used but within this yeere. For wee can goe up to the mines of Potosi, which are the best and the richest mines in all Peru. If the merchants of Spaine and Portugall did know this trade, they would not send nor venture so much merchandise to Cartagena as they doe. For up this river is a great deale the neerer way, and the easier to go to Peru. For the Peruleros or merchants of Peru, which dwell there, come downe to this harbour and river of Jenero, and bring with them fifteene thousand and twentie thousand ducats in reals of plate and gold, and imploy it heere in this river in commodities : and when heere are no commodities to be had for money in this place, then these merchants of Peru are constrained to go to Baia and Fernambuc, and there to imploy their money. I would I had brought good store of silks, and not these kinde of commodities which I did bring. For heere is more profit to be had a great deale then in the voyage of Angola. For heere with five hundred ducats in five moneths space a man may get sixe thousand ducats. And this is no fable, but most true, and a great deale more then I can expresse. For a rapier which doeth cost in Spaine foure and twenty and sixe and twenty reals, is solde heere for forty and fifty ducats : a bridle for a horse is solde for fifteene ducats : a locke of a doore and the key is solde for ten ducats: a pound of benjamin is solde for fifteene ducats : a yard of velvet is solde for twenty and five and twenty ducats: taffataes are solde for sixe and seven ducats the vare : an ownce of muske is solde for forty ducats: and all kinde of commodities after this rate. So one{n}41{n}A.D. 1596. The shortnesse of the retume of the voyage to Peru.{n}This rich trade was be-gunne in the yere 1595.{n}The voyage of Angola in Africa.{n}Gaine often thousand ducats for the laying out of one thousand.{n}A trade of buying Negros in Angola.{n}Broad cloth excellently well solde. Vineger.{n}Olives.{n}Taffataes.{n}Velvets.{n}thousand ducats of Spanish commodities will gaine tenne thousand ducats. Thus I hope in God to make more profit and gaine this voyage, then in two voyages to Angola: for I have solde most of my hats for two duckets and a halfe and for three ducats. The rest I will cary to Angola, to helpe to sell the rest of my commodities, which I cannot sell in this river. And I have solde an hundred cubits of broad cloth for five hundred and five hundred and fifty and sixe hundred reys the cubit. If I would have solde all my cloth for ready money tolde downe for foure hundred and fifty and five hundred reyes, the merchants would have bought it all of me : but I would sell no more, because I meant to exchange it in Angola for Negros. Howbeit with ready money in hand in Angola a man shall buy better Negros, and better cheape. The captaine of our ship solde all his cloth for ready money for foure hundred 8c fifty reys the cubit, and thought that he had made a good market: but he hath deceived himselfe. I solde six broad clothes for five hundred and fifty reys the cubit: and I was offered thirty thousand reys for a cloth. Vineger is solde for two and thirty, and sixe and thirty, and forty reals a jarre, by reason there is great store of limmons and orenges in the countrey: but in Angola it is more woorth. Olives are solde for halfe a reall a piece: wherefore I hope to sell the hogshead for twenty thousand reys. In taffataes and velvets there will be gotten two hundred and fifty and three hundred for one hundred. If I had brought great store, I could have solde it all at this rate. I have already gotten good store of reals of plate: for it is tolde mee that money is a good commodity in Angola. But I must imploy some in meale, which is in the grinding. All the rest of my money I will send you by billes of exchange, and some part I will imploy in sugars: for I have sent order to Baia for that purpose. For from this place there is no shipping that doth go that way. So these letters I do send by the way of Fernambuc, and have directed{n}them to my cousin : for I do determine to settle my selfe here in this countrey. There is come downe from Peru, by this river of Plate, a merchant called Alonso Ramires, and he hath brought downe with him ten or twelve thousand ducats in reals of plate, and is come downe to this place to build him a ship to returne into Spaine; and there is come in his company a bishop. And thus Jesus Christ send you long health.{n}Your loving brother Francis Suares.{n}