Happily perfourmed round about the world, by Sir Francis Drake, and M. Thomas Candish Esquire, together with the rest of our English voyages intended for the South Sea, the kingdomes of Chili, Peru, the backe side of Nueva Espanna, the Malucos, the Philippinas, the mightie empire of China, though not so happily perfourmed as the two former: whereunto are annexed certaine rare observations touching the present state of{n}China, and the kingdome of Coray, lately invaded by Quabacondono the last monarch of the 66. princedomes of Japan.{n}The famous voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the South sea, and therehence about the whole Globe of the earth, begun in the yeere of our Lord, 1577.{n}15. day of November, in the yeere of our I 1577. M. Francis Drake, with a fleete of s^ips and barkes, and to the number of{n}164. men, gentlemen and sailers, departed from Plim-mouth, giving out his pretended voyage for Alexandria: but the wind falling contrary, hee was forced the{n}IOI{n}A.D.{n}’577-{n}The ci tie of Assumption,or Ascension 60. leagues from the mouth of Paraguai.{n}200. leagues from Assumption subject to the Spaniard, to the ci tie of Xaraes.{n}next morning to put into Falmouth haven in Corne-wall, where such and so terrible a tempest tooke us, as few men have seene the like, and was in deed so vehement, that all our ships were like to have gone to wracke: but it pleased God to preserve us from that extremitie, and to afflict us onely for that present with these two particulars: The mast of our Admirall which was the Pellican, was cut over boord for the safegard of the ship, and the Marigold was driven ashore, and somewhat bruised: for the repairing of which damages wee returned againe to Plimmouth, and having recovered those harmes, and brought the ships againe to good state, we set forth the second time from Plimmouth, and set saile the 13. day of December following.{n}The 25. day of the same moneth we fell with the Cape Cantin, upon the coast of Barbarie, and coasting The Isle of along, the 27. day we found an Island called Mogador, Mogador on lying one mile distant from the maine, betweene which ^arbarie^ Island and the maine, we found a very good and safe harbour for our ships to ride in, as also very good entrance, and voyde of any danger.{n}On this Island our general erected a pinnesse, whereof he brought out of England with him foure already framed. While these things were in doing, there came to the waters side some of the inhabitants of the countrey, shewing foorth their flags of truce, which being seene of our general, hee sent his ships boate to the shore, to know what they would: they being willing to come aboord, our men left there one man of our company for a pledge, and brought two of theirs aboord our ship, which by signes shewed our General, that the next day they would bring some provision, as sheepe, capons and hennes, and such like : whereupon our general bestowed amongst them some linnen cloth and shooes, and a javeling, which they very joyfully received, and departed for that time.{n}The next morning they failed not to come againe to the waters side, and our general againe setting out 102{n}our boate, one of our men leaping over rashly ashore, and offering friendly to imbrace them, they set violent hands on him, offering a dagger to his throte if hee had made any resistance, and so laying him on a horse, caried him away: so that a man cannot be too circumspect and warie of himselfe among such miscreants.{n}Our pinnesse being finished, wee departed from this place the 30. and last day of December, and coasting  along the shore, wee did descrie, not contrary to our expectation, certaine Canters which were Spanish fishermen, to whom we gave chase and tooke three of them, and proceeding further we met with 3. Caravels and tooke them also.{n}The 17. day of January we arrived at Cape Blanco, Januarie. where we found a ship riding at anchor, within the Cape, and but two simple Mariners in her, which ship we tooke and caried her further into the harbour, where we remained 4. dayes, and in that space our General mustered, and trayned his men on land in warlike maner, to make them fit for all occasions.{n}In this place we tooke of the Fishermen such necessaries as wee wanted, and they could yeeld us, and leaving heere one of our litle barkes called the Benedict, wee tooke with us one of theirs which they called Canters, being of the burden of 40. tunnes or thereabouts.{n}All these things being finished, wee departed this harbour the 22. of Januarie, carying along with us one of the Portugall Caravels which was bound to the Islands of Cape Verde for salt, whereof good store is made in one of those Islands.{n}The master or Pilot of that Caravel did advertise our general that upon one of those Islands called Mayo, The Isle of there was great store of dryed Cabritos, which a few MaJ°-inhabitants there dwelling did yeerely make ready for such of the kings Ships as did there touch, beeing bound for his countrey of Brasile or elsewhere. Wee fell with this Island the 27. of January, but the Inhabitants would in no case traffique with us, being{n}103{n}thereof forbidden by the kings Edict: yet the next day our general sent to view the Island, and the likeli-hoodes that might be there of provision of victuals, about threescore and two men under the conduct and government of Master Winter and Master Doughtie, and marching towards the chiefe place of habitation in this Island (as by the Portugall wee were informed) having travailed to the mountaines the space of three miles, and arriving there somewhat before the day breake, we arrested our selves to see day before us, which appearing, we found the inhabitants to be fled : but the place, by reason that it was manured, wee found to be more fruitfull then the other part, especially the valleys among the hils.{n}Rife grapes in Here we gave our selves a litle refreshing, as by very Winter. ripe anj swee[e grapes, which the fruitfulnesse of the earth at that season of the yeere yeelded us : and that season being with us the depth of Winter, it may seeme strange that those fruites were then there growing : but the reason thereof is this, because they being betweene the Tropike and the Equinoctiall, the Sunne passeth twise in the yeere through their Zenith over their heads, by meanes whereof they have two Summers, & being so neere the heate of the line, they never lose the heate of the Sunne so much, but the fruites have their increase and continuance in the midst of Winter. The Island is wonderfully stored with goates and wilde hennes, and it hath salt also without labour, save onely that the people gather it into heapes, which continually in great quantitie is increased upon the sands by the flowing of the sea, and the receiving heate of the Sunne kerning the same, so that of the increase thereof they keepe a continuall traffique with their neighbours.{n}The descrip- Amongst other things we found here a kind of fruit tion of the tree caHed Cocos, which because it is not commonly knowen ^kos^*	us in England, I thought good to make some{n}description of it.{n}104{n}The tree beareth no leaves nor branches, but at the very top the fruit groweth in clusters, hard at the top of the stemme of the tree, as big every severall fruite as a mans head : but having taken off the uttermost barke, which you shall find to bee very full of strings or sinowes, as I may terme them, you shall come to a hard shell which may holde of quantitie in liquor a pint commonly, or some a quart, and some lesse: within that shell of the thicknesse of halfe an inch{n}good, you shall have a kinde of hard substance and very white, no lesse good and sweete then almonds : within that againe a certaine cleare liquor, which being drunke, you shall not onely finde it very delicate and. sweete, but most comfortable and cordiall.{n}After wee had satisfied our selves with some of these{n}fruites, wee marched further into the Island, and saw great store of * Cabritos alive, which were so chased by the inhabitants, that wee could doe no good towards our provision, but they had layde out as it were to stoppe our mouthes withall, certaine olde dryed Cabritos, which being but ill, and small and few, wee made no account of.{n}A.D.{n}1578.{n}* Or goates.{n}Being returned to our ships, our general departed hence the 31. of this moneth, and sayled by the Island The Isle of S. of S. Iago, but farre enough from the danger of the inhabitants, who shot and discharged at us three peeces, but they all fell short of us, and did us no harme. The Island is fayre and large, and as it seemeth, rich and fruitfull, and inhabited by the Portugals, but the mountaines and high places of the Island are sayd to be possessed by the Moores, who having bin slaves to the Portugals, to ease themselves, made escape to the desert places of the Island, where they abide with great strength.{n}Being before this Island, we espied two ships under  sayle, to the one of which wee gave chase, and in the end boorded her with a ship-boat without resistance, which we found to be a good prize, and she yeelded unto us{n}105{n}A prize, and good store of wine : which prize our General committed to the custodie of Master Doughtie, and reteining the %lfot taken. P^ot> sent the rest away with his Pinnesse, giving them a Butte of wine and some victuals, and their wearing clothes, and so they departed.{n}The isle of The same night wee came with the Island called by the Portugals, Ilha del fogo, that is, the burning Island: in the Northside whereof is a consuming fire, the matter is sayde to be of Sulphure, but notwithstanding it is like to bee a commodious Island, because the Portugals have built, and doe inhabite there.{n}Upon the South side thereof lyeth a most pleasant and sweete Island, the trees whereof are alwayes greene and faire to looke upon, in respect whereof they call it Ilha Brava, that is, the brave Island. From the bankes thereof into the sea doe run in many places reasonable streames of fresh waters easie to be come by, but there was no convenient roade for our ships : for such was the depth, that no ground could bee had for anchoring, and it is reported, that ground was never found in that place, so that the tops of Fogo bur ne not so high in the ayre, but the rootes of Brava are quenched as low in the sea.{n}Being departed from these Islands, we drew towards the line, where wee were becalmed the space of 3. weekes, but yet subject to divers great stormes, terrible lightnings and much thunder: but with this miserie we had the commoditie of great store of fish, as Dolphins, Bonitos, and flying fishes, whereof some fell into our shippes, wherehence they could not rise againe for want of moisture, for when their wings are drie, they cannot flie.{n}From the first day of our departure from the Islands of Cape Verde, wee sayled 54. dayes without sight of land, and the first land that we fell with was the coast Aprill. of Brasil, which we saw the fift of April in ye height 33- Agrees. o£ 33. degrees towards the pole Antarctike, and being discovered at sea by the inhabitants of the countrey, 106{n}1578. they made upon the coast great fires for a sacrifice (as we learned) to the devils, about which they use conjurations, making heapes of sande and other ceremonies, that when any ship shall goe about to stay upon their coast, not onely sands may be gathered together in shoalds in every place, but also that stormes and tempests may arise, to the casting away of ships and men, whereof (as it is reported) there have bene divers experiments.{n}The seventh day in a mightie great storme both of lightning, rayne and thunder, wee lost the Canter which we called the Christopher: but the eleventh day after, by our Generals great care in dispersing his ships, we found her againe, and the place where we met, our general called the Cape of Joy, where every ship tooke in some Cape of water. Heere we found a good temperature and sweete ayre, a very faire and pleasant countrey with an exceeding fruitfull soyle, where were great store of large and mightie Deere, but we came not to the sight of any people: but travelling further into the countrey, we perceived the footing of people in the clay-ground, shewing that they were men of great stature. Being returned to our ships, we wayed anchor, and ranne somewhat further, and harboured our selves betweene a rocke and the maine, where by meanes of the rocke that brake the force of the sea, we rid very safe, and upon this rocke we killed for our provision certaine sea-wolves, commonly called with us Seales.{n}From hence we went our course to 36. degrees, and T^ir entrance entred the great river of Plate, and ranne into 54. and 55. fadomes and a halfe of fresh water, where wee filled our water by the ships side: but our general finding here no good harborough, as he thought he should, bare out againe to sea the 27. of April, and in bearing out we lost sight of our Flieboate wherein master Doughtie was, but we sayling along, found a fayre and reasonable good Bay wherein were many, and the same profitable Abundance of Islands, one whereof had so many Seales, as would at the Seales.{n}107{n}The File-boat cast off and burnt.{n}The people of the countrey.{n}least have laden all our Shippes, and the rest of the Islands are as it were laden with foules which is wonderfull to see, and they of divers sortes. It is a place very plentifull of victuals, and hath in it no want of fresh water.{n}Our general after certaine dayes of his abode in this place, being on shore in an Island, the people of the countrey shewed themselves unto him, leaping and dauncing, and entred into traffique with him, but they would not receive any thing at any mans hands, but the same must bee cast upon the ground. They are of cleane, comely, and strong bodies, swift on foote, and seeme to be very active.{n}The eighteenth day of May our general thought it needfull to have a care of such Ships as were absent, and therefore indevouring to seeke the Flieboate wherein master Doughtie was, we espied her againe the next day: and whereas certaine of our ships were sent to discover the coast and to search an harbour, the Mary-gold and the Canter being imployed in that businesse, came unto us and gave us understanding of a safe harbour that they had found, wherewith all our ships bare, and entred it, where we watered and made new provision of victuals, as by Seales, whereof we slew to the number of 200. or 300. in the space of an houre.{n}Here our general in the Admirall rid close aboord the Flie-boate, and tooke out of her all the provision of victuals and what els was in her, and hailing her to the Lande, set fire to her, and so burnt her to save the iron worke : which being a doing, there came downe of the countrey certaine of the people naked, saving only about their waste the skinne of some beast with the furre or haire on, and something also wreathed on their heads: their feces were painted with divers colours, and some of them had on their heads the similitude of homes, every man his bow which was an ell in length, and a couple of arrowes. They were very agill people and quicke to deliver, and seemed not to be ignorant in the feates of 108{n}warres, as by their order or ranging a few men, might appeare. These people would not of a long time receive any thing at our handes; yet at length our general being ashore, and they dauncing after their accustomed maner about him, and hee once turning his backe towards them, one leapt suddenly to him, and tooke his cap with his golde band off his head, and ran a litle distance from him and shared it with his fellow, the cap to the one, and the band to the other.{n}Having dispatched all our businesse in this place, wee departed and set sayle, and immediatly upon our setting foorth we lost our Canter which was absent three or foure dayes: but when our General had her againe, he tooke out the necessaries, and so gave her over neere to the Cape of Good hope.	The cape of{n}The next day after being the twentieth of June, wee harboured our selves againe in a very good harborough, u ‘ called by Magellan Port S. Julian, where we found a Ports. Julian. gibbet standing upon the maine, which we supposed to be the place where Magellan did execution upon some of his disobedient and rebellious company.{n}The two and twentieth day our general went ashore to the maine, and in his companie, John Thomas, and Robert Winterhie, Oliver the Master gunner, John Brewer, Thomas Hood, and Thomas Drake, and entring on land, they presently met with two or three of the countrey people, and Robert Winterhie having in his hands a bowe and arrowes, went about to make a shoote of pleasure, and in his draught his bowstring brake, which the rude Savages taking as a token of warre, began to bend the force of their bowes against our company, and drove them to their shifts very narrowly.{n}In this Port our general began to enquire diligently of the actions of M. Thomas Doughtie, and found them not to be such as he looked for, but tending rather to contention or mutinie, or some other disorder, whereby (without redresse) the successe of the voyage might greatly have bene hazarded: whereupon the company{n}109{n}was called together and made acquainted with the particulars of the cause, which were found partly by master Doughties owne confession, and partly by the evidence of the fact, to be true: which when our general saw, although his private affection to M. Doughtie (as hee then in the presence of us all sacredly protested) was great, yet the care he had of the state of the voyage, of the expectation of her Majestie, and of the honour of his countrey did more touch him, (as indeede it ought) then the private respect of one man : so that the cause being throughly heard, and all things done in good order as neere as might be to the course of our lawes in England, it was concluded that M. Dough tie should receive punishment according to the qualitie of the offence: and he seeing no remedie but patience for himselfe, desired before his death to receive the Communion, which he did at the hands of M. Fletcher our Minister, and our general himselfe accompanied him in that holy action: which being done, and the place of execution made ready, hee having embraced our general and taken his leave of all the companie, with prayer for the Queenes majestie M. Thomas and our realme, in quiet sort laid his head to the blocke, Doughtie where he ended his life. This being done, our general ’ made divers speaches to the whole company, perswading us to unitie, obedience, love, and regard of our voyage; and for the better confirmation thereof, willed every man the next Sunday following to prepare himselfe to receive the Communion, as Christian brethren and friends ought to doe, which was done in very reverent sort, and so with good contentment every man went about his businesse.{n}August. The 17. day of August we departed the port of The streight S. Julian, & the 2o. day we fell with the streight or of Magellan. freat of Magellan going into the South sea, at the Cape or headland whereof we found the bodie of a dead man, whose flesh was cleane consumed.{n}The 21. day we entred The streight, which we found to have many turnings, and as it were shuttings up, as if there were no passage at all, by meanes whereof we had{n}IIO{n}I yT the wind often against us, so that some of the fleete recovering a Cape or point of land, others should be forced to turne backe againe, and to come to an anchor  where they could.{n}In this streight there be many faire harbors, with store of fresh water, but yet they lacke their best commoditie : for the water is there of such depth, that no man shal find ground to anchor in, except it bee in some narow river or corner, or betweene some rocks, so that if any extreme blasts or contrary winds do come (whereunto the place is much subject) it carieth with it no small danger.{n}The land on both sides is very huge & mountainous, the lower mountains whereof, although they be monstrous and wonderfull to looke upon for their height, yet there are others which in height exceede them in a strange maner, reaching themselves above their fellowes so high, that betweene them did appeare three regions of cloudes.{n}These mountaines are covered with snow: at both the Southerly and Easterly partes of the streight there are Islands, among which the sea hath his indraught into the streights, even as it hath in the maine entrance of the freat.{n}This streight is extreme cold, with frost and snow continually; the trees seeme to stoope with the burden of the weather, and yet are greene continually, and many good and sweete herbes doe very plentifully grow and increase under them.{n}The bredth of the streight is in some place a league, The bredth of in some other places 2. leagues, and three leagues, and the itreights of in some other 4. leagues, but the narowest place hath °se an' a league over.{n}The 24. of August we arrived at an Island in the streights, where we found great store of foule which -Abundance of could not flie, of the bignesse of geese, whereof we *e killed in lesse then one day 3000. and victualled our selves throughly therewith.{n}57. Degrees and a terce of Southerly latitude.{n}Botero witeth that another hath found this place all Islands.{n}M. Winter separated and returned.{n}The trending{n}The 6. day of September we entred the South sea at the Cape or head shore.{n}The seventh day wee were driven by a great storme from the entring into the South sea two hundred leagues and odde in longitude, and one degree to the Southward of the Streight: in which height, and so many leagues to the Westward, the fifteenth day of September fell out the Eclipse of the Moone at the houre of sixe of the clocke at night: but neither did the Eclipticall conflict of the Moone impayre our state, nor her clearing againe amend us a whit, but the accustomed Eclipse of the Sea continued in his force, wee being darkened more then the Moone seven fold.{n}From the Bay (which we called The Bay of severing of friends) wee were driven backe to the Southward of the streights in 57. degrees and a terce: in which height we came to an anker among the Islands, having there fresh and very good water, with herbes of singular vertue. Not farre from hence we entred another Bay, where wee found people both men and women in their Canoas, naked, and ranging from one Island to another to seeke their meat, who entered traffique with us for such things as they had.{n}We returning hence Northward againe, found the 3. of October three Islands, in one of which was such plentie of birdes as is scant credible to report.{n}The 8. day of October we lost sight of one of our Consorts wherein M. Winter was, who as then we supposed was put by a storme into the streights againe, which at our returne home wee found to be true, and he not perished, as some of our company feared.{n}Thus being come into the height of The streights againe, we ran, supposing the coast of Chili to lie as the general Maps have described it, namely Northwest, which we found to lie and trend to the Northeast and{n}of the coast of Eastwards, whereby it appeareth that this part of Chili hath not bene truely hitherto discovered, or at the least not truely reported for the space of 12. degrees at the{n}112{n}least, being set downe either of purpose to deceive, or of ignorant conjecture.{n}We continuing our course, fell the 29. of November with an Island called la Mocha, where we cast anchor, 2% and our general hoysing out our boate, went with ten of Mocha in 38. our company to shore, where wee found people, whom the cruell and extreme dealings of the Spaniards have forced for their owne safetie and libertie to flee from the maine, and to fortifie themselves in this Island. We being on land, the people came downe to us to the water side with shew of great courtesie, bringing to us potatoes, rootes, and two very fat sheepe, which our general received and gave them other things for them, and had promise to have water there: but the next day repayring againe to the shore, and sending two men aland with barrels to fill water, the people taking them for Spaniards (to whom they use to shew no favour if they take them) layde violent hands on them, and as we thinke, slew them.{n}Our general seeing this, stayed here no longer, but wayed anchor, and set sayle towards the coast of Chili, and drawing towards it, we mette neere to the shore an Indian in a Canoa, who thinking us to have bene Spaniards, came to us and tolde us, that at a place called S. Iago, there was a great Spanish ship laden from the kingdom e of Peru: for which good newes our general gave him  divers trifles, wherof he was glad, and went along with us and brought us to the place, which is called the port The port of of Valparizo.{n}When we came thither, we found indeede the ship ^nutes. riding at anker, having in her eight Spaniards and three Negros, who thinking us to have bene Spaniards and their friends, welcommed us with a drumme, and made ready a Bottija of wine of Chili to drinke to us: but as Wine ofChili. soone as we were entred, one of our company called Thomas Moone began to lay about him, and strooke one of the Spanyards, and sayd unto him, Abaxo Perro, that is in English, Goe downe dogge. One of these Spaniards{n}xi	113	H{n}seeing persons of that quality in those seas, all to crossed, and blessed himselfe: but to be short, wee stowed them under hatches all save one Spaniard, who suddenly and desperately leapt over boord into the sea, and swamme ashore to the towne of S. Iago, to give them warning of our arrivall.{n}They of the towne being not above 9. housholds, presently fled away and abandoned the towne. Our general The towne of manned his boate, and the Spanish ships boate, and went S. Iago taken. to t^e Towne, and being come to it, we rifled it, and came to a small chappell which wee entred, and found therein a silver chalice, two cruets, and one altar-cloth, the spoyle whereof our general gave to M. Fletcher his minister.{n}We found also in this towne a warehouse stored with WineofChiR. wine of Chili, and many boords of Cedar-wood, all which wine we brought away with us, and certaine of the boords to burne for fire-wood: and so being come aboord, wee departed the Haven, having first set all the John Grieg> a Spaniards on land, saving one John Griego a Greeke Pilot taken, borne, whom our general caried with him for his Pilot to bring him into the haven of Lima.{n}When we were at sea, our general rifled the ship, and found in her good store of the wine of Chili, and 25000. Gold of Bal- pezoes of very pure and fine gold of Baldivia, amounting divia. in vaiue to 37000. ducats of Spanish money, and above.{n}So going on our course, wee arrived next at a place called Coquimbo in Coquimbo, where our general sent 14. of his men on 29. degrees ianJ to fetch water: but they were espied by the Spaniards, 30. mtnu es. who came with 300. horsemen and 200 footemen, and slewe one of our men with a piece, the rest came aboord in safetie, and the Spaniards departed: wee went on shore againe, and buried our man, and the Spaniards came downe againe with a flag of truce, but we set sayle and would not trust them.{n}Tarapaza. From hence we went to a certaine port called Tarapaza, where being landed, we found by the Sea side a Spaniard lying asleepe, who had lying by him 13. barres of silver, 114{n}which weighed 4000. ducats Spanish; we tooke the silver, and left the man.{n}Not farre from hence going on land for fresh water, we met with a Spaniard and an Indian boy driving 8. Llamas or sheepe of Peru which are as big as asses; every of which sheepe had on his backe 2. bags of leather, each bagge conteining 50. li. weight of fine silver: so that bringing both the sheepe and their burthen to the ships, we found in all the bags 800. weight of silver.{n}Here hence we sailed to a place called Arica, and -Arica in 18. being entred the port, we found there three small barkes 3°>min-which we rifled, and found in one of them 57 wedges of silver, each of them weighing about 20 pound weight, and every of these wedges were of the fashion and bignesse of a brickbat. In all these 3. barkes we found not one person: for they mistrusting no strangers, were all gone aland to the Towne, which consisteth of about twentie houses, which we would have ransacked if our company had bene better and more in number. But our general contented with the spoyle of the ships, left the Towne and put ofF againe to sea and set sayle for Lima, and by the way met with a small barke, which he boorded, and found in her good store of linnen cloth, whereof taking some quantitie. he let her goe.{n}To Lima we came the 13. day of February, and being Lima in 11. entred the haven, we found there about twelve sayle of	5°-{n}ships lying fast moored at an anker, having all their sayles ‘ caried on shore; for the masters and marchants were here most secure, having never bene assaulted by enemies, and at this time feared the approch of none such as we were. Our general rifled these ships, and found in one of them a chest full of royals of plate, and good store of silkes and linnen cloth, and tooke the chest into his owne ship, and good store of the silkes and linnen. In which ship hee had newes of another ship called the Cacafuego which was gone towards Paita, and that the same shippe was laden with treasure: whereupon we staied no longer here, but cutting all the cables of the shippes in the{n}115{n}The rich ship called the Cacafuego taken.{n}Cape de San Francisco in I, degree to the North.{n}haven, we let them drive whither they would, either to sea or to the shore, and with all speede we followed the Cacafuego toward Paita, thinking there to have found her: but before wee arrived there, she was gone from thence towards Panama, whom our general still pursued, and by the way met with a barke laden with ropes and tackle for ships, which hee boorded and searched, and found in her 8o.li. weight of golde, and a crucifixe of gold with goodly great Emerauds set in it which he tooke, and some of the cordage also for his owne ship.{n}From hence we departed, still following the Cacafuego, and our general promised our company, that whosoever could first descrie her, should have his chaine of gold for his good newes. It fortuned that John Drake going up into the top, descried her about three of the clocke, and about sixe of the clocke we came to her and boorded her, and shotte at her three peeces of ordinance, and strake downe her Misen, and being entered, we found in her great riches, as jewels and precious stones, thirteene chests full of royals of plate, foure score pound weight of golde, and sixe and twentie tunne of silver. The place where we tooke this prize, was called Cape de San Francisco, about 150. leagues from Panama.{n}The Pilots name of this Shippe was Francisco, and amongst other plate that our general found in this ship, he found two very faire guilt bowles of silver, which were the Pilots : to whom our general sayd : Senior Pilot, you have here two silver cups, but I must needes have one of them : which the Pilot because hee could not otherwise chuse, yeelded unto, and gave the other to the steward of our Generals ships.{n}When this Pilot departed from us, his boy sayde thus unto our general: Captaine, our ship shall be called no more the Cacafuego, but the Cacaplata, and your shippe shall bee called the Cacafuego: which pretie speach of the Pilots boy ministred matter of laughter to us, both then and long after.{n}116{n}When our general had done what hee would with this Cacafuego, hee cast her off, and wee went on our course still towards the West, and not long after met with a ship laden with linnen cloth and fine Chinadishes of white earth, and great store of China-silks, of China-silks, all which things wee tooke as we listed.	andPorceUan.{n}The owner himselfe of this ship was in her, who was a Spanish Gentleman, from whom our general tooke a Fawlcon of golde, with a great Emeraud in the breast thereof, and the Pilot of the ship he tooke also with him, and so cast the ship off.{n}This Pilot brought us to the haven of Guatulco, the Guatulco. towne whereof, as he told us, had but 17. Spaniards in it. Assoone as we were entred this haven, wee landed, and went presently to the towne, and to the Towne-house, where we found a Judge sitting in judgement, being associate with three other officers, upon three Negros that had conspired the burning of the Towne : both which Judges & prisoners we tooke, and brought them a shipboord, and caused the chiefe Judge to write his letter to the Towne, to command all the Townesmen to avoid, that we might safely water there. Which being done, and they departed, we ransaked the Towne, and in one house we found a pot of the quantitie of a bushell, full of reals of plate, which we brought to our ship.{n}And here one Thomas Moone one of our company, tooke a Spanish Gentleman as hee was flying out of the towne, and searching him, he found a chaine of golde about him, and other jewels, which he tooke, and so let him goe.{n}At this place our General among other Spaniards, set The Portugal ashore his Portugall Pilote, which hee tooke at the Pitot set on Islands of Cape Verde, out of a ship of S. Mary port lan ’ of Portugall: and having set them ashore, we departed hence, and sailed to the Island of Canno, where our The Island of general landed, and brought to shore his owne ship, CamK-and discharged her, mended, and graved her, and furnished our ship with water and wood sufficiently.{n}117{n}A ship with a govemour fir the Islands of PhiRppinas.{n}June.{n}Sir Francis Drake sailed on the hackside of America to 43- degrees of Northerly latitude.{n}And while wee were here, we espied a shippe, and set saile after her, and tooke her, and found in her two Pilots, and a Spanish Governour, going for the Islands of the Philippinas : wee searched the shippe, and tooke some of her marchandizes, and so let her goe. Our general at this place and time, thinking himselfe both in respect of his private injuries received from the Spaniards, as also of their contempts and indignities offered to our countrey and Prince in generail, sufficiently satisfied, and revenged : and supposing that her Majestie at his returne would rest contented with this service, purposed to continue no longer upon the Spanish coasts, but began to consider and to consult of the best way for his Countrey.{n}He thought it not good to returne by the Streights, for two speciali causes: the one, lest the Spaniards should there waite, and attend for him in great number and strength, whose hands, hee being left but one ship, could not possibly escape. The other cause was the dangerous situation of the mouth of the streights in the South sea, where continuall stormes reigning and blustering, as he found by experience, besides the shoalds and sands upon the coast, he thought it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolved therefore to avoyde these hazards, to goe forward to the Islandes of the Malucos, and therehence to saile the course of the Portugals by the Cape of Buena Esperanza.{n}Upon this resolution, hee beganne to thinke of his best way to the Malucos, and finding himselfe where he now was becalmed, he saw that of necessitie hee must be forced to take a Spanish course, namely to sayle somewhat Northerly to get a winde. Wee therefore set saile, and sayled 600. leagues at the least for a good winde, and thus much we sailed from the x6. of April, till the 3. of June.{n}The 5. day of June, being in 43. degrees towards the pole Arctike, we found the ayre so colde, that our men being grievously pinched with the same, complained 118{n}of the extremitie thereof, and the further we went, the{n}I579*{n}more the colde increased upon us. Whereupon we thought it best for that time to seeke the land, and did so, finding it not mountainous, but low plaine land, till wee came within 38. degrees towards the line. Degrees. In which height it pleased God to send us into a faire and good Baye, with a good winde to enter the same.{n}In this Baye wee anchored, and the people of the description Countrey having their houses close by the waters side, of the people shewed themselves unto us, and sent a present to our andPountrty general.{n}When they came unto us, they greatly wondred at the things that wee brought, but our general (according to his natural and accustomed humanitie) courteously intreated them, and liberally bestowed on them necessarythings to cover their nakednesse, whereupon they supposed us to be gods, and would not be perswaded to the contrary : the presents which they sent to our general, were feathers, and calles of net-worke.{n}Their houses are digged round about with earth, and have from the uttermost brimmes of the circle, clifts of wood set upon them, joyning close together at the toppe like a spire steeple, which by reason of that closenesse are very warme.{n}Their beds is the ground with rushes strowed on it, and lying about the house, have the fire in the midst. The men go naked, the women take bulrushes, and kembe them after the manner of hempe, and thereof make their loose garments, which being knit about their middles, hang down about their hippes, having also about their shoulders a skinne of Deere, with the haire upon it. These women are very obedient and serviceable to their husbands.{n}After they were departed from us, they came and visited us the second time, and brought with them feathers and bags of Tabacco for presents : And when they came to the top of the hill (at the bottome whereof we had pitched our tents) they staied them-{n}119{n}selves : where one appointed for speaker wearied himselfe with making a long oration, which done, they left their bowes upon the hill, and came downe with their presents.{n}In the meane time the women remaining on the hill, tormented themselves lamentably, tearing their flesh from their cheekes, whereby we perceived that they were about a sacrifice. In the meane time our general with his company went to prayer, and to reading of the Scriptures, at which exercise they were attentive, & seemed greatly to be affected with it: but when they were come unto us, they restored againe unto us those things which before we bestowed upon them.{n}The newes of our being there being spread through the Countrey, the people that inhabited round about came downe, and amongst them the King himselfe, a man of a goodly stature, & comely personage, with many other tall and warlike men : before whose comming were sent two Ambassadors to our general, to signifie that their King was comming, in doing of which message, their speach was continued about halfe an houre. This ended, they by signes requested our general to send some thing by their hand to their king, as a token that his comming might be in peace: wherein our general having satisfied them, they returned with glad tidings to their King, who marched to us with a princely majestie, the people crying continually after their manner, and as they drew neere unto us, so did they strive to behave themselves in their actions with comelinesse.{n}In the fore-front was a man of a goodly personage, who bare the scepter or mace before the King, whereupon hanged two crownes, a lesse and a bigger, with three chaines of a marvellous length: the crownes were made of knit worke wrought artificially with fethers of divers colours : the chaines were made of a bonie substance, and few be the persons among them that are admitted to weare them: and of that number also the persons are 120{n}stinted, as some ten, some 12. &c. Next unto him which bare the scepter, was the King himselfe, with his Guard about his person, clad with Conie skins, & other skins: after them followed the naked common sort of people, every one having his face painted, some with white, some with blacke, and other colours, & having in their hands one thing or another for a present, not so much as their children, but they also brought their presents.{n}In the meane time our general gathered his men together, and marched within his fenced place, making against their approching a very warre-like shew. They being trooped together in their order, and a generail salutation being made, there was presently a general silence. Then he that bare the scepter before the King, being informed by another, whom they assigned to that office, with a manly and loftie voyce proclaymed that which the other spake to him in secrete, continuing halfe  an houre : which ended, and a general Amen as it were given, the King with the whole number of men and women (the children excepted) came downe without any weapon, who descending to the foote of the hill, set themselves in order.{n}In comming towards our bulwarks and tents, the scepter-bearer began a song, observing his measures in a daunce, and that with a stately countenance, whom the King with his Guarde, and every degree of persons following, did in like maner sing and daunce, saving onely the women, which daunced & kept silence. The General permitted them to enter within our bulwarke, where they continued their song and daunce a reasonable time. When they had satisfied themselves, they made signes to our General to sit downe, to whom the King, and divers others made several orations, or rather supplications, that hee would take their province and kingdome into his hand, and become their King, making signes that they would resigne unto him their right and title of the whole land, and become his subjects. In which, to per-swade us the better, the King and the rest, with one{n}121{n}The King consent, and with great reverence, joyfully singing a resides hu	song, did set the crowne upon his head, inriched his{n}kingdom* to	necke with all their chaines, and offred unto him many{n}Sir Francis other things, honouring him by the name of Hioh, Drake. adding thereunto as it seemed, a signe of triumph: which thing our general thought not meete to reject, because he knew not what honour and profit it might be to our Countrey. Wherefore in the name, and to the use of her Majestie he tooke the scepter, crowne, and dignitie of the said Countrey into his hands, wishing that the riches & treasure thereof might so conveniently be transported to the inriching of her kingdom at home, as it aboundeth in ye same.{n}The common sorte of people leaving the King and his Guarde with our general, scattered themselves together with their sacrifices among our people, taking a diligent viewe of every person : and - such as pleased their fancie, (which were the yongest) they inclosing them about offred their sacrifices unto them with lamentable weeping, scratching, and tearing the flesh from their faces with their nailes, whereof issued abundance of blood. But wee used signes to them of disliking this, and stayed their hands from force, and directed them upwards to the living God, The like they whom onely they ought to worship. They shewed unto did in Hoche- us their wounds, and craved helpe of them at our hands, whereupon we gave them lotions, plaisters, and oynt-ments, agreeing to the state of their griefes, beseeching God to cure their diseases. Every third day they brought their sacrifices unto us, until they understood our meaning, that we had no pleasure in them: yet they could not be long absent from us, but dayly frequented our company to the houre of our departure, which departure seemed so greevous unto them, that their joy was turned into sorow. They intreated us, that being absent we would remember them, and by stealth provided a sacrifice, which we misliked.{n}Our necessarie businesse being ended, our general with his company travailed up into the Countrey to their{n}122{n}villages, where we found herdes of Deere by 1000. in Great herdes a company, being most large, and fat of body.	of Deere.{n}We found the whole Countrey to bee a warren of a Abundance of strange kinde of Connies, their bodies in bignesse as be stran& co™5-the Barbary Connies, their heads as the heads of ours, the feete of a Want, and the taile of a Rat being of great length: under her chinne is on either side a bag, into the which she gathereth her meate, when she hath filled her bellie abroad. The people eate their bodies, and make great accompt of their skinnes, for their Kings coate was made of them.{n}Our general called this Countrey Nova Albion, and Nova Albion. that for two causes: the one in respect of the white bankes and cliffes, which lie towards the sea: and the other, because it might have some affinitie with our Countrey in name, which sometime was so called.{n}There is no part of earth heere to bee taken up, Golde and wherein there is not some probable shew of gold or{n}r	°	earth of Nova{n}S11V5-	,	,	„	Albion.{n}At our departure hence our general set up a monument of our being there, as also of her Majesties right and title to the same, namely a plate, nailed upon a faire great poste, whereupon was ingraven her Majesties name, the day and yeere of our arrivall there, with the free giving up of the province and people into her Majesties hands, together with her highnesse picture and armes, in a peece of sixe pence of current English money under the plate, whereunder was also written the name of our general.{n}It seemeth that the Spaniards hitherto had never bene Their deparin this part of the Countrey, neither did ever discover ture-the land by many degrees, to the Southwards of this place.	. October.{n}After we had set saile from hence, wee continued Certaine without sight of land till the 13. day of October Islands in %, following, which day in the morning wee fell with cer-taine Islands 8. degrees to the Northward of the line, Qanoas> i^e from which Islands came a great number of Canoas, those of Java.{n}123{n}having in some of them 4. in some 6. and in some also 14. men, bringing with them cocos, and other fruites.{n} Their Canoas were hollow within, and cut with great arte and cunning, being very smooth within and without, and bearing a glasse as if it were a horne daintily burnished, having a prowe, and a sterne of one sort, yeelding inward circle-wise, being of a great height, and full of certaine white shels for a braverie, and on each side of them lie out two peeces of timber about a yard and a halfe long, more or lesse, according to the smalnesse, or bignesse of the boate.{n}This people have the nether part of their eares cut into a round circle, hanging downe very lowe upon their cheekes, whereon they hang things of a reasonable weight. The nailes of their hands are an ynche long, their teeth are as blacke as pitch, and they renew them often, by eating of an herbe with a kinde of powder, which they alwayes carrie about them in a cane for the same purpose.{n}Islands. Leaving this Island the night after we fell with it, the 18. of October, we lighted upon divers others, some whereof made a great shew of Inhabitants.{n}Wee continued our course by the Islands of Tagulada, Zelon, and Zewarra, being friends to the Portugals, the first whereof hath growing in it great store of Cinnamom.{n}November. The 14. of November we fell with the Islands of Maluco, which day at night (having directed our course to runne with Tydore) in coasting along the Island of Mutyr, belonging to the King of Ternate, his Deputie or Vice-king seeing us at sea, came with his Canoa to us without all feare, and came aboord, and after some conference with our general, willed him in any wise to The Isle of runne in with Ternate, and not with Tydore, assuring Ternate. hjm tjiat the King would bee glad of his comming, and would be ready to doe what he would require, for which purpose he himselfe would that night be with the King, and tell him the newes, with whom if he once dealt, hee{n}124{n}should finde that as he was a King, so his word should stand: adding further, that if he went to Tydore before he came to Ternate, the King would have nothing to doe with us, because hee held the Portugall as his enemie: whereupon our General resolved to runne with Ternate, where the next morning early we came to anchor, at which time our general sent a messenger to the king with a velvet cloke for a present, and token of his comming to be in peace, and that he required nothing but traffique and exchange of marchandize, whereof he had good store, in such things as he wanted.{n}In the meane time the Vice-king had bene with the king according to his promise, signifying unto him what good things he might receive from us by traffique : whereby the King was mooved with great liking towards us, and sent to our general with speciali message, that hee should have what things he needed, and would require with peace and friendship, and moreover that hee would yeeld himselfe, and the right of his Island to bee at the pleasure and com-mandement of so famous a Prince as we served. In token whereof he sent to our general a signet, and within short time after came in his owne person, with boates, and Canoas to our ship, to bring her into a better and safer roade then she was in at present.{n}In the meane time, our Generals messenger beeing come to the Court, was met by certaine noble personages with great solemnitie, and brought to the King, at whose hands hee was most friendly and graciously intertained.{n}The King purposing to come to our ship, sent before 4. great and large Canoas, in every one whereof were certaine of his greatest states that were about him, attired in white lawne of cloth of Calicut, having over their heads from the one ende of the Canoa to the other, a covering of thinne perfumed mats, borne up with a frame made of reedes for the same use, under which every one did sit in his order according to his 125{n}A.D.{n}»579-{n}The king of Ternate offreth himselfe and his kingdome to the service of the Queene of England.{n}The great and strange Canoas of the King of Ternate.{n}The King of Ternate came to visite Sir Francis . Drake.{n}Saga a kinde of meale.{n}dignitie, to keepe him from the heate of the Sunne, divers of whom beeing of good age and gravitie, did make an ancient and fatherly shew. There were also divers yong and comely men attired in white, as were the others: the rest were souldiers, which stood in comely order round about on both sides, without whom sate the rowers in certaine galleries, which being three on a side all along the Canoas, did lie off from the side thereof three or foure yardes, one being orderly builded lower then another, in every of which galleries were the number of 4. score rowers.{n}These Canoas were furnished with warlike munition, every man for the most part having his sword and target, with his dagger, beside other weapons, as launces, calivers, darts, bowes and arrowes: also every Canoa had a small cast base mounted at the least one full yarde upon a stocke set upright.{n}Thus comming neere our shippe, in order they rowed about us, one after another, and passing by, did their homage with great solemnitie, the great personages beginning with great gravitie and fatherly countenances, signifying that ye king had sent them to conduct our ship into a better roade.{n}Soone after the King himselfe repaired, accompanied with 6. grave and ancient persons, who did their obeisance with marvellous humilitie. The king was a man of tall stature, and seemed to be much delighted with the sound of our musicke, to whom as also to his nobilitie, our general gave presents, wherewith they were passing well contented.{n}At length the King craved leave of our general to depart, promising the next day to come aboord, and in the meane time to send us such victuals, as were necessarie for our provision: so that the same night we received of them meale, which they call Sagu, made of the tops of certaine trees, tasting in the mouth like sowre curds, but melteth like sugar, whereof they make certaine cakes, which may be kept the space of ten 126{n}1579-yeeres, and yet then good to be eaten. We had of them store of rice, hennes, unperfect and liquid sugar, sugar canes, and a fruite which they call Figo, with store of cloves.{n}The King having promised to come aboord, brake his promise, but sent his brother to make his excuse, and to intreate our general to come on shoare, offring himselfe pawne aboord for his safe returne. Where-unto our general consented not, upon mislike conceived of the breach of his promise, the whole company also utterly refusing it. But to satisfie him, our General sent certaine of his Gentlemen to the Court, to accompany the King’s brother, reserving the Vice-king for their safe returne. They were received of another brother of the kings, and other states, and were conducted with great honour to the Castle. The place A ** that they were brought unto, was a large and faire Ternatehouse, where were at the least 1000. persons assembled.{n}The King being yet absent, there sate in their places 60. grave personages, all which were said to be of the kings Counsel. There were besides 4. grave persons, apparelled all in red, downe to the ground, and attired on their heads like the Turkes, and these were said to be Romanes, and Ligiers there to keepe continual traf- Romana and fike with the people of Ternate. There were also 2.{n}Turks Ligiers in this place, and one Italian. The king majestie at last came in guarded with 12. launces covered over of the King. with a rich canopy, with embossed gold. Our men accompanied with one of their Captaines called Moro, rising to meete him, he graciously did welcome, and intertaine them. He was attired after the manner of the Countrey, but more sumptuously then the rest.{n}From his waste downe to the ground, was all cloth of golde, and the same very rich: his legges were bare, but on his feete were a paire of shooes, made of Cordovan skinne. In the attire of his head were finely wreathed hooped rings of gold, and about his necke he had a chai ne of perfect golde, the linkes whereof{n}127{n}were great, and one folde double. On his fingers hee had sixe very faire jewels, and sitting in his chaire of estate, at his right hand stood a page with a fanne in his hand, breathing and gathering the ayre to the King. The fanne was in length two foote, and in bredth one foote, set with 8. saphyres, richly imbrodered, and knit to a staffe 3. foote in length, by the which the Page did hold, and moove it. Our Gentlemen having delivered their message, and received order accordingly, were licensed to depart, being safely conducted backe againe by one of the kings Counsell.{n}Temate the This Island is the chiefest of all the Islands of Maluco, and the King hereof is King of 70. Islands auco-ts s. bgsidgs The king with his people are Moores in religion, observing certaine new Moones, with fastings: during which fasts, they neither eat nor drinke in the day, but in the night.{n}After that our Gentlemen were returned, and that we had heere by the favour of the king received all necessary things that the place could yeeld us: our General considering the great distance, and how farre he was yet off from his Countrey, thought it not best here to linger the time any longer, but waying his anchors, set A Utle Island out of the Island, and sayled to a certaine litle Island ^ard^f^' to Southwards of Celebes, where we graved our Celebes. ship, and continued there in that and other businesses 26. dayes. This Island is throughly growen with wood of a large and high growth, very straight and without boughes, save onely in the head or top, whose leaves are not much differing from our broome in England. Amongst these trees night by night, through the whole Tiery worms, land, did shew themselves an infinite swarme of fiery wormes flying in the ayre, whose bodies beeing no bigger then our common English flies, make such a shew and light, as if every twigge or tree had bene a burning candle. In this place breedeth also wonderfull store of Bats. Bats, as bigge as large hennes: of Crayfishes also heere Cravlshes. wanted no plentie, and they of exceeding bignesse, one 128{n}1580. whereof was sufficient for 4. hungry stomacks at a dinner, beeing also very good, and restoring meate, whereof we had experience: and they digge themselves holes in the earth like Conies.{n}When wee had ended our businesse here, we waied, and set saile to runne for the Malucos: but having at that time a bad winde, and being amongst the Islands, with much difficultie wee recovered to the Northward of the Island of Celebes, where by reason of contrary winds not able to continue our course to runne Westwards, we were inforced to alter the same to the Southward againe, finding that course also to be very hard and dangerous for us, by reason of infinite shoalds which lie off, and among the Islands: whereof wee had too much triall to the hazard and danger of our shippe and lives. For of all other dayes upon the 9. of Januarie, in the Januarie in yeere 1579. wee ranne suddenly upon a rocke, where ’579-we stucke fast from 8. of the clocke at night, til 4.	' 741{n}of the clocke in the afternoone the next day, being indeede out of all hope to escape the danger: but our Their danger general as hee had alwayes hitherto shewed himselfe 0 recke’ couragious, and of a good confidence in the mercie and protection of God: so now he continued in the same, and lest he should seeme to perish wilfully, both he, and we did our best indevour to save our selves, which it pleased God so to blesse, that in the ende we cleared our selves most happily of the danger.{n}We lighted our ship upon the rockes of 3. tunne of Cloves. cloves, 8. peeces of ordinance, and certaine meale and beanes: and then the winde (as it were in a moment The klfe of11 by the speciali grace of God) changing from the starre-	the{n}boord to the larboord of the ship, we hoised our sailes, " and the happy gale drove our ship off the rocke into the sea againe, to the no litle comfort of all our hearts, for which we gave God such prayse and thanks, as so great a benefite required.	p, .{n}The 8. of Februarie following, wee fell with the fruitfull Island of Barateve, having in the meane time suffered island.{n}xi	129	1{n}Nutmegs and long Peper growing in Barateve.{n}Commendation of the Island of Barateve.{n}Java major.{n}many dangers by windes and shoalds. The people of this Island are comely in body and stature, and of a civill behaviour, just in dealing, and courteous to strangers, whereof we had the experience sundry wayes, they being most glad of our presence, and very ready to releeve our wants in those things which their Countrey did yeelde. The men goe naked, saving their heads and privities, every man having something or other hanging at their eares. Their women are covered from the middle downe to the foote, wearing a great number of bracelets upon their armes, for some had 8. upon each arme, being made some of bone, some of horne, and some of brasse, the lightest whereof by our estimation waied two ounces apeece.{n}With this people linnen-cloth is good marchandize, and of good request, whereof they make rols for their heads, and girdles to weare about them.{n}Their Island is both rich and fruitfull: rich in golde, silver, copper, and sulphur, wherein they seeme skilful! and expert, not onely to trie the same, but in working it also artificially into any forme and fashion that pleaseth them.{n}Their fruits be divers and plentiful, as nutmegs, ginger, long pepper, lemmons, cucumbers, cocos, figu, sagu, with divers other sorts: and among all the rest, wee had one fruite, in bignesse, forme, and huske, like a Bay berry, hard of substance, and pleasant of taste, which being sodden, becommeth soft, and is a most good and whol-some victuali, whereof we tooke reasonable store, as we did also of the other fruits and spices: so that to confesse a trueth, since the time that we first set out of our owne Countrey of England, we happened upon no place (Ternate onely excepted) wherein we found more comforts and better meanes of refreshing.{n}At our departure from Barateve, we set our course for Java major, where arriving, we found great coiirtesie, and honourable entertainment. This Island is governed by 5. Kings, whom they call Rajah: as Rajah Donaw, and{n}130{n}1580. Rajah Mang Bange, and Rajah Cabuccapollo, which live as having one spirite, and one minde.{n}Of these five we had foure a shipboord at once, and two or three often. They are wonderfully delighted in Red & greene coloured clothes, as red and greene: their upper parts cl°^1 of their bodies are naked, save their heads, where- eseeme • upon they weare a Turkish roll, as do the Maluccians: from the middle downward they weare a pintado of silke, trailing upon the ground, in colour as they best like.{n}The Maluccians hate that their women should bee manners seene of strangers: but these offer them of high Peo^e courtesie, yea the kings themselves.{n}The people are of goodly stature, and warlike, well provided of swords and targets, with daggers, all being of their owne worke, and most artificially done, both in tempering their mettall, as also in the forme, whereof we bought reasonable store.{n}They have an house in every village for their common assembly: every day they meete twise, men, women, and children, bringing with them such victuals as they thinke good, some fruites, some rice boiled, some hennes roasted, some sagu, having a table made 3. foote from the ground, whereon they set their meate, that every person sitting at the table may eate, one rejoycing in the company of another.{n}They boile their rice in an earthen pot, made in forme of a sugar loafe, being ful of holes, as our pots which we water our gardens withall, and it is open at the great ende, wherein they put their rice drie, without any moisture. In the meane time they have ready another great earthen pot, set fast in a fornace, boiling full of water, whereinto they put their pot with rice, by such measure, that they swelling become soft at the first, and by their swelling stopping the holes of the pot, admit no more water to enter, but the more they are boiled, the harder and more firme substance they become, so that in the end they are a firme & good bread, of the which with oyle, butter,{n}131{n}A strange fashion of boy ling rice.{n}The Cape of Buena Esperanza not so dangerous as the Portugals have given out.{n}Sierra Leona.{n}Oister-trees.{n}sugar, and other spices, they make divers sorts of meates very pleasant of taste, and nourishing to nature.{n}The French pocks is here very common to all, and they helpe themselves, sitting naked from ten to two in the Sunne, whereby the venemous humour is drawen out. Not long before our departure, they tolde us, that not farre off there were such great Ships as ours, wishing us to beware: upon this our Captaine would stay no longer.{n}From Java Major we sailed for the cape of Good Hope, which was the first land we fell withall: neither did we touch with it, or any other land, untill we came to Sierra Leona, upon the coast of Guinea: notwithstanding we ranne hard aboord the Cape, finding the report of the Portugals to be most false, who affirme, that it is the most dangerous Cape of the world, never without intolerable stormes and present danger to travailers, which come neere the same.{n}This Cape is a most stately thing, and the fairest Cape we saw in the whole circumference of the earth, and we passed by it the 18. of June.{n}From thence we continued our course to Sierra Leona, on the coast of Guinea, where we arrived the 22. of July, and found necessarie provisions, great store of Elephants, Oisters upon trees of one kind, spawning and increasing infinitely, the Oister suffering no budde to grow. We departed thence the 24. day.{n}We arrived in England the third of November 1580. being the third yeere of our departure.{n}