a account of the particularity of the employments of the english man leave in Virginia by sir Richard greenevill under the charge of master Ralph lane general of the same , from the 17. of August 1585. until the 18. of June 1586. at which time they depart the country : send and direct to sir Walter Ralegh . hat i may proceed with order in this discourse , i think it requisite to divide it into two part . the first shall declare the particularity of such part of the country within the main , as our weak number , and supply of thing necessary do inable we to enter into the 2. part of this discourse . discovery of . the second part shall set down the reason general move we to resolve on our departure at the instant with the general sir Francis Drake , and our common request for passage with he , when the bark , pinnace , and boat with the master and mariner mean by he to be leave in the country , for the supply of such , as for a further time mean to have stay there , be carry away with tempest and foul weather : in the beginning whereof shall be declare the conspiracy of Pemisapan , with the savage of the main to have cut we off , etc 320 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv they Cambridge core . term oh ? usej-u-vaiabieathttpsv / www . cambridge.org / core / term . the first part declare the particularity of the country of Virginia . irst therefore touch the particularity of the country , you shall understand that our discovery of the same have be extend from the hand of Roanoak , ( the same have be the place of our settlement or inhabitation ) into the south , into the north , into the north - west , and into the west . the uttermost place to the southward of any discovery be Secotan , be by estimation fourscore mile distant from Roanoak . the passage from thence be through a broad sound within the main , the same be without ken of land , and yet full of flat and shoald : we have but one boat with four oar to pass through the same , which boat can not carry above fifteen man with their furniture , baggage , and victuali for seven day at the most : and as for our pinnace , beside that she draw too deep water for that shallow sound , she will not stir for a oar : for these and other reason ( winter also be at hand ) we think good whole to leave the discovery of those part until our strong supply . to the northward our further discovery be to the chesepians , distant from Roanoak about 130. mile , the passage to it be very shallow and most dangerous , by reason of the breadth of the sound , and the little succour that upon any flaw be there to be have . but the territory and soil of the chesepians ( be distant fifteen mile from the shore ) be for pleasantness of seat , for temperature of climate , for fertility of soil , and for the commodity of the sea , beside multitude of bear ( be a excellent good victuali ) with great wood of sassafras , and walnut tree , be not to be excel by any other whatsoever . there be sundry king , who they call weroance , and country of great fertility adjoin to the same , as the excellende of the seat of cheseplook . Viii 321 the town of Chawanook able to make 700. man of war . the english voyage the mandoage , tripanick , and opossians , which all come to visit the colony of the english , which i have for a time appoint to be resident there . to the northwest the far place of our discovery be to Chawanook distant from Roanoak about 130. mile . our passage thither lie through a broad sound , but all fresh water , and the channel of a great depth , navigable for good ship , but out of the channel full of shoald . the town about the water side situate by the way be these follow : Passaquenoke the woman town , Chepanoc , weapomeiok , muscamunge , and metackwem : all these be under the jurisdiction of the king of weapomeiok , call Okisco : from muscamunge we enter into the river , and jurisdiction of Chawanook : there the river begin to straighten until it come to Chawanook , and then grow to be as narrow as the Thames betewene Westminster , and Lambeth . between muscamunge and Chawanook upon the left hand as we pass thither , be a goodly high land , and there be a town which we call the blind town , but the savage call it Ohanoak , and have a very goodly corn field belong unto it : it be subject to Chawanook . Chawanook it self be the great province and signiory lie upon that river , and the very town it self be able to put 700. fight man into the field , beside the force of the province it self . the king of the say province be call Menatonon , a man impotent in his limb , but otherwise for a savage , a very grave and wise man , and of a very singular good discourse in matter concern the state , not only of his own country , and the disposition of his own man , but also of his neighbour round about he as well far as near , and of the commodity that each country yield . when i have he prisoner with i , for two day that we be together , he give i more under-322 1585-86 . stand and light of the country than i have receive by all the search and savage that before i or any of my company have have conference with : it be in march last past 1586. among other thing he tell i , that go three day journey in a Canoa , up his river of Chawanook , and then descend to the land , you be within four day journey to pass over land Northeast to a certain king country , who province lie upon the sea , but his place of great strength be a island - a i^nd in situate , as he describe unto i , in a bay , the water a Ba9‘ round about the island very deep . out of this bay he signify unto i , that this purksm ex~ king have so great quantity of pearl , and do so c ™ ding quan-ordinarily take the same , as that not only his own ’ skin that he wear , and the better sort of his gentleman and follower be full set with the say pearl , but also his bed , and house be garnish with they , and that he have such quantity of they , that it be a wonder to see . he show i that the say king be with he at Chawanook two year before , and bring he certain pearl , but the same of the worst sort , yet be he fain to buy they of he for copper at a dear rate , as he think . he give i a rope of the same pearl , but they be black , and nought , yet many of they be very great , and a few among a number very orient and round , all which i lose with other thing of i , come aboard sir Francis Drake his fleet : yet he tell i that the say king have great store of pearl that be white , great , and round , and that his black pearl his man do take out of shallow water , but the white pearl his man fish for in very deep water . it seem to i by his speech , that the say king have traffic with white man that have clothes as we have , for these white pearl , and that be the reason that he will not depart with other then with black pearl , to those of the same country . 323 a enterprise of speciali importance . [ Iii . 257. ] the english voyage the king of Chawanook promise to give i guide to go over land into that king country whensoever i will : but he advise i to take good store of man with i , and good store of victuali , for he say , that king will be loath to suffer any stranger to epter into his country , and especial to meddle with the fish for any pearl there , and that he be able to make a great many of man into the field , which he say will fight very well . hereupon i resolve with my self , that if your supply have come before the end of April , and that you have send any store of boat or man , to have have they make in any reasonable time , with a sufficient number of man and victual to have find we until the new corn be come in , i will have send a small bark . with two pinnace about by sea to the northward to have find out the bay he speak of , and to have sound the bar if there be any , which shall have ride there in the say bay about that hand , while i with all the small boat i can make , and with two hundred man will have go up to the head of the river of Chawanook with the guide that menatonon will have give i , which i will have be assure shall have be of his best man , ( for i have his best belove son prisoner with i ) who also shall have keep i company in a handlocke with the rest , foot by foot , all the voyage over land . my meaning be further at the head of the river in the place of my descent where i will have leave my boat , to have raise a sconce with a small trench , and a palisado upon the top of it , in the which , and in the guard of my boat i will have leave five and twenty , or thirty man , with the rest will i have march with as much victuali as every man can have carry , with their furniture , mattock , spade and axe , two day journey . in the end of my march upon some convenient plot will i have raise another sconce accord to the former , where i will have 324 leave fifteen or twenty . and if it will have fall out convenient , in the way i will have raise my say sconce upon some corn field , that my company may have live upon it . and so i will have hold this course of insconse whither m. every two day march , until i have be arrive at the bay or port he speak of : which find to be move 0 worth the possession , i will there have raise a main fort , both for the defence of the harbour , and our ship also , and will have reduce our whole habitation from Roanoak and from the harbour and port there ( which by proof be very nought ) unto this other beforemention , from whence , in the four day march before specify , can i at all time return with my company back unto my boat ride under my sconce , very near whereunto direct from the west run a most notable river , and in all those part most famous , call the river of Moratoc . this river open into the broad sound of weapomeiok . and whereas the river of Chawanook , and all the other sound , and bay , salt and fresh , show no current in the world in calm weather , but be move altogether with the wind : this river of Moratoc have so violent a current from the west and Southwest , that it make i almost of opinion that with oar it will scarce be navigable : it pass with many creek and turn , and for the space of thirty mile row , and more , it be as broad as the Thames betwixt greenwich and the isle of dog , in some place more , and in some less : the current run as strong , be enter so high into the river , as at London bridge upon a vale water . and for that not only Menatonon , but also the savage of Moratoc themselves do report strange thing of the head of that river , and that from Moratoc it self , which be a principali town upon that river , it be thirty day as some of they say , and some say fourty day voyage to the head thereof , which head 325 cmspiracie oj the savage against the english . the english voyage they say spring out of a main rock in that abundance , that forthwith it make a most violent stream : and further , that this huge rock stand so near unto a sea , that many time in storm ( the wind come outward from the sea ) the wave thereof be beat into the say fresh stream , so that the fresh water for a certain space , grow salt and brackish : i take a resolution with my self , have dismiss Menatonon upon a ransom agree for , and send his son into the pinnace to Roanoak , to enter present so far into that river with two double whirry , and fourty person one or other , as i can have victuali to carry we , until we can meet with more either of the moratok , or of the mangoak , which be another kind of savage , dwell more to the westward of the say river : but the hope of recover moor victuali from the savage make i and my company as narrow to escape starve in that discovery before our return , as ever man do , that miss the same .. for Pemisapan , who have change his name of win-gina upon the death of his brother Granganimo , have give both the choanist , and mangoak word of my purpose touch they , i have be enforce to make he privy to the same , to be serve by he of a guide to the mangoak , and yet he do never rest to solicit continual my go upon they , certify i of a generail assembly even at that time make by Menatonon at Chawanook of all his weroance , and ally to the number of three thousand bow , prepare to come upon we at Roanoak , and that the mangoak also be join in the same confederacy , who be able of themselves to bring as many more to the enterprise : and true it be that at that time the assembly be hold at Chawanook about we , as i find at my come thither , which be unlooked for do so dismay they , as it make we have the better hand at they . but this confederacy against we of the choanist and Mangoaks be altogether and whole procure by Pemisapan him-326 self , as Menatonon confess unto i , who send they continual word , that our purpose be full bend to destroy they : on the other side he tell i , that they have the like meaning towards we . he in like sort have send word to the mangoak of my intention to pass up into their river , and to kill they ( as he say ) both they and the moratok , with who before we be enter into a league , and they have ever deal kind with we , abandon their town along the river , and retire themselves with their * crenepos , and their corn within the main : * then-insomuch as have pass three day voyage up the women‘ river , we can not meet a man , nor find a grain of corn in any their town : whereupon consider with my self that we have but two day victuali leave , and that we be then 160. mile from home , beside casualty of contrary wind or storm , and suspect treason of our own Savages in the discovery of our voyage intend , though we have no intention to be hurtful to any of they , otherwise then for our [ three . 258. ] copper to have have corn of they : i at night upon the corpse of guard , before the put forth of centinel , advertise the whole company of the case we stand in for victuali , and of my opinion that we be betray by our own Savages , and of purpose draw forth by they upon vain hope to be in the end starve , see all the country flee before we , and therefore while we have those two day victuali leave , 1 thought it good for we to make our ■ return homeward , and that it be necessary for we to get the other side of the sound of weopomeiok in time , where we may be relieve upon the wear of Chypanum , and the woman town , although the people be flee . thus much i signify unto they , as the safe way : nevertheless i do refer it to the great number of voice , whether we shall adventure the spend of our whole victuali in some further view of that most goodly river in hope to meet with some better hap , 327 a marvellous mineral in the country of Chaunls Temoatan . the english voyage or otherwise to retire our self back again . and for that they may be the better advise , i will they to deliberate all night upon the matter , and in the morning at our go aboard to set our course accord to the desire of the great part . their resolution full and whole be ( and not three find to be of the contrary opinion ) that while there be leave but one half pint of corn for a man , we shall not leave the search of that river , and that there be in the company two mastiff , upon the pottage of which with sassafras leave ( if the worst fell out ) the company will make shift to live two day , which time will bring they down the current to the mouth of the river , and to the entry of the sound , and in two day more at the far they hope to cross the sound and to be relieve by the wear , which two day they will fast rather than be draw back a foot till they have see the mangoaks , either as friend or foe . this resolution of they do not a little please i , since it come of themselves , although for mistrust of that which afterward do happen , i pretend to have be rather of the contrary opinion . and that which make i most desirous to have some do with the mangoak either in friendship or otherwise to have have one or two of they prisoner , be , for that it be a thing most notorious to all the country , that there be a province to the which the say mangoak have recourse and traffic up that river of Moratoc , which have a marvelous and most strange Minerali . this mine be so notorious among they , as not only to the savage dwell up the say river , and also to the savage of Chawanook , and all they to the westward , but also to all they of the main : the country name be of fame , and be call Chaunis Temoatan . the minerail they say be wassador , which be copper , but they call by the name of wassador every mettle 328 whatsoever : they say it be of the colour of our copper , but our copper be better than they : and the reason be for that it be red and hard , whereas that of Chaunis Temoatan be very soft , and pale : they say that they take the say mettle out of a river that fall very swift from high rock and hill , and they take it in shallow water : the manner be this . they take a great bowl by their description as great as one of our target , and wrap a skin over the hollow part thereof , leave one part open to receive in the minerail : that do , they watch the come down of the current , and the change of the colour of the water , and then sudden chap down the say bowl with the skin , and receive into the same as much oar as will come in , which be ever as much as their bowl will hold , which present they cast into a fire , and forthwith it melt , and do yield in five part , at the first melt , two part of metal for three part of oar . of this metal the mangoak have so great store , by report of all the savage adjoin , that they beautify their house with great plate of the same : and this to be true , i receive by report of all the country , and particular by young Skiko , the king of Chawanooks son my prisoner , who also himself have be prisoner with the mangoak , and set down all the particularity to i before mention : but he have not be at chawnis Temoatan himself : for he say , it be twenty day journey overland from the mangoak , to the say mineral country , and that they pass through certain other territory between they and the mangoak , before they come to the say country . upon report of the premise , which i be very inquisitive in all place where i come to take very particular information of , by all the savage that dwell towards those part , and especial of Menatonon himself , who in every thing do very particular inform i , and promise i guide of his own man , who shall pass over with i , even to the say country 329 of Chaunis Temoatan ( for overland from Chawanook to the mangoak be but one day journey from sun rise to sun set , whereas by water it be seven day with the soon : ) these thing , i say , make i very desirous by all mean possible to recover the mangoak , and to get some of that their copper for a assay , and therefore i willing yield to their [ three . 259. ] resolution : but it fall out very contrary to all expectation , and likelihood : for after two day travel , and our whole victuali spend , lie on shore all night , we can never see man , only fire we may perceive make alongst the shore where we be to pass , and up into the country , until the very last day . in the evening whereof , about three of the clock we hear certain savage call as we think , Manteo , who be also at that time with i in the boat , whereof we all be very glad , hope of some friendly conference with they , and make he to answer they , they present begin a song , as we think , in token of our welcome to they : but Manteo present betake he to his piece , and tell i that they mean to fight with we : which word be not so soon speak by he , and then a conflict light horseman ready to put to shore , but there light begin by they a vopje of their arrow among they in the boat , * s' but do no hurt ( God be thank ) to any man . in - mediate , the other boat lie ready with their shot to skoure the place for our hand weapon to land upon , which be present do , although the land be very high and steep , the savage forthwith quit the shore , and betake themselves to flight : we land , and have fair and easy follow for a small time after they , who have wooded themselves we know not where : the sun draw then towards the set , and be then assure that the next day if we will pursue they , though we may happen to meet with they , yet we shall be assure to meet with none of their victuali , which we then have good cause to think of : therefore choose for the company a con - 330 venient ground in safety to lodge in for the night , make a strong corpse of guard , and put out good centinel , i determine the next morning before the rise of the sun to be go back again , if possible we may recover the mouth of the river , into the broad sound , which at my first motion i find my whole company ready to assent unto : for they be now come to their dog porridge , that they have bespeak for themselves if that befall they which do , and i before do mistrust we shall hardly escape . the end be , we come the next day by night to the river mouth within four or five mile of the same , have row in one day down the current , as much as in , four day we have do against the same : we lodge upon a hand , where we have nothing in the world to eat but pottage of sassafras leave , the like whereof for a meat be never use before as i think . the broad sound we have to pass the next day all fresh and fast : that day the wind blow so strong , and the billow so great , that there be no possibility of passage without sink of our boat . this be upon easter eve , which be fast very true . upon Easter day in the morning the wind come very calm , we enter the sound , and by four of the clock we be at Chipanum , whence all the savage that we have leave there be flee , but their wear do yield we some fish , as God be please not utter to suffer we to be lose : for some of our company of the light horseman be far spend . the next morning we arrive at our home Roanoak . i have set down this voyage somewhat particular , to the end it may appear unto you ( as true it be ) that there want no great good will from the most to the least among we , to have perfect this discovery of the mine : for that the discovery of a good i , by the goodness of God , or a passage to the Southsea , or some way to it , and nothing else can bring this country in request to be inhabit by our nation . 331 the great current of the river of Morattico . and with the discovery of either of the two above show , it will be the most sweet and healthfull climate , and therewithal ! the most fertile soil ( be manure ) in the world : and then will sassafras , and many other root and gum there find make good merchandise and lade for ship , which otherwise of themselves will not be worth the fetch . provide also , that there be find out a better harbour than yet there be , which must be to the northward , if any there be , which be my intention to have spend this summer in the search of , and of the mine of Chawnis Temoatan : the one i will have do , if the bark that i shall have have of sir Francis Drake , by his honourable courtesy , have not be drive away by storm : the other if your supply of more man , and some other necessary have come to we in any convenient sufficiency . for this river of Moratico promise great thing , and by the opinion of m. hariot the head of it by the description of the country , either rise from the bay of Mexico , or else from very near unto the same , that open out into the south sea . And touch the minerali , thus do m. Youghan affirm , that though it be but copper , see the savage be able to melt it , it be one of the rich mineral in the world . wherefore a good harbour find to the northward , as before be say , and from thence four day overland , to the river of Choanoak sconce be raise , from whence again overland through the province of Choanoak one day voyage to the first town of the mangoak up the river of Moratico by the way , as also upon the say river for the defence of our boat like sconce be set , in this course of proceed you shall clear your self from all those danger and broad shallow sound before mention , and gain within four day travel ! into the heart of the main 200. mile at the least , and so pass your discovery into that most notable 332 1585-86 . country , and to the likely part of the main , with far great felicity than otherwise can be perform . thus sir , i have though simple , yet true set down unto you , what my labour with the rest of the gentleman , and poor man of our company ( not without both pain and peril , which the lord in his mercy many way deliver we from ) can yield unto you , which may have be perform in some more perfection , if the lord have be please that only that which you have provide for we have at the first be leave with we , or that he have not in his eternal providence now at the last set some other course in these thing , than the wisdom of man can look into , which true the carry away by a most strange and unlooked for storm of all our provision , with bark , master , mariner , and sundry also of my own company , all have be so courteous supply by the generail sir Francis Drake , the same have be most sufficient to have perform the great part of the premise , must ever make i to think the hand of God only ( for some his good purpose to my self yet unknown ) to have be in the matter . the second part touch the conspiracy of Pemisapan , the discovery of the same , and at the last , of our request to depart with sir Francis drake for England . Nsenore a savage father to Pemisapan be the only friend to our nation that we have among they , and about the king , die the 20. of April 1586. he alone have before oppose himself in their consultation against all matter propose against we , which both the king and all the rest of they after grangemoes death , be very willing to have prefer . and he be not only by the mere providence of God during his life , a mean to save we from hurt , as poison and such like , 333 this skill of make wear will he learn . the english voyage but also to do we very great good , and singular in this . the king be advise and of himself dispose , as a ready mean to have assure bring we to ruin in the month of march 1586. himself also with all his savage to have run away from we , and to have leave his ground in the hand unsowed : which if he have do , there have be no possibility in common reason , ( but by the immediate hand of God ) that we can have be preserve from starve out of hand . for at that time we have no wear for fish , neither can our man skill of the make of they , neither have we one grain of corn for seed to put into the ground . in my absence on my voyage that i have make against the chaonist , and mangoak , they have raise a brute among themselves , that i and my company be part slay , and part starve by the chaonist , and mangoak . one part of this tale be too true , that i and i be like to be starve , but the other false . nevertheless until my return it take such effect in Pemisapan breast , and in those against we , that they grow not only into contempt of we , but also ( contrary to their former reverend opinion in show , of the almighty god of heaven , and Jesus Christ who we serve and worship , who before they will acknowledge and confess the only God ) now they begin to blaspheme , and flat to say , that our lord God be not God , since he suffer we to sustain much hunger , and also to be kill of the renapoak , for so they call by that generail name all the inhabitant of the whole main , of what province soever . insomuch as old Ensenore , neither any of his fellow , can for his sake have no more credit for we : and it come so far that the king be resolve to have present go away as be aforesaid . but even in the begin of this bruit i return , which when he see contrary to his expectation , and the advertisement that he have receive : that not only my self , and my company be all safe , but also by report of 334 his own 3. Savages which have be with i beside Manteo in that voyage , that be to say , Tetepano , his sister husband Eracano , and Cossine , that the chanoist and mangoak ( who name and multitude beside their valour be terrible to all the rest of the province ) dare not for the most part of they abide we , and that those that do abide we be kill , and that we have take Menatonon prisoner , and bring his son that he best love to Roanoak with i , it do not a little assuage all devise against we : on the other side , it make ensenores opinion to be receive again with great respect . for he have often before tell they , and then renew those his former speech , both to the king and the rest , that we be the servant of God , and that we be not subject to be destroy by they : but contrary wise , that they among they that seek our destruction , shall find their own , and not be able to work we , and that we be dead man be able to do they more hurt , then now we can do be alive : a opinion very confident at this day hold by the wise among they , and of their old man , as also , that they have be in the night , be 100 mile from any of we , in the air shoot at , and strike by some man of we , that by sickness have die among they : and many of they hold opinion , that we be dead man return into the world again , and that we do not remain dead but for a certain time , and that then we return again . all these speech then again grow in fui credit with they , the king , and all , touch we , when he see the small troop return again , and in that sort from those who very name be terrible unto they : but that which make up the matter on our side for that time be a accident , yea rather ( as all the rest be ) the good providence of the almighty for the save of we , which be this . within certain day after my return from the say journey , Menatonon send a messenger to visit his son the prisoner with i , and send i certain pearl 33 [ three . 261. ] the beginning of their harvest in July . the english voyage for a present , or rather , as Pemisapan tell i , for the ransom of his son , and therefore i refuse they : but the great cause of his send then , be to signify unto i , that he have command Okisko king of weo-pomiok , to yield himself servant , and homager , to the great Weroanza of England , and after she to sir Walter Raleigh : to perform which commandment receive from Menatonon , the say Okisko joyht with this menatonons messenger send four ' and twenty of his principall man to Roanoak to Pemisapan , to signify that they be ready to perform the same , and so have send those his man to let i know that from that time forward , he , and his successor be to acknowledge her majesty their only sovereign , and next unto she , as be aforesaid . all which be do , and acknowledge by they all , in the presence of Pemisapan his father , and all his savage in counsel then with he , it do for the time thorough ( as it seem ) change he in disposition towards we : insomuch as forthwith Ensenore win this resolution of he , that out of hand he shall go about , and withal , to cause his man to set up wear forthwith for we : both which he at that present go in hand withal , and do so labour the expedition of it , that in the end of April he have sow a good quantity of ground , so much as have be sufficient , to have feed our whole company ( God bless the growth ) and that by the belly , for a whole year : beside that he give we a certain plot of ground for our self to sow . all which put we in marvelous comfort , if we can pass from April until the begin of July , ( which be to have be the begin of their harvest , ) that than a new supply out of England or else our own store will well enough maintain we : all our fear be of the two month betwixt , in which mean space if the savage shall not help we with Cassavi , and china , arid that our wear shall fail we , ( as often they do , ) we may very well starve , notwithstanding the grow corn , like the starve 336 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv 1585-86 . horse in the stable , with the grow grass , as the proverb be : which we very hardly have escape but only by the hand of God , as it please he to try we . for within few day after , as before be say , Ensenore our friend die , who be no soon dead , but certain of our great enemy about Pemisapan , as osacan a wero-ance , tanaquiny and Wanchese most principal , be in hand again to put their old practise in ure against we , which be ready embrace , and all their former devise against we , reneue , and new bring in question . but that of starve we , by their forbear to sow , be break by Ensenore in his life , by have make the king all at one instant to sow his ground , not only in the hand , but also at Dasamonquepeio in the main , within two league over against we . nevertheless there want no store of mischievous practise among they , and of all they resolve principal of this follow . first that Okisko king of weopomeiok with the man - conspira-doages shall be move , and with great quantity of °fpemisa~ copper entertain to the number of 7. or 8. hundred p ' bow , to enterprise the matter thus to be order . they of weopomeiok shall be invite to a certain kind of month mind which they do use to solemnise in their savage manner for any great personage dead , and shall have be for Ensenore . at this instant also shall the mandoak , who be a great people , with the chesepians and their friend to the number of 700. of they , be arm at a day appoint to the main of Dasamonquepeio , and there lie close at the sign of fierce , which shall interchangeable be make on both side , when Pemisapan with his troop above name shall have execute i , and some of our weroance ( as they call all our principali officer , ) the main force of the rest shall have come over into the hand , where they mean to have dispatch the rest of the company , who they do imagine to find both dismay and disperse abroad in the island , seek of crab and fish to live withal . the manner of their enterprise be this . vni 337 y the sufficiende of our man to deal against the savage . 10. to a hundredth . the Savages Uve by fish , and hunt , till harvest . the english voyage Tarraquine and Andacon two principali man about Pemisapan , and very lusty fellow , with twenty more appoint to they have the charge of my person to see a order take for the same , which they mean shall in this sort have be execute . in the dead time of the night they will have beset my house , and put fire in the reed that the same be cover with : mean ( as it be likely ) that my self will have come run out of a sudden amaze in my shirt without arm , upon the instant whereof they will have knock out my brain . the same order be give to certain of his fellow , for m. heriot : so for all the rest of our better sort , all our house at one instant be set on fire as afore be say , and that as well for they of the fort , as for we at the town . now to the end that we may be the few in number together , and so be the more easy deal withal ( for in deed ten of we with our arm prepare , be a terror to a hundred of the best sort of they , ) they agree and do immediate put it in practice , that they shall not for any copper sell we any victual whatsoever : beside that in the night they shall send to have our wear rob , and also to cause they to be break , and once be break never to be repair again by they . by this mean the king stand assure , that i must be enforce for lack of sustenance there , to disband my company into sundry place to live upon shell fish , for so the savage themselves do , go to Hatorask , croatoan , and other place , fish and hunt , while their ground be in sow , and their corn grow : which fail not his expectation . for the famine grow so extreme among we , or wear fail we of fish , that i be enforce to send captain Stafford with 20. with he to croatoan my lord admiral hand to serve two turn in one , that be to say , to feed himself and his company , and also to keep watch if any ship come upon the coast to warn we of the same . i send m. pridiox with the pinnace to Hatorask , and ten with he , with the provost marshal to live there , and also to wait 338 for ship : also i send every week ten 6. or 20. of the rest of the company to the main over against we , to live of Casada and oyster . in the mean while Pemisapan go of purpose to Dasamonquepeio for three cause : the one to see his ground there break up , and sow for a second crop : the other to withdraw himself from my daily send to he for supply of victuali for my company , for he be afraid to deny i any thing , neither dare he in my presence but by colour and with excuse , which t be content to accept for the time , mean in the end as i have reason , to give he the jump once for all : but in the mean while , as i have ever do before , i and i bear all wrong , and accept of all excuse . my purpose be to have rely my self with menatonon , and the chaonist , who in truth as they be more valiant people and in great number than the rest , so be they more faithful in their promise , and since my late be there have give many token of earnest desire they have to join in perfect league with we , and therefore be great offend with Pemisapan and weopomeiok for make he believe such tale of we . the three cause of this go to Dasamonquepeio be to dispatch his messenger to weopomeiok , and to the mandoage as aforesaid : all which he do with great impress of copper in hand , make large promise to they of great spoil . the answer within few day after come from weopomeiok , which be divide into two part . first for the king Okisko , who deny to be of the party for himself , or any of his especial follower , and therefore do immediate retire himself with his force into the main : the other be concern the rest of the say province who accept of it : and in like sort the mandoag receive the impress . the day of their assembly aforesaid at Roanoak be appoint the 10. of June : all which the premise be discover by Skyco , the king Menatonon his son my 339 prisoner , who have once attempt to run away , i lay he in the bylboe , threaten to cut off his head , who i remit at Pemisapan request : whereupon he be persuade that he be our enemy to the death , he do not only feed he with himself , but also make he acquaint with all his practise . on the other side , the young man find himself as well use at my hand , as i have mean to show , and that all my company make much of he , he flat discover all unto i , which also afterward be reveal unto i by one of Pemisapan own man , that night before he be slay . Theise mischief be all instant upon i and my company to be put in execution , it stand i in hand to study how to prevent they , and also to save all other , which be at that time as aforesaid so far from i : whereupon i send to Pemisapan to put suspicion out of his head , that 1 mean present to go to croatoan , for that i have hear of the arrival of our fleet , ( though i in truth have neither herd nor hope for so good adventure , ) and that i mean to come by he , to borrow of his man to fish for my company , and to hunt for i at croatoan , as also to buy some four day provision to serve for my voyage . he send i word that he will himself come over to Roanoak , but from day to day he defer , only to bring the weopomeiok with he and the mandoag , who time appoint be within eight day after . it be the last of May 1586 when all his own savage begin to make their assembly at Roanoak , at his commandment send abroad unto they , and i resolve not to stay long upon his come over , since he mean to come with so good company , but think good to go and visit he with such as i have , which i resolve to do the next day : but that night i mean by the way to give they in the island a canvisado , and at the instant to seize upon all the canoas about the island , to keep he from advertisement . but the town take the alarm before i mean it to 340 they : the occasion be this . i have send the master of the light horseman , with a few with he , to gather up all the canoas in the set of the sun , and to take as many as be go from we to Dasamonquepeio , but to suffer any that come from thence , to land . he meet with a Canoa go from the shore , and overthrow the Canoa , and cut off slaughter two Savages head : this be not do so secret but he be discover from the shore ; whereupon the cry arise : for in truth they , privy to their own villainous purpose against we , hold as good espial upon we , both day and night , as we do upon they . the alarm give , they take themselves to their bow , and we to our arm : some three or four of they at the first be slay with our shot : the rest flee into the wood . the next morning with the light horseman and one Canoa take 25 with the colonel of the chesepians , and the sergeant major , i go to Dasamonquepeio : and be land , send Pemisapan word by one of his own savage that meet i at the shore , that i be go to croatoan , and mean to take he in the way to complain unto he of Osocon , who the night pass be convey away my prisoner , who i have there present tie in a handlocke . hereupon the king do abide my come to he , and find my self amid seven or eight of he principali weroance and follower , ( not regard any of the common sort ) i give the watchword agree upon , ( which be , Christ our victory ) and immediate those his chief man and himself have by the mercy of God for our deliverance , that which they have purpose for we . the king himself be shoot through by the colonel with a pistol , lie on the ground for dead , and i look as watchful for the save of Manteos friend , as other be busy that none of the rest shall escape , sudden he start up , and run away as though he have not be touch , insomuch as he overrun all the company , be by the way shoot thwart the buttock by my irish boy with my petronel . in the end a 341 irish man serve i , one Nugent , and the deputy provost , undertake he ; and follow he in the wood , overtake he : and i in some doubt lest we have lose both the king and my man by our own negligence to have be intercept by the savage , we meet he Pemisapan return out of the wood with Pemisapan head in slay - he hand .. This fall out the first of June 1586 , and the eight of the same come advertisement to i from captain Stafford , lie at my lord admiral island , that he have discover a great fleet of three and twenty sail : but whether they be friend or foe , he can not yet discern . he advise i to stand upon as good guard as i can . the nine of the say month he himself come unto i , have that night before , and that same day travel by land twenty mile : and i must true report of he from the first to the last ; he be the gentleman that never spare labour or peril either by land or water , fair weather or foul , to perform any service commit unto he . a letter from he bring i a letter from the general sir Francis sir Francis Drake , with a most bountiful and honourable offer for ’ the supply of our necessity to the performance of the action we be enter into ; and that not only of victual , munition , and clothe , but also of bark , pinnaces , and boat ; they also by he to be victual , man , and furnish to my contentation . the ten day he arrive in the road of our bad harbour : and come there to a anchor , the eleven day i come to he , who i find in deed most honourable to perform that which in writing and message he have most courteous offer , he have aforehand propound the matter to all the captain of his fleet , and get their like and consent thereto . with such thank unto he and his captain for his care both of we and of our action , not as the matter deserve , but as i can both for my company and my 342 ' self , i ( be aforehand prepare what i will desire ) crave at his hand that it will please he to take with he into England a number of weak and unfit man for my good action , which i will deliver to he ; and in place of they to supply i of his company with oare-man , artificer , and other . that he will leave we so much ship and victuali , as about August then next follow will carry i and all my company into England , when we have discover somewhat , that for lack of needful provision in time leave with we as yet remain undo . that it will please he withal to leave some sufficient master not only to carry we into England , when time shall be , but also to search the coast for some better harbour , if there be any , and especial to help we to some small boat and oare-man . also for a supply of caliver , hand weapon , match and lead , tool , apparel , and such like . he have receive these my request , accord to his usual commendable manner of government ( as it be tell i ) call his captain to counsel ; the resolution be that i shall send such of my officer of my company as i use in such matter , with their note , to go aboard with he ; which be the master of the victual , the keeper of the store , and the vicetreasurer : to who he appoint forthwith for i the Francis , be a very proper bark of 70 tun , and take present order for bring of victual aboard she for 100 man for four month , with all my other demand whatsoever , to the uttermost . and further , he appoint for i two pinnace , and four small boat : and that which be to perform all his former liberality towards we , be that he have get the full assent of two of as sufficient experiment master as be any in his fleet , by judgement of they that know they , with very sufficient ging to tarry with i , and to employ themselves most earnest in the action , as i shall appoint they , until the term which 343 [ three . 264. . ] i promise of our return into England again . the name of one of those master be Abraham Kendal , the other Griffith Herne . while these thing be in hand , the provision aforesaid be bring , and in bring aboard , my say master be also go aboard , my say bark have accept of their charge , and my own officer , with other in like sort of my company with they ( all which be dispatch by the say general the 12 of the say month ) the 13 of the same there arise such a unwonted storm , and continue four day , that have like to have drive all on shore , if the lord have not hold his holy hand over they , and the general very provident foresee the worst himself , then about my dispatch put himself aboard : but in the end have drive sundry of the fleet to put to sea the Francis also with all my provision , my two master , and my company aboard , she be see to be free from the same , and to put clear to sea this storm have continue from the 13 to the 16 of the month , and thus my bark put away as aforesaid , the general come ashore make a new proffer unto i ; which be a ship of 170 ton , call the bark Bonner , with a sufficient master and guide to tarry with i the time appoint , and victual sufficient to carry i and my company into England , with all provision as before : but he tell i that he will not for any thing undertake to have she bring into our harbour , and therefore he be to leave she in the road , and to leave the care of the rest unto my self , and advise i to consider with my company of our case , and to deliver present unto he in write what i will require he to do for we : which be within his power , he do assure i aswell for his captain as for himself , shall be most willing perform . Heereupbn call such captain and gentleman of my company as then be at hand , who be all as privy as my self to the general offer : their whole re - 344 quest be to i , that consider the case that we stand in , the weakness of our company , the small number of the same , the carry away of our first appoint bark , with those two especial master , with our principali provision in the same , by the very hand of God as it seem , stretch out to take we from thence ; consider also , that his second offer , though most honourable of his part , yet of we not to be take , insomuch as there be no possibility for she with any safety to be bring into the harbour : see furthermore , our hope for supply with sir Richard Greenvill , so undoubted promise we before easter , not yet come , neither then likely to come this year , consider the do in England for Flanders , and also for America , that therefore i will resolve my self with my company to go into England in that fleet , and accord to make request to the general in all our name , that he will be please to give we present passage with he . which request of we by my self deliver unto he , he most ready assent unto : and so he send immediately his pinnace unto our island for the fetch away of a few that there be leave with our baggage , the weather be so boisterous , and the pinnace so often on ground , that the most of all we have , with all our card , book and write be by the sailor cast overboard , the great number of the fleet be much aggrieve with their long and dangerous abode in that miserable road . ' from whence the general in the name of the almighty , weigh his anchor ( have bestow we among his fleet ) for the relief of who he have in that storm sustain more peril of wrack then in all his former most honourable action against the Spaniard , with praise unto God for all , set sail the nineteenth of June 1586 , and arrive in Portsmouth the seven and twenty of July ’ the same year . 