the description of the west Indies in generail , but chief and particular of Florida . America unknown to all antiquity . hat part of the earth which at this day we call the four part of the world , or America , or rather the west India , be unknown unto our ancestor by reason of the great distance thereof . in like manner all the western island and fortunate isle be not discover but by those of our age . howbeit there have be some which have say that they be discover in the 448 time of Augustus Caesar , and that Virgil have make mention thereof in the sixth book of his TEneidos , when he say , there be a land beyond the star , and the course of the year and of the sun , where Atlas the porter of heaven sustain the pole upon [ three . 305. ] his shoulder : nevertheless it be easy to judge that he mean not to speak of this land , whereof no man be find to have write before his time , colon or counterfeit - lumbe . neither yet above a thousand year after . Christopher Christopher Colon do first light upon this land in the year 1592. and five year after Americus go thither by the Americus ves-commandement of the king of Castille , and give unto puciusofwhom it his own name , whereupon afterward it be call ' ’ ' America . this man be very well see in the art of navigation and in astronomic : whereby he discover in his time many land unknown unto the ancient geographer . this country be name by some , the land of bresill , and the land of parrot . it stretch it self , accord unto Postell , from the America take the name . thefirst generail part of America . Cabota in the year 1597 have discover .. - . — .. .. all this tract one pole to the other , save at the strait of Magelan , for the crown whereunto it reach 53. degree beyond the equator , of England . i will divide it for the better understanding into three principali part . that which be towards the pole arcticke on the north be call new France , because that in the year 1524. John Verrazzano a florentine be send by king Francis the first , and by madam the regent his mother unto these new region , where he go on land , and discover all the coast which be from the Tropic of Cancer , to wit , from the eight and twenty unto the fifty degree , and father unto the north . he plant in this country the ensign and arm of the king of France : so that the Spaniard themselves which be there afterward , have name this country terra Francesca . the same then extend itself in latitude from the 25. degree unto the 54. towards the north : and in longitude from 210. unto 330. the eastern part thereof be call by the late writer the land of Norumbega , which begin at the bay of Gama , viii 449 2 f the second general part of America . the three general part of America . viuegaignon . Florida with a ample description thereof . the english voyage which separate it from the isle of Canada , whither Jaques Carthier sail the year 1535 - about the which there be many hand , among which be that which be name terra de Labrador stretch toward Greenland . in the western part there be many know country , as the region of Quivira , Civola , Astatlan , and Terlichichimici . the southern part be call Florida , because it be discover on Palme-sunday , which the Spaniard call Pascha Florida . the northern part be altogether unknown . the second part of all America be call new Spain . it extend from the Tropic of Cancer in twenty three degree and a half , unto the nine degree . in the same be situate the city of Themistitan , and it have many region , and many island adjoin unto it , which be call the Antilles , whereof the most famous and renown be Hispaniola and Isabel , with a infinite number of other . all this land , together with the bay of Mexico , and all the hand aforesaid , have not in longitude past seventie degree , to wit , from the two hundred and forty , unto three hundred and ten : it be also long and narrow as Italy . the three part of America be call Peru , it be very great , and extend it self in latitude from the ten degree unto the three and fifty beyond the equator , to wit , as i have say before , unto the strait of Magelan . it be make in fashion like to a egg , and be very well know upon all side . the part where it be large have threescore degree , and from thence it wax narrow and narrow towards both the end . in one part of this land villegaignon plant right under the Tropic of Capricorn , and he call it France antarctic , because it draw towards the pole antarctic , as our France do towards the arctic . new France be almost as great as all our Europe . howbeit the most know and inhabit part thereof be Florida , whither many Frenchmen have make diverse voyage at sundry time , insomuch that now it be the 45° best know country which be in all this part of new France . the cape thereof be as it be a long head of land stretch out into the sea a hundred league , and run direct toward the south : it have right over against it five and twenty league distant the isle of Cuba otherwise call Isabel , towards the east the isle of Bahama and Lucaya , and towards the west the bay of Mexico . the country be flat , and divide with diverse river , and therefore moist , and be sandy towards the sea shore . there grow in those part great quantity of pinetree , which have no kernel in the the tree of apple which they bear . their wood be full of oak , Florida , Walnuttrees , black cherrietree , mulberry tree , lentisks , and chestnut tree , which be more wild than those in France . there be great store of cedar , cypress , bay , palm tree , holly , and wild vine , which climb up along the tree and bear good grape . there be there a kind of meddler , the fruit whereof be better these be per-then that of France , and big . there be also plumtree , which bear very fair fruit , but such as be not gavage call very good . there be raspass , and a little berry which Tunas . we call among we blue , which be very good to eat . there grow in that country a kind of root which they call in their language hasez , whereof in necessity they make bread . there be also there the tree call Esquine , which be very good against the pock and other contagious disease . the beast best know in this the beast of country be stag , hind , goat , deer , leopard , Tlonda . ounce , lusern , diverse sort of wolf , wild dog , [ three . 306. ] hare , cony , and a certain kind of beast that diflrer-eth little from the lion of Africa . the fowl be Thefouk oj turkeycock , partridge , parrot , pigeon , ringdove , Florida . turtle , blackbirde , crow , tarcel , falcon , lay nerd , herons , crane , stork , wild goose , malards , cormorant , hernshawe , white , red , black and grey , and a infinite sort of all wild foul . there be such abundance of crocodile , that oftentimes in swim man crocodile . be assail by they ; of serpent there be many sort . 451 the mountains of appalatcy . store of die and colour . the disposition and manor of the floridians . the wear of their hair . their exercise and pastime . run for game . shoot . play at the ball . the english voyage there be find among the savage good quantity of gold and silver , which be get out of the ship that be lose upon the coast , as i have understand by the savage themselves . they use traffic thereof one with another . and that which make i the rather believe it , be , that on the coast toward the cape , where common the ship be cast away , there be more store of silver then towards the north . nevertheless they say , that in the mountain of appalatcy there be mine of copper , which i think to be gold . there be also in this country great store of grain and herb , whereof may be make excellent good die and painting of all kind of colour . and in truth the Indian which take pleasure in paint of their skin , know very well how to use the same . the man be of a olive colour , of great stature , fair , without any deformity , and well proportion . they cover their privity with the skin of a stag well dress . the most part of they have their body , arm , and thigh paint with very fair devise : the paint whereof can never be take away , because the same be prick into their flesh . their hair be very black and reach even down to their hip , howbeit they truss it up after a fashion that become they very well . they be great dissembler and traitors , valiant of their person and fight very well . they have none other weapon but their bow and arrow . they make the string of their bow of a gut of a stag , or of a stag skin , which they know how to dress as well as any man in France , and with as different sort of colour . they head their arrow with the tooth of fish and stone , which they work very fine and handsome . they exercise their young man to run well , and they make a game among themselves , which he win that have the long breath . they also exercise themselves much in shoot . they play at the ball in this manner : they set up a tree in the midst of a place which be eight or nine fathom high , in the top whereof there be set a square mat make of reed or bulrush , which whoso - 45 2 hunt . fish . their form of war . their triumph after the victory . they worship Rene Laudonniere ever hit in play thereat , win the game . they take great pleasure in hunt and fish . the king of the country make great war one against the other , which be not execute but by surprise , and they kill all the man they can take : afterward they cut of their head to have their hair , which return home they carry away , to make thereof their triumph when they come to their house . they save the woman and child and nourish they and keep they always with they . be return home from the war , they assemble all their subject , and for joy three day and three night they make good cheer , they dance and sing , likewise they make the most ancient woman of the country to dance , hold the hair of their enemy in their hand : and in dance they sing praise to the sun , ascribe unto he the honour of the victory . they have no m knowledge of God , nor of any religion , save of that ’ which they see , as the sun and the moon . they have their priest to who they give great credit , their priest because they be great magician , great soothsayer , and be . e . caller upon devil . Theise priest serve they in stead physician . of physician and chirurgeon . they carry always about they a bag full of herb and drug to cure the sick disease which for the most part be sick of the pock , for they love woman and maiden exceed , which they call the daughter of the sun : and some of they be sodomite . they marry , and every one their marri-hath his wife , and it be lawful for the king to have two ase ' or three : yet none but the first be honour and acknowledge for queen : and none but the child of the first wife inherit the good and authority of the father . the woman do all the business at home . they keep the painefal-not house with they after they know they be with child . ness the and they eat not of that which they touch as long as ’ they have their flower . there be in all this country manyherma-many hermaphrodite , which take all the great pain , and bear the victual when they go to war . they the naije paint their face much , and stick their hair full of both sex . 453 their food and provision for war . their dress their flesh and fish over the smoke . their order in march to the war . their consultation . [ he . 307. ] the english voyage feather or down , that they may seem more terrible . the victual which they carry with they , be of bread , of honey , and of meal make of Maiz parch in the fire , which they keep without be mar a long while . they carry also sometime fish , which they cause to be dress in the smoke . in necessity they eat a thousand rifraffe , even to the swallow down of coal , and put sand into the pottage that they make with this meal . when they go to war , their king march first , with a club in the one hand , and his bow in the other , with his quiver full of arrow . all his man follow he , which have likewise their bow and arrow . while they fight , they make great cry and exclamation . they take no enterprise in hand , but first they assemble oftentimes their council together , and they take very good advisement before they grow to a resolution . they meet together every morning in a great common house , whither their king repair , and set he down upon a seat which be high than the seat of the other : where all of they one after another come and salute he : their salute and the most ancient begin their salutation , lift up of their king , their hand twice as high as their face , say , ha , he , ya , and the rest answer ha , ha . assoon as they have do their salutation , every man sit he down upon the seat which be round about in the house . if there be any thing to entreat of , the king call the Jawas , that be to say , their priest , and the most ancient man , and ask they their advice . afterwards he command Cassine to be brew , which be a drink make of they the drink leaf of a certain tree : they drink this cassine very °LfonfhL i otte : he rink first , than he cause to be give to battle thereof to all of they one after another in the same bowl , which hold well a quart measure of Paris . the honour ex - they make so great account of this drink , that no man menofvdure taste thereof in this assembly , unless he have make above other . proote ot his valour in the war . Moreover this drink the excellent - have such a virtue , that assoon as they have drink it aeof cassine . they become all in a sweat , which sweat be pass , it 454 take away hunger and thirst for four and twenty hour after . when a king die , they bury he very their manner solemn , and upon his grave they set the cup oft^^all wherein he be wont to drink : and round about the say grave they stick many arrow , and weep and fast three day together without cease . all the king which be his friend make the like mourning : and in token of the love which they bear he , they their cut cut of more than the one half of their hair , as well man as woman . during the space of six moon ( so tr they reckon their month ) there be certain woman appoint which bewail the death of this king , cry with a loud voice thrice a day , to wit , in the morning , at noon , and at evening . all the good of this king be put into his house , and afterward they set it on fire , so that nothing be ever more after to be see . the like be do with the good of the priest , and beside they bury the body of the priest the burial of their priest . soio twice in 6 month . Maiz from the time that it be sow until the time that it be ready to be gather , be but three month on the ground . the other 6. month they let the earth rest . they have also fair pumpion , and very fair pumpi-good bean . they never dung their land , only ms-when they will sow , they set the weed on fire , goodh bean . which grow up the 6. month , and burn they all . they dig their ground with a instrument of wood instrument which be fashion like a broad mattock , wherewith . they dig their vine in France , they put two grain encage etr of Maiz together . when the land be to be sow , ’ the king command one of his man to assemble his subject every day to labour , during which labour the king cause store of that drink to be make for they , whereof we have speak . at the time when the bring the Maiz be gather , it be all carry into a int0 a common common house , where it be distribute to every man house . 455 in their house , and then they set they on fire . they sow their Maiz twice a year , to wit , in march and in June , and all in one and the same soil . the say their provi - accord to his quality . they sow no more but sum of corn that which they think will serve their turn for for 6 month six month > and that very scarce . for during the ' r^ir manner winter they retire themselves for three or four month of live in in the year into the wood , where they make little the winter , cottage of palm bough for their retreat , and live there of Maste , of fish which they take , of oyster , of stag , of turkeycocke , and other beast which Thedressingoj - they take . they eat all their meat broil on they their meat in coal , and dress in the smoke , which in their the smoke . janguage they call boucane . they eat willing the flesh of the crocodile : and in deed it be fair and white : and be it not that it savour too much like their manner musk we will oftentimes have eat thereof . they of cure this - have a custom among they , that when they find ease ' themselves sick , where they feel the pain , whereas we cause ourselves to be let blood , their physician suck they until they make the blood follow . their woman the woman be likewise of good proportion and ndm^rs tal1 ’ and °f the same colour that the man be of , ' paint as the man be : howbeit when they be bear , they be not so much of a olive colour , and be far oil in white . for the chief cause that make they to be Florida . of cojour proceed of anointing of oil which they use among they : and they do it for a certain ceremony which i can not learn , and because of the sun which shine hot upon their body . the woman great agility of the woman be so great , that they can swimmer . swim over the great river bear their child upon one of their arm . they climb up also very nimble upon the high tree in the country . behold in brief the description of the country , with the nature and custom of the inhabitant : which i be very willing to write , before i enter any further into the discourse of my history , to the end that the reader may be the better prepare to understand that , which i mean hereafter to entreat of . 