my lord admiral of Chastillon , a noble man more desirous of the public then of his private benefit , understand the pleasure of the king his prince , which be to discover new and strange country , cause vessel fit for this purpose to be make ready with all diligence , and man to be levy meet for such a enterprise : among who he choose captain John Ribault , a man in truth expert in sea cause : which have receive his charge , set himself to sea the year 1562. the eighteenth of February , accompany only with two of the king ship , but so well furnish with gentleman , ( of who number i my self be one ) and with old soldier , that he have mean to achieve some notable thing and worthy of eternal memory . have therefore sail two month , never hold the usual course of the Spaniard , he arrive in Florida , land near a cape or promontory , which be no high land , because the coast be all flat , but only rise by reason of the high wood , which at his arrival he call cape Francois in honour of our France . this cape be distant from the equator about thirty degree . coast from this place towards the north , he discover a very fair and great river , which give he occasion to cast anchor that he may search the same the next day very early in the morning : which be do by the break of day , accompany with captain Fiquinville and diverse other soldier of his ship , he be no soon arrive on the brink of the shore , but straight he perceive many Indian man and woman , which come of purpose to that place to receive the Frenchman with all gentleness and amity , as they well declare by the oration which their king make , and the present of chamois skin wherewith he honour our captain , which the day follow cause a pillar of hard stone to be plant within the say river , and not far from the mouth of the same upon a little sandy knap , in which pillar the 457 A.D. 1587. [ he . 308. ] the first voyage of John ri-baulttoflorida 1562. the course of the Spaniard not altogether necessary . cape Francois in 30. degree . apillar setup . Armes of France be carve and engrave . This be do he embark himself again , to the end always to discover the coast towards the north which be his chief desire . after he have sail a certain time he cross over to the other side of the river , and then in the presence of certain Indian , which of purpose do attend he , he command his man prayer and to make their prayer , to give thanks to God , for thankestogod . tjjat of grace he have conduct the french nation unto these strange place without any danger at all . the prayer be end , the Indian which be very attentive to hearken unto they , think in my judgement , that we worship tbe sun , because we always have our eye lift up towards heaven , rise all up and come to salute the captain John Ribault , promise to show he their king , which rise not up as they do , but remain still sit upon green leaf of bay and palmetree : towards who the captain go and sit down by he , and hear he make a long discourse , but with no great pleasure , because he can not understand his language , and present give much less his meaning . the king give our captain to Ribault . at h-s departure a plume or fan of hernshawes feather die in red , and a basket make of pa { me-boughe after the Indian fashion , and wrought very artificial , and a great skin paint and draw throughout with the picture of diverse wild beast so lively draw and portray , that nothing lack but life . the captain to show himself not unthankful , give he pretty tin bracelet , a cut hook , a look glass , and certain knife : whereupon the king show himself to be very glad and full content . have spend the most part of the day with these Indian , the captain embark himself to pass over to the north side of the river , whereat the king seem to be very sorry . nevertheless be not able to stay we , he command that with all diligence they shall take fish for we : which they do 458 with all speed . for be enter into their wear their fish-or enclosure make of reed and frame in the fashion of a labirynth or maze , they load we with trout , great mullet , Plaise , turbut , and marvelous store of other sort of fish altogether different from we . this do , we enter into our boat and go they pass towards the other shore . but before we come to the shore , we be salute with a number of other Indian , which enter into the water to their armpit , bring we many little basket full of Maiz , and goodly mui - goodly mulberry both red and white : other offer themselves to bear we on shore , where be land our per - ’ ceive their king sit upon a place dress with bough , and under a little arbour of cedar and bay tree somewhat distant from the water side . he be accompany with two of his son which be exceed fair and strong , and with a troop of Indian who have all their bow and arrow in marvelous good order . his two son receive our captain very gracious : but the king their father , represent i wot not what kind of gravity , do nothing but shake his head a little : then the captain go forward to salute he , and without any other move of himself he retain so constant a kind of gravity , that he make it seem unto we that by good and lawful right he bear the title of a king . our captain know not what to judge of this man behaviour , though he be jealous because we go first unto the other king , or else that he be not well please with the pillar or column which he have plant . while thus he know not what hereof to [ three . 309. ] think , our captain show he by sign , that he be come from a far country to seek he , to let he understand the amity which he be desirous to have with he : for the better confirmation whereof , he draw out of a budget certain trifle , as certain bracelet cover as it be with silver and guilt , which he present he withal , and give his son certain 459 other trifle . whereupon the king begin very love to entreat both our captain and we . and after these gentle entertainment , we go our self into the wood , hope there to discover some singularity : where be great store of mulberry tree white and red , great store of on the top whereof there be a infinite number of silkworm . sjlkeworme . follow our way we discover a fair and great meadow , divide notwithstanding with diverse marsh , which constrain we by reason of the water , which environ it about , to return back again toward the river side . find not the king there , which by this time be go home to his house , we enter into our boat and sail toward our ship : the river of where after we arrive , we call this river the river of May , because we discover it the first day of the say month . soon after we return to our ship , we weigh our anchor and hoist our sail to discover the coast far forward , along the which we discover another fair river , which the captain himself be mind to search out , and have search it out with the king and the river of inhabitant thereof , he name it Seine , because it be very ke unto the river of Seine in France . from this river we retire towards our ship , where be arrive , we trim our sail to sail further towards the north , and to descry the singularity of the coast . but we have not sail any great way before we discover another very fair river , which cause we to cast anchor over against it , and to trim out two boat to go to search it out . we find there an he the river of anJ a king no less affable than the rest , afterward we r name this river Somme . from thence we sail about six league , after we discover another river , the river of which after we have view be name by we by the cherente , name of Loire . and consequent we there discover Grande $ve ot^ers : whereof the first be name Cherente , the belle ’ second Garonne , the three Gironde , the four Belle , the Grande . five Grande : which be very well discover with such 460 thing as be in they , by this time in less than the space of threescore league we have find out many singularity along nine river . nevertheless not full satisfy we say lead yet further to ward the north , follow the course that may bring we to the river of Jordan one of the fair river of the north , and hold our wont course , great fog and tempest come upon we , which constrain we to leave the coast to bear towards the main sea , which be the cause that we lose the sight of our pinnace a whole day and a night until the next day in the morning , what time the weather wax fair and the sea calm , we discover a river which we call bellei a veoir . after we have . sail three or four league , we begin to espy our a veoir . pinnace which come straight towards we , and at their arrival they report to the captain , that while the foul weather and fog endure , they harbour themselves in a mighty river which in bigness and beauty exceed the former : wherewithal ! the captain be exceed joyful , for his chief desire be to find out a haven to harbour his ship , and there to refresh our self for a while . thus make thitherward we arrive athwart the say river , ( which because of the fairness and largeness thereof we name port royal ) river °f we strike our sail and cast anchor at ten fathom of water : for the depth be such , namely when the sea ° begin to flow , that the great ship of France , yea , the arguze of Venice may enter in there . have cast anchor , the captain with his soldier go on shore , and he himself go first on land : where we find the place as pleasant as be possible , for it be all cover over with mighty high oak and infinite store of cedar , and with lentisk grow underneath they , smell so sweet , that the very fragrant odour only make the place to seem exceed pleasant . as we pass through these wood we see nothing but , , turkeycock fly in the forest , partridge grey and porridges* ' red , little different from we , but chief in bigness . grey and red . 461 we hear also within the wood the voice of stag , of bear , off luserne , of leopard , and diverse other sort of beast unknown unto we . be delight with this place , we set our self to fish with net , and fish in abun - we catch such a number of fish , that it be wonderful ! . dance . and among other we take a certain kind of fish which we call Sallicoques , which be no less than crevice , so that two draught of the net be sufficient to feed all the company of our two ship for a whole the river 3. day . the river at the mouth thereof from cape to leaguesat cape be no less than 3. French league broad ; it be m°u ’ divide into two great arm , whereof the one run towards the west , the other towards the north : and i believe in my judgement that the arm which stretch . toward the north run up into the country as a passage by far as the river Jordan , the other arm run into a river into g as be know anj understand by those of [ three . 310 ] our company , which be leave behind to dwell in this place . Theise two arm be two great league broad : and in the midst of they there be a he , which be point towards the open of the great river , in which hand there be infinite number of all sort of store of rare strange beast . there be simple grow there of so simples . rare property ) anJ in so great quantity , that it be a excellent thing to behold they . on every side there be nothing to be see but palmetree , and other sort of tree bear blossom and fruit of very rare shape and very good smell . but see the evening approach , and that the captain determine to return unto the ship , we pray he to suffer we to pass the night in this place . in our absence the pilot and chief mariner advertise the captain that it be needful to bring the ship further up within the river , to avoid the danger of the wind which may annoy we , by reason of our be so near to the mouth of the river : and for this cause the captain send for we . be come to our ship , we sail three league further up within the river , and there we cast anchor . a little while 462 after , John Ribault accompany with a good number Gibault sall of soldier embark himself , desirous to sail further • * i th a RtVfgf up into the arm that run towards the west , and to ' search the commodity of the place . Having sail twelve league at the least , we perceive a troop of Indian , which assoon as ever they espy the pinnace , be so afraid that they flee into the wood leave behind they a young Lucerne which they be a turn upon a spit : for which cause the place be call cape cape Lucerne . Lucerne : proceed forth on our way , we find another arm of the river , which run towards the east , up which the captain determine to sail and to leave the great current . a little while after they begin to espy diverse other Indian both man and woman half hide within the wood : who know not that we be such as desire their friendship , be dismay at the first , but soon after be embolden , for the captain cause store of merchandise to be show they open whereby they know that we mean nothing but well unto they : and then they make a sign that we shall come on land , which we will not refuse . at our come on shore diverse of they come to salute our general accord to their barbarous fashion . some of they give he skin of chamois , other little basket make of chamois . palm leave , some present he with pearl , but no pearl . great number . afterwards they go about to make a arbour to defend we in that place from the parch heat of the sun . but we will not stay as then . wherefore the captain thank they much for their good will , and give present to each of they : wherewith he please they so well before he go thence , that his sudden departure be nothing pleasant unto they . for know he to be so liberali , they will have wish he to have stay a little long , seek by all mean to give he occasion to stay , show he by sign that he shall stay but that day only , and that they desire to advertise a great Indian lord which have toreofpeary pearl in great abundance , and silver also , all which and silver . 463 thing shall be give unto he at the king arrival : say further that in the mean time while that this great lord come thither , they will lead he to their house , and show he there a thousand pleasure in shoot , and see the stag kill , therefore they pray he not to deny they their request . notwithstanding we return to our ship , where after we have be but one night , the captain in the morning command to put into the pinnace a pillar of hard stone fashion like a column , wherein the arm of the king of France be grave , to plant the same in the fair place that he can find . this do , we embark our self , and sail three league towards the west : where we discover a little river , up which we sail so long , that in the end we find it return into the great current , and in his return to make a little hand separate from the firm land , where we go on shore : and by commandment of the captain , because it be exceed fair and pleasant , there we plant they a pillar of pillar upon a hillock open round about to the view , and free stone environ with a lake half a fathom deep of very good arm of and sweet water . in which hand we see two stag France be of exceed bigness , in respect of those which we have grave , set up see before , which we may easy have kill with our he^lvertf11 harquebus , if the captain have not forbid we , port Royal. move with the singular fairness and bigness of they . but before our departure we name the little river which the river of environ . this he , the river of Liborne . afterwards 1 orne - embark our self to search another he not far distant from the former : wherein after we have go a land , we find nothing but tall cedar , the fair that the lie of be see in this country . for this cause we call cedar . it jie of ceciar : so we return into our pinnace to go towards our ship . a few day afterward John Ribault determine to return once again towards the Indian which inhabit that arm of the river which run towards the west , and to carry with he good store of soldier . for 464 his meaning be to take two Indian of this place to bring they into France , as the queen have command he . with this deliberation again we take our former course so far forth , that at the last we come to the self same place where at the first we find the Indian , from thence we take two Indian by the permission of the king , which think that they be more favour [ three . 311. ] than the rest , think themselves very happy to stay with we . but these two Indian see we make no two Indian show at all that we will go on land , but rather that take awa^ we follow the midst of the current , begin to be somewhat offend , and will by force have leap into the water , for they be so good swimmer that immediate they will have get into the forest . nevertheless be acquaint with their humour , we watch they narrow and seek by all mean to appease they : which we can not by any mean do for that time , though we offer they thing which they much esteem , which thing they disdain to take , and give back again whatsoever be give they , think that such gift shall have altogether bind they , and that in restore they they shall be restore unto their liberty . in fine , perceive that all that they do avail they nothing , they pray we to give they those thing which they have restore , which we do incontinent : than they approach one towards the other and begin to sing , the doleful agree so sweet together , that in hear their song it seem that they lament the absence of their friend . it they continue their song all night without cease : all which time we be constrain to lie at anchor by reason of the tide that be against we , but we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and return to our ship . assoon as we be come to our ship , every one seek to gratify these 2 Indian , and to show they the best countenance that be possible : to the intent that by such courtesy they may perceive the good desire and affection which we have to remain their friend in time to come . than we offer they meat to eat , but they vin 465 2 g the Indian eat not before the sun be set . Laudonniers put down in write the word and phrase of the Indian speech . the feast of Toya . This seem to be la grand Gopal , the english voyage refuse it , and make we understand that they be accustom to wash their face and to stay until the sun be set before they do eat , which be a ceremony common to all the Indian of new France . nevertheless in the end they be constrain to forget their superstition , and to apply themselves to our nature , which be somewhat strange unto they at the first . they become therefore more jocunde , every hour make we a 1000 discourse , be merveilous sorry that we can not understand they . a few day after they begin to bear so good will towards i , that , as i think , they will rather have perish with hunger and thirst , then have take their refection at any man hand but i . see this their good will , i seek to learn some Indian word , and begin to ask they question , show they the thing whereof i desire to know the name , how they call it . they be very glad to tell it i , and know the desire that i have to learn their language , they encourage i afterward to ask they every thing . so that put down in write the word and phrase of the Indian speech , i be able to understand the great part of their discourse . Every day they do nothing but speak unto i of the desire that they have to use i well , if we return unto their house , and cause i to receive all the pleasure that they can devise , aswell in hunt as in see their very strange and superstitious ceremony at a certain feast which they call Toya . which feast they observe as straight as we observe the Sunday . they give i to understand , that they will bring i to see the great lord of this country which they call Chiquola , which exceed they in height ( as they tell i ) a good foot and a half . they say unto i that he dwell within the land in a very large place and enclose exceed high , but i can not learn wherewith . and as far as i can judge , this place whereof they speak unto i , be a very fair city . for they say unto i that within the enclosure there be great store of house which be build very high , wherein there be a infinite number of man like 466 unto themselves , which make none account of gold , of silver , nor of pearl , see they have thereof in abundance . i begin then to show they all the part of heaven , to the intent to learn in which quarter they dwell . and straightway one of they stretch out his hand show i y‘ they dwell towards the north , which make i think that it be the river of Jordan . and now i remember , that in the reign of the emperor Charles the five , certain Spaniards inhabitant of saint Domingo ( which make a voyage to get certain slave to work in their mine ) steal away by subtlety the inhabitant of this river , to the number of 40 , think to carry they into their new Spain . but they lose their labour : for in despite they die all for hunger , save one that be bring to the emperor , which a little while after he cause to be baptise , and give he his own name and call he Charles of Chiquola , because he speak so much of this lord of Chiquola who subject he be . also , he report continual , that Chiquola make his abode within a very great enclose city . beside this proof , those which be leave in the first voyage have certify i , that the Indian show they by evident sign , that far within the land towards the north , there be a great enclosure or city , where Chiquola dwell . after they have stay a while in our ship , they begin to be sorry , and still demand of i when they shall return . i make they understand that the captain will be to send they home again , but that first he will bestow apparel of they , which few day after be deliver unto they . but see he will not give they licence to depart , they resolve with themselves to [ three . 312. ] steal away by night , and to get a little boat which we have , and by die help of the tide to sail home towards their dwelling , and by this mean to save themselves . which thing they fail not to do , and put their enter - than 2 Indian prize in execution , yet leave behind they the apparel escafe awa3-which the captain have give they , and carry away nothing but that which be their own , show well 467 hereby that they be not void of reason . the captain care not great for their departure , consider they have not be use otherwise then well : and that therefore they will not estrange themselves from the Frenchman . captain Ribault therefore know the singular fairness of this river , desire by all mean to encourage some of his man to dwell there , well foresee that this thing may be of great importance for the king service , and the relief of the common wealth of France . therefore proceed on with his intent , he command the anchor to be weigh and to set thing in order to return unto the open of the river , to the end that if the wind come fair he may pass out to accomplish the rest of his meaning . when therefore we be come to the mouth of the river , he make they cast anchor , whereupon we stay without discover any thing all the rest of the day . the next day he command that all the man of his ship shall come up upon the deck , say that he have somewhat to say unto they . they all come up , and immediate the captain begin to speak unto they in this manner . 