the voyage true discourse , make by sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , chief pretend for some speciali service on the island and main of the west Indies , with six of the queen ship , and 21 other ship and bark , contain 2500 man and boy , in the year 1595. in which voyage both the foresay knight die by sickness . i break ground out of the sound of Plymouth on Thursday the 28 of August , and that night ankor again in Causon bay , where we ride till Friday . than we set sail and stand Southwest : and about three of the clock the next morning the hope , wherein sir Thomas Baskervil go , strike upon the eddy stone , and shoot oflr a piece , but after clear herself well enough . on Monday at six of the clock in the morning the land end bare northwest and by north , and 226 last voyage of drake and Hawkins then we stand away Southwest and by south for the coast of Spain . the 8 of September we take two small flemish fliboat bind for Barbary ; which we carry a while with we and afterward dismiss they without do they any harm : only we learn news of they , and stay they from descry our fleet to the enemy . the 26 we see Forteventura , be one of the island of the canary . the 27 be Saturday by break ot day we nad overshot the chief town of grand Canaria to the north-east , and then stand about for it again , and by nine of the clock be at anchor fair before the fort to the eastward of the town some league . at one of the clock we offer to land one thousand and four hundred man in the sandy bay betwixt the fort and the town : but by our detract of the time they have make a bulwark in the sandy bay and plant ordinance : so that by reason thereof , and the great breach of the sea that go then on shore we be not able to land without endanger our whole force , which our general will not do . there be of Spaniards horseman and footman some 900 , which play upon we out of their trench , most of they be shoot . at the time of our land there go by commandment of our general within musket shoot of the shore , and ride there at anchor some three hour , the Salomon , the Bonaventure , the Elizabeth Constance , the phoenix , the jewel , the little John , the delight , the Pegasus , the exchange , the Francis , the caravel , and the two catch : but when the general sir Francis Drake give over the land being in his barge , the ship weigh be in some danger , and stand off again to the great ship . than we go to the west end of the island and there water : where captain Grimston go up the hill with 6 or 7 in his company be set upon by the herdsman , who with their dog and staff kill the captain and three or four of his company : 227 the rest be sore wound : the Salomons chirurgeon take prisoner , who disclose our pretend voyage as much as in he lie : so as the viceroy send a caravel of adviso into the Indies , unto all such place as we do pretend to go to . howbeit they have intelligence from the king of all our voyage the eight of August , which be three week before we set forth of England : as also by a fleme that have see all our provision at London . the 28 be Sunday at ten of the clock at night we set sail , and stand away Southwest and Southsouthwest some 200 league , until we come in the height of the island of cape Verde , and then more westerly for Martinino , one of the island of the west Indies , which we see the 27 of October : but the night before we have a storm , in which sir Francis with four or five other ship bear on head of the fleet be Dominica , separate . than we stand for Dominica , a island full of inhabitant of the race of the cannibal , not past ten league distant from Martinino . in it grow great store of tobacco : where most of our English and french man barter knife , hatchet , saw , and such like iron tool in truck of tobacco . before we come to Dominica our general sir Francis Drake alter his course , and go for Marigalante , which we have sight of the 28 day , and come to a anchor on the north-east side a saker shoot off the shore in 13 fathom water fair shold . there the general go on shore in his barge , and by chance meet a Canoa of Dominicans , to the people whereof he give a yellow [ three . 584. ] waistcoat of flannel and a handkerchief ; and they give he such fruit as they have , and the dominicanes row to Dominica again . they come thither to fetch some fruit which they sow and plant in diverse place of that island , which they keep like garden . the next morning by break of day we weigh and stand between the todo santos , which be 4 or 5 little island between Guadalupe and Dominica . there 228 be nothing upon these island but wood . we come to the southeast side of Guadalupe and there anchor hard aboard the shore : the southwest side of the island be deep water and good ankorage : where that day sir John Hawkins come to we again stand up from the south side of Dominica . there we water , wash our ship , set up our pinnace , and refresh our soldier on shore . the 30 captain Wignol in the Francis , a bark of 3 5 ton , be the sternmost of sir John Hawkins fleet be chase by five of the king of Spain frigate or zabra be ship of 200 ton a piece , which come of purpose with 3. other zabra for the treasure of saint Juan de Puerto rico : the Francis go room with they , suppose they have be our own fleet , be by they take in sight of our caravel . they leave the Francis drive in the sea with 3 or 4 hurt and sick man , and take the rest of our man into their ship , as the prisoner which we take at saint Juan de Puerto rico tell we . the 4 of November we begin to unlade the Richard , one of our victualler , which be by the next day unlade , unrip and then sink . than we stand northwest and by north : and the next morning see the hand of monserrata , Redonda , Estazia , saint Christopher and Saba . the big of these island be not past 8 league long . there be good ankorage in 8 , 7 , and 5 fathom water fair white sand . than we stand away Southwest , and on the 8 in the morning be Saturday come to a anchor some 7 or 8 league off within certain break hand call las virgin , which have be account dangerous : but we find there a very good road , have it be for a 1000 sail of ship in 14 , 12 , and 8 fathom fair sand and good ankorage , high island on either side , but no fresh water that we can find : here be much fish to be take with hook and net : also we stay on shore and foul . here sir John Hawkins be extreme sick ; which his sickness 229 the fight at saint Juan de Puerto rico . the english voyage begin upon news of the take of the Francis . the 18 day we weigh and stand north and by east into a lesser sound , which sir Francis in his barge discover the night before , and ankor in 13 fathom , have high steep hill on either side , some league distant from our first ride . the 12 in the morning we weigh and set sail into the sea due south through a small strait but without danger , and then stand west and by north for saint Juan de Puerto rico , and in the after noon leave the 3 small island call the passage to the southward of we , and that night come up to the eastermost end of saint John , where sir John Hawkins depart this life : upon who decease sir Thomas Baskervil present go into the garland . at 2 of the clock we come to anchor at the estermost side of the chief town call Puerto rico in a sandy bay 2 mile off : where we receive from their fort and place where they plant ordinance some 28 great shot , the last of which strike the admiral through the mizzen , and the last but one strike through her quarter into the steerage , the general be there at supper , and strike the stool from under he , but hurt he not , but hurt at the same table sir Nicholas Clifford , m. brown , captain Stratford , with one or two more . sir Nicholas Clifford and master brown die of their hurt . than we set sail and stand to the eastward , and at midnight tack about to the west , and in the morning come to a anchor before the point without the town , a little to the westwards by the 3 island . the 13 we ride still until night , when in the beginning with twenty five pinnace , boat and shallop man and furnish with firework and small shot we go into the road within the great castle , and in despite of they fire the five zabra of frigate , all ship of two hundred ton the piece or more , quite burn the rearadmiral down to the water , which be the great ship of they all , and also mighty spoil 230 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a.d. ... I595 - the admiral and viceadmiral , notwithstanding the castle and ship give we a hundred eighty and five great shot , beside small shot abundance . they have also sink a great ship in the mouth of the channel and raft it over with her mast almost to the very fort and castle , so as they think it impregnable . the frigate have in each of they twenty piece of brass , and a hundred barrel of powder . their chief lade that they bring thither be silk , oil , and wine . the treasure which they go to fetch , which be bring thither in a ship call the Vigonia , be convey into the strong and sure castle of defence ; be , as one of the prisoner confess , three million of ducat or five and thirty ton of silver . also they have send all the woman , child , and unable person into the wood , and leave none but soldier and fight man in the town . the fight on our side be resolute , hot , and dangerous : wherein we lose some forty or fifty man , and so many [ in . 585. ] be hurt . there be also great death of the Spaniard aboard the frigate , with burn , drown , and kill , and beside some take prisoner . the 14 we ride still , be within shot of the uttermost castle : but they fear the next night we will come in again , begin to warp up the other 4 frigate , begin first with the admiral : which whether by chance or their own will we see to sink ; and as we suppose so do they with all the rest , or else by stealth get up far within their chief force . the 15 also we ride still , and at afternoon we espy a caravel come from the castle point : but before our pinnace can fetch she up , she run on shore , where our boat can not come at she because of the breach , and also many of the islander come down to guard she with shot . the beginning of this night we weigh , and stand one hour to the east , and then tack about to the west . the 16 be Sunday , and the 17 also we be becalm . 231 the 18 we anchor a little to the southward of the southwest point of the island , give the point a birth because of a shall of sand that lie some two cable length off : there we ride in four , five , and six fathom fair white sand , where we set up more pinnace , wash our ship , and refresh our man on shore . here the general take a pinnace of Hispaniola with diverse letter , signify that two Englishmen of war have do great hurt along their island . the 20 the general row to the phoenix , the delight and the caravel , and cause they to weigh and anchor right against the mouth of a fresh river in two fathom water in ozy sand to the southward of the other ship some league or more . the general go into this river three or four league up , and take horse in the country . sir Thomas Baskervil row up the river , and stay there all night , and go up into the land three or four league . the 23 we discharge a bark call the pulpit and burn she : and at three of the clock that afternoon , when we be ready to set sail , there come aboard the defiance our admiral , a Spaniard with his wife , who fear some great torment for not have repair to the town accord to the general commandment of that island , who have command that all able man of the fleet shall repair to the town to defend it against we . than we stand again west and by north because of a ledge of rock that lie sink 4 or 5 league off the southside of the island . the 25 we stand away southwest , and see Mona Mona , be a low flat island between Hispaniola and S. Juan de Puerto rico . that day the exchange of captain winter spend her boult-sprite ; and in the begin of the night the phoenix be send back to seek she : which by God help that night meet with she , and keep her company until the next morning , then take in a small cable from she for a tow : but by 9 that morning she spend her main mast and split her foreyard , 232 last voyage of drake and Hawkins oh .. 1595 - break also her tow : so as they be fain to save some trifle out of she and the man , and to sink the hull . than we stand away south and south and by west after the fleet : and the 26 in the morning have sight of the fleet again . the 29 we have sight of the island call Curazao the isle of within eight league of the main , and on the north - Curazao . west side come to a anchor in very deep water hard aboard the shore without any danger : but the general weigh present and stand away northwest and by west , and northnorthwest for the main , and that night see Aruba , be somewhat a less island than the Aruba . other : we leave it some three league to the southward of we . on Sunday morning be the last of November we see three or four little island call the Monjes , Monjes . betwixt Aruba and the next north point of the main . at 12 of the clock we see the main , where we see a great current set to the westward , and also the water change very white . the phoenix , the caravel , and one of the catch keep within , and at midnight come under cape de la Vela , and make a fire , cape de la whereby the rest of the fleet come to anchor under ela-the cape , where be a very good road , fair shold and sandy ground , fourteen , twelve , and ten fathom near the shore . the cape be a bare land without tree or shrub , and fall in eight or ten league southeast and northwest : and a saker shoot off the point stand a little island like Mewestone near Plymouth , but somewhat big . in the morning the first of December we embark all our soldier for Rio de la Hacha , which be a town twenty league Rio de la to the westwards , one of the ancient in all the main , HacJia taken-although not very big : but it stand in a most fertile and pleasant soil . our man take it by ten of the clock in the night . the ship bear all that night and the day before in 5 and 6 fathom , the lesser ship in two fathom and a half water : the 233 phoenix go so near the shore by the general commandment , that she strike on ground , but get off again . there lie to the eastward of the town a A shall of mile or thereabouts he shall of sand : therefore give a san^‘ birth some half league or more before you come right against the town . there we come to anchor in two fathom , but the great ship ride off in five and [ three . 586. ] six fathom . there be a fresh river about a bowshot afresh river . eastward of the town ; whereinto our pin - ness can scarce enter by reason of a bar of sand in the river mouth , but within it be navigable for bark of twenty or thirty ton some six or eight league up . the six day the Spaniard come in to talk about the ransom of the town , but not to the general his like : and that night sir Thomas Baskervil march up into the country to overrun those part : and the general the same night with some hundred and fifty man go by water six league to the eastward , la Rancheria and take the Rancheria a fisher town , where they take . drag for pearl . the people all flee except some sixteen or twenty soldier , which fight a little , but some be take prisoner , beside many negro , with some store of pearl and other pillage . in the house we refresh our self , and be all embark to come away , and then have sight of a brigandine or a dredger , which the general take within one hour chase with his two barge : she have in her indy-wheat , which we call maiz , and some silver and pearl , but of small value . on Saturday the seven , master York captain of the hope die of sickness , and then master Thomas Drake the general brother be make captain of the hope , and master Jonas Bodenham captain of the adventure , and master Charles Caesar captain of the amity . the ten day the Spaniard conclude for the ransom of the town for 24000 ducat , and one prisoner promise to pay for his ransom 4000 ducat . 234 the fourteenth day they bring in the town ransom in pearl , but rate so dear as the general after conference with they , mislike it , send it back again , give they four hour respite to clear themselves with their treasure . the sixteenth the governor come into the town about dinner , and upon conference with the general tell he plain , that he care not for the town , neither will he ransom it : and that the pearl be bring in without his command or consent , and that his detract of time so long be only to send the other town word , that be not of force to withstand we , whereby they may convey all their good , cattle , and wealth into the wood out of danger . So the general give the governor leave to depart accord to promise , have two hour to withdraw himself in safety . the seventeenth sir Thomas Baskervil with the Eliza beth Constance , the phoenix , the caravel with four or five pinnace go some five league to the westward , and land , march some four league up into the country to a place call Tapia , which he take and Tapia take . burn certain village and farm house about it . he have some resistance as he pass over a river , but have but one man hurt , which he bring aboard alive with he : he march one league far and burn a village call Sallamca , and so return with some prisoner , Sallamca the soldier have get some pillage . burn . the 18 the Rancheria , and the town of Rio de la Hacha be burn clean down to the ground , the church and a lady house only except , which by her letter write to the general be preserve . that day we set sail and fall to leeward , to meet with sir Thomas Baskervil . the 19 we weigh and stand to leeward for cape Cape de de Aguja , which the twenty at sun rise we see . Aguja . it be a cape subject much to flaw , by reason it be a very high land : and within the cape lie a island within 235 the mouth of the sound , which have a white cliff or spot in the westnorthwest part of the island . the land all about the cape rise all in hammock or break steepy hill . a league Southwest within that , ( for so fall the land thereabouts ) there stand on the top of a cliff a watchhouse : and a little within that a small island : you may go in between the main and it , or to leeward if you lust : and hard within that be Santa Martha the road and town of Santa Martha , which at 11 of take . the clock we take , the people all be flee , except a few Spaniard , negro and Indian , , which in a bravado at our land give we some 30 or 40 shot , and so run away . that night their lieutenant general be take and some little pillage bring in out of the wood : for in the town nothing be leave but the house sweep clean . in all the main be not a rich place for gold : for the hop be mix with the earth in every place , and also in the sand a little to the leeward of the town . in the bay we have a bad ride by reason of a small moon , for every small moon make foul weather all the main along . the 21 , the general cause the town to be burn , and all the ship to weigh , and stand out , many of the soldier be embark where the general have appoint , in the small ship which ride near the shore . we lose that night the company of the phoenix , captain Austin , Peter Lemond , and the garland pinnace , which stand along the shore , and be chase off by galley out of Carthagena Peter Lemond with nine of our man be take , the rest come safe to our [ three . 587. ] fleet . the 26 we see the hand some twelve league to the eastward of number de Dios stand in towards the shore , but towards night we stand to the oflin until the next day . number de the 27 we come into the mouth of number de dios , Dios take , and by one of the clock take the town , the people 236 being all flee except some too Spaniards , which keep the fort , and play upon we , have in the fort some 3 or 4 small piece of ordinance , and one of they break in discharge at we . they give we also a volley of small shot : but see our resolution in run upon they they all flee and take the wood . the town be big , have large street , house very hie , all build of timber , but one church very fair and large wrought all of timber likewise . Nothing be leave in the town of value : there be a show in their shop of great store of merchandise that have be there . there be a mill above the town , and upon the top of another hill in the wood stand a little watchhouse , where we take twenty sow of silver , two bar of gold , some money in coin , beside other pillage . the town be situate in a watery soil , and subject much to rain , very unhealthy as any place in the Indies , have great store of orange , plantan , cassavy-root , and such other fruit ; but very dangerous to be eat for breed of disease . to the eastward of the town within the bay run out a fresh river of excellent good water , with house , and all about it garden : half a league from hence due east into the country be a Indian town , whither as we march a little before our come away with a hundred man they have break down a bridge to hinder our passage , where they lie in ambush with some twenty or thirty small shot , and bow and arrow , set upon we , and kill lieutenant Jones , hurt three or four and so flee into the wood , run before we and fire their own town , and then flee far into the wood : our man fire diverse other house in pursue they , and so return again : our general with sir Thomas be in the river mouth with thirty or forty man fill water about some mile from we . the road of number de Dios be a fair road : but on each side , as you come to ride before the town , lie a ledge of rock , but there be no danger because they 237 a Indian town fire . be in sight . you may ride between they in three or four fathom water , and without if you will in eight or ten fathom , where neither castle nor fort can annoy you . the name of number de dios be great than their strength . for they have no castle nor fort , but only the little fort aforesaid stand on the top of a hill , although they may have make it strong if they will . the 29 sir Thomas Baskervil with 750 arm man , beside chirurgeon and provand boy , go for Panama . the last of December the general burn half the town , and the first of Januarie burn the rest , with all the frigate , bark and galliot , which be in the harbour and on the beach on shore , have house build over they to keep the pitch from melt . the second of January sir Thomas return with his soldier both weary and hungry , have march more than half the way to the south sea . the Spaniard play diverse time upon we both outward and homeward in the wood , the way be cut out of the wood and rock both very narrow , and full of mire and water . the march be so sore as never Englishman march before . Having march some ten league in a marvellous strait way , upon the top of a hill , through which we must needs pass , the Spaniard have set up a fort and keep it with some 80 or 90 man , who play upon we as we come up , before we be aware of they , and so kill some twenty or moor of we , among who be captain Marchant quartermaster general , and ensign Samson , Maurice Williams one of her majesty guard , beside diverse be hurt , as m. captain Nicholas Baskervil a valiant gentleman , with diverse other . then sir Thomas have perfect knowledge that they must pass two such fort more , if he get that , beside Panama to be very strong , the enemy know of our come long before . also our soldier have no victual leave , nor any mean 238 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a.d. ... * 596 - to get more : which consideration cause sir Thomas to return and give over his attempt . as he march thitherward he take a Indian and send he to number de dios with letter of his return and proceed . the 5 we set sail at 12 of the clock , and stand to the westward . the 10 day we see a hand lie westward some the lie of 30 league call escudo , where we come to anchor Escudo . on the southside in 12 fathom water , fair sand and good ankorage . if you come into the eastern point , give it a birth , because of a ledge of rock , that lie out there from the end of the island : come to anchor we see a road , who see we , set sail , but that night with our pinnace we take he , he have nothing in he but a little maiz . the man be examine by the general confess he to be a advisor send from number de dios to all the port along the coast westward . this hand lie 9 or 10 [ three . 588. ] league from the main , and be not past two league long full of wood , and have great store of fresh water in every part of the hand , and that very good . it be a sickly climate also , and give to much rain : here we wash our ship , and set up the rest of our pinnace . the 15 day captain plat die of sickness , and then sir Francis Drake begin to keep his cabin , and to complain of a scour or flux . the 23 we set sail and stand up again for Puerto bello , which be but 3 league to the westwards of number de Dios. the 28 at 4 of the clock in the morning our general the death of sir Francis Drake depart this life , have be sir Francis extreme sick of a flux , which begin the night before drake . to stop on he . he use some speech at or a little before his death , rise and apparel himself , but be bring to bed again within one hour die . he make his brother Thomas Drake and captain Jonas Bodenham executor , and m. Thomas drake son 239 his heir to all his land , except one manor which he give to captain Bodenham . the same day we ankor at Puerto bello , be the best harbour we find all along the main both for great ship and small . there stand a saker shoot off the shore at the eastern point a little hand : and there be betwixt the main and that 5 or 6 fathom : but the best come in be the open mouth betwixt that hand and another hand that lie to the westward with a range of rock . in Puerto bello be but 8 or 10 house , beside a great new house which they be in building for the governor that shall have be for that place : there be also a very strong fort all to the water side with flanker of great tree and stone fill with earth between : and have not our come disappoint their pretence , they will have make it one of the strong place in all the main . there they mean to have build a great town . we find there three piece of brass ordinance sink in the sea , which we weigh up , all the people be flee and their good carry away . up within this bay there be a little village but of no force , where we find a great fresh river , our man row up some two league find pillage , as wine and oil , and some small quantity of iron . after our come hither to anchor , and the solemn burial of our general sir Francis in the sea : sir Thomas Baskervill be aboard the defiance , where m. bride make a sermon , have to his audience all the captain in the fleet , sir Thomas command all aboard the garland , with who he hold a council , and there show his commission be accept for general , and captain Bodenham make captain of the defiance , and m. Savill captain of the adventure . the 27 die captain Josias of the delight , and captain Egerton a gentleman of the foresight , and James wood chief chirurgeon of the fleet out of the garland . 240 the 28 die Abraham Kendal out of the saker . at this place we water again , wash our ship and make new sail , it be by the general and all the captain agree , that if we can by any mean turn up again for Santa Martha , we shall , if not , to go direct for England . here also we take in some ballast as our need require . the 6 of February the Elizabeth of m. Wattes be discharge and sink , and that day the Pegasus jolly be go on shore for water , carry no guard : the Spaniard perceive it come down upon they , kill two of they , and take 2 or 3 prisoner , and so run up into the wood again . the seven the delight and captain Eden frigate be discharge and sink because they be old and leak , and the queen ship want sailor . that day our man be muster we have sick and whole 2000 and the next day we set on shore all our prisoner as Spaniards and Negros . but before at our first come to Puerto bello sir Thomas send two of those Spaniard to number de dios and to Panama to fetch ransom for some of the chief prisoner , but they never return again . as we be set sail there come one with a flag of truce , and tell the general that they have take 18 of our man , and that they be well use , add that if he will stay 8 or 10 day long they shall be bring from Panama . we suppose this to have be but a delay to have keep we there while the king force have come about by sea , as they daily expect . we set sail the 8 of February , turn up for Santa Martha , and the 14 day we see the hand of Baru some 14 league to the westward of Carthagena : the general that night tell we he will stand in for the town of Baru in the bay : but that night blow so much wind and continue that small moon , that the same night we lose the foresight , and the next day stand again to make the land which we have make , ten 241 q we lose company of the Susan parnel , the help , and the Pegasus . then the next day we put over for cape [ three . 589. ] S. Antony , and give over Santa Martha . the grand the 25 we see the hand of grand cayman some cayman . league to the northwestward of Jamaica , be a low sandy hand , have many tortoise about it . the 26 we see the high land of Cuba to the eastward of the break hand , to the east of the hand of Pinos , and be imbay in among those dangerous place . but perceive it , we stand out again southsoutheast and so get clear , and then stand away west the ik of and by north for the he of Pinos , which we see the Pinos . first of march . it be a low land with wood and fresh water to the western end . if you come in with the midst of it you shall see rise up above the rest of the land 8 or 9 round hammock , and the westermost have three in one . be shoot forth with the west end , and stand in for to water we espy 20 sail of ship about one in the afternoon . this be a three part of the fleet which the king send for Carthagena , the rest of the fleet be go for the Honduras . they be in all 60 sail send only to meet our fleet , be command wheresoever they hear we be , to come upon we with all their three force . this fleet which we meet withal come stand for cape de los Corrientes , and have be refresh at Havana . as soon as they descry we , they keep close upon a tack , think to get the wind of we : but we weather they . and when our admiral with all the rest of our fleet be right in the wind eye of they , sir Thomas Baskervil put out the queen arm , and all the rest of our fleet their bravery , bare room with they , and command the defiance not to shoot , but to keep close by to second he . the vice-admiral of the Spaniard be a great ship than any of we , and the best sailor in all their fleet loof by and give the concord the two first great shot , which she repay 242 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a.d. . 1596. present again , thus the fight begin . the Bonaventure the fight bebare full with she , ring her such a peal of ordinance between they and small shot withal , that he leave she with tear side . ^nSllsh the admiral also make no spare of powder and shot . but the defiance in the midst of the spanish fleet i thunder of her ordinance and small shot continue the fight to the end . so that the vice-admiral with 3 or 4 of her consort be force to tack about to the eastward , leave their admiral and the rest of the fleet , who come not so hot into the fight as they do . the fight continue two hour and better . at sun set all the fleet tack about to the eastward , we continue our course to the westward for cape de los Corrientes , suppose we shall have meet with more of their consort . in this conflict in the defiance we have five man slay , three english man , a greek and a negro . that night some half hour after , their fleet keep upon their weather quarter , we see a mighty smoke qne of the rise out of one of their great ship which stay behind : punish great which happen by mean of powder as we think , burn . and present after she be all on a light fire , and so be consume and all burn , as we may well perceive . the next day be the second of march in the morning by break of day we be hard aboard cape de los Corrientes , which be a bare low cape , have a bush of tree high than the rest some mile to the eastward of the cape . all Cuba be full of wood on the southside . the spanish fleet which then be but 14 not more than we be , keep still upon our weather quarter , but dare not to come room with we although our admiral stay for they . assoon as we have clear our self of the cape 3 of their best sailor come room with the Salomon , which be so near the land that she can not double the cape , but tack about to the eastward , and so be both a stern and also to leeward of all our fleet : but when we see the Spaniard work , the defiance tack about to rescue she : which the Spaniard see , and have not forget the fight which she 243 make the night before , they loof up into the midst of their fleet again , and then all the fleet stay until the Salomon come up , and so stand along for cape Zante cape S. Antonio , which we come in sight of by two Antonio . } n after noon , be a low cape also , and to the southwest a white sandy bay , where 3 or 4 ship may very well water . there be a good road for north and easterly wind : there the Spaniard begin to fall a stern . that night we stand away a glass or two northwest , and northnorthwest , and Northeast , and in the morning-watch south , and in the morning have sight of Cuba about the east part of the organ , which be dangerous rock lie 8 league off upon the north part of Cuba , present assoon as you pass cape S. Anthony : than we stand to the eastward of the land , the wind at Southsouthwest , and at 6 at night have foul weather , but after be becalm all night . the 5 the wind come scant . the 7 we see a high land like a crown , which appear so 13 or 14 league to the westward of Havana , and another place in Cuba call the table , 8 league to the eastward the crown . of the crown . the land over Havana make two small mountain like a woman breast or pap . here we find no great current until we come to the gulf of Bahama . the cape of the io we see the cape of Florida be but Florida . a reasonable low land and break hand to the southward of the cape . and at two in the afternoon we [ three . 590. ] lose sight of the land 12 league to the northward of the cape . after we have disemboque , we stand west till midnight , and be in 28 degree , and then stand Northeast till the 13 at night , when we be in 31 degree . and after the wind scant with a great storm , in which we lose the Bonaventure , and the little John , they bear on head . than we stand with our larboard tack eastsoutheast . the 19 we be in 29 degree our course Eastnortheast . the 21 we have a great stormy gale of wind 244 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a.d. j596-and much rain but large . and then all the rest of our fleet fall a stern except the hope , which bear a head : so that there keep no more with the admiral , but the defiance , the adventure , and the phoenix . the 28 we be in 39 degree , and stand away for Flores , which the 8 of April we see , and the 9 come to a anchor on the southside , where we water because the defiance when we come in have but two butt of water . we barter with the Portugal for some fresh victual , and set here on shore at our come away out of the admiral our two Portugal pilot ; which sir Francis Drake carry out of England with he . the 10 be Easter-eve at night we set sail the wind serve we to lie some slent in our course . that night and easter day we have much rain : the wind come up at Northeast , we beat it up some 30 league to the eastward , and then about to the west , and so again to the east , and try , and the next board to the west . on Thursday towards night , be the 16 we have sight of Corvo again , we try all that night : and on Friday towards night we come to a anchor to the westward of the point of Santa Cruz under Flores : but before midnight we drive , and set sail the next day stand away north-east . about three of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up again at north . on Sunday the 19 by two of the clock in the afternoon we have make 20 league a east way : and then the wind come up a good gale at northwest , and so Northeast with a fly sheet we make the best way we can : but be disperse by bad weather we arrive about the begin of may in the west part of England . and the last ship which come in together to Plymouth be the defiance , the garland , the adventure , and the phoenix . 