de Guiana carmen epicum . [ in . 669. ] hat work of honour and eternal name , for all the t’atchieve , fill i with hand to my heart world t’envie and we fury , and give arm peace , that else will glad turn my limb and every sense into my thought rapt with the thirst action of my mind ? o Clio , honour muse , sing in my voice , tell the attempt , and prophecy th’exploit of his eliza-consecrated sword , that in this peaceful charm of England sleep , open most tender her age throat , offer to power fresh youth through all her vein , that flesh of brass and rib of steel retain . riches , and conquest , and renown i sing , riches with honour , conquest , without blood , enough to seat the monarchic of earth , 446 like to Jove eagle on Eliza hand . Guiana , who rich foot be mine of gold , who forehead knock against the roof of star , stand on her tiptoe at fair England look , kiss her hand , bow her mighty breast , and every sign of all submission make , to be her sister , and the daughter both of our most sacred maid : who barren ness be the true fruit of virtue , that may get , bear and bring forth anew in all perfection , what heretofore savage corruption hold in barbarous chaos ; and in this affair become her father , mother , and her heir . then most admire sovereign , let your breath go forth upon the water , and create a golden world in this our iron age , and be the prosperous forewind to a fleet , that second your last , may go before it in all success of profit and renown : doubt not but your election be divine , ( aswell by fate as your high judgement order ) to raise he with choice bounty , that can add height to his height ; and like a liberali vine , not only bear his virtuous fruit aloft , free from the press of squint-eyed envy foot , but deck his gracious prop with golden bunch , and shroud it with broad leaf of rule overgrow from all black tempest of invasion . those conquest that like general earthquake shake the solid world , and make it fall before they , build all their brave attempt on weak ground , and less persuasive likelihood then this ; nor be there ever princely fount so long powr’d forth a sea of rule with so free course , and such ascend majesty as you : then be not like a rough and violent wind , 447 that in the morning rend the forest down , shove up the sea to heaven , make earth to tremble , and tomb his wasteful bravery in the even : but as a river from a mountain run , the further he extend the great grow , and by his thrifty race strengthen his stream , even to join battle with th’imperious sea disdain his repulse , and in despite of his proud fury , mix with his main , take on he his title and command : so let thy sovereign empire be increase , and with iberian neptune part the stake , who trident he the triple world will make . you then that will be wise in wisdom spite , direct with discredit of direction , and hunt for honour , hunt he to death . with who before you will inherit gold , [ three . 670. ] you will loose gold , for which you loose your soul ; you that choose nought for right , but certainty , and fear that valour will get only blow , place you faith in incredulity . sit till you see a wonder , virtue rich : till honour have gold , rob gold of honour , till as man hate desert that get nought , they loathe all get that deserve not aught ; and use you gold-made man as dregs of man ; and till your poison soul , like spider lurk in sluttish chin eke , in mist of cobweb hide your foggy body and your dunghill pride . o incredulity , the wit of fool , that slovenly will spit on all thing fair , the coward castle , and the sluggard cradle how easy t’is to be a infidel ? but you patrician spirit that refine your flesh to fire , and issue like a flame 448 on brave endeavour , know that in they the tract of heaven in morn-like glory open , that know you can be the king of earth , ( claim the right of your creation ) and let the mine of earth be king of you ; that be so far from doubt likely drift , that in thing hard y’are most confident : you that know death live , where power live unused , joy to shine in wave that bury you , and so make way for life even through your grave ; that will not be content like horse to hold a threadbare beat way to home affair : but where the sea in envy of your reign , close her womb , as fast as t’is disclose , that she like avarice may swallow all , and let none find right passage through her rage : there your wise soul as swift as Eurus lead your body through , to profit and renown , and scorn to let your body choke your soul , in the rude breath and prison life of beast : you that herein renounce the course of earth , and lift your eye for guidance to the star , that live not for yourselves , but to possess your honour’d country of a generail store ; in pity of the spoil rude selfe● make , of they who life and you one air do feed , one soil do nourish , and one strength combine ; you that be bless with sense of all thing noble , in this attempt your complete woorthe redouble . but how be nature at her heart corrupt , ( i mean even in her most ennoble birth ) how in excess of sense be sense bereave she ! that her most lightening-like effect of lust wound through her flesh , her soul , her flesh wound ; and she must need incitement to her good , even from that part she hurt ! o how most like ten 449 2f art thou ( heroic author of this act ) to this wrong’d soul of nature that sustain pain , charge , and peril for thy country good , and she much like a body numb’d with surfeit , feel not thy gentle application for the health , use , and honour of her power ! yet shall my verse through all her ease-locked ear trumpet the noblesse of thy high intent : and if it can into act proceed , the fault and bitter penance of the fault make red some other eye with penitence , for thou be clear ; and what more nimble spirit , apt to bite at such unhook bait gain by our loss ; that must we needs confess thy princely valour will have purchase we . which shall be fame eternal to thy name , though thy contentment in thy grave desire , of our advancement , fail deserv’d effect . o how i fear thy glory which i love , lest it shall dear grow by our decrease . nature that stick in golden-graveld spring , in muck-pit can escape their swallowing . but we shall forth i know ; gold be our fate , which all our act do fashion and create . then in the thespiad bright prophetic fount , i think i see our liege rise from her throne , her ear and thought in steep amaze erect , at the most rare endeavour of her power . and now she bless with her wont grace th’industrious knight , the soul of this exploit , dismiss he to convoy of his star . and now for love and honour of his worth , our twice-borne noble bring he bridegroom-like , that be espouse for virtue to his love with feast and music , ravish the air , to his argolian fleet , where round about 4so his bate colour english valour swarm in haste , as if guianian Orenoque with his fell water fall upon our shore . and now a wind as forward as their spirit , set their glad foot on smooth guianas breast , where ( as if each man be a Orpheus ) a world of savage fall tame before they , store their theft-free treasury with gold , and there do plenty crown their wealthy field , there learning eat no more his thriftless book , nor valour estridge-like his iron arm . there beauty be no strumpet for her want , nor Gallique humour putrify her blood : but all our youth take Hymen light in hand , and fill each roof with honor’d progeny . there make society adamantine chain , and join their heart with wealth , who wealth disjoin’d . there healthful recreation strew their mead , and make their mansion dance with neighbourhood , that here be drown’d in churlish avarice . and there do palace and temple rise [ three . 672. ] out of the earth , and kiss th’enamored sky , where new Britannia humble kneel to heaven , the world to she , and , both at her bless foot , in who the circle of all empire meet . G. C. ad thomam hariotum matheseos , and universas Philosophias peritissimum , de Guiana carmen . Dat. Anno. 1595. montibus est regio , quasi muris , obsita , multis : circumsepit aquis quos Raleana suis . intus habet largo Guiana recessus : Hostili gestan libera colla jugo . Hispanus clivis illis sudavit , and alsit Septem annos , novy : nec tamen invaluit . 451 the english voyage numen , and omen in numeris . fatale sit illi : et nobis virtus sit recidiva , precor . Gualtero patefacta via est duce and auspice Ralegh Mense uno : d factum hoc nomine quo celebrem ? nocte dieque ; datis velis , remisque laborans , exegit summae dexteritatis opus . scilicet expensis magnis non ille pepercit , Communi natus consuluisse bono . Providus excubuit simili discrimine Joseph : sic fratres , fratrem deseruere suum : fama coloratam designet sibona , vestem : Vestis Scissa malis sic fuit illa modis . Mira leges . Auresque animumque tuum arrige . Tellus haec aurum , and gemma graminis instar , habet . Ver ibi perpetuum est : ibi prodiga terra quotannis Luxuriat , sola fertilitate nocens . Anglia nostra licet dives sit , and undique foelix : Anglia , si confer , indigna frugis erit . Expertes capitum , volucres piscesque ferasque ; Praetereo : haud prosunt , quae novitate , placent . est ibi , vel nusquam , quod quaerimus . ergo petamus : debt Deus , hanc Canaan possideamus . amen . tui Amantiss . L. king 