certain note of the voyage to Brasill with the minion of London aforesaid , in the year 1580. write by Thomas grig purser of the say ship . he third day of November in the year abovesaid we depart in the minion of London from Harwich , from which time no great thing worth the knowledge or regard of other happen until the 22. of December the next month , which day for our own learning and use we ob - serve the set of the sun ne , which be west southwest , we then be under the line equinoctial , where we find the air very temperate , and the wind for the most part southeast and east southeast . the same day we also observe the rise of the moon , be one day after the full , which rise at east north-east . the first land that we fall with upon the coast of the isle of . Brasill be the island of saint Sebastian , where we arrive Sebastian . g Jay of JanUary in the year 1581. the 16. day Thomas Babington , and other in our pinnace , go a shore to Guaybea , where they meet with John whithall his father and mother in law , who have receive letter from thence to be deliver at Santos , come aboard , and then we weigh and set sail , and the theykof . 28. day we arrive at the island of Santa Catelina , Catelina . near the entrance of Santos . our course from saint Sebastian be southwest and by west , and betwixt the southwest and by west , and west southwest . [ Iii . 705. ] this island of Santa Catelina seem at the first to be a part of the island of Girybia . we anchor at nine fathom black osie ground . upon the island there grow many palmito-tree , but no fresh water be there to be find . the three day of February we arrive before the town 34 of Santos , and be there well receive and entertain off they arrive the captain , the king officer , and all the people . at Santos . the four day we take into our ship a beef alive , which serve for the victual of the ship , and the refresh of our man , and to make we the merry at Shrovetide . the eight day we deliver to m. John whithall a bedstead with the appurtenance , which be send to he from our merchant of London . the 18. day the captain of Santos come aboard our ship , by who we have knowledge of four great french ship of war , that have be at the river of Jenero , which there take three canoas , but be drive from thence by their castle and fort , and be look for here at Santos . whereupon the captain request we to lend they some armour and artillery , and we lend they twenty caliver , and two barrel of powder . the 19 day our skiff which we have send to alcat - the yk of rarza , and have be away six day , come again , and bring good store of great and good fish , and tell we ’ that there be good store of fish to be take there by the hook , and as much wood as we can have of the palmito-tree . the 20. day at night Nicholas gale , one of our company , fall over our ship side , and be drown in the port of Santos before the town , where our ship ride at anchor . the 22. day two of the canoas which the Frenchman take in the river of Jenero , return to Santos , and report that the four french ship be pass to the southward , as they think , for the strait of Magellan , and so into the south sea . the 23. day the aforesaid Nicholas gale , who fall overbord two day before , be find again , and take up three mile from our ship , and our company go to his burial in the church at Santos . this day the captain and justice of Santos wish we to tarry in their road till the last of April , for they have send a bark of Santos to Baya at the king charge , to know whether we shall have trade there or not , and this bark can not return before that time . about this time there arrive at Fernambuck a ship from Portugal , which bring news that the island , Indies , and Portugal it self be molest and trouble by the Spaniard , and that the Portugal have both english and Frenchmen to Lisbon to defend they against Spain . the 25. day we send two of our man , namely Thomas Michael and Simon thorn to Baya in a bark that go thither from Santos . the two and twenty day of April our master and Thomas Babington have some talk and conference with the Padres of Santos , they ( our man be ready to go to the river of Jenero ) tell they , that they be sorry for our banishment from the church , and that the ministrador have write from Rip de Jenero , that forasmuch as these twenty year or more the english nation have deny the church of Rome and her proceed , therefore the Ministrador command that none of we shall come to their church : the Padres will we herein to have patience , and to take it in good part , and promise to stand our friend in their word and writing , both to the Ministrador and to the bishop at Baya , and further request all our english company to have no ill opinion of they . their lade the 28. of April our jade sugar into our ship . of sugar . the 2i 0 of pvlay we take in fresh victual from Santos . the 10. day of June we gratify one losto Thorno , dwell in Santos , with some of our english victual , and entertain he in good sort in our ship , and this day we be promise to have a pilot at Santos to carry we to Baya . the 11. day we go to fish , to make provision for our ship and man , and from that time till the eighteenth day we fetch water , and cut wood for our fire , and trim 36 our ship of the harm and leak which the worm have leak in the make in she while we rid at the island of saint Sebastian , pinion make and in the mean time we depart from before the w°rmes-towne of Santos . our master send his skiff from the bar of Santos , think to have bring Thomas Babington and William euet with the pilot , which we have tarry for three day : and as the skiff be go , William euet be by the river side , call to our pinnace , and send a letter to our * master , which Thomas * who name Babington have write , wherein be not news , but that the Ministrador be arrive at Santos from the river of ' jenero , and will speak with our master , but he will that whatsoever Thomas Babington do write , no credit shall be give to it . and further he wish we present to depart for Sant Sebastian , and there to dispatch our business , and then to send back for Babington and himself to Guaybea , where he ( if he be [ hl 706. ] well ) will give his attendance to come aboard . as we ride two league a seaboard the bar of Santos their dewee break a cable in the open sea , which happen the 15. day of this month . ’ we arrive at saint Sebastian the 15. day , and there shift our ballast , and have in stone , and hail our ship a ground to stop our leak , and carry our cask a shore to be hoop for water , which indeed may better have be do in Santos , before the Ministrador come thither : yet we finish all thing pertain to our ship , by the 22. of this month , at saint Sebastian . the first day of July Thomas Babington come aboard with William euet , in our pinnace , and the rest of our man that go for they : but there be no pilot bring accord to promise to carry we to Baya . the thing that we observe and note in the time of our be at Santos , be these . all such ware and merchandize as owe no custom in Brasill , their use be , to set a price upon the same , how they shall|be sell : which be do by the magistrate of the town , accord to the ordinance of their king . some part of Peru but 12. day journey from Santos . the portu-galesforbidden to use their mine . the english voyage but for all such merchandize as do owe custom there , the merchant be to sell they accord as they may , to the great profit and advantage that they can . concern the province of Peru , we learn that one part of it by land and water be but twelve day journey from the town of Santos , and from thence it may be about four or five day journey by water to the main river of plate . from the head of the river of plate , and from their chief town there , they do trade and traffic by land into Peru by wagon , and horse or mule . the say river of plate be so full of sand and danger , and the fresh so fierce sometime , that not ship dart to deal with it , small bark to their knowledge may go up it , and not else . the Portugal here can be suffer to use their mine of treasure in these part , upon pain of death , the contrary be command by the king and the viceroy , who be as their king in place of authority . about twenty league from Santos there be a certain kind of wild savage , lie in the mountain , which be in friendship with the Portugal , and they have continual war with certain other savage that dwell towards the border of Peru , which be distant from Santos about 400. or 500 league . those savage of Peru have store of gold and silver , but they know not the use of it . look what Savages of their enemy they take , they sell they to the Portugal for knife , comb , axe or hatchet , and other trifle : they will sell one for a penny-knife to a Portugal , and after two year they be worth twenty or thirty ducat to the Portugal . this people have also continual war with the Spaniard : and this be tell we by one of those savage , which have dwell among the Portugal these seven year , with his master call signior Manoel Veloso . and this fellow will willing have come with we for there be certain rock that lie off between the isle of Alcatrarzas and S. Sebastian , about two league , theyleof which be to be take heed of , which a far off in fair Alcatrarzas weather show like the sail of ship . there be other rock that lie off saint Catelina also five league to the east and by south into the sea off the island . at our come up to Santos we find four fathom and a half water in the shallow place , and the like we find within a league after we be depart from saint Catelina , little more or less , but after you have run in the depth of four fathom and a half , about a mile or less , than you shall have it deep again more and more . before the town of Santos we ride in eight and ten fathom water . 