concern the mighty kingdom of Coray , tributary to the king of China , and borther upon his north-east frontier , call by the Portugal Coria , and by they esteem at the first a island , but since find to adjoin with the main not many day journey from Paqui the metropolitan city of China . the more perfect discovery whereof and of the coast of Tartary northward , may in time bring great light ( if not full certainty ) either of a northwest or a north-east passage from Europe to those rich country . collect out of the Portugal Jesuit yearly japonian epistle date 1590 , 1591 , 1592 , 1594 , etc the first testimony contain a resolute determination of quabacondono the great monarch of all Japan , to invade and conquer China by the way of Coray , be a country divide from the isle of Japan only by a arm of the sea about twenty league broad , and abound with victual and all other necessary for the maintenance of the war . out of the epistle of father Frier Lewis Frois , date 1590. uabacondono have subdue all the petty kingdom of Japan , in the year of our lord 1590 ( as father Frier Lewis Frois write in his japonian epistle of the foresay year ) grow so proud and insolent that he seem another Lucifer ; so far forth , that he make a solemn vow and oath , 422 that he will pass the sea in his own person to conquer China : and for this purpose he make great preparation , say , that since he be become lord of all Japan , he have nothing now to do but to conquer China , and that although he shall end his life in that enterprise , he be not to give over the same . for he hope to leave behind he hereby so great fame , glory , and renown , as none may be comparable thereunto . and though he can not conquer the same , and shall end his life in the action , yet shall he always remain immortali with this glory . and if God do not cut he off , it be think very , that he will thorough attempt the same . and for his more secure passage thither , he be determine to leave behind he two governor ( after his manner ) in the part of Miac6 with the administration of Finqua ; and of those of his monarchic he say that he will take with he all the great japonish lord , or at the least all his principali subject , and leave in his dominion such guard and garrison as shall seem best unto he . and so have pass the winter , he mean to come to these part ofXimo , for from hence he be to set forth his army , Ximo . and : to pass to the land of Coray , which the Portugal Coray con-call Coria , be divide from Japan with a arm of the sea . and although the Portugal in time past thought , m a^ut ' that it be a lie or Peninsula , yet be it firm land , which join unto the kingdom of Paqui . and he have now strike such a terror with his name in the country of Coray , that the king thereof have send his ambassador hither to yield unto he a kind of homage , as he require ; which ambassador be now in the city of Miac6 . and by this Peninsula of Coray he may pass FromCorayan with his army by land in few day journey unto the city of Paqui , be the principali city where the king of - tn fa day China have his residence . and as the chinians be weak , to Paqui then and the people of Japan so valiant and fear of they , if of God do not cut he off in this expedition , it may fall china-out accord to his expectation . 423 but whatsoever become of China , it be hold for a certainty , that his come will cause great alteration in these part of Ximo , especial in this kingdom of Figen , wherein be the princedom of Arima and Omura , and all the force of our christianity : and he tell don Protasio when he be with he once before , that he will make he a great man in China , and that he will remove these lord , and deliver their government unto lord that be gentile ; which will be the ruin of all this christianity ; neither shall we have any place wherein to remain . for , as it be the custom of Japan in the alteration of estate and kingdom ( which they call Cuningaia ) to remove all the nobility and gentry , and to leave only the base people and labourer , commit they to the government of ethnic , we shall hereby also lose our house , and the Christians shall be disperse with their lord ; who sometime he handle in such sort , that he give they nothing to sustain themselves , and so they remain with all their follower , as man banish , and utter ruin . the second testimony contain the huge levy and preparation of quabacondono , as also his war and conquest , and the success thereof in the kingdom of Coray . together with a description of the same kingdom , and of their traffic and manner of government : and also of the ship of China , Japan , and Coray , with mention of certain isle thereunto adjacent , and other particular very memorable . out of the epistle of the aforesaid father friar Luis Frois date 1591 , and 1592. a bout this time quabacondono determine to put his war against China in execution , assemble sundry of his noble and captain , unto who he declare his intent ; who , albeit they be all of a quite contrary 424 opinion , yet all of they without any pretense of difficulty approve his determination . for he have give out that he will not abstain from this war , although his own son shall rise from death to life and request he ; yea whosoever will move any impediment or difficulty in that matter , he will put he to death . wherefore for certain month there be nothing in all place to be see , but provision of ship , armour , munition , and other necessary for the war . quabacondono make a catalogue of all the lord and noble his subject , will every one of they ( not a man except ) to accompany he in this expedition , enjoin and appoint to each one , what number they shall bring . in all these kingdom of Ximo he have nominate 4 of his especial favourite ; who ( to all man admiration ) he will have to be head over all these new kingdom , notwithstanding that here be 4 other far more mighty than they . of who ( by God good providence ) two be Christians , to wit , Augustine eucunocamindono governor of half the kingdom of Finga , and cainocami the son of quambioindono governor of the great part of the kingdom of Bugen . the other two be ethnique , namely Toranosuque governor of the half of the kingdom of Finga and augustins mortali enemy ; and Iconocami governor of the residue of the kingdom of Bugen , and a enemy both to Augustine and Cainocami . and quabacondono have command all the christian lord of Teximo to follow christian governor . whereupon the lord Protasius be there with 2000 soldier ; and omurandono the lord of Ceuxima and augustins son in law , which late become a christian , with a thousand . also he appoint that the governor of Firando and Goto shall follow Augustine , who albeit they be Gentiles , have many Christians to their subject . wherefore Augustine be to conduct 15000 soldier , beside mariner , slave , and other base people to carry the baggage of the army , all which be as great a number as the former , so soon as they arrive in the kingdom of 425 the english voyage Coray , be make soldier , and bear arm . unto the say Augustine , quabacondono , in token of singular favour , grant the first assault or invasion of the kingdom of Coray , to wit , that he only with his force may enter the same , the other lord remain in Ceuxima ( which be 18 league distant from Coray ) till they shall be advertise from Augustine : which thing procure unto Augustine great envy and disdain from they all ; howbeit ( as you shall forthwith understand ) it prove in the end most honourable unto he . the other christian governor Cainocami be but a young man of 23 year , he command the king of Bungo to follow with 6000 soldier ; so that with the 4000 which he have before , his number amount unto 10000 , beside mariner and other which carry burden . this be most joyful news to we , and to all the Christians . of the ethnic lord quabacondono appoint the governor of Riosogo together with Foranosuque to march with 8000 : and likewise the king of Sazeuma and Iconocami with as many . and among all he give the first and chief place unto Augustine . all the other soldier of Japan he cause to accompany his own person : the number of all together ( as appear out of a write catalogue ) amount to three hundred thousand person : of who two hundred thousand be soldier . the order prescribe in this whole army be , that first they shall make their entrance by the kingdom of Coray , which be almost a island , one end whereof join upon the main land of China ; which though it be a several kingdom of it self , yet be it subject and tributary unto the king of China . and because this kingdom of Coray be divide but by a arm of the sea from Japan , quabacondono determine to subdue the same , for that it so abound with victual , that from thence he may the easy invade china . while all thing be prepare , it be command , that at the chief port of Ximo call Nangoia , be twelve league distant from Firando , there shall be erect a mighty 426 great castle ; where quabacondono with all his fleet be mind to stay , till news be bring of the success of the aforesaid 4 governor or captain . he appoint also another castle to be build in fuchinoxima , which be another island situate between Nangoia and Ceuxima . and he build a three castle in Ceuxima , that his passage may be the more commodious . the charge of build these castle he impose upon the 4 aforesaid governor , and command the other lord of Ximo their associate to assist they ; all which so apply that business , that in 6 month space it be whole finish . the castle of Nangoia be environ with a double wall of square and beautiful stone , with broad and deep ditch like unto Miac6 . the innermost wall be less than the other two be 100 fathom square , within the compass whereof be so many house build both for the lord , and their follower , and also for merchant shop , and victualler house , distinguish with broad and direct street , that it seem a fair town . but ( that which be much more admirable ) all the way from Miac6 to Nangoia , at the end of every day journey , all the lord and governor , at the commandment of quabacondono , build each one within his jurisdiction new and stately palace from the ground , so that for 20 day together he lodge every night with all his train in one of those palace . and because these thing be do at the very same time when the expedition into the kingdom of Coray be in hand , all Japan be so grievous oppress ( quabacondono in the mean while be at no charge ) as it be most intolerable . yet be it incredible how ready every one be to do he service : which appear by these magnificent stately building rear up in so short a space , which in Europe will have require a long time and huge expense . in the mean season it be common give out , that this enterprise of quabacondono will have most unfortunate success , as be a matter wrought by constraint , and that it will be a occasion of manifold dissension in Japan : for no man there be , but 427 mislike of this war : yea , all the lord be in great hope , that some one man at length will step forth and restore their liberty ; howbeit there be none as yet find , which dare put his hand to that business . wherefore they be all ( though to their great grief and lamentation ) violent constrain to prosecute the enterprise . but quabacondono be void of all anxiety , to the end he may encourage his follower , boast that he will make great alteration of kingdom , and will bestow upon they the kingdom of Coray and China ; and unto the lord Protasius he have promise 3 kingdom : but he with all the other lord give he great thanks , have much rather retain a small portion of their estate in Japan , than to hunt after all those kingdom which he promise . and whereas quabacondono have by proclamation publish , that he will personal be present at Nangoia the 3 moon of this year ; troop and army of man begin to resort from all the quarter of Japan to these part . now be our affliction renew . for so long as quabacondono remain at Miac6 , we may stay in these part of Ximo without any danger : but after he begin to come this way , it seem impossible for our state to continue whole and sound , and we be put into no small perplexi tie . for the christian lord advise we , that sithence quabacondono be come so near , all our company that live in the college , in the house of probation , and in the seminary , shall depart to some other place . and the Christians from Miac6 write daily unto we , that we shall pull down our house and church at Omura , arima , and Cansaco , and that the father of Europe shall return unto nangasaque in the secular habit of Portugal , but that the japonian friar shall retire themselves unto several house of Christians , that so they may all remain safe and out of danger . but this remedy , as it be too grievous and subject to many difficulty , so do it afford we but small comfort . in brief the father visitor talk of this matter with 428 eucunocamindono , the lord Protasius , and omurandono , before their expedition towards the kingdom of Coray , find they , as before , in the same fortitude of mind , be constant in their first opinion : neither will they give any other counsel or direction , then that the father shall keep themselves secret , and shall only forsake their house at Arima , and Omura , wherein the Toni or great lord will have some of their kinsman remain . it be also think convenient , that the number of the seminary shall be diminish , and that of 90 there shall only remain 50 in our school , namely such as study the latin tongue . with the father visitor [ three . 857. ] there come unto nangasaque certain father and friar , which be say to be of Fungo and Firando . for the say father under the name of a legate may retain they with he more open . about this time quabacondono , that he may with some pastime recreate his noble which accompany he ; and also may declare , with how great confidence and security of mind he take upon he this expedition for China ; and likewise to obscure the most renown fame of a certain hunt and hawk perform of old by that mighty prince Joritono , who be emperor over all Japan ; he determine to ordain ( as it be ) another royal court of diverse kind of fowl . whereupon being accompany with many great lord and other , he depart to the kingdom of Oiaren , where his game have so good success , that he catch above 30000. fowl of all sort ; among which be many falcon . howbeit , for quabacondono his great recreation , and for the more solemnity of the game , there be also add many dead fowl , which the japonians with certain poulder or mean to composition know how to preserve sweet in their feather a long time . this game be end , Quaba - - m t^ir condono return with great pomp unto Miac6 ; before feather a long who go great multitude which carry those thou - time . sand of fowl upon guild cane . next after these follow many horseman sumptuous attire , carry 429 of great number of falcon and other bird . after they be lead many horse by the reins , most rich trap . next of all be bring coscis or littier very stately adorn : after which be carry quabacondono himself in a litty of another fashion , like unto those which in India be call palanchin , which be make in China , with most curious and singular workmanship , and be present unto he by the father visitor , and seem exceed to content he , for that in all action of solemnity he use the same . last of all follow a great troop of prince and noble brave mount on horseback , and gorgeous attire , thereby the more to delight quabacondono , who in triumphant sort be welcome by the way , with the shout and applause of infinite swarm of people , enter the city of Miac6 . now when the time of sail towards China approach , quabacondono determine first to proclaim his nephew inangondono his successor , and governor of all Japan , to the end he may supply his own room in the time of this war . and therefore he command the dairi to transfer unto his say nephew the dignity belong to himself , call he by the name of Taicusama , that be to say , great lord . which dignity be in such sort translate , that albeit he assign unto his nephew large revenue , together with that princely title , yet himself remain the very same that he be before . the day of the say translation be appoint , he summon all the prince of Japan to appear , and to swear obedience unto this his nephew : who with great pomp go unto the dairi to receive that dignity at his hand , have surrendered unto he the castle of Miac6 , and the palace of quabacondono to dwell in . thus at the begin of the three moon , he set forward on his journey to Nangoia , have before give order , that Augustine shall pass over into the kingdom of Coray , and that his other captain shall remain in Ceuxima . wherefore , the twenty day of the three moon he come unto Nangoia , where the company 43° of the other lord be number , be find to be 200000. person , beside those that be conduct by the four foresay governor . in the mean season Augustine with his force , and with a fleet of eight hundred fleet of ship , arrive at Coray . in who army the lord Pro - 8°0-tasius excel all other ; for though he have but the lead of 2000 soldier , yet for the goodness of his armour , and the beauty of his ship , he be admire of all man . at their very first entrance they win 2. castle of the kingdom of Coray by main force , wherein the corayans repose great confidence ; for they be environ with mighty high wall , and defend with great multitude of soldier , and with a kind of gun gun of 2. span and long , which in stead of bullet wtth discharge with a terrible noise wooden arrow head arrow with fork point of iron : but the say gun be able to hurt but a small distance off , and the japonians be furnish with brazen ordinance unknown unto the corayans , they present drive they from their wall , and with ladder make for the same purpose of great cane , they forthwith scale the same , and plant their ensign thereon ; the corayans indeed for a short time make resistance , but after a while betake themselves to dishonourable flight , 5000 man of their part be slay , and of augustines but 100 and 400. wound . Augustine perceive that the corayans can not endure any long assault , determine to take upon himself , and his army the whole burden and honour of this war , and not stay for the governor his associate , to march up into the heart of the kingdom , and to the principali city ; [ three . 858. ] unto which determination all the lord that be with he give their consent . this be ( no doubt ) a bold , yea , and in some sort , a rash enterprise of Augustine : but yet it argue a wise and valiant mind in he . but this long delay be so grievous to the captain which in Ceuxima expect the success of the war , that before they hear any news at all concern the surprise of the two castle , they bring Augustine in suspicion among 431 their friend , that he ambitious affect the honour of the whole war . which thing be know unto quabacondono , he be so trouble in mind even before he come to Nangoia , that sudden he command the other captain to set sail from Ceuxima . but when quabacondono be come to Nangoia , and hear news of the two castle take , and that Augustine pursue they the significa - victory proceed on towards the Miaco , that be to say , time of Miaco . cltie of Coray , and be determine to invade the same also ( all which Augustine himself write , and request he to send the other captain and commander to assail the kingdom on all side , and to furnish the castle which he have take and shall take , with garrison of soldier , because as yet he have not man enough to hold those fortress which he have win ) he be surprise with such unspeakable joy , as he affirm open , that in all Japan he have no subject comparable to Augustine : and that neither Nabunanga , nor himself ever know any man endue with so valiant and courageous a mind . i ( say he ) know against who and with what force i wage war , subdue by little and little all Japan unto i : but Augustine in so short a time and with so small force , have bold set his foot in a foreign region , and with most glorious victory have subdue the mighty kingdom of Coray . wherefore ( quoth he ) i will reward he with many kingdom , and will make he next unto my self the great prince in all Japan . he add far , that now his own son seem to be rise from the death : and that whosoever dare either disgrace or extenuate the deed of Augustine , he will grievous punish he , not respect whether he do it upon reason or malice . by this speech the name and report of Augustine grow so honourable among all man , that those which most envy his estate , dare not speak one ill word of he , but high commend he before q^bacondono . breadth of this kingdom or Coray extend in length about Coray . roo . and in breadth 60. league . and albeit the inhabi - 432 tants in nation , language , and strength of body ( which make the people of China to dread they ) be different from the chinians , yet because they pay tribute to the king of China , and exercise traffic with his subject , they do after a sort imitate the law , apparel , custom , and government of the chinians . they border on one side upon the Tartar , and other nation , with who sometime they have peace , and sometime war : but with the chinians they have continual peace . they be speciali good bowman ; but at other weapon , because they have but few , and those bad , they be nothing so skilful . wherefore they be not comparable to the japonians , who by reason of their war be continual exercise in arm , and be by nature more courageous and valiant , be furnish with iron-piece , with lance , and with excellent sword . only in ship they be inferior to the corayans and chinians , by reason of the hugeness of their ship which they use upon the sea . wherefore , if they be to join battle by sea , there be no doubt but that both the foresay nation will be too the people of hard for they . but now because they know nothing of an the come of the japonian army , or for that they str^er in doubt that their sea-force be the strong , or else ship , then because God be determine to punish they , he suffer they of Japan . they to be destitute of all the defence of their ship , so that the japonians without any resistance land upon their dominion . now the fame of augustines victory cause the army notable to increase , and the mariner , and many other which carry burden ( as they be train up in war from their childhood ) bear arm , while the corayan captive supply their base office : so great a terror possess all the people of Coray where Augustine come , that all the castle and fortress which he pass by be forsake by their garrison , and all man flee for refuge to the principali city . and while other commander and Christians send from Ceuxima and Nangoia shape their course for Coray , Augustine have pitch his camp near xi 433 2 e the king of Coray flee out of his frin-cipall city . [ HL 859. ] the english voyage unto the foresay principali city : of the which be come within 3. day journey , he be encounter by 20000 man ; who at the very first assault , have slay 3000. of they , he put to flight . but approach very near unto the city , and have pass a river , he maintain a valiant conflict at a certain narrow passage against 80000. Corayans , 8000. whereof be slay , and a great number drown in the river . here while Augustine appoint all his troop to remain for two day , to the end they may somewhat refresh their weary limb , the king of Coray see himself besiege by his enemy , and that many other japonian lord with strong army invade his kingdom on all side , determine to have his city strengthen with garrison , and to retire himself into the inland of China . which by reason of the abundance of horse that he have , he be able right com-modiously to perform . whereupon the second or three day after , Augustine without any resistance enter the head-city , be present with great store of victual and gift by they that remain therein . thus Augustine , with other captain his associate , become lord of the principali city , and win all the honour of the victory unto himself : for albeit by this time the other captain be come from Ceuxima , and many from Nangoia , yet they find all thing perform to their hand . quabacondono be advertise of this second victory , yield as much honour unto Augustine as he can possible devise , speak so high to the commendation both of he , and of other captain his associate , as if but the ten part of his fair promise come to effect , they shall be far great than they be , and Augustine ( next unto himself ) shall be the principali person in all Japan . and now he be become so famous in the court , and throughout the whole kingdom of Japan , that at all their meeting and assembly there be no talk but only of the valour and fortitude of Augustine , who in twenty day space have subdue so mighty a kingdom to the crown of Japan . and all the noble account he a 434 most happy man , be astonish at the immortali renown which he have attain unto by this exploit : yea , and quabacondono send forthwith unto he , as unto the conqueror and vanquisher of the corayans , in token of great honour , a two-edged sword and a horse , which among the japonians be a pledge of the most peerless honour that can possible be do to a man : and this very gift do Nabunanga in time past send unto quabacondono , when he have in any battle win any kingdom from morindono . and by this great event the power of the christian god , and his providence towards his child be know not only to the christian , but even to the very ethnic themselves , for that in the heat of such extreme persecution it have please his divine majestic to lay the honour of all this war upon christian lord . wherefore we doubt not , but they will prove more mighty and famous then ever they be . hence it come to pass that the Portugal ship come from China , have winter in Japan : by which occasion the presence of the father visitor have be a great comfort not only to we , but to all the other Christians , who in regard of the departure of so many man with quabacondono and his captain to the war , think they shall have be leave utter forsake and destitute , have not the father visitor , in who they repose all their confidence , remain here . but the singular providence and love of God towards we appear in this , that he will have the say ship , contrary to their usual custom , to winter in Japan . for when quabacondono have obtain that victory , be determine to return unto Ximo , they be all shroud under the protection of the foresay father ; who hear that he be enter into Nangoia , cause Frier John Rodorigues and the governor of the Portugal ship to salute and welcome he . for the Christians of Miaco , which succeed in their room that go for Coray , advise he in their letter so to do . and it be very acceptable to quabacondono to see the 435 Portugal captain general attend upon by so many Portugal sumptuous attire , and come with so many ship in the company of friar John Rodoriguez : and he ask the friar how the father visitor do ? and whether the present to the viceroy like he ? as also , that he take it in very good part that the father have winter in Japan , and that the friar shall stay with he . afterwards write a answer to the father , he declare therein the great favour which he bear to the captain of the ship . who , have familiar entertain he for the space of 2. hour , he dismiss with evident token of good will . after the captain return , friar Rodoriguez stay behind above a month , attempt very often to speak with quabacondono , of who he be always most kind use . afterwards by reason of sickness he return to nangasaque ; whereupon quabacondono demand why he be not cure at the same place where himself remain ? jacuino answer , that be a stranger , he be to be cure with such diet and medicine , as be not there to be have : with which answer he be satisfy . hence it be , that by often conference which be make by reason of the ambassage , quabacondono wax every day more courteous and affable . and yet for all this , new occasion of trouble and affliction be not cut off : for certain it be , that quabacondono have give out , that if he have good success with his war against China , he will make great alteration of estate , in assign the kingdom of Coray and China to the christian prince , and place in their room ethnic lord throughout Japan : which thing may redound to the ruin and destruction of all christianity here , neither shall the christian find in Japan any place of refuge . and albeit Augustine have certain inform the father visitor ’of the say alteration of [ three . 860. ] estate , and jacuine have write unto Augustine , that quabacondono have full determine to alter the state or government of Ximo , and so consequent the state of Augustine , and of the christian prince of Arima and 436 Omura ; yea , and that the say two prince have notice thereof : yet almighty God with the eye of his infinite mercy have vouchsafe to regard the prayer of his faithful servant ( who for this cause be most perplex and sorrowful ) and to provide this remedy follow . the corayans have intelligence , that their king and the force which he carry with he be in safety , go the great part of they , with as much victual as they can get , and hide themselves in the mountain and wood , remain there with such hate and indignation against the japonians , that with promise of safe conduct they can by no mean be draw out of their start hole . wherefore albeit the japonians have all the castle and place of defence in their own possession , yet because they want people to till the ground , and to do they other necessary service , they can choose but forgo all that which they have win . Moreover , the common high way be so pester with thief and murderer , that unless the japonians march in whole troop all together , they be sudden oppress with swarm of Corayans issue forth of the wood . many of the corayans also have retire themselves unto the neighbour-island , from whence with number of great hand near ship , to the mighty loss of the japonians , they assail unt0 coray-their small and weak one , and have already sink many of they . wherefore all the japonian lord why he remain in Coray have write unto quabacondono , that his army must for a certain time in no wise remove from the place where it be , for avoid of such imminent danger as in proceed further it may incur . upon these advertisement quabacondono be ready to take his journey to Coray , to divide the whole kingdom , be hinder from his purpose , and send most friendly letter to all his noble , will they to be of good cheer , for that he will not deal about alter of their estate , till 3. year be expire : whereupon they be ease of exceed great care and grief . for albeit there be no great trust to be give to his word , yet we hope that 437 this year he will not meddle : what he will do afterward , God know . in Coray at this present there be above 200000. japonian soldier , who at the commandment of quabacondono be divide throughout the whole kingdom . Augustine lie upon the very extreme frontier of China : but because the chinians be separate from the kingdom of Coray with a mighty river of 3. league broad , and abound with great ship , and have plant innumerable troop of man upon the shore , the success of the war remain most doubtful and uncertain . neither do we know whither the japonians will proceed any far this year or no . the three testimony of Coray , signify ( among other notable and political observation ) the late success of the war of Japan against Coray ; and to what end quabacondono still maintain garrison in that kingdom . out of the epistle of father Organtino Brixiano , bear date from Japan anno 1594. the whole empire of Japan be now in the hand of this king quabacondono : and ( which have not be know since the first creation thereof ) there be not the breadth of one foot throughout all the whole island , which be not absolute subject unto he . and he reign in so great peace and tranquillity , that if his successor follow the same course of government , there be no likelihood of future sedition or perturbation in any of the kingdom . and doubtless the mean which he use to establish continual ! peace and concord among the japonians , be very great and effectual ! . one be , that after he have pass his public promise , he never put any of his adversary to death , which his predecessor Nabunanga perform not : for he have subdue any kingdom , will put all the lord and governor to the sword . but this king grant unto they not only life , but also yearly revenue , whereby to 438 maintain themselves in a honest and mean estate : in which regard they all rest content , and willing submit themselves . another be , in that he have bring the husbandman and peasant ( by who assistance and wealth all the pety-king-doms be after a sort sustain ) unto such extreme poverty , that they have scarce wherewithal ! to keep life and soul together : as likewise he have bereave they of all kind of weapon . the three be , because he have most straight forbid all contention , sedition , fray , and skirmish . for whosoever be find culpable of this crime , they die every man of they on both party . if any escape by flight , their kinsfolk be punish in their stead ; and for lack of they , their servant ; and for default of both their next neighbour . if many be guilty , many be punish and suffer death : but hence it come to [ three . 861. ] pass , that many innocent person be constrain to die . and this severity be the cause , why there be at this present so seidome fray and contention in Japan . the four be , that in administer of justice he be most upright , without all respect either to his own kindred , or to his ancient captain , or the blood royal , or any of the Bonzii , be they never so famous : and be once advertise of a crime , he pardon no man . and albeit himself be exceed addict to woman , yet will he permit none of his subject to have any concubine . for which cause not many day ago , he banish a Bonzio of great wealth , be in alliance and dignity most near unto himself . And be inform that all the Bonzii of Miac6 keep concubine , he will have put they all to death , have not the governor of Miac6 promise , that he will undertake to keep they from offend any more in that kind . wherefore he cause all the Bonzii every month to be swear , that they shall live honest upon pain of death : as also he have swear the head or superior of all their 439 the war of Japan against Coray and China . the english voyage religious house under pain of death , to give up their name who they most suspect of the foresay crime . hence it be , that all of they ( if you regard their outward estate ) live in extreme fear ... the five be , for that he suffer none of his soldier , nor his great lord to live in idleness . if there be no war for their employment , he occupi they in building of stately palace , and in raise new fortress , or in repair and strengthen of old , and also in perform other notable work , to the ornament of Japan , and to his own last honour . so that at this present near unto Miac6 there be thirty thousand man employ about the build of one castle ; and in the city of Bozacca above a hundred thousand : which employments afford they neither place nor time to practise any rebellion . the sixth be he alter of government : for he removeth his governor from one extreme part of Japan to another . the seven , for that unto his soldier ( beside the ordinary pay continual allot unto they for their service ) in time of war he allow victual at his own cost . whereof it come to pass , that he effect whatsoever he think good by their mean . neither have he hitherto wage any war , wherein his enemy be not vanquish , accord to his own desire : this late war of China only except , which far surmount all his force . howbeit in the kingdom of Coray he maintain as yet great garrison , as well to keep his honour , as to constrain the chinians to sue for peace . the eight be , in that he curb and restrain person of ambitious and aspire mind , who ( as he conjecture ) after his death may work some innovation in the common wealth , or disturb the kingdom . the nine be , because he have on no side within four or five day journey of Miac6 , any mighty or industrious captain or governor . 44° the ten and last be , for that he have bring his yearly revenue to two million of gold . by these course and mean , we be in good hope that firm peace will be establish in all these kingdom , and also that a fit way will be prepare , for the conversion of all the great lord unto christian religion . 