A Catalogue of the great Masters of the Order of the Dutch knights, commonly called the Hospitalaries of Jerusalem: and what great exploites every of the saide Masters hath atchieved, either in conquering the land of Prussia, or in taming and subduing the Infidels, or els in keeping them under their obedience and subjection, taken out of Munster.{n}He order of the Dutch knights had their first original at Jerusalem in the yere of our Lorde 1190. within the Hospitali of the blessed Virgine: and the first Master of the saide order was called Henrie of Walpot, under whome many good things, and much wealth and riches{n}were throughout all Germanie and Italie procured unto the order: and the saide Hospitali was removed from Jerusalem unto Ptolemais, otherwise called Aeon, and the foresaid Order grew and mightily increased, whereof I will hereafter discourse more at large in my Treatise of Syria. Henrie of Walpot deceased in the yeere of Christ 1200. The 2. Master was Otto of Kerpen, and he continued Master of the Order for the space of sixe yeeres. The 3. was Hermannus Bart a godly and devout person, who deceased in the yeere 1210. being interred at Aeon, as his predecessors were. The 4. was Hermannus de Saltza, who thirtie yeeres together governed the saide Order, and managed the first expedition of{n}11{n}The first war moved against the Prussian infidels, anno dom. 1239.{n}warre against the infidels of Prussia, and ordained another Master also in Prussia to bee his Deputie in the same region. In the yeere 1239. the knights of the sword, who travelled into Livonia to convert the inhabitants thereof unto Christ, seeing they were not of sufficient force to performe that enterprise, and that their enemies increased on all sides, they united themselves unto the famous Order of the Dutch knights in Prussia, that their worthie attempt might bee defended and promoted by the aide and assistance of the saide Duch knights. At the very same time the ensigne of the crosse was exalted throughout all Germanie against the Prussians, and a great armie of souldiers was gathered together, the Burgrave of Meidenburg being general of the armie, who combining themselves unto the Dutch knights, joyned battell with the Infidels, and slew about five hundred Gentiles, who beforetime had made horrible invasions and in-roades into the dominions of Christians, wasting all with fire and sword, but especially the land of Colm, and Lubonia, which were the Provinces of Conradus Duke of Massovia. Nowe, the foresaide knights having made so huge a slaughter, built the castle of Reden, betweene Pomerania and the land of Colm, and so by degrees they gotte footing in the lande, and daylie erected more castles, as namely, Crutzburg, Wissenburg, Resil, Bartenstein, Brunsburg, and Heilsburg, and furnished them all with garrisons. The fift Master of the Order was Conradus Landgravius, the brother of Lodo-vick, which was husband unto Ladie Elizabeth. This Conradus, by his fathers inheritance, gave great riches and possessions unto the Order, and caused Ladie Elizabeth to be interred at Marpurg, within the religious house of his saide Order. Under the government of this Master, Aeon in the lande of Palestina was subdued unto the Saracens. Moreover, in the yeere 1254. there was another great armie of Souldiers prepared against Prussia, by the Princes of Germanie. For Octacer, alias Odoacer king of Bohemia, Otto Marques of{n}Brandeburg, the Duke of Austria, the Marques of Moravia, the Bishops of Colen and of Olmutz came marching on with great strength of their Nobles and common souldiers, and invading the lande of Prussia in the Winter season, they constrained the inhabitants thereof to receive the Christian faith, and to become obedient unto the knights. After which exploite, by the advice and assistance of king Odoacer, there was a castle built upon a certaine hill of Samogitia, which immediately after grewe to be a great citie, being at this day the seate of the Prince of Prussia: and it was called by Odoacer Kunigsberg, that is to say, Kings Mount, or Mount royall, being finished in the yeere 1255. Out of this fort the knights did bridle and restraine the furie of the Infidels on all sides, and compelled them to obedience. The sixt Master was called Boppo ab Osterna, under whom the citie of Kunigsberg was built. At the very same instant the knights beeing occupied about the warre of Curland, the Prussians conspiring together, and abandoning the Christian faith, in furious maner armed themselves against ye Christians, defaced and burnt down Churches, slew Priests, and to the utmost of their abilitie, banished all faithfull people. The report of which misdemeanour being published throughout all Germanie, an huge armie was levied and sent for the defence and succour of the knights, which marching into the land of Natan, made many slaughters, & through the inconstancie of fortune sometimes woonne, and sometimes lost the victorie. Also the Infidels besieged these three castles, namely, Barsten-stein, Crutzberg and Kunigsberg, and brought extreame famine upon the Christians contained within the saide fortes. Againe, in the yeere of our Lord 1262. the Earle of Juliers, with other Princes and great chivalrie came downe, and giving charge upon the Prussians, put three thousand of them to the edge of the sworde. Afterward the Prussians banding themselves together, were determined to spoile the castle of Kunigsberg, but{n}The Prussians abandon Christianitie.{n}A.D.{n}1262.{n}their confederacie being disclosed, they had the repulse. And when the knightes had prevailed against them, they laide in pledges, and yet for all that were not afraid to breake their fidelitie. For upon a certaine time, after they had given divers pledges, they slewe two noble knights of the Order, and so by that meanes incensed the principali of the saide order, insomuch that they caused two paire of galloues to be set up besides the castle, & thirtie of the Prussians pledges to be hanged therupon. Which severitie so vexed and provoked the Prussians, that in revenge of the said injury, they renewed bloody and cruel warres, slew many Christians, yea, and put 40. knights with the master of the Order, and the Marshal, unto the edge of the sword. There was at the same instant in Pomerania a Duke called Suandepolcus, professing the Christian faith, but being joyned in league with the Prussians, he indevoured for many yeeres, not onely to expell the knights, but all Christians whatsoever out of the lande of Prussia, in which warre the foresaide knights of the Order suffered many abuses. For they lost almost all their castles, and a great number of themselves also were slaine. This Suandepolcus put in practise many lewde attempts against religion. For albeit he was baptized, he did more mis-chiefe then the very Infidels themselves, untill such time as the knights being assisted by the Princes of Germanie, brought the saide Duke and the Prussians also into such straights, that (maugre their heads) they were constrained to sue for peace. Afterward Swandepolcus lying at the point of death, admonished his sonnes that they should not doe any injurie unto the knights of the order, affirming that himselfe never prospered so long as he urged warre against them. Howbeit his sonnes for a certaine time observed not their fathers counsel, untill at length one of them named Warteslaus, was created one of the Order, and the other called Samborus bestowed by legacie his goods and possessions upon the saide Order, receiving maintenance and exhibition from{n}the saide Order, during the terme of his life. It fortuned also under the government of the foresayde Master Boppo, that one Syr Martine a Golin beeing accompanied with another knight, went into the countrey to see howe the Prussians were imployed. And meeting with three Prussians, they slew two, and the thirde they reserved to guide them the directest way. But this guide betrayed them into their enemies handes. Which when they perceived, they slewe the Traytour. Then five Prussian horsemen came riding and tooke [I. 14-6.} them, delivering them bounde to the custodie of two. And the other three pursued the horses of the two, which broke loose in the time of the fraye. And they tarying somewhat long, the other two woulde have beheaded the two Knightes in the meane season. And memorable as one of them was striking with his drawen sworde, strata&me-at the necke of Sir Martine, hee saide unto them : Sirs, you doe unwisely in that you take not off my garment before it bee defiled with blood. They therefore loosing the cordes wherewith hee was bounde, to take off his garment, set his armes more at libertie.{n}Which Syr Martine well perceiving reached his keeper such a boxe, that his sworde fell to the grounde. Which hee with all speede taking up, slewe both the keepers and unbounde his fellowe Knight. Moreover, seeing the other three Prussians comming furiously upon them, with stoute couragious hearts they made towarde the saide Prussians, and slew them, and so escaped the danger of death. The seventh great Master was Hanno de Sangershusen, who deceased in the yeere one thousand two hundreth seventie five. The eight was Hartmannus ab Heldringen who deceased in the yeere 1282. The ninth was Burckardus a Schuvenden beeing afterwarde made knight of the order of Saint Johns. The tenth was Conradus a Feuchtuvang: under this man the Citie of Aeon in Palestina was sacked by the Soldan, and manie people were slayne. The Templars which were therein returned home out of Fraunce, where they had{n}great revenewes. The Knightes of Saint John, who also had an Hospitali at Aeon, changed their place, and went into the Isle of Cyprus, and from thence departing unto Rhodes, they subdued that Islande unto themselves. Nowe the Dutch Knights abounded with wealth and possessions throughout all Germanie, beeing Lordes of a good part of Prussia, Livonia, and Curland, whose chiefe house was then at Marpurg, till such time as it was remooved unto Marieburg, a Towne of Prussia. The eleventh great Master was Godfrey Earle of Hohenloe. Under this man the knights sustained a great overthrowe in Livonia: but having strengthned 4000. their armie, they slewe neere unto Rye foure thousande of their enemies. The twelfth Master was Sifridus a Feuchtuvang. Under this man, the principali house of the Order was translated from Martpurg to Marieburg, which in the beginning was established at Aeon, and from thence was remooved unto Venice, and from Venice unto Martpurg. This Sifridus deceased in the yeere 1341. The thirteenth Master was called Charles Beflart of Triers. This man built a fort upon the river of Mimmel, and it was named Christmimmel. The foure-teenth was Warnerus ab Orsele, whome a certaine knight of the Order slewe with his sworde. The 15. was Ludolphus Duke of Brunswick, who built the Towne of Ylgenburg, and deceased 1352. The sixteenth was Theodoricus Earle of Aldenborg, and hee built the Towne of Bartenstein. The seventeenth was Ludolphus sir named King. The eighteenth was Henrie a Tusimer. The nineteenth Winricus a Knoppenrodt. In this mans time the knights took the king of the Lithuanians named Kinstut captive, and kept him prisoner in Marieburg halfe a yeere, but by the helpe of a servaunt, having broken out of the Castle, hee escaped away by night. But fearing that hee was layde waite for in all places, hee left his horse, and went on foote through unknowen pathes. In the day time hee hidde himselfe in secrete places, and in the night hee continued his{n}journey untill hee came unto Massovia. But all the Knightes joye was turned into sorrowe, after they had lost so great an enemie. The twentieth grand Master was Conradus Zolner of Rotenstein. The one and twentieth Conradus Walenrod. The two and twentieth This man sent Conradus a Jungingen, who deceased in the yeere one ^hard^tke thousand foure hundreth and seven. The three and se:tnd. twentieth Ulricus a Jungingen. This man dyed in battell in the yeere one thousand foure hundreth and tenne : which battell was fought against Vladislaus Father of Casimire. Both partes had levied mightie and huge forces: unto the Polonians the Lithuanians and the Tartars had joyned themselves, over whome one Vitol-dus was captaine: the Dutch Knights had taken up Souldiers out of all Germanie. And when eache armie had encamped themselves one within twentie furlongs of another, (hoping for victorie and impatient of delay) the great Master of the Prussians sent an Herault to denounce warre unto the King, and immediately (alarme beeing given) it is reported that there were in both armies fourtie thousand horsemen in a readinesse. Vladislaus commaunded the Lithuanians and the Tartars to give the first onsette, and placed the Polonians in the rerewarde of the battell: on the contrarie side, the Prussians regarded least of all to reserve any strong troupes behinde, which might rescue such as were wearie, and renewe the fight, if neede shoulde require, but set forwarde the flower and chivalrie of all his Souldiers in the verie forefront of the battell. The charge beeing given certaine unarmed Tartars & Lithuanians were slaine  handsmooth : howbeit the multitude pressed on, neither durst the fearefull Polonians turne’ their backes, and so a cruell battell was fought upon the heapes of dead carkases. The combate continued a long time, terrible slaughters were committed, and the Lithuanians and Tartars were slaine like sheepe. But when newe and fresh enemies continually issued foorth, the Dutch knights being wearied, began to fight more faintly. Which{n}Vladislavs no sooner perceived, but in all haste hee sends forwarde his mightie and well armed bande of Polonians, who suddenly breaking in renewed the skirmish. The Dutch were not able to withstand the furie of the fresh troupes (great oddes there is betweene the wearied Soul-dier and him that comes in a fresh) insomuch that the knights with their people were constrained to flee. The master of the Order seeing his souldiers give way unto the enemie, gathered a companie together, and withstoode him in the face, howbeit himselfe was slaine for his labour, the flight of his people proved greater and more dishonourable, neither did the Dutch cease to flee, so long as the Polonian continued the chase. There fell on the Knights partie manie thousands of men, and the Polonians gotte not the victorie without great spoile and damage. This battell was foughten in regard of the bounds of regions in the yeere 1410. All Prussia following the happie successe of the Polonian king (except Marieburg onely) yeelded themselves unto him being Conquerour. Howbeit the Emperour Sigismund taking up the quarell, peace was ordained between the knights and Polonia, and a league concluded, certaine summes of money also were paide unto the Polonian, Prussia was restored unto the knights, neither was the saide order disturbed in the possession of their lands untill the time of Friderick. The 24. Master was Henrie Earle of Plaen. This man being deposed by the Chapter, was 7. yeres holden prisoner at Dantzik. The 25. Master was Michael Kuchenmeister, that is, master of the Cookes of Sternberg. The 26. was Paulus a Russdorff. The 27. Conradus ab Ellerichs-hausen. This man, after divers and sundry conflicts betweene the Dutch knights, and the king of Polonia, concluded a perpetuali league with the saide king. Howbeit the citizens of Dantzig secretely going about to obteyne their freedome, that the foresaide Order might have no dominion over them, made sute unto the Polonian king to be their Protector. This 8{n}Conradus died in the yeere 1450. The 28. was Lewis ab Ellerichshausen. Under this man there arose a dangerous sedition in Prussia betweene the chiefe cities and the knights of the Order. The citizens demanded libertie, complaining that they were oppressed with divers molestations. Whereupon they privily made sute unto Casimir then king of Polonia. The Master of the Order seeing what would come to passe began to expostulate with the king, that he kept not the peace which had bene concluded betweene them to last for ever. Also Frederick the Emperour com-maunded the Prussians to returne unto the obedience of the knights, who by the dint of their swordes had released that province out of the hands of Infidels, and had bought it with the shedding of much blood. Notwithstanding the popular sort persisting stil in their stubborne determination, proceeded at length to open warre. The cities adhearing unto the king usurped divers Castles belonging to the Master, tooke certain Commanders and knights, yea, and some they slewe also. Fiftie and five townes conspired together in that rebellion : but thinking their estate and strength not sure enough against their own governors without forrein aide, they chose king Casimir to be their lord. Heere-upon the Polonian king marched into Prussia with a great armie, taking possession of such cities as yeelded themselves unto him, and proceeding forward against Marieburg, besieged the castle and the towne. In the meane season the Master having hired an armie of Germane souldiers, suddenly surprised the king at unawares in his tents, and slewe about 300. Polonians, tooke prisoners 136. noblemen, spoiled their tents, tooke away their horses, victuals, and armour, insomuch that the king himselfe hardly escaped upon one horse. These things came to passe in the yeere 1455. The Master having thus obtained the victorie, sent his armie into the countrey, and recovered the castles and cities which he had lost, to the number of 80. putting many 9{n}The great master overcommeth the king of Polonia.{n}The king by treason over-throweth the Master.{n}of his enemies also unto the sword. Moreover, he recovered Kunigsberg being one of the foure principali cities, which are by name Thorne, Elburg, Kunigsberg, and Gdanum, that is to say, Dantzig. And when the warre was longer protracted then the Master could well beare, and a whole yeres wages was unpaid unto his captains, those captaines which were in the garison of Marieburg conspired against the Master, and for a great summe of money betrayed the castle of Marieburg unto the king. Which practise beeing knowen, the Master fled to Kunigsberg, and newe warre was begunne, and great spoile and desolation was wrought on both sides : untill at length, after composition made, the king retayned Pomerella, and all the castles and townes therein, together with Marieburg and Elburg : and the master injoyed Samaitia, Kunigsberg, &c. This composition was concluded in the yeere 1466. The 29. Master was Henrie Reuss, first being deputie, and afterwarde Master of Prussia. The 30. was Henrie a Richtenberg, who deceased in the yeere 1477. The 31. called Martine Truchses died in the yeere 1489. The 32. John a Tieflen died in the yeere 1500. The 33. being Duke of Saxonie, and marques of Misn, deceased in the yeere 1510. This man began to call in question, whether the foresaid composition concluded betweene the king of Polonia, and the Order, were to bee observed or no ? especially sithence it conteined certaine articles against equitie and reason. Wherupon he appealed unto the Bishop of Rome, unto the Emperor, unto the princes and electors of Germany, and prevailed with them so farre forth, that there was a day of hearing appointed at Posna in Polonia. And the Legates of both parts meeting heard complaints and excuses, & dispatched no other businesse. In the meane time Prince Frederick deceased in the tenth yeere of his government. The 34. Master was Albertus marques of Brandenburg, whom the King of Polonia did so grievously molest{n}with war, and oppressed all Prussia with such extreme rigour, that the Prince of the countrey was constrained to make a league of foure yeeres with him, and to yeeld unto such conditions, as turned to the utter over-throwe of the whole Order. And amongst other conditions are these which follow. Sithence that the originali of all discorde betweene Polonia and the order doeth from hence arise, for that hitherto in Prussia, no lawfull heyre and successor hath borne rule and authority, but divers and sundry have had the government therof, by whose meanes the nations have bene provoked one against another, much Christian blood hath bin shed, the lands and inhabitants grievously spoiled, and many widowes and Orphans made : the Popes, Emperors, and Princes being often sollicited for the establishing of that perpetual league, which Casimir hath heretofore concluded &c. Sithence also that the truce which hath bene agreed upon of both parties is in short time to be expired, and that it is to bee feared, that bloody warres will then be renewed, and that all things will prove worse and worse, unlesse some lawfull composition be made, and some good and wholesome devise be put in practise, as well for the benefit of the King and of his posteritie, as for the commoditie of the whole common weale of Prussia, especially considering that Albertus the Marques refuseth not to submitte himselfe to the Councell of the King, &c.{n}A.D.{n}1525-{n}