The most solemne, and magnificent coronation || Or Theodor. of || Pheodor Ivanowich, Emperour of Russia &c. the tenth of June, in the yeere 1584. seene and observed by Master Jerom Horsey gentleman, and servant to her Majesty, a man of great travell, and long experience in those parts: wherwith is also joyned the course of his journey over land from Mosco to Emden.{n}The death of Ivan Vasili-wich 1584.{n}Apr. 18.{n}Hen the old Emperour Ivan Vasiliwich died, (being about the eighteenth of Aprill, 1584. after our computation) in the ci tie of Mosco, having raigned 54. yeeres, there was some tumult and uprore among some of the nobilitie, and cominal-tie, which notwithstanding was quickly{n}pacified. Immediately the same night, the Prince Boris{n}Pheodorowich Godonova, Knez Ivan Pheodorowich,{n}L. Boris adopted as the Emperors third sonne.{n}Mesthis Slafsky, Knez Ivan Petrowich Susky, Mekita Romanowich & Bodan Jacovlewich Belskoy, being all noble men, and chiefest in the Emperors Will, especially the Lord Boris, whom he adopted as his third sonne, & was brother to the Empresse, who was a man very wel liked of al estates, as no lesse worthy for his valure & wisedome: all these were appointed to dispose, & settle 336{n}his sonne Pheodor Ivanowich, having one sworne another, and all the nobili tie, and officers whosoever. In the morning ye dead Emperor was layd into the Church of Michael the Archangel, into a hewen sepulcre, very richly decked with vestures fit for such a purpose: and present Proclamation was made, (Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia &c.) Throughout all the citie of Mosco was great watch and ward, with souldiers, and gunners, good orders established, and officers placed to subdue the tumulters, and mainteine quietnes: to see what speede and policie was in this case used was a thing worth the beholding. This being done in Mosco, great men of birth and accompt were also presently sent to the bordering Townes, as Smolensko Vobsko, Kasan, Novo-gorod &c. with fresh garrison, and the old sent up. As upon the 4. of May a parliament was held, wherein were assembled, the Metropolitane, Archbishops, Bishops, Priors, and chiefe clergie men, and all the nobility whatsoever : where many matters were determined not pertinent to my purpose, yet all tended to a new reformation  in the government: but especially the terme, and time was agreed upon for the solemnizing of the new{n}yong sonne sent to Ouglets.{n}Emperors coronation. In the meane time ye Empresse, Em~ wife to the old Emperor, was with her child the{n}Emperors sonne, Charlewich Demetrie Ivanowich, of Jatier,an er one yeres age or there abouts, sent with her father Pheodor Pheodorowich Nagay, & that kindred, being 5.{n}Brothers, to a towne called Ouglets, which was given unto her, and the young Prince her sonne, with all the lands belonging to it in the shire, with officers of all sortes appointed, having allowance of apparell, jewels, diet, horse &c. in ample maner belonging to the estate of a princesse. The time of mourning after their use being expired, called Sorachyn, or fortie orderlie dayes, the day of the solemnizing of this coronation, with great preparations, was come, being upon the 10. day of June, 1584. and that day then Sunday, he being of the age of 25. yeeres: at which time, Master Jerom Horsey was{n}The day of Pheodor his coronation.{n}in{n}337{n}orderly sent for, and placed in a fit roome to see all the solemnitie. The Emperor comming out of his Pallace, there went before him, the Metropolitan, Archbishops, Bishops, and chiefest Monkes, and Clergie men, with very rich Copes, and Priestes garments upon them, carying pictures of our Ladie &c. with the Emperours Angell, banners, censers, and many other such ceremonious things, singing all the way. The Emperour with his nobilitie in order entred the Church named Blaveshina, or Blessednes, where prayers, and service were used, according to the maner of their Church : that done, they went thence to the Church, called Michael the Archangell, and there also used the like prayers, and service: and from thence to our Lady Church, Prechista, being their Cathedrall Church. In the middest thereof was a chaire of majestie placed, wherein his Auncestors used to sit at such extraordinarie times: his robes were then changed, and most rich and unvaluable garments put on him: being placed in this Princely seate, his nobility standing round about him in their degres, his imperiali Crowne was set upon his head by the Metropolitane, his Scepter globe in his right hand, his sword of Justice in his left of great riches: his 6. Crownes also, by which he holdeth his kingdomes were set before him, and the Lord Boris Pheodorowich was placed at his right hand: then the Metropolitan read openly a booke of a small volume, with exhortations to the Emperour to minister true Justice, to injoy with tranquilitie the Crowne of his auncestors, which God had given him, and used these words following.{n}Through the will of the almighty & without beginning God, which was before this world, whom we glorifie in the Trinitie, one onely God, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, maker of all things, worker of all in all every where, fulfiller of all things, by which will, and working, he both liveth, and giveth life to man: that our only God which enspireth every one of us his only children with his word to discerne God through our Lord 338{n}Jesus Christ, and the holy quickning spirit of life, now in these perilous times establish us to keep the right Scepter, and suffer us to raigne of our selves to the good profit of the land, to the subduing of the people, together with the enemies, & the maintenance of vertue. And so the Metropolitan blessed and layd his crosse upon him. After this, he was taken out of his chaire of Majestie, having upon him an upper robe adorned with precious stones of all sorts, orient pearles of great quantitie, but alwayes augmented in riches : it was in waight two hundred pounds, the traine, and parts thereof borne up by 6. Dukes, his chiefe imperiali Crowne upon his head very precious : his staffe imperiali in his right hand of an unicornes horne of three foot and a halfe in length beset with rich stones, bought of Merchants of Ausburge by the old Emperour in An. 1581, and cost him 7000. Markes sterling. This Jewel M. Horsey kept sometimes, before the Emperor had it. His scepter globe was caried before him by the prince Boris Pheodorowich, his rich cap beset with rich stones and pearles was caried before him by a Duke : his 6. Crownes also were caried by Demetrius Ivanowich Godonova, the Emperors uncle, Mekita Romanowich the Emperors uncle, Stephan Vasili-wich, Gregory Vasiliwich, Ivan Vasiliwich brothers of the blood royal. Thus at last the Emperor came to the great Church doore, and the people cried, God save our Emperour Pheodor Ivanowich of al Russia. His horse was there ready most richly adorned, with a covering of imbrodered pearle and precious stones, saddle, and all furniture agreeable to it, reported to be worth 300000. markes sterling.{n}There was a bridge made of 150. fadome in length, three maner of waies, three foote above ground and two fadome broad, for him to goe from one Church to the other with his Princes and nobles from the presse of the people, which were in number infinite, and some at that time pressed to death with the throng. As the Emperour returned out of the Churches, they were spred under foot 339{n}with cloth of gold, the porches of the Churches with red velvet, the bridges with scarlet, and stammell cloth from one church to another : and as soone as the Emperor was passed by, the cloth of gold, velvet and scarlet was cut, and taken of those that could come by it, every man desirous to have a piece, to reserve it for a monument:  silver and gold coyne, then mynted of purpose was cast among the people in great quantitie. The lord Boris Pheodorowich was sumptuously, and richly attired, with his garments decked with great orient pearle, beset with al sorts of precious stones. In like rich maner were appareled all the family of the Godonovaes in their degrees, with the rest of the princes, and nobili tie, whereof one named Knez Ivan Michalowich Glynsky, whose robe, horse, and furniture, was in register found worth one hundred thousand markes sterling, being of great antiquitie. The Empresse being in her pallace, was placed in her chaire of Majesty also before a great open window : most precious, and rich were her robes, and shining to behold, with rich stones, and orient pearle beset, her crowne was placed upon her head, accompanied with her Princesses, and Ladies of estate : then cried out the people, God preserve our noble Empresse Irenia. After all this the Emperour came into the Parliament house which was richly decked : there he was placed in his royall seat adorned as before : his 6. crownes were set before him upon a table : the basin, and ewer royall of gold held by his knight of gard with his men standing two on each side in white apparell of cloth of silver, called Kindry, with scepters, and battle axes of gold in their hands: the Princes, and nobilitie were all placed according to their degrees all in their rich roabs.{n}The Emperour after a short oration, permitted every man in order to kisse his hande: which being done, he removed to a princely seate prepared for him at the table: where he was served by his nobles in very princely order. The three out roomes being very great, and large were beset with plate of golde, and silver round, from the 340{n}ground up to the vauts one upon the other: among which plate were many barrels of silver and golde: this solemnitie, and triumph lasted a whole weeke, wherein many royall pastimes were shewed and used: after which the chiefest men of the nobilitie were elected to their places of office, & dignitie, as the Prince Boris Pheodorowich was made chiefe Counsellor to the Emperor, Master of the horse, had the charge of his person, Liuetenant of the Empire, and Warlike engins, Governor or Liuetenant of the Empire of Cazan, and Astracan and others: to this dignitie were by Parliament, and gift of the Emperor given him many revenues, and rich lands, as there was given him, and his for ever to inherite a province called Vaga, of 300. English miles in length, and 250. in bredth, with many townes and great villages populous and wealthy, his yeerely revenue out of that province, is 35. thousand markes sterling, being not the 5. part of his yerely revenue. Further, he and his house be of such authoritie, and power, that in 40. dayes warning they are able to bring into the fielde 100. thousand Souldiers well furnished.{n}The conclusion of the Emperors Coronation was a peale of ordinance, called a peale royall two miles without the citie, being 170. great pieces of brasse of all sorts, as faire as any can be made, these pieces were all discharged with shot against bulwarkes made of purpose : 20. thousand hargubusers standing in 8. rankes two miles in length, appareled all in velvet, coloured silke & stammels, discharged their shot also twise over in good order : and so the Emperor accompanied with all his princes and nobles, at the least 50. thousand horse departed through the City to his pallace. This royall coronation would aske much time, and many leaves of paper to be described particularly as it was performed: it shal suffice, to understand that the like magnificence was never seene in Russia.{n}The coronation, and other triumphes ended, al the nobilitie, officers, and merchants according to an accustomed order every one in his place, and degree brought{n}341{n}A.D.{n}I584-{n}rich presents unto the Emperor, wishing him long life, and joy in his kingdome.{n}The same time also Master Jerom Horsey aforesaid, remayning as servant in Russia for the Queenes most excellent Majestie, was called for to the Emperor, as he sate in his imperiali seat, and then also a famous Merchant of Netherland being newly come to Mosco, (who gave him selfe out to be the king of Spaines subject) called John de Wale, was in like sort called for. Some of the nobilitie would have preferred this subject of the Spaniard before Master Horsey servant to the Queene of England, whereunto Master Horsey would in no case agree, saying, he would have his legges cut off by the knees, before he would yeeld to such an indignitie offered to his Soveraigne the Queenes Majesty of England, to bring the Emperor a present, in course after the King of Spaines subject, or any other whatsoever. The Emperor, and the Prince Boris Pheodorowich perceiving the controversie, sent the Lord Treasorer Peter Ivanowich Galavyn, and Vasili Shalkan, both of the Counsell, to them, who delivered the Emperor backe, Master Horseys speech : whereupon he was first in order (as good reason) admitted and presented the Emperor in the behalfe of the English Merchants trading thither, a present wishing him joy, and long to raigne in tran-quilitie, and so kissed the Emperors hand, he accepting the present with good liking, and avouching, that for his sisters sake Queene Elizabeth of England, he would be a gracious Lord to her Merchants, in as ample maner as ever his father had ben : and being dismissed, he had the same day sent him 70. dishes of sundry kinds of meats, with 3. carts laden with al sorts of drinks very bountifully. After him was the foresayd subject of the Spanish king admitted with his present, whom the Emperor willed to be no lesse faithfull and serviceable unto him, then the Queene of Englands subjects were & had bene, and then the king of Spaines subjects should receive favour accordingly.{n}342{n}All these things thus in order performed, praises were sung in all the churches. The Emperor and Empresse very devoutly resorted on foote to many principal Churches in the Citie, and upon Trinitie Sunday betooke themselves to a progresse in order of procession, to a famous monasterie called Sergius and the Trinitie, 60. miles distant from the Citie of Mosco, accompanied with a huge armie of Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, mounted upon goodly horses with furniture accordingly.{n}The Empresse of devotion tooke this journey on foot all the way, accompanied with her princesses and ladies, no small number: her guard and gunners were in number 20000, her chiefe counsellor or attendant, was a noble man of the blood Roial her uncle of great authoritie called Demetri Ivanowich Godonova. All this progresse ended, both the Emperor and Empresse returned to Mosco : shortly after the Emperor by the direction of the prince Boris Pheodorowich, sent a power into the land of Siberia, where all the rich Sables & Furres are gotten. This power conquered in one yeere and a halfe, 1000. miles. In the performance of this warre, there was taken prisoner the Emperor of the countrey called Chare Siber- ChareSiberski sky, and with him many other dukes and noble men, ^ce. , //,	i , a i .	a r	u-	alberta taken{n}which were brought to Mosko with a guard or souldiers prismer an(i and gunners, who were received into the citie in very brought to honorable maner, and do there remaine to this day. Mosco.{n}Hereupon the corrupt officers, Judges, Justices, captains and lieutenants through the whole kingdom were remooved, and more honest men substituted in their places, with expresse commandement, under severe punishment to surcease their old bribing & extortion which they had used in the old Emperors time, and now to execute true justice without respect of persons : and to the end that this might be the better done, their lands and yeerly stipends were augmented: the great taskes, customes, and duties, which were before layd upon the people in the old Emperors time, were now abated, and some wholy remitted, and no punishments com-343{n}Sophet Keri Alli king of the Crimmes arrival at Mosco.{n}manded to be used, without sufficient and due proofe, although the crime were capitali, deserving death : many Dukes and noble men of great houses, that were under displeasure, and imprisoned 20. yeeres by the old Emperor, were now set at libertie and restored to their lands : all prisoners were set at libertie, and their trespasses forgiven. In summe, a great alteration universally in the government folowed, and yet all was done quietly, civilly, peaceably, without trouble to the Prince, or offence to the Subject: and this bred great assurance and honour to the kingdom, and all was accomplished by the wisedom especially of Irenia the Empresse.{n}These things being reported and caried to the eares of the kings and princes that were borderers upon Russia, they grew so fearefull and terrible to them, that the Monarch of all the Scythians called the Crimme Tartar or great Can himselfe, named Sophet Keri Alli, came out of his owne countrey to the Emperor of Russia, accompanied with a great number of his nobilitie well horsed, although to them that were Christians they seemed rude, yet they were personable men, and valiant: their comming was gratefull to the Emperor, and their entertainment was honourable, the Tartar prince having brought with him his wives also, received of the Russe Emperor entertainment, and princely welcome according to their estates.{n}Not long after, 1200. Polish gentlemen, valiant Souldiors, and proper men came to Mosko offiing their service to the Emperor, who were all entertained : and in like sort many Chirkasses, and people of other nations came and offied service. And assoone as the report of this new created Emperor was spred over other kingdoms of Europe, there were sent to him sundry Ambassadors to wish him joy and prosperi tie in his kingdom : thither came Ambassadors from the Turke, from the Persian, the Bogharian, the Crimme, the Georgian, and many other Tartar princes. There came also Ambassadors from the Emperor of Almaine, the{n}344{n}Pole, the Swethen, the Dane, &c. And since his coronation no enemie of his hath prevailed in his attempts.{n}It fell out not long after, that the Emperor was 2% Em-desirous to send a message to the most excellent Queene perorPheodore of England, for which service he thought no man fitter kttmand “ then M. Jerome Horsey, supposing that one of the requests to the Queenes owne men and subjects would be the more Queene. acceptable to her. The summe of which message was, that the Emperor desired a continuance of that league, friendship, amitie and intercourse of traffique which was betweene his father and the Queens majestie and her subjects, with other private affaires besides, which are not to be made common.{n}