The life and travels of Constantine the great, Emperour and King of Britaine.{n}Lavius Constantinus cognomento Magnus post Genitorem Constantium Britannorum Rex, ac Romanorum Caesar Augustus, ex Britannica matre in Britannia natus, & in Britannia creatus Imperator, patriam natalem magnifici suae glori® participem fecit. Profligatis Alemanis, Hispanis, &{n}Francis, eorumque Regibus pro spectaculo bestiis objectis, Galliam subjectam tenuit: Tres Helen® matris avunculos Britannos, Leolinum, Traherum, & Marium, quos c®teris semper fidentiores habuerat in suis fortunis, Italis ii Maxentii tyrannide fcelicit^r liberatis, in Senatorum ordinem Rom® promovit. Innumer® in eo (ut Eutropius habet) claruere tam animi, quam corporis virtutes, 272{n}dum appetentissimus esset glorias militaris, successu semper in bellis prospero. Inter literas tam Graecas quam Latinas, a Christianissima matre Helena Christi fidem edoctus, eos honorabat praecipui, qui in Philosophia Christiana vitam reclinassent. Unde ab Oceani finibus nempe Britannis incipiens, ope fretus divina, religionis curam in mediis superstitionum tenebris cepit, ab Occiduis ad Indos, innumeras ad aeternae spem vitae erigens gentes. Animum divinis exercendo studiis, noctes trahebat insomnes, & quaesita scribendi diverticula per otium frequentabat : Imperium oratione, ac Sanctis operationibus continendum ratus, Egregius Christianae disciplinae praeco, filios ac proceres docuit, pietatem divitiis omnibus, atque aded ipsi anteferre totius mundi Monarchiae. Falsorum deorum eversor, Imaginum cultus per Graeciam, TEgyp-tum, Persiam, Asiam, & universam ditionem Romanam, repetitis abrogat legibus, jubens per edicta Christum coli, Evangelium praedicari sacrum, Ministris honores, & alimenta dari, atque idolorum ubique destrui templa. Et ut fidei forma cunctis videretur, Evangelium Jesu Christi ante se semper ferri fecit, & Biblia sacra ad omnes provincias destinari, diademaque Monarchicum primus Britannis regibus dedit: Ecclesiis infinita prae-  stitit, agros, annonam, stipem egenis, aegris, viduis, ac orphanis, pro quibusque ut pater sollicitus. Eusebium, Lactantium, & similes, familiarissimos habuit, & hanc ad Deum orationem indies ipsis in ejus vita testibus fudit. Unum te Deum esse novimus, unum te Regem intelligi-mus, appellamus adjutorem, nobis abs te victoria cecidit, ex te Adversarium fudimus, &c. Pro deliciis habuit, ut Sextus Aurelianus tradit, literarum studia colere, bonos artes fovere, legere, scribere, meditari: composuit Graece & Latini multos libros & Epistolas. E vita Nicomediae discessit Senex, aetatis suae Anno 66. & Imperii 32. a Christi vero incarnatione 339. Constantinopli sepultus, Octavio in Britanniis regnante. Ejus vitam in quatuor libris Eusebius Caesariensis Graeci scripsit, & Joannes Portesius Gallus in Latinum transtulit sermonem.{n}iv	273	s{n}FLavius Constantine, surnamed the great, king of the Britaines after his father, and Emperor of the Romanes, borne in Britanie of Helena his mother, and there created Emperour, made his native countrey partaker of his singular glory and renoume.{n}Having conquered and put to flight the Almanes, Spaniards, Frenchmen, and their Kings for a spectacle thro wen out to wild beasts, he held France it selfe as subject unto him : and having happily delivered the Italians from the tyrannic of Maxentius, he preferred three of his mothers uncles, all Britaines, namely, Leoline, Trahere, and Marius, whom in all his actions he had found more faithfull unto him then any others, to be of the order of the Romane Senators.{n}Eutropius reporteth, that he infinitely excelled in the vertues both of the mind and body also, and that having a pleasure in the practise of warre, and in the just commendation of Martial! prowesse, he never pitched his field but his successe in the battel was alwayes victorious. His mother Helena having instructed him in the faith of Christ, although hee made much of all men that were learned in the Greeke and Latine tongues, yet he yeelded speciali honor to those that spent their time in the studie of Divinitie, which he called Christian Philosophic: so that beginning at the furthest part of the Ocean sea, which then was taken to be his owne native soyle of Britaine, and trusting in the assistance of God, when the darkenes of superstition was most thicke, then hee undertooke a care of Religion, stirring up innumerable nations from the West as farre as India it selfe, to the hope of eternal! life.{n}Hee passed many nightes without sleepe, having his minde occupied in divine studies: and whensoever his laisure from greater affaires did permit him, his vacant times should be spent in the use of writing and other good exercises, assuring himselfe that his kingdomes and 274{n}Empire were to be continued and strengthened to him by prayer and holy workes: and oftentimes taking upon him as it were the person of a notable preacher of Christian discipline, he would teach his children and nobilitie, that godlinesse was to be preferred before riches, yea, before the Monarchic of all the world.{n}He overthrew the false gods of the heathens, and by many lawes often revived, he abrogated the worshipping of Images in all the countries of Greece, Egypt, Persia, Asia, and the whole Romane Empire, commanding Christ onely by his Edicts to be worshipped, the sacred Gospell to be preached, the Ministers thereof to be honoured and relieved, and the temples of Idoles every where to be destroyed.{n}Whithersoever he went hee caused the booke of the Gospell of Christ to be still caried before him, that thereby it might appeare to be a forme of faith to all men, and to appertaine generally to all nations.{n}He was the first that appointed an Imperiali Diademe, or Crowne to the Kings of Britaine.{n}He was most beneficiall to all Churches, bestowing upon them lands and fields, and upon the poore, sicke persons, widowes and orphanes, corne and wood, being as carefull of them as if hee had bene their natural father.{n}He used learned men most familiarly, as Eusebius, Lactantius and others, and they are witnesses that this was his usuall prayer to God. O Lord we know thee to be the onely God, we are sure that thou art the onely King, and we call upon thee as our helper : through thee we have gotten the victorie, and throwen the enemie.{n}Sextus Aurelius reporteth, that it was his greatest delight to imbrace the studie of learning, to favour good Arts, to read, write and meditate, and that he composed many bookes and Epistles both in the Greeke and Latine tongues.{n}He died at Nicomedia, being then 66. yeres of age, in the 32. yere of his reigne, and in the 339. yeere after 275{n}by thee we have over-{n}the Incarnation of Christ, and was buried at Constantinople, Octavius being then King of Britaine: whose life Eusebius bishop of Caesarea hath written in Greeke in 4. bookes, which afterwards were translated into the Latine tongue by John Portes a Frenchman.{n}