The travaile of Helena.{n}Elena Flavia Augusta serenissimi Coeli Britannici Regis Haeres, & unica filia, Magni Constantini Caesaris mater, incomparabili decore, fide, religione, bonitate, ac magnificentia pia, Eusebio etiam teste, per totum resplenduit orbem : Inter omnes aetatis suae fceminas, nulla invenie-{n}batur ea in liberalibus artibus doctior, nulla in instrumentis musicis peritior, aut in linguis nationum copiosior. Innatam habebat ingenii claritudinem, oris facundiam, ac morum ornatissimam compositionem : Hebraici, Graeci, & Latine erudita. Caruerat pater alia sobole (inquit Virumnius) quae Regni solio potiretur. Illam propterea his instrui fecit per optimos praeceptores, ut ed commodius Regni tractaret negotia. Unde ob incredibilem ejus pulchritudinem, atque alias eximias animi & corporis dotes, Constantius Chlorus Caesar illam duxit in uxorem, 270{n}. . . . c- 274‘ atque ex ei filium in Britanni^ genuit Constantinum Magnum. Sed eo tandem Eboraci defuncto, cum Anna illa Evangelic^, in sancti viduitate perduravit ad ultimum vitae diem, tota Christianae religioni dedita. Sunt enim  authores, qui narrent per istam, cessante persecutione, pacem Ecclesiis datam : Ad tantam coelestis Philosophiae cognitionem eam ferunt post agnitum Evangelium pervenisse, ut olim multos ediderit libros, & carmina quaedam Graeca, quae hucusque & Pontico superesse perhibentur. Visionibus admonita Hierosolymam petiit, & omnia salvatoris loca perlustravit. Romae tandem octogenaria fceliciter in Christo quievit. 15. Kalendas Septembris, filio adhuc superstite, anno salutis humanae 337. Regnante apud Britannos Octavio. Hujus corpus non minimi nunc cura Veneriis servatur.{n}The same in English.{n}HElena Flavia Augusta, the heire and onely daughter of Coelus sometime the most excellent king of Britaine, the mother of the Emperour Constantine the great, by reason of her singular beautie, faith, religion, goodnesse and godly Majestie (according to the testi-monie of Eusebius) was famous in all the world. Amongst all the women of her time, there was none either in the liberali arts more learned, or in instruments of musike more skilfull, or in the divers languages of nations more abundant then herselfe. She had a natural quicknesse or excellency of wit, eloquence of speech, and a most notable grace in all her behaviour. She was seene in the Hebrew, Greeke and Latine tongues.{n}Her father (as Virumnius reporteth) had no other childe to succeed in the kingdome after him but her, and therefore caused her to be instructed in these things by the best teachers, that thereby she might the better in time governe the Realme : so that by reason of her passing beautie, and other her excellent giftes of body and minde, Constantius Chlorus the Emperour married her, and had by her a sonne called Constantine the 271{n}great, while hee remained in Britaine. Who at length deceasing at Yorke, this Helena (no otherwise then Anna of whom mention is made in the new Testament) continued a vertuous and holy widow to the end of her life.{n}There are some writers which doe affirme, that persecution ceased, and peace was granted to the Christian Churches by her good meanes.{n}After the light and knowledge of the Gospel, she grewe so skilfull in divinitie, that shee wrote and composed divers bookes, and certaine Greeke verses also, which (as Ponticus reporteth) are yet extant. Being warned by some visions she went to Jerusalem, and visited all the places there, which Christ had frequented. She lived to the age of fourescore yeeres, and then died at Rome the 15 day of August, in the yeere of our redemption 337. Octavius being then king of Britaine, and her sonne Constantine the Emperour then also living, and her body is to this day very carefully preserved at Venice.{n}