[II. i. 4..] The life and travailes of Pelagius borne in Wales.{n}Elagius Cambrius ex ea Britanniae parte oriundus, famati illius Collegii Ban-nochorensis a Cestria non procul, praepositus erat, in quo Christianorum philosophorum duo millia ac centum, ad plebis in Christo commoditatem militabant, manuum suarum laboribus, juxta{n}Pauli doctrinam victitantes. Post quam plures exhibitos, pro Christiana Repub. labores, vir eruditione insignis, & tum Graece, tum Latine peritus, ut Tertullianus alter, quorundam Clericorum lacessitus injuriis, gravatim tulit, ac tandem a fide defecit.{n}Peragratis igitur deinceps Galliis, in Aegyptum, & Syriam aliasque orientis Regiones demum pervenit. Ubi ex earum partium Monacho praesul ordinatus, sui nominis haeresim fabricabat : asserens hominem sine peccato nasci, ac solo voluntatis imperio sine gratia salvari posse, ut ita nefarius baptismum ac fidem tolleret. Cum his & consimilibus impostricis doctrinae foecibus in patriam suam reversus, omnem illam Regionem, Juliano & Caelestino Pseudoepiscopis fautoribus, conspurcabat. Verum ante lapsum suum studia tractabat honestissima, ut post Gennadium, Bedam, & Honorium alii ferunt authores, composuitque multos libros ad Christianam utilitatem. At postquam est Hereticus publicatus, multo plures edidit haeresi succurrentes, & ex diametro cum vera pietate pugnantes, unde erat a suis Britannis in exilium pulsus, ut in Epistola ad Martinum 5. Valdenus habet. Claruit anno post Christum incarnatum, 390. sub Maximo Britannorum Rege.{n}276{n}PElagius, borne in that part of Britaine which is called Wales, was head or governour of the famous Col-ledge of Bangor, not farre from Chester, wherein lived a Societie of 2100. Divines, or Students of Christian philosophic, applying themselves to the profite of the Christian people, and living by the labours of their owne handes, according to Pauls doctrine. He was a man excellently learned, and skilfull both in the Greeke and Latine tongues, and as it were another Tertullian, after his long and great travailes for the good of the Christian common wealth, seeing himselfe abused, and injuriously dealt withall by some of the Clergie of that time, he tooke the matter so grievously, that at the last he relapsed from the faith.{n}Whereupon he left Wales, and went into France, and having gone through France, hee went therehence into Egypt, Syria, & other Countries of the East, and being made Priest by a certaine Monke of those partes, he there hatched his heresie, which according to his name was called the heresie of the Pelagians: which was, that man was borne without sinne, and might be saved by the power of his owne will without grace, that so the miserable man might take away faith and baptisme. With this and the like dregges of false doctrine, hee returned againe into Wales, and there by the meanes of the two false Prelates Julian and Celestine, who favoured his heresie, hee infected the whole Countrey with it. But before his fall and Apostasie from the faith, he exercised himselfe in the best studies, as Gennadius, Beda, Honorius, and other authors doe report of him, and wrote many bookes serving not a litle to Christian utilitie: but being once fallen into his heresie, hee wrote many more erroneous bookes, then he did before honest, and sincere: whereupon, at the last his owne Countreymen banished him, as Walden testifieth in his Epistle to Pope Martine the fift. He flourished in{n}277{n}the yere after the Incarnation, 390. Maximus being then King of Britaine.{n}