The travailes of Robert Curson.{n}Obertus Curson ex nobili quodam An-glorum ortus genere, disciplinis tum prophanis, tum sacris studiosus incubuit, idque (quantum ex conjecturis colligo) in celebratissima Oxonii Academia. Prae-stantissimis illic institutoribus usus, ex summa circa ingenuas artes industria,{n}& assiduo literarum labore, famam sibi inter suos celeberrimam comparavit. Ampliora deinde meditatus Parisiorum Lutetiam, atque Romam ipsam petiit, illic Theologus Doctor, hic vero Cardinalis effectus. Unde uterque Matthaeus Parisius, ac Westmonasterius, hoc de ipso testimonium adferunt: hic libro 2. ille 8. suorum Chronicorum. Anno Domini. 1218 (inquiunt) in cap-347{n}tione Damiatae jEgypti urbis, sub Joanne Brenno Hierosolymorum rege, fuit cum Pelagio Albaneiisi Magister Robertus de Curson, Anglus, Clericus celeberrimus, genere nobilis, ac Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalis, &c. [II. i. 32.] Bostonus Buriensis in suo Catalogo Cursonum aliquos libros composuisse narrat. Claruit anno superius numerato per praedictos testes in Anglia regnante Henrico tertio Joannis regis filio: fuitque hic diebus Honorii tertii Romani pontificis in Angliam, Bostono teste, legatus.{n}The same in English.{n}RObert Curson descended of a noble family of England, used great diligence aswell in prophane as in divine studies in the famous University of Oxford (as I conjecture.) He had there the best scholemasters that were to be gotten, and was most industrious in the arts and continual exercises of learning: by meanes whereof he grew to be of great renowne where he lived. Afterward thinking of greater matters he went to Paris, and thence to Rome it selfe, and at Paris he proceeded doctor of Divinity, at Rome he was made cardinali: whereupon both Matthew Paris & Matthew of Westminster produce this testimony of him, the one in his second booke, the other in his eight booke of Chronicles. In the yere of our Lord (say they) 1218, at the taking of Damiata a city of Egypt under John Brenne king of Jerusalem, M. Robert Curson an English man, a most famous clearke of noble parentage, and cardinali of the church of Rome, was there with Pelagius Albanensis, &c. Boston of Burie in SufFolke in his catalogue reporteth, that he wrote divers books. He flourished in the yeere aforesayd by the witnesses aforesayd. Henry the third sonne of king John being then king of England: and by the further testimony of Boston, this Curson was legate into England in the dayes of Honorious the third, bishop of Rome.{n}