The travailes of Hubert Walter bishop of Sarisburie.{n}Ubertus Walterus Sarisburiensis copus, vir probus, ingenioque ac{n}pietate{n}clarus, inter praecipuos unus eorum erat, qui post Richardum regem expugnandorum Saracenorum gratia in Syriam proficiscebantur. Cum ex Palaestina rediens, audiret in Sicilia, quod idem Richardus in inimicorum manus incidisset, omisso itinere incoepto, ad eum cursim divertebat: Quem & ille statim in Angliam misit, ut illic regii Senatus authoritate, indicto pro ejus redemptione tributo pecuniam colligeret, quod & industrius fecit ac regem liberavit. Inde Cantuario-rum Archiepiscopus factus, post ejus mortem Joanni illius fratri ac successori paria fidelitatis officia praestitit. Longa enim oratione toti Anglorum nationi persuasit, quod vir providus, praestans, fortis, genere nobilissimus, & imperio dignissimus esset: quo salutatus a populo fuit, atque in regem coronatus. Composuit quaedam opuscula, & ex immenso animi dolore demum obiisse fertur, Anno salutis humanae 1205. cum sedisset annos 11. Menses octo, & dies sex: quum vidisset ex intestinis odiis, omnia in transmarinis regionibus pessum ire, regnante Joanne.{n}The same in English.{n}HUbert Walter bishop of Sarisburie, a vertuous man, and famous for his good wit and piety, was one of the chiefest of them that followed king Richard into Syria going against the Saracens. As he returned from 346{n}Palaestina and came in his journey into Sicilia, he there heard of the ill fortune of the king being fallen into his enemies handes, and thereupon leaving his journey homewards, he went presently and in all haste to the place where the king was captived, whom the king immediatly upon his comming sent into England, that by the authority of the councell, a tribute might be collected for his redemption: which this Hubert performed with great diligence, and delivered the king. After this he was made Archbishop of Canterburie, and after the death of king Richard he shewed the like dueties of fidelitie and trust to his brother John that succeeded him. For by a long oration he perswaded the whole nation of the English men, that Ke was a very circumspect man, vertuous, valiant, borne of noble parentage, and most woorthy of the crowne. Whereupon he was so received of all the people and crowned king. He wrote certaine books, and died at the last with very great griefe of minde, in the yeere 1205, having beene archbishop the space of 11 yeres 8 moneths and sixe dayes, by reason of the civil discords abroad, whereby all things went topsie turvy, and in the reigne of king John.{n}