A note drawen out of a very ancient booke remaining in the hands of the right worshipfull M. Thomas Tilney Esquire, touching Sir Frederike Tilney his ancestor, knighted at Aeon in the Holy land for his valour, by K. Richard the first, as foloweth.{n}Ertinuit iste liber prius Frederico Tilney de Boston, in comitatu Lincolniae militi facto apud Aeon in terra Judaeae anno regis Richardi primi tertio. Vir erat iste magnae staturae & potens in corpore: qui cum patribus suis dormit apud Tirring-ton juxta villam sui nominis Tilney in{n}Mershland. Cujus altitudo in salva custodia permanet ibidem usque in hunc diem. Et post ejus obitum sex-decem militibus ejus nominis Tilney haereditas illa successive obvenit, quorum unus post alium semper habitabat apud Boston praedictum: dum fratris senioris haereditas haeredi general devoluta est, quae nupta est Johanni duci Norfolciae. Eorum miles ultimus fuit Philippus Tilney nuper de Shelleigh in Comitatu Suffolciae, pater & genitor Thomae Tilney de Hadleigh in Comitatu praedicto Armigeri, cui modo attinet iste liber. Anno aetatis suae 64. Anno Domini 1556.{n}The same in English.{n}THis booke pertained in times past unto Sir Frederick Tilney of Boston in the Countie of Lincolne, who was knighted at Aeon in the land of Jurie, in the third yeere of the reigne of king Richard the first. This knight was of a tall stature, and strong of body, who resteth interred with his forefathers at Tirrington, neere unto a towne in Marshland called by his owne name Tilney. The just height of this knight is there kept in safe custody untill this very day. Also, after this mans decease, the inheritance of his landes fell successively unto 342{n}sixteene sundry knights called all by the name of Tilney, who dwelt alwayes, one after another, at the towne of Boston aforesayd, untill such time as the possessions of the elder brother fell unto an heire general, which was maried unto John duke of Northfolke. The last knight of that name was sir Philip Tilney late of Shelleigh in the Countie of Suffolke, predecessor and father unto Thomas Tilney of Hadleigh in the Countie aforesayd Esquire, unto whom the sayd booke of late appertained. In the yeere of his age 64. and in the yeere of our Lord, 1556.{n}