The firing and sinking of the stout and warre-like Carack called Las Cinque Llaguas, or, The five Wounds, by three tall Ships set foorth at the charges of the right honorable the Erle of Cumberland and his friends : Written by the discreet and valiant captaine M. Nicholas Downton.{n}Besides these 3 ships there was a pinnas called the Violet, or the Why not I..{n}N the latter ende of the yeere i£93- the right honourable Erle of Cumberland, at his owne charges and his friends, prepared 3 ships all at equall rate, and either of them had like quantitie of victuals, and like numbers of men, there being embarked in all 3 ships 420 men{n}of al sorts. The Roial Exchange went as Admirall, wherein M. George Cave was captaine. The May-flower Viceadmirall under the conduct of William Anthonie: and the Sampson, the charge whereof it pleased his honour to commit unto me Nicholas Dounton. Our directions were sent us to Plimmouth, and we were to open them at sea.{n}The sixt of Aprill 1594 we set sayle in the sound of Plimmouth, directing our course toward the coast of Spaine.{n}The 24 of the sayd moneth at the Admirals direction wee divided our selves East and West from ech other, being then in the heigth of 43 degrees, with commaunde-ment at night to come together againe.{n}118{n}THE FIRING OF ‘THE FIVE WOUNDS’ a.d.{n}The 27 day in the morning we descried the Mayflower and the litle Pinnasse with a Prise that they had taken, being of Viana in Portugall, and bound for Angola in Africa. This Barke was of 28 tunnes, having some 17 persons in the same. There were in her some 12 Commodities Buts of Galicia wine, whereof we tooke into every shippe fi* fir Angola. a like part, with some Ruske in chests and barrels, with 5 buts of blew course cloth, and certaine course linnen-cloth for Negros shirts, which goods were divided among our fleet.{n}The 4 of May we had sight of our Pinnasse, and the Admirals Shallop which had taken three Portugall Caravels, whereof they had sent two away and kept the third.{n}The second of June we had sight of S. Michael. The third day in the morning wee sent our small pinnasse, which was of some 24 tunnes, with the small Caravell which we had taken at the Burlings to range the road of all the Hands, to see if they could get any thing in the same: appointing them to meet usW.S.W. 12 leagues from Faiall. Their going from us was to no purpose. They missed comming to us when we appointed, as also we missed them, when we had great cause to have used them.{n}The 13 of June we met with a mightie Carack of the East Indies, called Las cinque Llagas, or The five wounds. The May-flower was in fight with her before night. I, in the Sampson, fetched her up in the evening, and as I commanded to give her the broad side, as we terme it, while I stood very heedfully prying to discover her strength: and where I might give counsel to boord her in the night when the Admirall came up to us, and as I remember at the very first shot she discharged at us, I was shot in a litle above the belly, whereby I was made unserviceable for a good while after, without touching any other for that night. Yet by meanes of an honest truehearted man which I had with me, one captaine Grant, nothing was neglected: untill midnight when{n}119{n}the Admirall came up, the May-flower, and the Sampson never left by turnes to ply her with their great ordinance; but then captai ne Cave wished us to stay till morning, at what time each one of us should give her three bouts with our great ordinance, & so should clap her a boord: but indeed it was long lingered in the morning untill io of the clocke before wee attempted to boord her. The Admirall laid her a boord in the mid ship: the May-flower comming up in the quarter, as it should seeme, to lie at the sterne of the Admirall on the larboord side. The captaine of the sayd May-flower was slaine at the first comming up: whereby the ship fell to [II. ii. 200.] the sterne of the out-licar of the Carack, which (being a piece of timber) so wounded her foresaile, that they sayd they could come no more to fight, I am sure they did not, but kept aloofe from us. The Sampson went aboord on the bow, but having not rome enough, our quarter lay on the Exchanges bow, and our bowe on the Caracks bowe. The Exchange also at the first comming had her captaine M. Cave shot into both the legs, the one whereof he never recovered, so he for that present was not able to doe his office, and in his absence he had not any that would undertake to lead out his company to enter upon the enemie. My friend captaine Grant did lead my men on the Caracks side, which being not manfully backed by the Exchanges men, his forces being smal, made the enemie bolder then he would have bene, whereby I had sixe men presently slaine and many more hurt, which made them that remained unhurt to returne aboord, and would never more give the assault. I say not but some of the Exchanges men did very well, and many more (no doubt) would have done the like, if there had bene any principali man to have put them forward, and to have brought all the company to the fight, and not to have run into corners themselves. But 1 must needs say, that their ship was as well provided for defence, as any that I have seene. And the Portugals peradventure encouraged by our slacke working, plaied{n}120{n}the men and had Barricados made, where they might stand without any danger of our shot. They plied us also very much with fire, so that most of our men were burnt in some place or other: & while our men were putting out of the fire, they would ever be plying them with small shot or darts. This unusuall casting of fire did much dismay many of our men and made them draw backe as they did. When we had not men to enter, we plied our great ordinance much at them as high up as they might be mounted, for otherwise we did them litle harme, and by shooting a piece out of our forecastle being close by her, we fired a mat on her beak-head, which more and more kindled, and ran from thence to the mat on the bow-sprit, and from the mat up to the wood of the bow-sprit, and thence to the top-saile yard, which fire made the Portugals abaft in the ship to stagger, and to make shew of parle. But they that had the charge before encouraged them, making shew, that it might easily be put out, and that it was nothing. Whereupon againe they stood stifly to their defence. Anone the fire grew so strong, that I saw it beyond all helpe, although she had bene already yeelded to us. Then we desired to be off from her, but had litle hope to obtaine our desire; neverthelesse we plied water very much to keep our ship well. In deed I made litle other reckoning for the ship, my selfe, and divers hurt men, then to have ended there with the Carack, but most of our people might have saved themselves in boats. And when my care was most, by Gods providence onely, by the burning asunder of our spritsaile-yard with ropes and saile, and the ropes about the spritsaile-yard of the Carack, whereby we were fast intangled, we fell apart, with burning of some of our sailes which we had then on boord. The Exchange also being farther from the fire, afterward was more easily cleared, and fell off from abaft. And as soone as God had put us out of danger, the fire got into the fore-castle, where, I thinke, was store of Benjamin, and such other like combustible matter, for{n}121{n}it flamed and ran over all the Carack at an instant in a maner. The Portugal s lept over-boord in great numbers. Then sent I captaine Grant with the boat, with leave to use his owne discretion in saving of them. So he brought me aboord two gentlemen, the one an*old man called Nuno Velio Pereira, which (as appeareth by the 4 chapter in the first booke of the woorthy history of Huighen de Linschoten) was governour of Mozambique and Cefala, in the yeere 1582. and since that time had bene likewise a governour in a place of importance in the East Indies. And the shippe wherein he was comming home was cast away a litle to the East of the Cape of Buona Speranza, and from thence he travelled over-land to Mozambique, and came as a passenger in this Carack. The other was called Bras Carrero, and was captaine of a Carack which was cast away neere Mozambique, and came likewise in this ship for a passenger. Also three men of the inferior sort we saved in our boat, onely these two we clothed and brought into England. The rest which were taken up by the other ship boats, we set all on shore in the He of Flores, except some two or three Negros, whereof one was borne in Mozambique, and another in the East Indies. This fight was open ofF the Sound betweene Faial and Pico 6 leagues to the Southward. The people which we saved told us that the cause why they would not yeeld, was, because this Carack was for the king, and that she had all the goods belonging to the king in the countrey for that yeere in her, and that the captaine of her was in favour with the king, and at his returne into the Indies should have bene Viceroy there. And withall this ship was nothing at all pestered neither within boord nor without, and was more like a ship of warre then otherwise: moreover, she had the ordinance of a Carak that was cast away at Mozambique, and the company of her, together with the company of another Carack that was cast away a litle to the Eastwards of the Cape of Buona Speranza. Yet through sicknesse which they caught at Angola, where they watered, they{n}122{n}THE FIRING OF ‘THE FIVE WOUNDS’ a.d.{n}1594-say, they had not now above 150 white men, but Negros{n}a great many. They likewise affirmed that they had [II. ii. 201.] three noblemen and three ladies in her, but we found them to differ in most of their talke. All this day and all the night she burned, but the next morning her poulder which was lowest being 60 barrels blew her abroad, so that most of the ship did swim in parts above the water. Some of them say, that she was bigger then the Madre de Dios, and some, that she was lesse: but she was much undermasted, and undersailed, yet she went well for a ship that was so foule. The shot which wee made at her in great Ordinance before we layde her aboord might be at seven bouts which we had, and sixe or 7 shot at a bout, one with another, some 49 shot: the time we lay aboord might be two houres. The shot which we discharged aboord the Carack might be some twentie Sacars. And thus much may suffice concerning our daungerous conflict with that unfortunate Carack.{n}The last of June after long traversing of the seas we had sight of another mightie Carack which diverse of our company at the first tooke to be the great S. Philip the Admirall of Spaine, but the next day being the first of July fetching her up we perceived her indeede to be a Carack, which after some few shot bestowed upon her we summoned to yeeld; but they standing stoutly to their defence utterly refused the same. Wherefore seeing no good could be done without boording her I consulted what course we should take in the boording. But by reason that wee which were the chiefe captaines were partly slaine and partly wounded in the former conflict, and because of the murmuring of some disordered and cowardly companions, our valiant and resolute determinations were crossed: and to conclude a long discourse in few wordes, the Carack escaped our hands. After this attending abput Corvo & Flores for some West Indian purchase, and being disappointed of our expectation, and victuals growing short, we returned for England, where I arrived at Portesmouth the 28 of August.{n}