Ornatissimo viro, Magistro Richardo Hakluyto Oxonii in Collegio sedis Christi, Artium & Philosophise Magistro, amico, & fratri suo.{n}. Non statueram ad te scribere, cum in mentem veniret promissum literarum tuarum. Putabas te superiore jam Junio nos subsecuturum. Itaque de meo statu ex doctore Humfredo certiorem te fieri jusseram. Verum sic tibi non esset satisfactum. Itaque scribam ad te{n}iisdem fere verbis, quia nova meditari & wvow/M^eiv mihi hoc tempore non vacat. Undecimo Junii ex Anglia revera tandem & serio solvimus, portu & terra apud Plemuthum simul relictis. Classis quinque navibus constabat: maxima, quam* frater Amiralii accommodaverat, ignotum quo consilio, statim tertio die a nobis se subduxit. Reliqui perpetud conjunctim navigavimus ad 23. Julii, quo tempore magnis nebulis intercepto aspectu alii aliam viam tenuimus: nobis seorsim prima terra apparuit ad Calendas Augusti, ad gradum circiter 50. cum ultri 41. paucis ante diebus descendissemus spe Australium ventorum, qui tamen nobis suo tempore nunquam spiravere. Insula est ea, quam vestri Penguin vocant, ab avium ejusdem nominis multitudine. Nos tamen nec aves vidimus, nec insulam accessimus, ventis alio vocantibus. Caeteriim convenimus omnes in eundem locum paulo ante portum in quem communi consilio omnibus veniendum erat, idque intra duas horas, magna Dei benignitate & nostro gaudio. Locus situs est in Newfoundlandia, inter 47. & 48. gradum, Divum Joan-nem vocant. Ipse Admiralius propter multitudinem hominum & angustiam navis pauld afflictiorem comitatum habuit, & jam duos dysentericis doloribus amisit: de caeteris bona spes est. Ex nostris (nam ego me Mauricio Browno vere generoso juveni me conjunxeram) duo etiam casu quodam submersi sunt. Cseteri salvi & longe 78{n}firmiores. Ego nunquam sanior. In hunc locum tertio Augusti appulimus: quinto autem ipse Admiralius has regiones in suam & regni Angliae possessionem potestatemque vendicavit, latis quibusdam legibus de religione & obsequio Reginae Angliae. Reficimur hoc tempore paulo hilarius & lautius. Certe enim & qualibus ventis usi simus, & quam fessi esse potuerimus tam longi temporis ratio docuerit, proinde nihil nobis deerit. Nam extra Anglos, 20 circiter naves Lusitanicas & Hispanicas nacti in hoc loco sumus: eae nobis impares non patientur nos esurire. Angli etsi satis firmi, & a nobis tuti, authoritate regii diplomatis omni obsequio & humanitate prosequuntur. Nunc narrandi erant mores, regiones, & populi. Caeterum quid narrem mi Hakluyte, quando praeter solitudinem nihil video ? Piscium inexhausta copia: inde huc commeantibus magnus quaestus. Vix hamus fundum attigit, illico insigni aliquo onustus est.{n}Terra universa * montana & sylvestris: arbores ut pluri- 2» the south mum pinus: eae partim consenuere, partim nunc adolescunt: magna pars vetustate collapsa, & aspectum J°t^re is jt’re terrae, & iter euntium ita impedit, ut nusquam progredi ofplaine and liceat. Herbae omnes procerae: sed raro a nostris champion diversae. Natura videtur velle niti etiam ad generandum	as{n}frumentum. Inveni enim gramina, & spicas in similitu- Qiarhe found, dinem secales: & facile cultura & satione in usum humanum assuefieri posse videntur. Rubi in sylvis vel potius fraga arborescentia magna suavitate. Ursi circa tuguria nonnunquam apparent, & conficiuntur: sed albi sunt, ut mihi ex pellibus conjicere licuit, & minores quam nostri. Populus an ullus sit in hac regione incertum est: Nec ullum vidi qui testari posset. Et quis quaeso posset, cum ad longum progredi non liceat ?{n}Nec minus ignotum est an aliquid metalli sub sit montibus. Causa eadem est, etsi aspectus eorum mineras latentes prae se ferat. Nos Admiralio authores fuimus sylvas incendere, quo ad inspiciendam regionem spacium pateret: nec displicebat illi consilium, si non magnum incommodum allaturum videretur. Confirmatum est{n}enim ab idoneis hominibus, cum casu quopiam in alia nescio qua statione id accidisset, septennium totum pisces The great non comparuisse, ex acerbata maris unda ex terebynthina, heateofthe conflagrantibus arboribus per rivulos defluebat. summer. Coelum hoc anni tempore ita fervidum est, ut msi pisces, qui arefiunt ad solem, assidui invertantur, ab adustione defendi non possint. Hyeme quam frigidum sit, magnae moles glaciei in medio mari nos docuere. Relatum est a comitibus mense Maio sexdecim totos dies interdum se inter tantam glaciem haesisse, ut 60. orgyas altae essent insulae: quarum latera soli apposita cum liquescerent, liberatione quadam universam molem ita inversam, ut quod ante pronum erat, supinum eva- deret, magno praesentium discrimine, ut consentaneum est. Aer in terra mediocriter clarus est: ad orientem supra mare perpetuae nebulae: Et in ipso mari circa Bancum (sic vocant locum ubi quadraginta leucis a terra fundus attingitur, & pisces capi incipiunt) nullus ferme dies absque pluvia. Expeditis nostris necessitatibus in hoc loco, in Austrum (Deo juvante) progrediemur, tanto indies majori spe, qud plura de iis quas petimus regionibus commemorantur. Haec de nostris. Cupio de vobis scire: sed metuo ne incassum. Imprimis autem quomodo Untonus meus absentiam meam ferat, praeter modum intelligere velim: Habebit nostrum obsequium & officium paratum, quandiu vixerimus. Revera autem spero, hanc nostram peregrinationem ipsius instituto usui futuram. Nunc restat, ut me tuum putes, & quidem ita tuum, ut neminem magis. Juvet dei filius labores nostros eatenus, ut tu quoque participare possis. Vale amicissime, suavissime, ornatissime Hakluyte, & nos ama. In Newfundlandia apud portum Sancti Johannis 6. Augusti 1583.{n}STEPHANUS PARMENIUS.{n}Budeius, tuus.{n}To the worshipfull, Master Richard Hakluit at Oxford in Christchurch Master of Arts, and Philosophic, his friend and brother.{n}I Had not purposed to write unto you, when the promise of your letters came to my mind: You thought in June last to have followed us your selfe, and therefore I had left order that you should be advertised of my state, by Master Doctor Humfrey: but so you would not be satisfied: I will write therefore to you almost in the same words, because I have no leasure at this time, to meditate new matters, and to vary or multiply words.{n}The ii. of June we set saile at length from England in good earnest, and departed, leaving the haven and land behind us at Plimmouth: our Fleete consisted of five shippes: the greatest, which the Admirals brother had lent us, withdrew her selfe from us the third day, wee know not upon what occasion: with the rest we sailed still together till the 23. of July: at which time our view of one another being intercepted by the great mists, some of us sailed one way, and some another: to us alone the first land appeared, the first of August, about the latitude of 50. degrees, when as before we had descended beyond 41. degrees in hope of some Southerly windes, which notwithstanding never blew to us at any fit time.	v{n}It is an Island which your men call Penguin, because of the multitude of birdes of the same name. Yet wee neither sawe any birds, nor drew neere to the land, the winds serving for our course directed to another place, but wee mette altogether at that place a little before the Haven, whereunto by common Councell we had determined to come, and that within the space of two houres by the great goodnesse of God, and to our great joy. The place is situate in Newfound land, betweene 47. and{n}vni	81	F{n}A.D.{n}.1583.{n}48. degrees, called by the name of Saint Johns: the Admirall himselfe by reason of the multitude of the men, and the smalnesse of his ship, had his company somewhat sickly, and had already lost two of the same company, which died of the Flixe: of the rest we conceive good hope. Of our company (for I joyned my selfe with Maurice Browne, a very proper Gentleman) two persons by a mischance were drowned, the rest are in safetie, and strong, and for mine owne part I was never more healthy. Wee arrived at this place the third of August: and the fift the Admirall tooke possession of the Countrey, for himselfe and the kingdome of England: having made and published certaine Lawes, concerning religion, and obedience to the Queene of England: at this time our fare is somewhat better, and daintier, then it was before: for in good sooth, the experience of so long time hath taught us what contrary winds wee have found, and what great travell wee may endure hereafter: and therefore wee will take such order, that wee will want nothing: for we found in this place about twenty Portugall and Spanish shippes, besides the shippes of the English: which being not able to match us, suffer us not to bee hunger starved: the English although they were of themselves strong ynough, and safe from our force, yet seeing our authoritie, by the Queenes letters patents, they shewed us all maner of duety and humanitie.{n}The maner of this Countrey and people remaine now to be spoken of. But what shall I say, my good Hakluyt, when I see nothing but a very wildernesse? Of fish here is incredible abundance, whereby great gaine growes to them, that travell to these parts: the hooke is no sooner throwne out, but it is eftsoones drawne up with some goodly fish: the whole land is full of hilles  and woods. The trees for the most part are Pynes and of them some are very olde, and some yong: a great part of them being fallen by reason of their age, doth so hinder the sight of the land, and stoppe the way of those that seeke to travell, that they can goe no whither: all the 82{n}grasse here is long, and tall, and little differeth from ours. It seemeth also that the nature of this soyle is fit for corne: for I found certaine blades and eares in a manner bearded, so that it appeareth that by manuring and sowing, they may easily be framed for the use of man: here are in the woodes bush berries, or rather straw berries growing up like trees, of great sweetnesse. Beares also appeare about the fishers stages of the Countrey, and are sometimes killed, but they seeme to bee white, as I conjectured by their skinnes, and somewhat lesse then ours. Whether there bee any people in the Countrey I knowe not, neither have I seene any to witnesse it. And to say trueth, who can, when as it is not possible to passe any whither ? In like sort it is unknowne, whither any mettals lye under the hilles: the cause is all one, although the very colour and hue of the hilles seeme to have some Mynes in them: we mooved the Admirall to set the woods a fire, that so wee might have space, and entrance to take view of the Countrey, which motion did nothing displease him, were it not for feare of great inconvenience that might thereof insue: for it was reported and confirmed by very credible persons, that when the like happened by chance in another Port, the fish never came to the place about it, for the space of 7. whole yeeres after, by reason of the waters made bitter by the Turpentine, and Rosen of the trees, which ranne into the rivers upon the firing of them. The weather is so hote this time of the yeere, that except the very fish, which is layd out to be dryed by the sunne, be every day turned, it cannot possibly bee preserved from burning: but how cold it is in the winter, the great heapes, and mountaines of yce, in the middest of the Sea have taught us: some of our company report, that in May, they were sometimes kept in, with such huge yce, for 16. whole dayes together, as that the Islands thereof were threescore fathoms thicke, the sides wherof which were toward the Sunne, when they were melted, the whole masse or heape was so inverted and turned in maner of balancing, that that part which{n}was before downeward rose upward, to the great perill of those that are neere them, as by reason wee may gather. The ayre upon land is indifferent cleare, but at Sea towards the East there is nothing els but perpetuali mists, and in the Sea it selfe, about the Banke (for so they call the place where they find ground fourty leagues distant from the shore, and where they beginne to fish) there is no day without raine. When we have served, and supplied our necessitie in this place, we purpose by the helpe of God to passe towards the South, with so much the more hope every day, by how much the greater the things are, that are reported of those Countreys, which we go to discover. Thus much touching our estate.{n}Now I desire to know somewhat concerning you, but I feare in vaine, but specially I desire out of measure to know how my Patrone master Henry Umpton doth take my absence: my obedience, and duetie shall alwayes bee ready toward him as long as I live: but in deede I hope, that this journey of ours shalbe profitable to his intentions. It remaineth that you thinke me to be still yours, and so yours as no mans more. The sonne of God blesse all our labors, so farre, as that you your selfe may be partaker of our blessing. Adieu, my most friendly, most sweete, most vertuous Hakluyt: In Newfound land, at Saint Johns Port, the 6. of August. 1583.{n}STEVEN PARMENIUS of{n}Buda, yours.{n}