The description of the aforesaid River and Haven.{n}THe sayd River is small, not past 50. pases broad, and shippes drawing three fathoms water may enter in at a full sea: and at a low water there is nothing but a chanell of a foote deepe or thereabout. On both sides of the said River there are very good and faire grounds, full of as faire and mightie trees as any be in the world, and divers sorts, which are above tenne fathoms higher then Trees above ■$. the rest, and there is one kind of tree above three fathoms fathms abQUt-{n}about, which they in the Countrey call Hanneda, which hath the most excellent vertue of all the trees of the world, whereof I will make mention hereafter. Moreover there are great store of Okes the most excellent that ever I saw in my life, which were so laden with Mast that they cracked againe: besides this there are fairer Arables, Cedars, Beeches, and other trees, then grow in France: and hard unto this wood on the South side the ground is all covered with Vines, which we found laden with grapes as blacke as Mulberies, but they be not so kind as those of France because the Vines bee not tilled, and because they grow of their owne accord. Moreover there are many white Thornes, which beare leaves as bigge as oken leaves, and fruit like unto Medlers. To bee short, it is as good a Countrey to plow and mannure as a man should find or desire. We sowed seedes here of our Countrey, as Cabages, Naveaus, Lettises and others, which grew and sprong up out of the ground in eight dayes. The mouth of the river is toward the South, and it windeth Northward like unto a snake: and at the mouth of it toward the East there is a high and steepe cliffe, where we made a way in maner of a payre of staires, and aloft we made a Fort to keepe the nether Fort and the ships, and all things that might passe aswell by the great as by this small river. Moreover a man may behold a great extension of ground apt for tillage, straite and handsome and somewhat enclin-ing toward the South, as easie to be brought to tillage as 267{n}Hanneda the most excellent tree of the world.{n}Abundance of Vines full of grapes.{n}Fruit like Medlers.{n}Seed sprong out of the ground within 8 dayes.{n}A greatplaine of very good arable ground.{n}I would desire, and very well replenished with faire Okes and other trees of great beauty, no thicker then the Forrests of France. Here wee set twenty men to worke, which in one day had laboured about an acre and an halfe of the said ground, and sowed it part with Naveaus or small Turneps, which at the ende of eight dayes, as I said before, sprang out of the earth. And upon that high cliffe wee found a faire fountaine very neere the sayd Fort: adjoyning whereunto we found good store of Diamants of stones, which we esteemed to be Diamants. On the Canada. other side of the said mountaine and at the foote thereof, which is towards the great River is all along a goodly An ynn	Myne of the best yron in the world, and it reacheth even{n}Mtne'	hard unto our Fort, and the sand which we tread on is{n}perfect refined Myne, ready to be put into the fornace. Leaves of fine And on the waters side we found certaine leaves of fine ^^asthic e jj as ^hiekg as a mans nayle. And Westward of the naile found in said River there are, as hath bene sayd, many faire trees: Canada. and toward the water a goodly Medow full of as faire and goodly grasse as ever I sawe in any Medowe in France: and betweene the sayd Medow and the Wood are great store of Vines: and beyond the said Vines the land Excellent and groweth full of Hempe which groweth of it selfe, which strong hempe. -s as gOOC[ as pOSSibly may be seene, and as strong. And at the ende of the sayd Medow within an hundred pases there is a rising ground, which is of a kind of slate stone blacke and thicke, wherein are veines of mynerall matter, which shewe like gold and silver: and throughout all that stone there are great graines of the sayd Myne. And in some places we have found stones like Diamants, the most faire, pollished and excellently cut that it is possible for a man to see, when the Sun shineth upon them, they glister as it were sparkles of fire.{n}