The contents of those letters were these.{n}CAptaine Laudonniere, because some of them which Letters of the are returned from Florida speake indifferently of LordAdmtrall the Countrey, the King desireth your presence, to the end, that according to your tryall, he may resolve to ’ bestow great cost thereon, or wholly to leave it: and therfore I send Captaine John Ribault to bee governour there, to whom you shall deliver whatsoever vou have{n}85	'{n}in charge, and informe him of all things you have discovered. And in a postscript of the letter was thus written. Thinke not, that whereas I send for you, it is for any evill opinion or mistrust that I have of you, but that it is for your good and for your credit, and assure your selfe that during my life you shall find me your good Master.	Chastillon.{n}Now after I had long discoursed with Captaine Ribault, Captaine la Grange accosted mee, and told me of an Accusations infinite number of false reports which had bene made of against him. mee to my great hinderance: and among other things ’ he informed me, that my Lord Admirall tooke it very 2. evill that I had caried a woman with mee: likewise that some bodie had tolde him that I went about to counters’ feit the King, and to play the tyrant: that I was too +• cruell unto the men that went with mee : that I sought to be advanced by other meanes then by my Lord 5- Admirall: and that I had written to many Lords of the . i- Court, which I ought not to have done. Whereunto Laudonnieres j answerej that the woman was a poore chambermayd, answere there- . . , T , ,	,	. T /	. '{n}unto. which 1 had taken up in an Inne, to oversee my hous-hold businesse, to looke to an infinite sort of divers beasts, as sheepe and poultrie which I caried over with me to store the countrey withall: that it was not meete to put a man to attend this businesse : likewise, considering the length of the time that I was to abide there, mee thought it should not offend any body to take a woman with me, aswell to help my souldiers in their sickenesses, as in mine owne, whereinto I fell afterward. And how necessary her service was for us, ech one at that time might easily perceive: That all my men thought so well of her, that at one instant there were sixe or seven which did demand her of me in manage; as in very 2. deede one of them had her after our returne. Touching that which was sayd that I playd the King, these reports were made, because I would not beare with any thing which was against the duety of my charge, and the{n}Kings service. Moreover, that in such enterprises it is necessary for a Governour to make himselfe knowen and obeyed, for feare least every body would become a master, perceiving themselves far from greater forces. And that 3. if the tale-tellers called this rigour, it rather proceeded of their disobedience, then of my nature lesse subject to cruelty then they were to rebellion. For the two 4-last points, that I had not written to any of the Lords of the Court but by the advice & commandement of my Lord Admirall, which willed me at my departure to send part of such things as I should find in the countrey unto the Lords of the Counsel : to the end that being mooved by this meane, they might deale with the Queene mother for the continuance of this enterprise: that having bene so small time in the countrey, continually hindred with building of fortresses, and unlading of my ships, I was not able to come by any newe or rare things to send them, whereupon I thought it best to content them in the meane while with letters, untill such time as I might have longer space to search out the Countrey, and might recover something to sende them : the distribution of which letters I meant not otherwise but to referre to my Lord Admirals good pleasure : that if the bearer had forgot himselfe so farre, as that he had broken the covering of the letters, and presented them himselfe for hope of gaine, it was not my commandement. And 5. that I never honoured noble man so much, nor did to any man more willing and faithfull service then to my Lord Admirall, nor ever sought advancement but by his meanes. You see how things passed for this day. The next day the Indians came in from all parts, to know what people these were: to whom I signified that this was he which in the yeere 1562. arrived in this countrey, and erected the pillar which stood at the entrie of the river. Some of them knew him : for in trueth he was easie to be knowen by reason of the great bearde which he ware. He received many presents of them which were of the villages neere adjoyning, 87{n}The mountains of Apalatcy wherein are mines of perfect gold.{n}Sieroa Pira red mettall.{n}Perfect gold.{n}Good meanes to avoid the danger of fire.{n}September 4.{n}among whom there were some that he had not yet forgotten. The kings Homoloa, Serauahi, Alimacani, Malica, and Casti came to visit him and welcome him with divers gifts according to their manner. I advertised them that hee was sent thither by the king of France, to remaine there in my roome, and that I was sent for. Then they demanded and prayed him, if it might stand with his good pleasure, to cause the merchandise that hee had brought with him to be delivered them, and that in fewe daies they would bring him to the mountaines of Apalatcy, whither they had promised to conduct me, and that in case they performed not their promise, that they were content to be cut in pieces. In those mountaines, as they sayd, is found redde copper, which they call in their language Sieroa Pira, which is as much to say as red mettall, whereof I had a piece, which at the very instant I shewed to Captaine Ribault, which caused his gold-finer to make an assay thereof, which reported unto him that it was perfect golde. About the time of these conferences, commings and goings of the kings of the countrey, being weakened with my former travaile, and fallen into a melancholy upon the false reports that had bene made of mee, I fell into a great continuall fever, which held me eight or nine dayes : during which time Captaine Ribault caused his victuals to be brought on shore, and bestowed the most part thereof in the house which my Lieutenant had built about two hundred pases without the forte: which hee did to the ende they might bee the better defended from the weather, and likewise to the intent that the meale might bee neerer to the bake-house, which I had built of purpose in that place, the better to avoide the danger of the fire, as I sayd before. But loe howe oftentimes misfortune doth search and pursue us, even then when we thinke to be at rest 1 loe see what happened after that captaine Ribault had brought up three of his small ships into the river, which was the fourth of September ! Sixe great Spanish ships arrived in the rode, where four{n}of our greatest ships remained, which cast anker, assuring our men of good amity. They asked how the chiefe T& Spaniards captaine of the enterprise did, & called them all by{n}their names and surnames. I report me to you if it y prench. could be otherwise but these men before they went out of Spaine must needs be informed of the enterprise & of those that were to execute the same. About the breake of day they began to make toward our men : but our men which trusted them never a deale, had hoysed their sailes by night, being ready to cut the strings that tyed them. Wherefore perceiving that this making toward our men of the Spaniards was not to doe them any pleasure, and knowing wel that their furniture was too smal to make head against them, because that the most part of their men were on shore, they cut their cables, left their ankers, and set saile.{n}The Spaniards seeing themselves discovered, lent them certaine volleis of their great ordinance, made saile after them, and chased them all day long : but our men got way of them still toward the sea. And the Spaniards seeing they could not reach them, by reason that the French ships were better of saile then theirs, and also because they would not leave the coast, turned backe and went on shore in the river Seloy, which we cal the The river river of Dolphines 8 or 10 leagues distant from the orJ^t place where we were. Our men therefore finding them- g 'or selves better of saile then they, followed them to descry iO leagues what they did, which after they had done, they returned over land from unto the river of May, where captaine Ribault having but descried them, embarked himselfe in a great boat to know what newes they had. Being at the entry of the cape sea. river he met with the boat of captaine Cousets ship, wherin there was a good number of men which made relation unto him of all the Spaniards doings : and how the great ship named the Trini tie had kept the sea, and that she was not returned with them. They told him moreover that they had seen three Spanish ships enter into the river of Dolphins, & the other{n}Dangerous flaws of wind on the coast of Florida in September.{n}King Emola.{n} A village and river both of that name.{n}three remained in the rode; farther that they had put their souldiers, their victuals & munition on land. After he understood these newes hee returned to the fortresse, and came to my chamber where I was sick, and there in the presence of the captaines, La Grange, S. Marie, Ottigny, Visty, Yonville, and other gentlemen, he propounded, that it was necessary for the kings service, to embarke himselfe with all his forces, and with the three ships that were in the rode to seeke the Spanish fleete, whereupon he asked our advise. I first replyed, and shewed unto him the consequence of such an enterprise, advertising him among other things of the perilous flawes of windes that rise on this coast, and that if it chanced that hee were driven from the shore, it would be very hard for him to recover it againe, that in the meane while they which should stay in the Forte should be in feare and danger. The Captaines, Saint Marie, and La Grange declared unto him farther, that they thought it not good to put any such enterprise in execution, that it was farre better to keepe the land, Sc do their best indevour to fortifie themselves: And that after that the Trinitie (which was the principali ship) were returned, there would be much more likelyhood to enterprise this voyage. This notwithstanding he resolved to undertake it, and that which more is, after he understoode by king Emola, one of our neighbours which arrived upon the handling of these matters, that the Spaniards in great numbers were gone on shore, which had taken possession of the houses of Seloy, in the most part whereof they had placed their Negros, which they had brought to labour, and also lodged themselves and had cast divers trenches about them. Thus for the considerations which he had, and doubting (as he might well doe) that the Spanyards would encampe themselves there to molest us, and in the ende to chase us out of the Countrey, he resolved and continued in his embarkment, caused a Proclamation to be made, that all souldiers that were under his charge{n}should presently with their weapons embarke them, and that his two ensignes should march: which was put in execution. He came into my chamber, and prayed me to lend him my Lieutenant, mine ensigne, and my sergeant, and to let all my good souldiers, which I had, goe with him, which I denied him, because my selfe being sicke, there was no man to stay in the fort. Thereupon he answered me that I needed not to doubt at all, and that he would returne the morrow after, that in the meane space Monsieur de Lys should stay behind to looke to all things. Then I shewed unto him that he was chiefe in this Countrey, and that I for my part had no further authoritie : that therefore hee would take good advisement what hee did, for feare least some inconvenience might ensue. Then he tolde me that he could doe no lesse, then to continue this enterprise, and that in the letter which he had received from my Lord Admirall, there was a postscript, which hee shewed mee written in these wordes: Captaine John Ribault, as I was enclosing up this letter, I received a certaine advice, that Don Pedro Melendes departeth from Spaine to goe to the coast of Newe France: see you that you suffer him not to encroch upon you, no more then he would that you should encroch upon him. You see (quoth he) the charge that I have, and I leave it unto your selfe to judge, if you could do any lesse in this case, considering the certaine advertisement that we have, that they are already on lande, and will invade us. This stopped my mouth. Thus therefore confirmed or rather obstinate in this enterprise, and having regard rather unto his particular opinion then unto the advertisments which I had given him, and the inconveniences of the time whereof I had forewarned him, he embarked himselfe the eight of September, and tooke mine ensigne and eight and thirtie of my men away with him. I report mee to those that know what warres meane, if when an ensigne marcheth, any souldier that hath any courage in him will stay behind, to forsake his ensigne: Thus no man{n}9i{n}A.D.{n}1565.{n}An advertisement of my Lord Admiral to Captaine Ribault.{n}Captaine Ri-baidts em-barkment Sept. 8.{n}of commandement stayed behind with mee, for ech one followed him as chiefe, in whose name straight after his arrivall, all cries and proclamations were made. Captaine Grange, which liked not very well of this enterprise, The tenth of was unto the tenth of the moneth with mee, and would September. not have gone aborde, if it had not beene for the instant requestes that Captaine Ribault made unto him, which staid two dayes in the rode attending untill La Grange was come unto him: Who being come abord, they set sayle altogether, and from that time forward I never saw A mighty them more. The very day that he departed, which was l^uhof^eit th® tenth September, there rose so great a tempest ’ accompanied with such stormes, that the Indians themselves assured me that it was the worst weather that ever was seene on the coast: whereupon two or three dayes after, fearing least our ships might be in some distresse, I sent for Monsieur du Luys unto mee, to take order to assemble the rest of our people to declare unto them what neede wee had to fortifie our selves: which was done accordingly: and then I gave them to understand the necessity and inconveniences whereinto we were like to fall, aswel by the absence of our ships, as by the neerenesse of the Spanyards, at whose hands we could looke for no lesse then an open and sufficient proclamed war, seeing they had taken land and fortified themselves so neere unto us. And if any misfortune were fallen unto our men which were at Sea, we ought to make a full account with our selves that wee were to endure many great miseries, being in so small number, and so many wayes afflicted as we were. Thus every one promised mee to take paines: and therefore considering that their proportion of victuals was small, and that so continuing, they would not bee able to doe any Laudtmmere great worke, I augmented their allowance: although that{n}after the arrivall of Captaine Ribault my portion of victuals was allotted unto mee as unto a common souldier, neither was I able to give so much as part of a bottell of wine to any man which deserved it: for I was so farre from 92{n} A muster of the men left in the fort by Ribault.{n}RENE LAUDONNIERE	a.d.{n}. . . 15651 having meanes to doe so, that the Captaine himselfe tooke two of my boates, wherein the rest of the meale was, which was left me of the biscuits which I caused to bee made to returne into France: so that if I shoulde say that I received more favour at the handes of the Englishmen beeing Strangers unto mee, I shoulde say but a trueth. Wee beganne therefore to fortifie our Laudonniere selves and to repaire that which was broken downe, co™~ principally toward the water side, where 1 caused three- fortifie them. score foote of trees to be planted, to repaire the Palissado with the plankes which I caused to bee taken of the Shippe which I had builded. Neverthelesse notwithstanding all our diligence and travaile, wee were never able fully to repaire it by reason of the stormes, which commonly did us so great annoy, that wee could not finish our inclosure. Perceiving my selfe in such extremitie I tooke a muster of the men, which captaine Ribault had left me, to see if there were any that wanted weapon : I found nine or ten of them whereof not past two or three had ever drawen sword out of a scabbard, as I thinke. Let them which have bene bold to say, that I had men ynough left me, so that I had meanes to defend my selfe, give eare a little now unto mee, and if they have eyes in their heads, let them see what men I had. Of the nine there were foure but yong striplings, which served Captaine Ribault and kept his dogs, the fift was a cooke: among those that were without the fort, and which were of the foresaid company of Captaine Ribault, there was a Carpenter of threescore yeeres olde, one a Beere-brewer, one olde Crosse-bow maker, two Shoemakers, and foure or five men that had their wives, a player on the Virginals, two servants of Monsieur du Luys, one of Monsieur de Beauhaire, one of Monsieur de la Grange, and about fourescore and five or sixe in all, counting aswel Lackeys as women and children. Behold the goodly troupe so sufficient to defend themselves, and so couragious as they have esteemed them to be: and for my part I leave it to{n}93{n}Fourescore and five left in the fort with Laudonniere.{n}others consideration to imagine whether Captaine Ribault woulde have left them with me to have borrowed my men, if they had bene such. Those that were left me of mine owne company were about sixeteene or seventeene that coulde beare armes, and all of them poore and leane: the reste were sicke and maymed in the conflict which my Lieutenant had against Utina. This view being thus taken, wee set our watches, whereof wee made two Centinels, that the souldiers might have one night free. Then wee bethought our selves of those which might bee most sufficient, among whome wee chose two, one of whom was named Monsieur Saint Cler, and the other Monsieur de la Vigne, to whom we delivered candles and Lanterns to goe round about the fort to viewe the watch, because of the foule and foggie weather. I delivered them also a sandglasse or clocke, that the Centinels might not be troubled more one then another. In the meane while I ceased not, for all the foule weather nor my sicknesse which I had, to oversee the Corps de garde. The night betweene the nineteenth and twentieth of September La Vigne kept watch with his company, wherein he used all endevour, although it rayned without ceasing. When the day was therefore come, and that hee saw that it rayned still worse then it did before, hee pitied the Centinels so too moyled and wette: and thinking the Spanyardes woulde not have come in such a strange time, hee let them depart, and to say the trueth, hee went himselfe unto his lodging. In the meane while one which had something to doe without the fort, and my trumpet which went up unto the TheSpanyards rampart perceived a troupe of Spanyards which came downe from a little knappe. Where incontinently they J p ' beganne to cry alarme, and the Trumpetter also : Which assoone as ever I understoode, foorthwith I issued out, with my target and sword in my hand, and gatte mee into the middest of the Court, where I beganne to crie upon my souldiers. Some of them which were of the forward sort went toward the breach, which was on the{n}Southside, and where the munitions of the artillerie lay, where they were repulsed and slaine. By the selfe same place two ensignes entred, which immediately were The Spaniards planted on the wals. Two other ensignes also entred enter firton the other side toward the West, where there was another breach : and those which were lodged in this quarter, & which shewed themselves, were likewise defeated. As I went to succour them which were defending the breach on the southwest side, I encoun-tred by chance a great company of Spaniards, which had already repulsed our men and were now entred, which drave me backe unto the court of the fort: being there I espied with them one called Francis Jean, which Francis Jean was one of the Mariners which stole away my barks, atraitourto and had guided and conducted the Spanyards thither. ts na tm' Assoone as he sawe me, he began to say, This is the Captaine. This troupe was led by a captaine whose name, as I thinke, was Don Pedro Melendes: these Don Pedro made certain pushes at me with their pikes which lighted on my tarket. But perceiving that 1 was not able Spaniards. to withstand so great a company, and that the court was already wonne, and their ensignes planted on the ramparts, & that I had never a man about me, saving one only whose name was Bartholomew, I entred into the yard of my lodging, into which they followed me, and had it not bene for a tent that was set up, I had bin taken : but the Spanyards which followed me were occupied in cutting of the cordes of the tent, and in the meane while I saved my selfe by the breach which was on the West side neere unto my Lieutenants lodging, and gate away into the woods : where I found certain Laudonniers of my men which were escaped, of which number there esC0Pe-were three or foure which were sore hurt. Then spake I thus unto them : Sirs, since it hath pleased God that this mischance is happened unto us, we must needs take the paines to get over the marshes unto the ships which are at the mouth of the river. Some would needs go to a little village which was in the woods, the rest fol-{n}John du Che-min a faithfull servant.{n}The diligence of the Mariners to save them that escaped out of the fort.{n}Among these was Jaques Morgues painter sometime living in the Blackfryers in London.{n}lowed me through the reedes in the water, where being able to go no farther by reason of my sicknesse which I had, I sent two of my men which were with me, which could swim well, unto the ships, to advertise them of that which had happened, and to send them word to come and helpe me. They were not able that day to get unto the ships to certifie them thereof: so I was constrained to stand in the water up to the shoulders all that night long, with one of my men which would never forsake me. The next day morning, being scarcely able to draw my breath any more, I betooke me to my prayers with the souldier which was with mee, whose name was John du Chemin : for I felt my selfe so feeble, that I was afraid I should die suddenly: and in truth if he had not imbraced me in both his armes, and so held me up, it had not bene possible to save me. After we had made an ende of our prayers, I heard a voyce, which in my judgement was one of theirs which I had sent, which were over against the ships and called for the ship boat, which was so in deed : and because those of the ships had understanding of the taking of the fort by one called John de Hais, master Carpenter, which fled unto them in a shallop ; they had set saile to run along the coast to see if they might save any : wherin doubtlesse they did very well their endevour. They went straight to the place where the two men were which I had sent, and which called them. Assoone as they had received them in and understood where I was, they came and found me in a pitifull case. Five or sixe of them tooke me and caried me into the shallop : for I was not able by any means to go one foot. After I was brought into the shallop some of the Mariners took their clothes from their backs to lend them me, and would have caried me presently to their ships to give me a little Aqua vitae. Howbeit I would not goe thither, untill I had first gone with the boat along the reeds, to seeke out the poore soules which were scattered abroad, where we gathered up 18 or 20 of them. The last that I took 96{n}in was the nephew of the Treasurer le Beau. After we were al come to the ships, I comforted them as well as I could, and sent back the boat againe with speed to see if they could find yet any more. Upon her returne, the Mariners told mee how that captaine James Ribault which was in his ship about two muskets shot distant from the fort, had parted with the Spaniards, and that Francis Jean came unto his ship, where hee staied a long space, whereat they greatly marveiled, considering hee was the cause of this enterprise, how hee would let him escape. After I was come into the ship called the Greyhound, captaine James Ribault & captaine Valvot came to see me : and there we concluded to returne into France. Now forasmuch as I found the ship unfurnished of Captaine, Pilot, Master, and Masters-mate, I gave advice to choose out one of the most able men among al the mariners, & that by their owne voices. I tooke also sixe men out of another small ship, which we had sunke because it wanted ballast and could not be saved. Thus I increased the furniture of the ship wherein I was my selfe embarked, and made one, which had bene Masters-mate in the foresaid small ship, Master of mine. And because I lacked a pilot, I prayed James Ribault that he would grant me one of the foure men that he had in his ship, which I should name unto him, to serve me for a Pilot: he promised to give me them, which neverthelesse he did not at the instant when wee were ready to depart, notwithstanding all the speech I used to him, in declaring that it was for the kings service. I was constrained to leave the ship behind me which I had bought of the English Captaine, because I wanted men to bring her away. For captaine James Ribault had taken away her furniture : I tooke away her ordinance onely, which was all dismounted, whereof I gave nine pieces to James Ribault to carrie into France, the other five I put into my ship. The 25 of September wee set sailes to returne into France, and Captaine James Ribault and I kept company all that ix	97	g{n}A.D.{n}1565.{n}Francis Jean cause of this enterprise.{n}The bad dealing of James Ribault.{n}Our returne into France the 25. of September 1565.{n}day and the next untill three or foure a clock in the afternoone : but because his ship was better at bowline then ours, he kept him to the wind and left us the same day. Thus we continued our voyage, wherein we had marveilous flawes of wind. And about the October 28. eight and twentieth of October in the morning at the breake of the day we discried the Isle of Flores, one of the Azores, where immediatly upon our approching to the land we had a mightie gust of wind which came from the Northeast, which caused us to beare against it foure dayes : afterward the wind came South and Southeast, and was alwayes variable. In all the time of our passage we had none other foode saving November 10. biscuit and water. About the tenth or eleventh of November, after we had sailed a long time, and supposing we were not farre from land, I caused my men to sound, where they found threescore and Afteene fathoms water, whereat we all rejoyced, and praised God because we had sailed so prosperously. Immediatly after I caused them to set saile again and so we continued our way : but forasmuch as we had borne The chanel of too much toward the Northeast we entred into Saint Saint George. Georges chanell, a place much feared of all Sailers, and whereas many ships are cast away : But it was a faire gift of God that we entred in it when the weather was cleare. We sailed all the night, supposing wee had bene shot into the narrow Sea betweene England and France, and by the next day to reach Diepe, but we were deceived of our longing: for about two or three of the clocke after midnight as I walked upon the hatches, I discried land round about me, whereat wee were astonied. Immediatly I caused them to strike saile and sound : we found we had not under us past  8 fathoms of water, whereupon I commanded them to stay till breake of day : which being come, and seeing my Mariners told me that they knew not this land, I commanded them to approch unto it. Being neere thereunto I made them cast anker, & sent the boat on{n}1565-shore to understand in what Countrey we were. Word was brought me that we were in Wales a province of England. I went incontinently on land, where after I had taken the ayre, a sickenesse tooke mee whereof I thought I should have dyed. In the meane while I caused the ship to be brought into the bay of a small towne called Swansey, where I found merchants of S. Laudonnieres Malo, which lent me money, wherewith I made certaine apparel for my selfe and part of my company that was in Qiamorgan. with me : and because there were no victuals in the ship, fare in South I bought two Oxen, and salted them, and a tunne of Wales. Beere, which I delivered into his hands which had charge of the ship, praying him to cary it into France, which he promised me to doe : for mine owne part I purposed with my men to passe by land, and after I had taken leave of my Mariners, I departed from Swansey, and came that night with my company to a place called Morgan, where the Lord of the place, understanding what I was, stayed me with him for the space of 6 or 7 dayes, and at my departure mooved with pitie to see me goe on foot, especially being so weake as I was, gave me a litle Hackny. Thus I passed on my journey first to Bristoll, & then to London, where I went to doe my duty to Monsieur de Foix, which for the present was the kings Ambassador, and holpe me with mony in my necessitie. From thence I passed to Caleis, afterward to Paris, where I was informed that the king was gone to Molins to sojourne there : incontinently, & with all the hast I could possibly make, I gate me thither with part of my com{n}pany. Thus briefly you see the discourse of all that The conclusion. happened in New France since the time it pleased the kings Majesty to send his subjects thither to discover those parts. The indifferent and unpassionate readers may easily weigh the truth of my doings, and be upright judges of the endevor which I there used. For mine owne part I wil not accuse nor excuse any: it sufficeth mee to have followed the trueth of the history, whereof many are able to beare witnesse, which{n}99{n}The courtesie of one Master Morgan.{n}Bristoll.{n}London.{n}Monsieur de Foix Ambas-sadour for the French king in England.{n}Thecauseswhy the French lost Florida.{n}The French Fleete cast away on the coast of Florida.{n}were there present. I will plainly say one thing, That the long delay that Captaine John Ribault used in his embarking, and the 15. daies that he spent in roving along the coast of Florida, before he came to our fort Caroline, were the cause of the losse that we susteined. For he discovered the coast the 14 of August, and spent the time in going from river to river, which had bene sufficient for him to have discharged his ships in, and for me to have embarked my selfe to returne into France. I wote well that al that he did was upon a good intent: yet in mine opinion he should have had more regard unto his charge, then to the devises of his owne braine, which sometimes hee printed in his head so deeply, that it was very hard to put them out: which also turned to his utter undoing : for hee was no sooner departed from us, but a tempest tooke him, which in fine wrackt him upon the coast, where all his shippes were cast away, and he with much adoe escaped drowning, to fall into their hands which cruelly massacred him and all his company.{n}