The relation of Francis Vazquez de Coronado, Captaine generail of the people which were sent in the name of the Emperours majestie to the Countrey of Cibola newly discovered, which he sent to Don Antonio de Mendo9a Viceroy of Mexico, of such things as happened in his voyage from the 22. of Aprill in the yeere 1540. which departed from Culiacan forward, and of such things as hee found in the Countrey which he passed.{n}Chap. 1.{n}Francis Vazquez departeth with his armie from Culiacan, and after divers troubles in his voyage, arriveth at the valley of the people called Los Caracones, which he findeth barren of Maiz: for obtaining whereof hee sendeth to the valley called The valley of the Lord: he is informed of the greatnesse of the valley of the people called Caracones, and of the nature of those people, and of certaine Islands lying along that coast.{n}He 22. of the moneth of Aprill last past I departed from the province of Culiacan with part of the army, and in such order as 1 mentioned unto your Lordship, and according to the successe I assured my selfe, by all likelihood that I shall not bring all mine armie together in this{n}enterprise: because the troubles have bene so great and the want of victuals, that I thinke all this yeere wil not be sufficient to performe this enterprise, & if it should bee performed in so short a time, it would be to the great losse of our people. For as I wrote unto your Lordship, I was fourescore dayes in travailing to Culiacan, in all which time I and those Gentlemen my companions which were horsemen, carried on our backs,{n}IX{n}145{n}K{n} This was but 200. leagues from Mexico.{n}and on our horses, a little victuali, so that from henceforward wee carried none other needefull apparell with us, that was above a pound weight: and all this notwithstanding, and though wee put our selves to such a small proportion of victuals which wee carried, for all the order that possibly wee could take, wee were driven to our shifts. And no marvayle, because the way is rough and long: and with the carriage of our Harquebuses downe the mountaines and hilles, and in the passage of Rivers, the greater part of our corne was spoyled. And because I send your Lordship our voyage drawen 'in a Mappe, I will speake no more thereof in this my letter.{n}Thirtie leagues before wee arrived at the place which the father provinciali tolde us so well of in his relation, I sent Melchior Diaz before with fifteene horses, giving him order to make but one dayes journey of two, because hee might examine all things, against mine arrivall: who travailed foure dayes journey through exceeding rough Mountaines where hee found neither victuals, nor people, nor information of any things, saving that hee found two or three poore little villages, containing 20. or 30. cottages a piece, and by the inhabitants thereof hee understoode that from thence forward there were nothing but exceeding rough mountaines which ran very farre, utterly disinhabited and voyd of people. And because it was labour lost, I would not write unto your Lordship thereof.{n}It grieved the whole company, that a thing so highly commended, and whereof the father had made so great bragges, should be found so contrary, and it made them suspect that all the rest would fall out in like sort. Which when I perceived I sought to encourage them the best I coulde, telling them that your Lordshippe alwayes was of opinion, that this voyage was a thing cast away, and that wee should fixe our cogitation upon those seven Cities, and other provinces, whereof wee had knowledge: that there should bee the ende of our enterprise : and 146{n}. . . I540, with this resolution and purpose wee all marched cheere-fully through a very badde way which was not passable but one by one, or else wee must force out with Pioners the path which wee founde, wherewith the Souldiours were not a little offended, finding all that the Frier had sayde to bee quite contrary: for among other things which the father sayde and affirmed, this was one, that the way was plaine and good, and that there was but one small hill of halfe a league in length. And yet in trueth there are mountaines which although the way were well mended could not bee passed without great danger of breaking the horses neckes : and the way was such, that of the cattell which your Lordship sent us for the provision of our armie wee lost a great part in the voyage through the roughnesse of the rockes. The lambes and sheepe lost their hoofes in the way: and of those which I brought from Culiacan, I left the greater part at the River of Lachimi, because they could not The river of keepe company with us, and because they might come lachimi. softly after us, foure men on horsebacke remained with them which are nowe come unto us, and have brought us not past foure and twentie lambes, and foure sheepe, for all the rest were dead with travailing through that rough passage, although they travailed but two leagues a day, and rested themselves every day.{n}At length I arrived at the valley of the people called The valley of Caracones, the 26. day of the moneth of May: and from Culiacan untill I came thither, I could not helpe my ara~ selfe, save onely with a great quantitie of bread of Maiz : for seeing the Maiz in the fieldes were not yet ripe, I was constrained to leave them all behind me. In this valley of the Caracones wee found more store of people then in any other part of the Countrey which wee had passed, and great store of tillage. But I understood that there was store thereof in another valley called The Talk del Lords valley, which I woulde not disturbe with force, Sennor-but sent thither Melchior Diaz with wares of exchange to procure some, and to give the sayde Maiz to the{n}147{n}Indians our friendes which wee brought with us, and to some others that had lost their cattell in the way, and were not able to carry their victuals so farre which they brought from Culiacan. It pleased God that wee gate some small quantitie of Maiz with this traffique, whereby certaine Indians were releived and some Spanyards.{n}And by that time that wee were come to this valley of the Caracones, some tenne or twelve of our horses were dead through wearinesse : for being overcharged with great burdens, and having but little meate, they could not endure the travaile. Likewise some of our Negros and some of our Indians dyed here ; which was no small want unto us for the performance of our enterprise. They The valley de tolde me that this valley of the Caracones is five dayes ^isumt^ve5 journey fr°m the Westerne Sea. I sent for the Indians davet intima of the Sea coast to understand their estate, and while I from the Wes- stayed for them the horses rested: and I stayed there teme sea. foure dayes, in which space the Indians of the Sea coast  came unto mee: which told mee, that two dayes sayling Seven or eight from their coast of the Sea, there were seven or eight ^t^Isks ^s^an^s tight over against them, well inhabited with of California, people, but badly furnished with victuals, and were a rude people: And they told mee, that they had seene A ship seene a Shippe passe by not farre from the shore : which I coast.	wote not what to thinke whither it were one or those{n}that went to discover the Countrey, or else a Ship of the Portugals.{n}148{n}They come to Chichilticale: after they had rested themselves two dayes there, they enter into a Countrey very barren of victuals, and hard to travaile for thirtie leagues, beyond which they found a Countrey very pleasant, and a river called Rio del Lino, they fight with the Indians being assaulted by them, and with victorie vanquishing their citie, they relieved themselves of their pinching hunger.{n}1 Departed from the Caracones, and alwayes kept by the Sea coast as neere as I could judge, and in very deed I still found my selfe the farther off: in such sort that when I arrived at Chichilticale I found my selfe tenne dayes journey from the Sea: and the father provinciali sayd that it was onely but five leagues distance, and that hee had seene the same. Wee all conceived great griefe and were not a little confounded, when we saw that wee found every thing contrary to the information which he had given your Lordship.{n}The Indians of Chichilticale say, that if at any time they goe to the Sea for fish, and other things that they carry, they goe traversing, and are tenne dayes journey in going thither. And I am of opinion that the information which the Indians give me should be true. The sea returneth toward the West right over against the Caracones the space of tenne or twelve leagues. Where I found that your Lordships ships were seene, which went to discover the haven of Chichilticale, which father Marcus of Ni?a sayd to bee in five and thirtie degrees. God knoweth what griefe of mind I have sustained : because I am in doubt that some mishappe is fallen unto them : and if they follow the coast, as they sayde they would, as long as their victuals last which they carry with them, whereof I left them store in Culiacan, and if they be not fallen into some misfortune, I hope well in God that by this they have made some good discoverie, and in this respect their long staying out may be pardoned.{n}149{n}Chichilticale ten dayes journey from the sea.{n}This Chichil-ticaleisindeede but in 28. deg.{n}I rested my selfe two dayes in Chichilticale, and to have done well I should have stayed longer, in respect that here wee found our horses so tyred : but because wee wanted victuals, wee had no leasure to rest any longer : I entred the confines of the desert Countrey on The 23. of Saint Johns eve, and to refresh our former travailes, the June. first dayes we founde no grasse, but worser way of mountaines and badde passages, then wee had passed alreadie : and the horses being tired, were greatly molested therewith : so that in this last desert wee lost more horses then wee had lost before : and some of my Indians which were our friendes dyed, and one Spanyard whose name was Spinosa ; and two Negroes, which dyed with eating certaine herbes for lacke of victuals. From this place I sent before mee one dayes journey the master Don Garcia of the fielde Don Garcia Lopez de Cardenas with fifteene ^nas^^^' h°rses to discover the Countrey, and prepare our way : ' wherein hee did like himselfe, and according to the confidence which your Lordship reposed in him. And well I wote he fayled not to do his part: for as I have enformed your Lordship, it is most wicked way, at least thirtie leagues and more, because they are inaccessible mountaines.{n}A godly and But after wee had passed these thirtie leagues, wee fruitfull coun- founj fresh rivers, and grasse like that of Castile, and ’ specially of that sort which we call Scaramoio, many Nutte trees and Mulberie trees, but the Nutte trees differ from those of Spayne in the leafe : and there was Flaxe, but chiefly neere the bankes of a certayne river which Rio del Lino, therefore wee called El Rio del Lino, that is say, the river of Flaxe: wee found no Indians at all for a dayes travaile, but afterward foure Indians came out unto us in peaceable maner, saying that they were sent even to that desert place to signifie unto us that wee were welcome, and that the next day all the people would come out to meete us on the way with victuals : and the master of the fielde gave them a crosse, willing them to signifie to those of their citie that they should not feare, and they should 150{n}rather let the people stay in their houses, because I came onely in the name of his majestie to defend and ayd them.{n}And this done, Fernando Alvarado returned to advertise mee, that certaine Indians were come unto them in peaceable maner, and that two of them stayed for my comming with the master of the fielde. Whereupon I went unto them and gave them beades and certaine short clokes, willing them to returne unto their citie, and bid  them to stay quiet in their houses, and feare nothing.{n}And this done I sent the master of the field to search wisefore-whether there were any bad passage which the Indians cast' might keepe against us, and that hee should take and defend it untill the next day that I shoulde come thither.{n}So hee went, and found in the way a very bad passage, where wee might have sustayned very great harme : wherefore there hee seated himselfe with his company that were with him : and that very night the Indians came to take that passage to defend it, and finding it taken, they assaulted our men there, and as they tell mee, treason of they assaulted them like valiant men ; although in the the ^n^ans-ende they retired and fledde away ; for the master of the fielde was watchfull, and was in order with his company : the Indians in token of retreate sounded on a certaine small trumpet, and did no hurt among the Spanyards. The very same night the master of the Great forecast fielde certified mee hereof. Whereupon the next day in the best order that I could I departed in so great want master. of victuali, that I thought that if wee should stay one day longer without foode, wee should all perish for hunger, especially the Indians, for among us all we had not two bushels of corne: wherefore it behooved mee to pricke forward without delay. The Indians here and their made fires, and were answered againe afarre ofF as orderly as wee for our lives could have done, to give their fellowes understanding, how wee marched and where we arrived. _	.{n}Assoone as I came within sight of this citie of Granada, at	citie y{n}I sent Don Garcias Lopez Campe-master, frier Daniel, Cibola.{n}151{n}The arrogande of the people of Cibola.{n}and frier Luys, and Fernando Vermizzo somewhat before with certaine horsemen, to seeke the Indians and to advertise them that our comming was not to hurt them, but to defend them in the name of the Emperour our Lord, according as his majestie had given us in charge: which message was delivered to the inhabitants of that countrey by an interpreter. But they like arrogant people made small account thereof; because we seemed very few in their eyes, and that they might destroy us without any difficultie ; and they strooke frier Luys with an arrow on the gowne, which by the grace of God did him no harme.{n}In the meane space I arrived with all the rest of the horsemen, and footemen, and found in the fieldes a great sort of the Indians which beganne to shoote at us with Commande- their arrowes: and because I would obey your will and ment to use ^g Commaund of the Marques, I woulde not let my &the Savaged PeoPle charge them, forbidding my company, which intreated mee that they might set upon them, in any wise to provoke them, saying that that which the enemies did was nothing, and that it was not meete to set upon so fewe people. On the other side the Indians perceiving that wee stirred not, tooke great stomacke and courage unto them: insomuch that they came hard to our horses heeles to shoote at us with their arrowes. Whereupon seeing that it was now time to stay no longer, and that the friers also were of the same opinion, I set upon them without any danger: for suddenly they fled part to the citie which was neere and well fortified, and other into the field, which way they could shift: and some of the Indians were slaine, and more had beene if I would have suffered them to have bene pursued.{n}But considering that hereof wee might reape but small profite, because the Indians that were without, were fewe, There were and those which were retired into the citie, with them ^t^towne' which stayed within at the first were many, where the 'comara^ist. victuals were whereof wee had so great neede, I assembled gen. cap.w>- my people, and devided them as I thought best to assault !52{n}the citie, and I compassed it about: and because the famine which wee sustained suffered no delay, my selfe with certaine of these gentlemen and souldiers put our selves on foote, and commaunded that the crossebowes and harquebusiers shoulde give the assault, and shoulde beate the enemies from the walles, that they might not hurt us, and I assaulted the walles on one side, where they tolde me there was a scaling ladder set up, and that there was one gate: but the crossebowmen suddenly brake the strings of their bowes, and the harquebusiers did nothing at all: for they came thither so weake and feeble, that scarcely they coulde stand on their feete: and by this meanes the people that were aloft on the wals to defend the towne were no way hindered from doing us all the mischiefe they could: so that twise they stroke mee to the ground with infinite number of great stones, which they cast downe: and if I had not beene defended with an excellent good headpiece which I ware, I thinke it had gone hardly with mee: neverthelesse my companie tooke mee up with two small wounds in the face, and an arrowe sticking in my foote, and many blowes with stones on my armes and legges, and thus I went out of the battell very weake. I thinke that if Don Garcias Lopez{n}They defend the wait with stones like those of Hochelaga.{n}de Cardenas the second time that they strooke mee to the ground had not succoured mee with striding over mee like a good knight, I had beene in farre greater danger then I was. But it pleased God that the Indians yeelded themselves unto us, and that this citie was taken: and such store of Maiz was found therein, as our necessitie  required. The Master of the fielde, and Don Pedro de Tovar, and Fernando de Alvarado, and Paul de Melgosa Captaines of the footemen escaped with certaine knocks with stones: though none of them were wounded with arrowes, yet Agoniez Quarez was wounded in one arme with the shot of an arrowe, and one Torres a townesman of Panuco was shot into the face with another, and two footemen more had two small woundes with arrowes.{n}And because my armour was gilded and glittering, they{n}153{n}Excellent houses foure or five loftes high.{n}all layd load on mee, and therefore I was more wounded then the rest, not that I did more then they, or put my selfe forwarder then the rest, for all these Gentlemen and souldiers carried themselves as manfully as was looked for at their hands. I am nowe well recovered I thanke God, although somewhat bruised with stones. Likewise in the skirmish which wee had in the fieldes, two or three other souldiers were hurt, and three horses slaine, one of Don Lopez, the other of Viliega and the third of Don Alonso Manrique, and seven or eight other horses were wounded; but both the men and horses are whole and sound.{n}Chap. 3.{n}Of the situation and state of the seven cities called the Kingdome of Cibola, and of the customes and qualities of those people, and of the beasts which are found there.{n}IT remaineth now to certifie your Honour of the seven cities, and of the kingdom es and provinces whereof the Father provinciali made report unto your Lordship. And to bee briefe, I can assure your honour, he sayd the trueth in nothing that he reported, but all was quite contrary, saving onely the names of the cities, and great houses of stone : for although they bee not wrought with Turqueses, nor with lyme, nor brickes, yet are they very excellent good houses of three or foure or five lofts high, wherein are good lodgings and faire chambers with lathers in stead of staires, and certaine cellers under the ground very good and paved, which are made for winter, they are in maner like stooves : and the lathers which they have for their houses are all in a maner mooveable and portable, which are taken away and set downe when they please, and they are made of two pieces of wood with their steppes, as ours be. The seven cities are seven small townes, all made with these kinde of houses that I speake of: and they stand all within foure leagues together, and they{n}*54{n}are all called the kingdome of Cibola, and every one Cibola is a of them have their particular name: and none of them is called Cibola, but altogether they are called Cibola. And this towne which I call a citie, I have named Granada, as well because it is somewhat like unto it, as also in remembrance of your lordship. In this towne where I nowe remaine, there may bee some two hundred houses, all compassed with walles, and I thinke that with the rest of the houses which are not{n}so walled, they may be together five hundred. There Five hundred is another towne neere this, which is one of the seven, bouses in & it is somwhat bigger then this, and another of the ’ same bignesse that this is of, and the other foure are somewhat lesse : and I send them all painted unto your fainter ne-lordship with the voyage. And the parchment wherein [essarl^ zn a the picture is, was found here with other parchments. new tscovery' The people of this towne seeme unto me of a reasonable stature, and wittie, yet they seeme not to bee such as they should bee, of that judgement and wit to builde these houses in such sort as they are. For the most part they goe all naked, except their privie partes which are covered : and they have painted mantles like those Painted which I send unto your lordship. They have no cotton mantbes-wooll growing, because the countrey is colde, yet they weare mantels thereof as your honour may see by the shewe thereof: and true it is that there was found in their houses certaine yarne made of cotton wooll. They weare their haire on their heads like those of Mexico, and they are well nurtured and condicioned : And they Store of Tur-have Turqueses I thinke good quantitie, which with the lueses-rest of the goods which they had, except their corne, they had conveyed away before I came thither : for I found no women there, nor no youth under fifteene yeeres olde, nor no olde folkes above sixtie, saving two or three olde folkes, who stayed behinde to governe all the rest of the youth and men of warre. There were found in a certaine paper two poynts of Emralds, and Emralds. certaine small stones broken which are in colour some-{n}155{n}Excellent and very great Guinie cocks.{n}Gomara hist. gen.Cap.zi$. say th that the colde is by reason of the high mountaines.{n}A wood of Cedars. Excellent grasse.{n}Deere, hares, and conies.{n}what like Granates very bad, and other stones of Christall, which I gave one of my servaunts to lay up to send them to your lordship, and hee hath lost them as hee telleth me. Wee found heere Guinie cockes, but fewe. The Indians tell mee in all these seven cities, that they eate them not, but that they keepe them onely for their feathers. I beleeve them not, for they are excellent good, and greater then those of Mexico. The season which is in this countrey, and the temperature of the ayre is like that of Mexico : for sometime it is hotte, and sometime it raineth : but hitherto I never sawe it raine, but once there fell a little showre with winde, as they are woont to fall in Spaine.{n}The snow and cold are woont to be great, for so say the inhabitants of the Countrey : and it is very likely so to bee, both in respect to the maner of the Countrey, and by the fashion of their houses, and their furres and other things which this people have to defend them from colde. There is no kind of fruit nor trees of fruite. The Countrey is all plaine, and is on no side mountainous : albeit there are some hillie and bad passages. There are small store of Foules: the cause whereof is the colde, and because the mountaines are not neere. Here is no great store of wood, because they have wood for their fuell sufficient foure leaugues off from a wood of small Cedars. There is most excellent grasse within a quarter of a league hence, for our horses as well to feede them in pasture, as to mowe and make hay, whereof wee stoode in great neede, because our horses came hither so weake and feeble. The victuals which the people of this countrey have, is Maiz, whereof they have great store, and also small white Pease: and Venison, which by all likelyhood they feede upon, (though they say no) for wee found many skinnes of Deere, of Hares, and Conies. They eate the best cakes that ever I sawe, and every body generally eateth of them. They have the finest order and way to grinde that wee ever sawe in any place. And one Indian woman of this countrey{n}will grinde as much as foure women of Mexico. They have most excellent salte in kernell, which they fetch ^ery good from a certaine lake a dayes journey from hence. They S^^esterne have no knowledge among them of the North Sea, nor sea within of the Westerne Sea, neither can I tell your lordship 150. leagues to which wee bee nearest: But in reason they should fnm seeme to bee neerest to the Westerne Sea: and at the Lions least I thinke I am an hundred and fiftie leagues from porkesplcks, ’ thence: and the Northerne Sea should bee much further mlghtlesheep, off. Your lordship may see howe broad the land is wilde gpates. here. Here are many sorts of beasts, as Beares, Tigers, Boses. Lions, Porkespicks, and certaine Sheep as bigge as an horse, with very great homes and little tailes, I have Stagges. seene their homes so bigge, that it is a wonder to be- Tty travalle hold their greatnesse. Here are also wilde goates whose ^^rd^ heads likewise I have seene, and the pawes of Beares, n^e sea. and the skins of wilde Bores. There is game of Deere, QXe hides Ounces, and very great Stagges: and all men are of dressed and opinion that there are some bigger then that beast f°ity^very which your lordship bestowed upon me, which once belonged to John Melaz. They travell eight dayes journey unto certaine plaines lying toward the North Sea. In this countrey there are certaine skinnes well dressed, and they dresse them and paint them where they kill their Oxen, for so they say themselves.{n}157{n}[Chap. 4.{n}Tadouac seem-eth because it is a lake, and endeth in ac to have some affinitie herewith.{n}Other townes neere a river.{n}Chap. 4.{n}Of the state and qualities of the kingdomes of Totonteac, Marata, and Acus, quite contrary to the relation of Frier Marcus. The conference which they have with the Indians of the citie of Granada which they had taken, which had fiftie yeres past foreseene the com-ming of the Christians into their countrey. The relation which they have of other seven cities, whereof Tucano is the principali, and how he sent to discover them. A present of divers things had in these countreys sent unto the Viceroy Mendosa by Vasques de Coronado.{n}THe kingdome of Totonteac so much extolled by the Father provinciali, which sayde that there were such wonderfull things there, and such great matters, and that they made cloth there, the Indians say is an hotte lake, about which are five or sixe houses; and that there were certaine other, but that they are ruinated by warre. The kingdome of Marata is not to be found, neither have the Indians any knowledge thereof. The kingdome of Acus is one onely small citie, where they gather cotton which is called Acucu. And I say that this is a towne. For Acus with an aspiration nor without, is no word of the countrey. And because I gesse that they would derive Acucu of Acus, I say that it is this towne whereinto the kingdom of Acus is converted. Beyond this towne they say there are other small townes which are neere to a river which I have seene and have had report of by the relation of the Indians. I would to God I had better newes to write unto your lordship: neverthelesse I must say the trueth : And as I wrote to your lordship from Culiacan, I am nowe to advertise your honour as wel of the good as of the bad. Yet this I would have you bee assured, that if all the riches and the treasures of the world were heere, I could have done no more in the service of his Majestie and of your 158{n}1540. lordshippe, then I have done in comming hither whither you have sent mee, my selfe and my companions carrying our victuals upon our shoulders and upon our horses three hundred leagues ; and many dayes going on foote travailing over hilles and rough mountaines, with other troubles which I cease to mention, neither purpose I to depart unto the death, if it please his Majestie and your lordship that it shall be so.{n}Three dayes after this citie was taken, certaine Indians  of these people came to offer mee peace, and brought mee certaine Turqueses and badde mantles, and I re- Turqueses. ceived them in his Majesties name with all the good Mant^es-speaches that I could devise, certifying them of the purpose of my comming into this countrey, which is in the name of his Majestie, and by the commaundement of your Lordship, that they and all the rest of the people of this province should become Christians, and should knowe the true God for their Lorde, and receive his Majestie for their King, and earthly Soveraigne : And herewithall they returned to their houses, and suddenly Indians the next day they set in order all their goods and sub- A*/1’ stance, their women and children, and fled to the hilles, w-tves children leaving their townes as it were abandoned, wherein re- and goods. mained very fewe of them. When I sawe this, within eight or tenne dayes after being recovered of my woundes,{n}I went to the citie, which I sayde to bee greater then A citie greater this where I am, and found there some fewe of them, ^Granada. to whom I sayde that they should not bee afrayd, and that they should call their governour unto mee : howbeit, forasmuch as I can learne or gather, none of them hath any governour : for I sawe not there any chiefe house, whereby any preeminence of one over another might bee gathered. After this an olde man came, which sayd that hee was their lord, with a piece of a mantle made of many pieces, with whom I reasoned that small while that hee stayed with mee, and hee sayd that within three dayes after, hee and the rest of the chiefe of that towne would come and visite mee, and give order what course should{n}159{n}bee taken with them. Which they did: for they brought mee certaine mantles and some Turqueses. I advised them to come downe from their holdes, and to returne with their wives and children to their houses, and to become Christians, and that they would acknowledge the Emperours majestie for their King and lorde. And even to this present they keepe in those strong holdes their women and children, and all the goods which they have. Two tables I commaunded them that they should paint mee out a painted by the of aq ^e beastes which they knowe in their countrey: ^beasts0”6	And such badde painters	as they are, foorthwith they{n}another of	painted mee two clothes,	one of their beastes, another{n}birdes and	of their birdes and fishes.	They say that they will bring{n}fishes.	their children, that our religious men may instruct them,{n}and that they desire to knowe our lawe : And they assure ^^thatlhcM us’ a^ove yeeres past was prophecied among parts should be them, that a certaine people like us should come, and subdued by from that part that wee came from, and that they should Christians. subdue all that countrey.{n}They worship That which these Indians worship as farre as hitherto the water. wee can }earnej is the Water : for they say it causeth their corne to growe, and maintaineth their life ; and that they know none other reason, but that their ancestors did so. I have sought by all meanes possible to learne of the inhabitants of these townes, whether they have any knowledge of other people, countreys and cities : And Seven cities they tell mee of seven cities which are farre distant from ^Granada P^ace’ ^i^ are bke unto these, though they have ' not houses like unto these, but they are of earth, and small: and that among them much cotton is gathered. The chiefe of these townes whereof they have knowledge, Tucana. they say is called Tucano : and they gave mee no perfect knowledge of the rest. And I thinke they doe not tell me the trueth, imagining that of necessitie I must speedily depart from them, and returne home. But herein they shall soone finde themselves deceived. I sent Don Pedro de Tovar with his companie of footemen and with certaine other horsemen to see this towne : And I would not{n}160{n}have dispatched this packet unto your lordship, untill I had knowen what this towne was, if I had thought that within twelve or fifteene dayes I might have had newes from him: for hee will stay in this journey thirtie dayes at least. And having examined that the knowledge hereof is of small importance, and that the colde and the waters approch: I thought it my duety to doe according as your lordship gave mee charge in your instructions, which is, that immediatly upon mine arrivall here, I should signifie so much unto your lordship, and so I doe, sending withall the bare relation of that which I have seene. I have determined to send round about the countrey from hence to have knowledge of all things, and rather to suffer all extremitie, then to leave this enterprise to serve his majestie, if I may find any thing wherein I may performe it, and not to omit any diligence therein, untill your lordship send mee order what I shall doe. Wee have great want of pasture: and your lordship also shal understand, that among all those which are here, there is not one pound of raisins, nor suger, nor oyle, nor any The Spaniards wine, save only one pinte which is saved to say Masse: willing™ for all is spent & spilt by the way. Now your lordship ’ may provide us what you thinke needefull. And if your honour meane to send us cattell, your lordship must understand that they will bee a sommer in comming unto us: for they will not be able to come unto us any sooner.{n}I would have sent your lordshippe with this dispatch many musters of things which are in this countrey : but the way is so long and rough, that it is hard for me to doe so: neverthelesse I send you twelve small mantles, such as the people of the countrey are woont to weare, and a certaine garment also, which seemeth unto me to bee well 38°-] made : I kept the same, because it seemed to mee to bee excellent well wrought, because I beleeve that no man broideredwith ever sawe any needle worke in these Indies, except it were needle worke. since the Spaniards inhabited the same. I send your Lordshippe also two clothes painted with the beasts of this countrey, although as I have sayde, the picture bee{n}ix	161	L{n}The death of Stephan the Negro.{n}very rudely done, because the painter spent but one day in drawing of the same. I have seene other pictures on the walles of the houses of this citie with farre better proportion, and better made. I send your honour one Oxe-hide, certaine Turqueses, and two earerings of the same, and fifteene combes of the Indians, and certain tablets set with these Turqueses, and two small baskets made of wicker, whereof the Indians have great store. I send your lordship also two rolles which the women in these parts are woont to weare on their heads when they fetch water from their welles, as wee use to doe in Spaine. And one of these Indian women with one of these rolles on her head, will carie a pitcher of water without touching the same with her hande up a lather. I send you also a muster of the weapons wherewith these people are woont to fight, a buckler, a mace, a bowe, and certaine arrowes, among which are two with points of bones, the like whereof, as these conquerours say, have never beene seene. I can say nothing unto your lordshippe touching the apparell of their women. For the Indians keepe them so carefully from us, that hitherto I have not seene any of them, saving onely two olde women, and these had two long robes downe to the foote open before, and girded to them, and they are buttoned with certaine cordons of cotton. I requested the Indians to give me one of these robes, which they ware, to send your honour the same, seeing they would not shewe mee their women. And they brought mee two mantles which are these, which I send you as it were painted : they have two pendents like the women of Spaine, which hang somewhat over their shoulders. The death of the Negro is most certaine : for here are many of the things found which hee carried with him: And the Indians tell me that they killed him here, because the Indians of Chichilticale tolde them that hee was a wicked villaine, and not like unto the Christians: because the Christians kill nowomen: and hee killed women; and also he touched their women, which the Indians love more then themselves; therefore{n}162{n}they determined to kill him: But they did it not after such sort as was reported, for they killed none of the rest of those that came with him : neither slewe they the young lad which was with him of the province of Petatlan, but they tooke him and kept him in safe custodie untill nowe. And when I sought to have him, they excused themselves two or three dayes to give him mee, telling mee that hee was dead, and sometimes that the Indians of Acucu had carried him away. But in conclusion, when Acucu.{n}I tolde them that I should bee very angry if they did not give him mee, they gave him unto me. Hee is an interpreter, for though hee cannot well speake their language, yet hee understandeth the same very well. In this place there is found some quantitie of golde and and s^-silver, which those which are skilfull in minerail matters esteeme to be very good. To this houre I could never ’ learne of these people from whence they have it: And I see they refuse to tell mee the trueth in all things, imagining, as I have sayde, that in short time I would depart hence, but I hope in God they shall no longer excuse themselves. I beseech your lordship to certifie his Majestie of the successe of this voyage. For seeing wee have no more then that which is aforesayd, and untill such time as it please God that wee finde that which wee desire, I meane not to write my selfe. Our Lorde God keepe and preserve your Excellende.{n}From the province of Cibola, and from this citie of Granada the third of August 1540. Francis Vasques de Coronado kisseth the hands of your Excellende.{n}The rest of this voyage to Acuco, Tiguex, Cicuic, and Quivira, and unto the Westerne Ocean, is thus written in the general historic of the West Indies by Francis Lopez de Gomara, Chap. 214.{n}BEcause they would not returne to Mexico without doing Something, nor with emptie hands, they agreed to passe further into the countrey, which was tolde them to bee better and better. So they came to 163{n}The Westerne sea discovered. Tiguex.{n}Axa and Quivira.{n}A towne burnt. Another town assaulted.{n}Mantles. Turqueses. Feathers.{n}Precious things.{n}Acuco a towne upon an exceeding strong hill. And from thence Don Garcias Lopez de Cardenas with his companie of horsemen went unto the Sea : and Francis Vasques went to Tiguex, which standeth on the banke of a great river. There they had newes of Axa and Quivira. There they sayde was a King whose name was Tatarrax, with a long beard, horie headed, and rich, which was girded with a Bracamart, which prayed upon a payre of beades, which worshipped a Crosse of golde, and the image of a woman, the Queene of heaven. This newes did greatly rejoyce and cheere up the armie : although some thought it to bee false, and the report of the Friers. They determined to goe thither, with intention to winter in so rich a countrey as that was reported to bee. One night the Indians ranne away, and in the morning they found thirtie horses dead, which put the armie in feare. In their journey they burnt a certaine towne: And in another towne which they assaulted, they killed certaine Spaniards, and wounded fiftie horses, and the inhabitants drewe into their towne Francis de Ovando wounded or dead, to eate and sacrifice him as they thought, or peradventure to see more perfectly, what maner of men the Spaniards were : for there was not found there any signe of sacrificing men. Our people layde siege unto the towne, but could not take it in more then five and fortie dayes space. The townesmen that were besieged, dranke snowe in stead of water: and seeing themselves forlorne they made a fire, wherein they cast their mantles, feathers, Turqueses and precious things, that those strangers might not enjoy them. They issued out in a squadron with their women and children in the middest, to make way by force, and to save themselves, but fewe escaped the edge of our swordes and the horses, and a certaine river which was neere the towne. Seven Spaniards were slaine in this conflict, and fourescore were wounded, and many horses : whereby a man may see of what force resolution is in necessitie.{n}164{n}Many Indians returned to the towne with the women and children, and defended themselves, untill our men set fire on the towne. In this countrey there are melons, Melons. and white and redde cotton, whereof they make farre larger mantels, then in other parts of the Indies. From ^^fmreS' Tigues they went in foure dayes journey to Cicuic, which dayes journey is a small towne, and foure leagues from thence they met from Tiguex. with a new kind of oxen wild and fierce, whereof the first day they killed fourescore, which sufficed the armie with flesh. From Cicuic they went to Quivira, which after Quivira. their accompt, is almost three hundred leagues distant, through mighty plaines, and sandie heathes so smooth, and wearisome, and bare of wood, that they made heapes of oxe-dung for want of stones and trees, that they might Heapes of oxe not lose themselves at their returne : for three horses were ^mg made fir lost on that plaine, and one Spaniard, which went from his n°W companie on hunting. All that way & plaines are as full of crookebacked oxen, as the mountaine Serena in Spaine is of sheepe : but there is no people but such as keepe those cattell. They were a great succour for the hunger and want of bread which our people stoode in.{n}One day it rayned in that plaine a great showre of haile, as bigge as Orenges, which caused many teares, weakenesse, and vowes. At length they came to Quivira and found Tatarrax, whome they sought, an hoarie headed man, naked, and with a j ewell of copper hanging at his necke, which was all his riches. The The Spaniards Spaniards seeing the false report of so famous riches, returne to Ti-returned to Tiguex, without seeing either crosse or ^x\an^soto shewe or Chnstiamtie : and from thence to Mexico. TheSpaniards In the ende of March of the yeere 1542. Francis Vas- wouldhavein-quez fell from his horse in Tiguex, and with the fall habited the fell out of his wits, and became madde. Which some countrey-tooke to bee for griefe, and others thought it to be but counterfeited : for they were much offended with him, because hee peopled not the countrey.{n}Quivira is in fortie degrees: it is a temperate countrey, and hath very good waters, and much grasse, i65{n}Ships seene on the sea coast of Quivira, which were 30. dayes in sapling thither.{n}Andrew de Campo travailed from Quivira to Panuco.{n}The cause why the Spaniards peopled not in Cibola.{n}plummes, mulberries, nuts, melons and grapes, which ripen very well. There is no cotton : and they apparell themselves with oxe-hides and deeres skinnes. They sawe shippes on the sea coast, which bare Alcatrarzes or Pellicanes of golde and silver in their prows, and were laden with marchandises, and they thought them to bee of Cathaya, and China, because they shewed our men by signes that they had sayled thirtie dayes.{n}Frier John de Padilla stayed behinde in Tigues, with another of his companions called Frier Francis, and returned to Quivira, with some dozen Indians of Mechuacan, and with Andrew de Campo a Portugal!, the gardiner of Francis de Solis : Hee tooke with him horses and mules with provision. Hee tooke sheepe and hennes of Castile, and ornaments to say Masse withall. The people of Quivira slewe the Friers, and the Portugall escaped with certaine Indians of Mechuacan. Who albeit at that time he escaped death, yet could hee not free himselfe out of captivitie : for by and by after they caught him againe. But ten moneths after he was taken captive, hee fled away with a couple of dogs. As hee travailed, hee blessed the people with a crosse, whereunto they offered much, and wheresoever hee came, they gave him almes, lodging, and foode. He came to the countrey of the Chichimechas, and arrived at Panuco. When he came to Mexico, hee ware his haire very long, and his beard tyed up in a lace, and reported strange things of the lands, rivers and mountaines that he had passed.{n}It grieved Don Antonio de Mendosa very much that the army returned home : for hee had spent above threescore thousand pesos of golde in the enterprise, and ought a great part thereof still. Many sought to have dwelt there ; but Francis Vasquez de Coronado, which was rich, and lately married to a faire wife, would not consent, saying, that they could not maintaine nor defend themselves in so poore a countrey, and so farre from succour. They travailed above nine hundred leagues in this countrey.{n}