The voyage intended towards China, wherein M. Edward Fenton was appointed general: Written by M. Luke Ward his Viceadmiral, and Captaine of the Edward Bonaventure, begun Anno Dom. 1582.{n}He second of April I departed with the Edward Bonaventure from Blackwall, and the 19 of the same arrived in Nettle roade at Hampton, where I found riding the Gallion Leicester: and so remaining there till the first of May, wee set saile thence in the forenoone, being of us in{n}the whole fleete foure saile.{n}1	The Gallion Leicester of 400 tunnes Admirall, whereof was general Captaine Edward Fenton, and William Hawkins the yonger lieutenant general in her, and Christopher Hall, Master.{n}2	The Edward Bonaventure of 300 tunnes Vice-admirall, whereof was Captaine Luke Ward, and Thomas Perrie Master.{n}3	The Francis of fortie tunnes, whereof was Captaine John Drake, and William Markam Master.{n}4	The Elizabeth of fiftie tunnes, whereof was Captaine Thomas Skevington and Ralph Crane Master.{n}We spent by meanes partly of businesse, and partly of contrary windes, the moneth of May upon the coast, and then leaving the land wee put ofF to sea, and proceeded on our voyage intended by the grace of God for China: untill the moneth of August following, nothing fell out much worthy the knowledge of the worlde, which is not common to all navigants, but about the beginning of August aforesayd, being somewhat neere the coast of Guinie, upon the shooting ofF a peece and the putting out of a flag in the Admiral, I went on boord, and M. Walker, M. Shaw, M. GefFreis, our Master & Pilot{n}172{n}with me, where the general counsel was assembled to consider of two points, viz.{n}The first, whether it were necessarie to water presently or not, which was thought very needful of all men, and so concluded.{n}The second, where the best and aptest place was to water in, which was thought of the greater number to be at Sierra leona on the coast of Guinie, which was also concluded, and by the Master and Pilots agreed to goe hence Southeast, which determined, wee returned aboord.{n}The 3 day wee went Southeast and Eastsoutheast, till sixe a clocke at night that wee sawe the lande of Guinie, which bare Northeast of us about 12 leagues off, which seene, wee sounded, and had no ground: then went I and our Master and Pilot aboord the Admirall, and after many debatements concluded to run in Northeast by East, and at eleven at night wee came aboord againe, and went all night Northeast by East.{n}The 4 at eight a clocke in the forenoone wee were within 2 leagues of the lande, which bare off us Northeast, which rose like a hill full of woods, and on each side low land: wee being perswaded by our pilots that it was the entrance into Sierra leona, went in Northeast untill we were within an halfe league of the shoar, and had brought the South point Southeast by east off us. At eleven a clocke finding it a bay and not Sierra leona, wee brought our tacks aboord, and stoode along West by North and West larboord tacked.{n}In this time our Admirals pinnesse rowed in, and went on land upon the South side of the bay, and the Elizabeths boate with her. They found houses of boughes, and in one of the houses the tongue of a beast, and a bullocks tongue fresh killed; also a lake with plentie of fresh water, and fresh-water-fish in it had by the sea side: they found drie pomegranates, and pease like nuts, with other unknowen fruites under the trees. The Elizabeth ranne in, and brought the South point South by West of her, and ankered within Faulcon shot of the shore in 173{n}A.D.{n}1582.{n}They arrive in the river oj Sierra leona.{n}Trees hung with oysters.{n} seven fathom oaze, where they tooke fish with hookes, while hee stayed for the boates.{n}The 4 all the afternoone wee ran along the coast (which lyeth Northwest and by North, and Southeast by South) West, and within a point one way or the other, seeing the lande under our lee three or foure leagues off, and all night likewise.{n}The 9 at three a clock in the morning our Admiral shot off a peece, and at foure wee weyed and went hence Northeast. At five in the morning wee saw the land along, and the Island which wee saw the night before, and divers other Islands about it, & so ran in Northeast untill we had brought our selves thwart of the river, and then ran in East about sixe at night, being a league within the river. Our Admirall shot off a peece, and there wee ankered in eight fathom sand. Being at anker, I manned our boate and would have gone aboord the Admirall, but could not, the flood was bent so strong, and she rode halfe a mile beneath us in the tyde, but we had no tyde.{n}The 10 in the morning at five a clocke I sent our skiffe with our pilot in her to find a roade, and a watring place: in the meane time at sixe a clocke we set saile with our ship, and being calme wee towed with our boat untill ten, and then ankered a mile short of the watering place. After dinner I went on land with my skiffe to finde timber to fish our maste, and searching along the shoare we found a good watring place: and further seeking in the wood, which all the countrey is full of, and of divers sorts, wee found Limmon trees full of fruits: also trees growing by the water side with the stalkes hung full of oysters and great periwinkles, and crabs amongst them: wee found drie pomegranates with many other fruits un-knowen to us. In the meane time our Admirall and the Edward with the barkes, having a gale at West, set saile, and ran up and ankered in the rode before the accustomed watering place.{n}The 22 day certaine Portugals which had bene with 174{n}us before, came down and brought some other Portugals and Negros with them in a shippe-boate, wherein they brought us 80 mewes of rice, 500 and odde weight of Elephants teeth, and a Negro boy, which boy they gave the general, and the rice and teeth for the Elizabeth, Their trafique which wee solde them, with all her tackle and sailes, the having neede of the rice, because our meale which wee wu&a ■ brought out of England was decayed and naught, whereof wee had into the Edward 30 bushels, which is a mewe and a halfe: the Francis had 5 bushels, and the Gallion had the rest. And wee had 200 weight of Elephants teeth, and the Gallion 300 and a halfe, and sixe pound.{n}During this time we sent our skiffe with the Admiralls pinnesse up the river to meete with a Gundall, which the Portugals had sent for fresh victuals for us: who not finding her, returned at night: All this day I with M. Walker remained aboord with the Admirall, and after their dinner and supper wee ended our businesse, and returned aboord, having had many good speaches with the Portugals.{n}The 26 day being Sunday, Captaine Hawkins, M. Maddox, M. Hall, M. Bannister, Captaine Drake, M. Evans, M. Hoode, and others came aboord and heard the Sermon, and dined with me: after dinner we went on shoare to the lower point where we followed the footing of an Elephant, but saw him not, and so spent the time to and fro till supper time, and then came aboord, and supped together, which done, each man departed to his abode.{n}This night I was very sicke, (and so were all they Sicknesse by that were on shoare with mee,) with eating of a fruite eating seme in the countrey, which wee found on trees, like nuts: whereof some did eate foure, some five, some sixe, and ’ more, but wee vomited and scoured upon it without reason.{n}The 27 day in the afternoone the olde Greeke Francisco came aboord to me, with request that hee might have the Francis boate to goe up for his owne 175{n}boate which was not come downe, with whom I talked of this Countrey and Countrey-people, untill five of the clocke at night that the flood was come, and then I went aboorde to the Admirall, and got his consent, and sent themselves in her: viz. Ferdinando the Portugal! Master, and his Negro: In the meane time I sent foure of my men to watch in the Elizabeth all night.{n}The 28 day in the morning at foure a clocke I sent my skiffe with the Admirals pinnesse down to the west point to fish, who came aboorde againe at one in the afternoone, and brought as much fish as all our companies could eate.{n}During the time that our boates were a fishing, came downe the river a canoa and the Portugals former boate, 7^ Portugal with hennes, orenges, plantans, which they presented the presents. general and mee with: and also the rest of the rice due to us for the payment of the Elizabeth. For the parti- tions whereof I went aboord the Admirall, where I dined. M. Evans	After dinner M. Evans began to barter away certaine of{n}one of our	the ships commodities with the Negros, without acquaint-{n}marchants. jng the Generaq or any other untill hee had done, whereof grewe more wordes then profite, as by the bookes of marchandise appeareth. Which done I came aboord, and had two of the Portugals to supper with mee. About two of the clocke in the morning we had a Ternado, and much raine.{n}They search The 29 about 4 a clocke in the morning, I in my the countrey. skiffe, and Captaine Parker in his pinnesse, went downe to the West point, and there wee landed with 11 men in all well furnished, and searched the woods, plaines and plashes, after an Elephant, finding the haunt, footing, and soyle of many newly done, yet wee saw none of them. Wee saw hogs, goates or fawnes, and divers sorts of fowles very wilde: and having travailed about 2 leagues, about noone wee returned to the point, where wee landed, and met our boates which had beene at sea, and taken plentie of good fish: there wee refreshed our selves with such victuals as wee had, and came 176{n}1582. aboord our severall ships, where I found the Portugals and Negros, who had dined, and after supped aboord with mee.{n}The 2 of September we set saile at sixe of the clock in the morning, & went out West betweene 7 and 10 fathom, with a pretie gale at East til 8, then it waxed calme, wee being shot out of the harbour a league and a halfe. It continued calme this day till one in the afternoone, and then it blewe up at Westsouthwest a good gale, so wee stood off Northnorthwest, and Northwest till 5 in the afternoone, then wee ankered in 12 fathom, being 6 leagues off the point West by North.{n}The 3 day about eight a clocke in the forenoone, the They returne general came aboord to mee, complaining that his maine t0 ^rra ^ona crosse-trees were broken, and therefore determined to a^aine-goe into Sierra leona againe when the winde blewe: at 12 at noone wee set saile, and went in Eastsoutheast, and Southeast, and Southsoutheast, being carried to the Northward with the flood. And at 7 at night wee ankered in eight fathom three leagues off the entrance, Westnorthwest.{n}The 12 day came downe the river a boate with three Trafique with other Portugals, with whom the General bargained, to let 3 °j her.Porlu them have 3 barrels of salt for 5 barrels of rice, and after s£ewis that rate to exchange for 40 barrels, which hee acquainted Henriques a mee with: afterwards I dined among the Portugals with dweller here him: after dinner I went on shoare to the oven, and above 20 to the carpenters. After I had bene on shoare and seene the worke there, I returned aboord, & there supped with Fernandos mee the general, M. Maddox, Captaine Hawkins, and Captaine.{n}Portugals: after supper each man returned to his ^T'dro Vaz place.	™ ’{n}The 13 in the afternoone, the Portugals came againe aboord me, and brake their fast with me: after I sent by them up the river in my skiffe 12 barrels of salt, and gave them a bottell of wine for one of the savage Queenes.{n}XI	177	M{n}They enter up The 15 after dinner, the Master, M. Walker, and I, to search the accompanied with 12 other travelled over a great deale countrey. ground to finde some cattell, but found none: and comming home thorow the Oyster bay, I found of my company and of the Admirals together rosting of oysters: and going from them, Thomas Russell one of my com-pan ie sawe a strange fish named Utelif, which had fought with a crocodile, and being hurt came neere the shoare, where hee waded in, and by the taile drew him a lande, A sword-fish and there slewe him, and sent the general the hinder hilled. halfe of him: the head part I kept, in whose nose is a bone of two foot long like a sword with three and twentie pricks of a side, sharpe and strange: The bodie wee did eate, and it was like a Sharke.{n}The 30 and last day of September the Francis cooke came aboord about seven a clocke in the forenoone from fishing with my net, and brought among other A strange fish fish, a Sea-calfe (as wee called it) with haire and lympits, taken' and barnacles upon him, being seven foote long, foure foote nine inches about: which to see I sent for the general, and such as pleased to come see it out of the Admirall, who came and brought with him M. Maddox, Captaine Hawkins, Captaine Parker, and most part of his companie, who having viewed the beast, which was ougly being alive, it being flayed, opened, and dressed, prooved an excellent, faire, and good meate, broyled, rosted, sodde and baked, and sufficed all our companies for that day.{n}The first day of October in the morning, wee tooke in to make up our full complement of rice twentie barrels for the twelve barrels of salt, delivered the Portugall Lewis Henriques before.{n}The 2 day about sixe a clocke in the morning, wee set saile having little winde: the Captaine with the Master, and other of their companie of the Portugals came aboord me, complaining that the carsey by them received for the foure Negros of the general, was not sufficient for their payment, whereupon I gave them 178{n}1582. scarlet caps, and other things to their content, who finding themselves well pleased, departed away in the Gundall, and we having little winde, got downe thwart of the fishing bay, and there came to anker about nine a clocke the same forenoone.{n}The third day about two a clocke in the morning wee set saile, and went hence Southwest by West till two in the afternoone then being little wind: at five wee ankered sixe leagues Eastsoutheast of the Southermost  part of the land in fifteene fathom, and there wee rode till eight a clocke at night, and set saile with a stiffe gale at Northeast, which sometime blewe, and sometime was little winde, and so continued all night.{n}The first day of November in the forenoone, wee tooke in our maine saile to mend it: in the meane time, the Admirall came up by us, and desiring mee with my Master, and M. Blackcoller to come aboord to him about certaine conference, hee sent his boate for us, where by him was propounded, whether it were best for us to stand on with the coast of Brasil as wee did, or else to stand about starboord tacked to the Eastwards : whereupon divers of their charts and reckonings were shewed: by some it appeared, wee were a hundred and fifteene leagues, by some a hundred and fiftie leagues, by some a hundred and fortie leagues, and some a great deale further short of Brasil, next hand Northeast of us: but all agreed to bee within twentie minutes of the line, some to the North, some to the South of the line.{n}After many debatements, it was agreed by most consent to stand on for the coast of Brasil, except the wind changed, and there to doe, as weather should compell us. In this consultation, wee had speaches of courses, and places of meeting, if by misfortune wee should bee separated, wherein was no full order concluded, but that we should speake every night with the Admirall, if wee conveniently might, and so to appoint our course from time to time, if wee lost companie, to stay fifteene dayes 179{n}in the river of Plate, and from thence to go for the streights, and there to ride, and water, and trimme our ships.{n}The 12 in the afternoone M. Maddox, M. Hall, M. Bannister, and others came aboord to visite M. Walker. After a time of abode with him, they returned to the gallion all againe, except M. Maddox who remained with M. Walker here aboord.{n}This night M. Maddox and I, behelde many constellations in the firmament, and set downe certaine newe starres raised to the Southwards. All day and night wee went South, and South by East among.{n}The seventeenth day in the afternoone wee shot off three peeces of ordinance in honour of our Queenes Majestie. This day after dinner came master Maddox, and Captaine Drake with others to take their leave of Master Walker, as I with, all my company had done before, supposing him past hope of recoverie. At 19 degrees of foure of the clocke, finding our selves in nineteene Southerly	degrees to the Southwards of the line, and cleare of{n}aiu e'	the shoalds called by us Powles, wee went hence South-{n}southwest all night following.{n}The 18 day being Sunday, after dinner the general, M. Maddox, Captaine Parker, and many other came aboord, and visited M. Walker: which done, they dranke, and departed aboord againe. All this day and night, we went our course Southwest by South, with a franke gale.{n}The 19 day about noone, the Sun was in our Zenith, being declined to the Southwards 21 degrees, and 33 minutes, where wee found the aire fresh and temperate, as in England in June, when a fresh gale of winde Cold evenings, doeth blow in the heate of the day, but the evening, the night, and the morning are more fresh and colder here, then it is in England either in June or Julie.{n}The first of December, about sixe of the clocke in the morning, wee sawe lande on the coast of Brasil, in the height of 28 degrees or there abouts, which bare 180{n}Northwest, and was eight leagues from us very high land. Wee stood in with it, being much winde, and comming neere, found divers Islands : and seeing the Divers Hands. Francis would not come roome nor run ahead us, wee stood in with the shore, and sounded in 30 fathom oaze three leagues off the lande, bearing from the Westnorthwest to the Northnorthwest of us, and so stoode still till it shoalded orderly into seven fathom, within a mile of a headland: then perceiving a breach over our bowe, and no hope of a good harbour, in that place, wee bare up roome, and our Admirall after us, whom wee haled : then hee tolde us hee would seeke harbour to leewards, requiring me to go ahead. Then seeing the barke was asterne I hoised out my skiffe, and set her maste and saile, taking her ging, and Tobias one of my Masters mates with mee, and ranne before the shippe, sounding in 15 fathom faire sand, leaving a ledge of rockes asea-boord of us : so the ships and the barke looffed up under a headland, and ankered in eight fathom, halfe a mile off the lande, having brought the headland which lyeth in 27 degrees 50 minutes The latitude Southsoutheast off them, and the North land Northeast deZrees Off them.	50 minutes.{n}I stoode on with the skiffe, hoping to finde a better harbour to leeward three leagues, but it prooved not so : wherefore I returned, and in my way aboord I met with a rocke in the sea, where we landed, and killed good store of fowle, and after I went aboord the Admirall, where I presented him with fowle, and returned aboord to supper.{n}In this time our boates had beene aland, and found water, ballaste, and two decayed houses, as they told me, and our men aboord hooked fresh-fish. This night wee rode quietly.{n}The second, being Sunday, our masters moared our  ships further into the bay. We brought the South point Southeast off us, and the North land Northeast: and so rid.{n}181{n}jin exceeding great draught offish.{n}The woods set on fire by our men.{n}A saile seene and taken.{n}After dinner captaine Parker, with my boat, and company, went a land, and there placed pipes, and made three wels. In the meane time, I accompanied with M. Hawkins, M. Maddox, M. Cotton, and divers of mine owne people, landed farther within the bay, and found two rivers of fresh water, and a good fishing place. Presently I sent aboord for my net, with which at one draught we drew 600 great mullets, and 5 great basses; the like draught was never seene with so small a net: with which we went aboord, giving to the admirall 240, to the Francis 80, and the rest our company spent, and gave almighty God thanks for his great goodnesse.{n}All this while was captaine Parker and others gone into the land, and fired the woods; which burned extremely.{n}The third day in the morning our carpenter calked without boord, and the master and others tooke up all the merchandize in the stearne sheets to the keele, and there put downe a boats loding of stone : and seeing the merchandize well conditioned, stowed the same againe. In the meane time, my selfe, and others in our boats, scraped off the wormes, and washed the rudder, and part of one side of our ship.{n}After dinner, the master, pilot, and I, went ashore, and observed the Sunne at noone, which being past, with our net we drew plenty of divers sorts of fishes, and went from that bay to the watering place : from thence, aboord the generail, which had taken physicke, and gave them and the Francis fish for their companies, and so went aboord, where our company had romaged aforemast: so that this afternoone we tooke in two boats more lading of stones afore mast.{n}The sixt day in the morning, before sixe of the clocke, we saw a saile which went towards the Southwards, the admirall not having knowledge thereof. I went aboord, and certified him; who appointed me to goe and bring her in, and to take captaine Parker 182{n}and some of the gallions men into the Francis, and the admirals skiffe with us: so we gave her chase, and tooke her sixe leagues to the leewards of the place we rode in. Then not being able to fetch the rode againe, we ankered in the sea. I intending to come away in the pinnesse, and leave the Francis, and the prize together, being ready to depart, the winde blew at South a stout gale, and raine; so that about sixe of the clocke, we ankered in the rode, where our ships rid.{n}After we had taken them, and that captaine Parker and I were aboord, we had much talke with them before they came to the ships; and being ankered there, the chiefe men were caried abord the general, which was a gentleman, named Don Francisco de Torre Vedra, nephew to the governour of the river of Plate, named Don John de Torre Vedra.{n}We found an Englishman, named Richard Carter Richard borne in Limehouse, who had bene out of England foure and twenty yeres, and hath bene nere twelve ta^en -tn yeres dwelling in the river of Plate, at a towne named prize. Ascension, three hundred leagues up in the river, whither they were now determined to go & inhabit, having two women, and two yong children, seven friers, the rest boyes, and sailers, to the number of one and twenty persons.	The number{n}The olde frier was had in great reverence among the 1 in the rest : insomuch that they called him the Holy father. r ’ He was abiding in no place ; but as visitour he went visiting from monastery to monastery.{n}The substance of all the speeches was, that the Spanish fleet was before the streights of Magellan, as they thought; for they were departed sixe weeks past from the river of Jenero, where they had beene seven moneths to refresh and Winter, and that these were not of that company, but came out of Spaine the 26 of May 1582 in a barke of fourescore tun, and fourescore persons, of purpose for the river of Plate.{n}183{n}The friers being eighteene in number, could not agree, and their barke was a ground at Spirito santo, like to be lost: therefore the old frier bought this small barke of 46 tun, at a port named Spirito santo, in Brasill; and so divided themselves: and comming from thence, lost company at sea: but they thought they were before at the river of Plate. After his speeches, I went and appointed (by the generals order) men to remaine aboord the prize with captaine Parker, and brought one of the Portugals sailes away with me, and came aboord, where I found that our men had filled water all day.{n}The 7 day in the morning the general sent for me ; where he shewed me and M. Maddox certeine articles which the friers and mariners Spaniards were examined of; which tended altogether to the knowledge of the Spanish fleets intent, and of the meanes whereby we might be discovered by the way of the river of Plate by land to Peru. In this time came the rest: after whose comming it was debated, whether it were best to take the boat & people with us or not. Which was not determined; but referred till further examination.{n}Then was it determined to passe by the streights, notwithstanding the Spaniards were there, but not to set up forge, nor to build pinnesse, but water, and so thorow.{n}The eight day afore noone M. Walker and I went aboord the admirall to dinner, where was determined to discharge the Spanish barke, named Our lady of pity, and all the men, except Richard Carter the English man, and John Pinto a Portugall, which dwelled at the river of Plate. After dinner, the generail appointed mee and captaine Hawkins to see them all set aboord their ship, and to receive from them certeine necessaries, which willingly they imparted with us, and to leave them satisfied. Which done, I returned aboord.{n}The 9. day, being Sunday, in the morning, I sent M. Shaw and M. Geffries aboord the admirall, to peruse the Spaniards letters: wherein they found the estate of the 184{n}1582. fleet which was in the streights of Magellan, as by the note thereof appeareth.{n}About ten of the clocke the generail, M. Maddox, captaine Hawkins, and captaine Parker, came aboord of me. The general began to reproove my quarter master for grudging of victuali for the Francis. Which was answered: and he well satisfied. Then sent I for the olde frier and Don Francisco; who all dined with me: and after dinner, the Spaniards having received the canoa, which was suncke, aland, and stones to ballast them, which my boat caried them, and all other things to their liking and content, they departed from me. The general also departed, and his company, who being gone, I divided the sugar and ginger among my people, which Spanish the Spaniards gave us: and after spent the day in presents. ordinary businesse.{n}The 10 day in the morning, our skiffe went a fishing, whereof we eat as much to supper as served the company: the rest we salted for store, and to prove if they would take salt or not.{n}The 11 day, betimes in the morning, our skiffe went againe to fish, and tooke great plentie. About seven of the clocke I went aland, taking with me the master, and others of our best men, to the number of 22 persons, & travelled to the place where our people before had Things found found many great jars of earth, and decayed habitations in the uland~ of the Indians, and trees, being dead and withered, of sweet wood. From that place we saw over the tops of a narrow wood, a faire plaine, which at the request of the master and the rest, I went with them to see. We passed thorow a thicke and perillous wood, before we came to the supposed plaine: and when we came to it, we found the lowest part thereof higher then any of our heads, and so mossy under foot, that we slipped to the knees many steps, which so wearied us, that for my part, I was very sicke, and so hasted aboord, leaving the master with 15 men, which cut a tree of sweet wood, and brought many pieces thereof aboord.{n}185{n}They leave the harbour in 27 degrees and 50. min.{n}About 3 afternoone, M. Walker and many of our men being ashore, the winde came faire, and we layed out a warpe to the Northeast, and began to winde ahead. After we layed out another warpe with a bend, and wound to the plat, and so rid by it with one anker all night.{n}The 12 day about five a clocke in the morning, we set saile, and as we ran out betwixt the ledge of rocks and the maine, in eight fadom water, as we were catting our anker, the catt-rope, stopper, and all brake; so that we were glad to let slip all the cable, and cast off our boat and skiflfe to wey the same. After we had stood out a good way, the admirall was under saile: then cast we about and went roome with the admirall which weaved us, who sent in his pinnesse and the Francis to helpe out our boats; so by the helpe of the admirals pinnesse, with her saile, we had our boat the sooner, and about 12 a clocke at noone had taken in the anker, cable, our long boat, skiflFe, & all, and put out all our sailes bearing after the admirall, which went hence South by east. About sixe a clocke at night, being thicke weather, we lost sight of the land, being foure leagues off or thereabout. All night it was but little winde: yet went we our course South by west.{n}The 13 day about seven afore noon, the wind blew at Southsoutheast, & was very foggy; with which gale we stood in larboord tacked West, till ten a clocke the same forenoone. Then had we sight of the land ahead, all along (for it waxed cleere weather) it sheweth a farre off like white cliffes, but is all sandy hilles, and bayes along the sea side. At one a clocke after noone we were in j 6 fadome water, and within halfe a league of the shore, where we saw severall fires made by the Indians to give warning to the other people within the land, as we supposed. Then we cast about, and stood ofF Southeast by east till midnight, that the winde came large : then went we our course South by west till next morning.{n}The 14 day we went our course South by west, having sight of the land at sixe a clocke in the morning 186{n}1582. about seven leagues off: and so went till sixe at night, that wee saw land againe seven leagues ofF West, and the winde shifted to the South. Then we cast about, and stood off Eastsoutheast at seven at night for a while: then came up the winde at Northwest, and blew agood.{n}The 15 day in the morning, the admirall was ahead, as farre as we could almost see her, by whose default I know not; and being little winde we could not get to her till foure of the clocke after noone: then we hayled  her, and stood in betweene the Southsouthwest and the Southwest till sixe at night, that the winde was variable, and foule weather. Then we cast about, and sounded in 23 fadome soft oaze, and stood off a while Northeast; and presently cast about againe, and went South by East larboord tacked, and Southsoutheast, among all night: finding at foure in the morning 15 fadome sand.{n}The 20 day, about ten a clocke afore noone, we went aboord the admirall; viz. M. Walker, the master, the pilot, the two merchants, and my selfe, being directed so to doe by the general. Upon our comming the general was going to dinner, where wee also dined with him. Having dined, the general called us his assistants into his cabbin, and there delivered to us in writing two demands, to be by us considered upon, and he to have our opinions therein.{n}The effects of the demands were these.{n}1	Whether it was best for us to adventure our selves to passe the streights of Magellan or not; considering the force of the enemy, which we knew to be there before us: and also that our determination was there to set up our pinnesse, make yron hoops, carene our ships, and do all our necessary businesses for the full acomplish-ment of our voyage.{n}2	If that course were not thought best, which way were meetest for us to take.{n}To the first we were of opinion, that it were good to heare the opinions of captaine Hawkins, captaine Drake, 187{n}Richard Carter the English man taken in the prize, caried along with them.{n}They retume in the latitude{n}of 33-{n}and the two pilots, which had passed the streights and knew the harbours, and likest places to be fortified, and inhabited or not, who were called, & the three masters with them. Their opinions were as divers as their names; & as much difiered, as before this time they were wont usually to doe: onely they all agreed in this one point, that it was impossible for us to passe the streights without seeing, and incountring with the ships, although the fortification of the land did not annoy us: which being long and thorowly debated, and their opinions with the three masters demanded, which accorded not scant any one with other, they were dismissed.{n}Then the general received the opinions of us his assistants, beginning with the yoongest in authority first: which when he had heard them all over, and being set downe in writing under our hands, he tooke deliberation till after supper to give his determination.{n}When we had all supped, then he sent for us downe into his cabbin, and delivered in writing his determination, (which was) to victuali, and furnish our selves on this coast, before he proceeded any further; and named two places, The river of Plate, or S. Vincent, to be chosen.{n}For the better deciphering of the river of Plate, & the commodities thereof, was called before us, Richard Carter, which doth dwell there; who could not assure us of any wine, except we could stay foure moneths for it: but other victuals plenty. The river is shoale and dangerous, the road seven leagues from any towne, or place of commodity: which considered with the trechery that might from thence be used, into the streights by sea, and into Peru by land, we all concluded to go to S. Vincent, which place is inhabited by Portugals, and where in honest sort we might conveniently have all our businesse done.{n}With this resolution we tooke our leaves about eight a clocke at night, & being come aboord, presently bare up, and went roome, having all the day before beat up the 188{n}1583. winde larboord-tacked Eastsoutheast till at night: after it was a little winde all night we went North next hand.{n}The 21 day, after service, I declared unto my company the intent of our returne to the port of S. Vincent, wherewith they were well satisfied, being before doubtfull that we should not proceed, but returne without performance of our voyage. It continued calme all day till six at night, then we went Northwest by west till eight at night, and then we cast about, and stood off Eastsoutheast, and East by south all night with a good gale.{n}The 22 day in the morning we missed the Francis, John Drake in which by all presumption went roome in the beginning of Francts .	. A r r	°	° went to the{n}.	. river of Plate,{n}The 2 5 day, being Chnstmasse day, it was little winde wherein his in the forenoone till ten a clocke; then it blew a fresh ship was cast gale, with which wee went our course Northnortheast, bul the In the afternoone it was lesse wind: yet went we our ''landmdlived course North by east, and Northnortheast, and North, and months North by west, till midnight. Then being in shoaled among the water, wee cast about, and lay Southsoutheast, and South- Savages. east by south, an houre; and seeing our admirall came not after us, we cast about backe againe, and presently met him : so we went both together next hand Southsoutheast all the rest of the night. This afternoone we saw the Infinite numskim of fishes so thicke in the sea, that it seemed a water ber °ffish. troubled with trampling of horses; which was thicke, and slimy: for we had taken up some of it.{n}The 17 day of January, about seven a clocke, the master, M. Blaccoller, and I went in our skiffe, and rowed, and sounded round about an ile, and found 16 fadoms within a stones cast hard aboord the shore, and faire ground: after we landed, and found nothing but woods and bushes, and strange wormes: we saw a faulcon, and  one other small bird, and therefore named it Faulcon ile : Asmalllsland it is a mile about, with a rocke on the East side, which which our men lieth close to it, and it is in sight without danger. After aucon we came aboord, and dined; at two a clocke we set saile, with winde Southeast, and ran in Northeast a while, till the{n}189{n}winde scanted: then we went in Northnortheast, till we were in seven fadome and a halfe of water, within a league of shore: then we cast about, and stood off Southsoutheast all night, till sixe a clocke the next morning.{n}The 18 day about three a clocke, afore day, we saw our admirall againe, and kept her company till day.{n}Citron isle. The 19 day, being within a league of the Citron ile, about eight a clocke afore noone, we went aboord the general, viz. M. Walker, the master, the pilot, and my selfe, rejoycing of our good meeting, who tolde me of their evill road, where they lost an anker, a cable, and a haulser, and how the day before, their pinnesse was ashore on the same Hand, and found fowle, and water there, whither now they had sent their boat and pinnesse for more water, where I know they had small store.{n}I also taking captaine Parker, the master, and M. Wilks with me, went ashore, and travelled to the top of the ile, which is wooded, and high grasse, but evill water, and little on it, but yoong fowle plenty, and dangerous comming to them. By this time (I having set the isles, and headlands about in sight with a compasse) came a small gale at Southsoutheast; then our admirall shot off a piece for the boats, and hence I went, and dined aboord with him, and came after aboord, and went in Northnortheast and Northeast till morning: at which time wee were within a league of the isle, entring before Their arrwall s. Vincent, but knew not how much water was upon at S. Vtncent. barre to gO out<{n}The 20 day in the morning, being calme, the generals pinnesse came in to the shore, with intent to sound Three canoas the entrance, but seeing three canoas, with ech at the least °{/7ndians	men> whereof the greater part were naked Indians,{n}' which rowed, the rest Portugals, they returned aboord again. The canoas came with a flag of truce within, calling of our ship, and we shewed them the like, asking what we were, and of what nation : at length one Portugall went aboord the admirall, by whom the general sent a letter to the governour, craving a pilot to bring in 190{n}our ship of courtesie, and to have traffique. About noone, having the winde at South, we bare in Northwest, and so to the Northeast, as the chanell trended : but comming into seven fadome water, we ankered, untill our boats had sounded the barre. During which time, I went aboord the admirall, to conferre with him about our proceedings.{n}After I had stayed a while aboord the admirall, the generail came aboord with me, where we published unto all my company very good rules for their behaviour and profit, to their great satisfaction : after he went downe into my cabbin, where with all his assistants he conferred of divers particulars of our voyage : by which time the boat being returned from sounding, we departed, and set saile, following our skiffes and with our ships got within the barre into seven fadome : then being becalmed, we ankered againe before a sandy bay, wherein stands a castle A castle. and houses: we rid within musket shot of it: and ankered about foure a clocke afternoone.{n}Then went I forwards with my skiffe unto a further point, sounding along. Before my returne, the generail had sent for me to supper; and thither I went: but being ready to sit downe, there came out to us a canoa, wherein can°a with were ten Indians and two Christians; the one an ancient Genouois, the other a Portugall: who came aboord, and “christians there received a small banket, declaring their comming whereof one was to understand our intents, and what we sought: who was an old being satisfied, departed with a farewell of three great pieces from ech ship.{n}The 2i day about three a clocke afternoone, came a canoa, with the old Genouois named Joseph Dory, a John Whithall Fleming named Paul Badeves, and Steven Repose a Portugall, and brought a letter from the governor, and ^welleth at withall, answere of feare and doubts of us, &c. After Santos, hath many speeches and requests, a banket was made them, and married this the generail in his pinnesse with his musicke, & trumpets; Dories and I in my skiffe with trumpets, drum and fife, and tabor and pipe, accompanied them a mile up the river: at going{n}191{n}off, we saluted them with a volley of three great pieces out of ech ship: and after us came captaine Parker with the admirals long boat, and certeine shot in the same, to attend on the generail.{n}The 22 day betimes in the morning, I went aboord the admirall to conferre about the sending of some token and present to the governor, which was by all the assistants determined to send him three yards of fine skarlet, & three yards of fine murry-cloth; and to Joseph Dory the old Genouois, Steven Repose the Portugall, and to Paul Badeves the Fleming, ech of them three yards of fine Santos. blacke cloth, which our merchants went up to Santos withall in the admirals skiffe, about nine a clocke aforenoone.{n}Also this forenoone, we being minded to goe up higher  with our ships into harbour, I advised them to goe view the place, and sound the road before we went up; which we did: where were found the place both unconvenient, and the road woorse: and so we returned, and left the first determination. This day we tooke downe our maintops, and top-mast, and all the shrowds.{n}About two a clocke after noone our merchants returned with their presents, not having beene at the towne, because Steven Repose by the way met them on the river, and advised them to stay untill there had beene word sent to the governour, who was unwilling to speake with them yet, but shortly would send their answere.{n}The rest of this forenoone we spent in communication about the appointing of a purser for the Edward. Also we signed an assent for comming to this place: about which thing grew foule speeches betweene the general and his lieutenant, after the olde custome.{n}The Indians Then went wee to supper: and being at supper, certaine presents. Indians came aboord, and brought the generail a strange crow, and potatos, and sugar canes, to whom he gave Inn tin o- glasses, great pinns, and biscuit: and so we being late. Also this afternoone I ran over S. Vincent, and sounded the bay a league over, 192{n}The chanell of ,	. ,{n}S. Vincent	departed,{n}sounded.	towards{n}island found the chanell and flats, and returned aboord againe within two houres, having a good gale of winde.{n}The 23 day our skiffe went ashore to fish, and tooke prety store: we sent our main-top ashore to be mended, and many of our men to wash their cloaths; also I went my selfe with them aland, to take order that no man should any wayes offend the Indians. In the meane time the general with all the rest of the chiefest gentlemen, came ashore, and viewed the place, and appointed out the fittest roome to set up our smithes forge, and ovens Portable wens to bake our biscuit, and place for our coopers to trim t0 tn-our water caske.{n}The 24 day at foure of the clocke, before day, we heard one call for a boat on the North shore, to whom I sent my skifle, who brought aboord one named John John Whithall, an English man, which is maried here in this Whtthali-place, and with him two of his Indians; whom I enter-teined untill I sent word to the general to prepare himselfe to receive him: in which time he and I talked of many severall particulars.{n}About sixe a clocke I conveyed him aboord the GoodcounseU admirall: there he discovered unto us what had bene done at the towne, as fortification, and sending their t0 our wives away, &c. advising us to receive no more delayes, men. but to come up presently before the towne with our ships.{n}About ten a clocke came a canoa, and brought downe Joseph Dory and Steven Repose, who tolde us that on Saturday the governour would meet our generail, and talke with him, praying us in the meane time to use our ordinary business of cooperage, carpenters worke, filling water, fishing, and washing, &c. but not to set up forge, nor oven, untill speech had with the governour. After this answere, we dined together aboord the gallion: after dinner we left the messengers sitting in the cabbin, and went upon the poope; where the generail demanded the advice of his assistants, whether it were not best to stay these men while we had them or not, or whether it were best to go up with our ships to the towne or no.{n}xi	193	N{n}Whereunto ech man paused to make answere: wherefore I delivered my opinion; which was, that we were forbidden to use violence to any nation for trade.{n}The Minion of Secondly, I considered that divers of our nation, wor-^m^inBrasill	merchants, and now adventurers in this voyage,{n}for trafique. had set out the Minion hither, and begun a trade, which with our forcible dealing might be spoiled, and our nation brought in hatred.{n}Lastly, that with force we were not like to atteine so much commodity, as we were in possibility to have with courtesie.{n}Heereupon all was concluded, and they suffered to passe away: to whom the generail gave the three cloake-clothes, to Joseph Dory, to Paul Baudevese, and to Steven Repose, to ech of them one, which were before cut out for them: and so friendly we and they departed about two a clocke after noone.{n}Three Spanish About foure of the clocke this afternoone we saw ships dis-	three saile of ships come bearing in about the point,{n}'	which assoone as they saw us, ankered upon the barre,{n}and put themselves in readinesse, sending from one ship to another with their boats, and blowing off their ordinance, meaning to take us: and we before night, getting our men and other necessaries from the shore, which were busie on land, armed our ships to defend our selves. Then went I aboord the admirall to know what he meant to do: who determined to set his watch in warlike sort; and so he did: for after the trumpets and drum had sounded, he shot off a great piece, as they before had done; and presently the viceadmirall shot at me, whom I answered with another, and so ceased. We then set up our main-top, and top-mast, rigged before eleven of the clocke the same night. In the meane while they let slip their ankers and cables, and came driving and towing with their boats in upon  us, meaning to have boorded us: and being neere our admirall, he hailed them; who refused to tell of whence they were, thinking by spending of time to get{n}194{n}aboord of him: to whom I called still to beware, and to shoot at them in time. At length he let flie at them, yet was glad to let an anker and cable slip to avoid them: then came they all driving downe thwart my haulse, so that I was faine to let slip an anker and cable to shun the gallion. All this while the ordinance and small shot plied of all parts, and I was faine to send the gallion my skiffe with a haulser to ride by, for shee was loose, and with the flood drave up within me. Then was the viceadmirall on my broad side, who was well payed before, yet I left not galling of him, til I thought our powder spent in vaine to shoot at him, he was so torne, and broken downe by us. About foure of the clocke it rained so fast, that we could scant discerne one the other, the Moone being gone downe, yet rid the admirall, and the rereadmirall, but a little ahead of us: during which time, we paused, and made ready all our munition.{n}The 25 day, by day-light, we saw the viceadmirall sunke hard by us, so that his yards which were hoised acrosse, and his tops, and that over head, was above water: most of their men were gotten away in their boats, saving about fourtie persons which hung in the shrowds, and toppes, whom I advised our general to send for away, and had made ready, and well manned our pinnesses; but being upon the way going, the generail called them backe, and would not suffer them to goe. There were three of their boats also going for them from their ships; at whom I shot, and made them to retire, and leave them upon the shrowds. At length our generail sent for two of the men away: which his pinnesse brought to him; the one was heaved over boord, because he was sore hurt, not like to live; and he was a Marsillian; the other was a Greeke, borne in Zante, boatswaine of the viceadmirall: the rest of the men, some swam away upon rafts, some were drowned, and some remained still hanging on her. By this time it was faire day-light, and I called to our generail to r95{n}A.D.{n}I583-{n}The fight betwixt the English y Spanish ships at S. Vincent.{n}The Spanish viceadmirall sunhe by the English.{n}This Greeke told the general that there were 600 and odde in the 3 Spanish ships.{n}wey, and drive downe to them, who required mee to goe first and anker on their quarter, and he would follow, and anker on their bowes. I weyed, and went downe, and ankered by them; yet not so nere as I meant, for the ebbe put me off to the Northwards. There rid I alone, spending shot at them, and they both at me, foure houres, before our admiralls anker would come up; during which time I had some spoile done; but when our admirall came, she had her part, and eased me very well.{n}At length our admirall began to warpe away, and being come without me, set saile, and began to stand out into the sea: I went aboord of him to know his pleasure. Who determined to get out of shot; but could not, because the winde scanted on them. The Edward before she could get up her ankers, endured many more shot, after the gallion was further off a good way then she, and sometime the gallion had two or three. Thus we ended about two of the clocke after noone: the rest of this day and part of the night, we spent in mending, fitting, and putting our ordinance and furniture in order for the next morning, thinking they would have bene with us.{n}The 26 day in the morning we could not see them, because they were gone up the river: wee manned our boats and pinnesses, and weyed two ankers and one cable, that they let slip the night before: as our men were weying the third anker, the bwoy-rope brake, and so we lost that anker. Our admirall had an anker of twelve hundred, and a good cable of eleven inches, and we had an anker about sixe hundred, with a piece of a basse cable, and bwoy-rope nothing worth.{n}After dinner I went aboord the admirall, to confer with him, who determined to go off to sea, and thither I caried Senor Pinto to interpret the Indian language, with an Indian named Peter, which fled from the bay where we rid in a canoa, and brought with him a Spaniards caliver, flaske, and touch boxe, to goe with 196{n}us, whom our admirals boat met, and brought him aboord to the admirall. Hee tolde us that the Spaniards had brought many dead men on land, and buried them, and also landed many hurt men in their bay, and that there were certeine Spaniards gone over thorow the woods to looke after us. Then the general, captaine Hawkins, and master Maddox came aboord of mee to viewe my hurt men, and harmes of my shippe, both men, shippe, and tackle; and I also went aboord him to peruse his hurts, who had but one man, a sailer, slaine.{n}The 28 day in the morning died Lancelot Ashe, of a hurt; who departed very godly. This day we stood to the Northwards: and in getting in our ankers and skifie, we were put 3 leagues to leeward of Fiddle ile, but the gallion rid still.{n}The 29 day in the morning, seeing my selfe put to Where the sea from the admirall, I assembled master Walker, master Shawe, master Jeflries, the master, the masters mate, and venture werg the pilot, to whom I shewed that I was desirous to severed, and goe backe to seeke our admirall, whereunto the master, never met pilot, and masters mate answered directly, that wee could afterward. not fetch the ile where wee left them, and to meete them  in going backe it was very unlikely and to us dangerous many wayes, aswell for falling into the laps of the Spaniards, as to be put on a lee shoare: whereupon all the rest advised me to stand off into the sea, whereunto I assented, remembring withal, that time spent consumed victuali, and howe long wee had beaten up and downe in the same bay before, to get in with calmes and contrary windes.{n}Thus wee concluded that M. Walker should set downe each mans opinion, and wee set to our handes, and from hencefoorth hee to keepe a Register of all our proceeding, as M. Maddox did abord the Admirall.{n}The first day of February, wee went East by south, and East southeast with a stoute gale: and went the same course the 3. 4. and 5. dayes following.{n}197{n}The 5. day about 10. a clocke in the forenoone M. Walker died, who had bene weake and sicke of the bloodie flixe 6. dayes, wee tooke a view of his things, and prised them, and heaved him over bord, and shot a peece for his knell.{n}The 14. day I called into my cabbin the two marchants, the Master and the Pilot, shewing them our wants of victuals and other necessaries: whereupon they and I concluded, that it was best for us to returne to our countrey, with as litle losse of time and expense of victuals as might be, being without hope of reliefe upon this coast, and yet to keepe the coast of Brasil to friend for feare of extremitie.{n}The 17. day in the morning having much raine, wee saved above two tunne of water, of which we were very glad.{n}The 18. day I observed the variation of the compasse, which varied one point, and a halfe to the Southwards, by our ordinary compasse of London.{n}The second day of March the Master, Pilot, & I agreed to fetch the yle of Fernando Loronha.{n}From the 3. day to the 10. day we went West, and by South, and ran in for the shoare.{n}The 10. day we saw the land, which was sandie hilles with woods on it.{n}The 11. day seeking to goe a shoare, wee sawe foure men, which weaved to us with a white shirt, and we weaved to them with a flagge of truce: At length one of them swamme to our boats side, and there lay in the Sea talking with us, almost an houre: in the ende, being partly perswaded by Pinto, who talked with them in the Indian-tongue, and partly entised with such trifles as I shewed him, bee came into our Skiffe, and called to his companions on shoare, who came abord swimming: wee delivered them certaine barricos to fetch us them full of fresh water: after, there came downe 40. Indians, boyes, women, and men, and with them a French boy, but the former Indians deceived us of our barricos. Whereupon{n}198{n}Pinto and Russell swamme a shoare to seeke water, but found none.{n}The same day wee sailed to a place where boats might land, & I went a land in my Skiffe, and found the Indians, and Frenchman which were with mee the day before, and they brought our three barricos full of fresh water: for which I rewarded them with some trifles. In the meane time our boat went ashoare, and our men with some of the Indians brought us twentie barricos more of fresh water, and I my selfe went to shoare and brought 23. hennes of India.{n}The 12. day betimes in the morning, wee manned our boat and Skiffe, and tooke some trifling things to shoare, and barricos : at our first arrivall the rude Indians flocked together, wading to the Skiffe wherein I was, begging and wondering about us : First I caused them to fetch 27. barricos of water, whom I rewarded with small bells, &c. In the meane time they brought hens to me, wading to the Skiffe, for I kept my selfe alwayes afloat, and for their hens I gave them a knife, and a smal looking glasse. All this while M. Blackcoller our Pilot, Thomas Russel, Marke Thawghts were still on shoare, and would not tarry abord: In the ende, fearing some treacherie, because all the Indians were slipped on shoare from mee, I called our men away, and suddenly they layed handes on our men ashoare, and with their bowes shot thicke at us in the boats, and waded into the water to us, laying hands on our Skiffe, yet God of his mercie delivered us from their hands, with the losse of five men slaine, and others hurt.{n}Thus we got abord with 40. hens, ducks, turkies, and parrats, and three hogsheads of water: and I caried a Frenchman abord with mee, named Jaques Humfrey, who was by chance in the boat with me when this fray began.{n}The 17. day we tooke three sharks in the morning.{n}From that day to the first of April, wee went our course, sometime with raine, and sometime with variable 199{n}A.D.{n}I583-{n}Treason of the Indians.{n}Jaques Humfrey a Frenchman saved.{n}1583.	windes, & so til the 4. of April: which day we saw 4. birds with long tailes, which hovered about the ship, and in the afternoone we saw and tooke up many weedes which drave thicke in the sea, which we judged to be driven with the East windes from the yles of Cape verde.{n}	From this day till the 11. day we went our course sometime Northeast, sometime Northwest according to the winds: upon this 11. day George Coxe one of our Carpenters, having the night before broken up the hold, and stolne wine, and drunken himselfe drunke, being{n}A desperate act.	taken in the roome, lept overbord out of the beake head and so drowned himselfe. The 12. day wee spied our foremast to be perished in the hownes, and durst not beare our foretop saile upon it, but went hence with our sailes, next hand, North all day and night. From hence to the 20. day we went Northeast and{n}Variation of the Compasse.	by North. This day I observed the variation of the compasse: and I noted that the South point of the compasse caried more then halfe a point to the Westwards. The 25. day of May wee went betweene the East northeast, and the Northeast with a small gale till five a clocke in the afternoone: then had we sight of land, which rose ragged to the Northwards like broken land, we being about five leagues off: that yle bare Northeast by North of us, and the Northermost part bare North by East of us, with a rocke a sea bord: we then sounded and had fiftie and five fadome grey sand, and maze great store in it: so wee stood in Northeast till eight a clocke, and then behelde it againe being within foure leagues of it, bearing as before, but wee coulde not make it, for some thought it to bee the foreland of Fontenay, some judged it the yle of Ussant: then we sounded againe in 55. fadome browne sand, and little maze in it: at eight a clocke at night we went about, and stoode ofF South southwest one watch, then the wind shrinked to the Southwest, that we could 200{n}lye but South southwest sixe glasses, so that at three a clocke wee cast about, and lay Northwest sixe glasses, and North northwest a watch being then eight a clocke the next day.{n}The 26. day wee lay as nigh as wee coulde betweene the North and the North northeast, and saw the same land againe, and made it to bee the foreland of Fontenay, and the ragges to bee the Seames, which bare now East Northeast of us: and wee stoode on till tenne a clocke, then being within two leagues of the rockes and lesse, wee cast about and stoode ofF Southwest, because wee could not double the uttermost rockes: when we were about we drave to the Southwards very faste, for the ebbe set us West southwest, and being spring tides, it horsed us a pace to leewards, for the space of one houre: then with the flood which was come, we drave againe to windewards: at twelve at noone it was calme till 6. afternoone, then wee stoode about larbord tacked, South southwest one watch, then at midnight wee cast about and stoode over North till foure aforenoone.{n}The 27. day having brought the land East southeast of us, we made it to be Sylly being before deceived, and went hence East by North to double Grimsbie, leaving The bishop and his clearks to the Southwestwards, which we before tooke to be The Seames.{n}At 7. a clocke in the afternoone we sawe the lands end of England, which bare East by North ofF us, and is 7. leagues ofF from Sylly.{n}The 29. day at sixe a clocke, beforenoone we had brought the Ramhead North of us, and were within a league of it, and went in Northeast next hand, being thicke and foggie, and little winde: so that at eleven a clocke we got in within the yland, and there by mistaking of a sounding, our ship came aground betweene the yle and the maine, and there sate till 4. a clocke in the afternoone that it was halfe flood.{n}The 30. day about 9. a clocke, with much adoe I furnished away P. Jeffries, M. Symberbe, and William{n}201{n}A.D.{n}1583.{n}The yle of Sylly.{n}We came to PUmmouth.{n}Towreson with letters, after dined at M. Blaccollers, and made many salutations with divers gentlemen.{n}1583. The 31. I wrought abord all day, and put our ship, and things in order: Afternoone I having pitie of some poore men of Milbrooke, which were robbed the night before by a pirate named Purser, which rid in Cawson bay, I consented to goe out with the Edward in company of a small shippe which they had furnished to bee their Master, so about five of the clocke in the afternoone, came a hundreth men of theirs abord of mee: About twelve a clocke wee set saile, and by three afore day wee were gotten to the windwards of him, then hee set saile, and went hence to the Eastwards, and outsailed us, because our consort would not come neere him: after a small chase which we gave him to no effect, wee returned into our old road, and there moared the ship about nine of the clocke in the forenoone, and hence went all the Milbrooke men againe ashore from mee. And thus I ended a troublesome voyage.{n}