a testimony of the right and appendance of the crown of the kingdom of Britain , take out of m. Lambard his and pKatovotda , folio 137. page . 2. 
 5 
 A.D. 
 5I7 - 
 the same in english . 
 ARthur which be sometime the most renown king of the Britain , be a mighty , and valiant man , and a famous warrior . this kingdom be too little for he , and his mind be not content with it . he therefore valiant subdue all Scantia , which be now call Norway , and all the island beyond Norway , to wit , island and Greenland , which be appertain unto Norway , Sweveland , Ireland , Gotland , Denmark , Semeland , Windland , Curland , Roe , Femeland , Wireland , Flanders , Cherilland , Lapland , and all the other land and island of the east sea , even unto Russia ( in which Lapland he place the easterly bound of his british empire ) and many other island beyond Norway , even under the north pole , which be appendance of Scantia , now call Norway . Theise people be wild and savage , and have not in they the love of God nor of their neighbour , because all evil come from the north , yet there be among they certain Christians live in secret . but king Arthur be a exceed good Christian , and cause they to be baptize , and throughout all Norway to worship one God , and to receive and keep inviolable for ever , faith in Christ only . at that time all the noble man of Norway take wife of the noble nation of the Britain , whereupon the norse say , that they be descend of the 
 race and blood of this kingdom . the aforesaid king Arthur obtain also in those day of the pope and court of room , that Norway shall be for ever annex to the crown of Britain for the enlargement of this kingdom , and he call it the chamber of Britain . for this cause the norse say , that they ought to dwell with we in this kingdom , to wit , that they belong to the crown of Britain : for they have rather dwell here then in their own native country , which be drieand full of mountain , and barren , and no grain grow there , but in certain place . but this country of Britain be fruitful , wherein corn and all other good thing do grow and increase : for which cause many cruel battle have be oftentimes fight betwixt the Englishman and the people of Norway , and infinite number of people have be slay , and the norse have possess many land and island of this empire , which unto this day they do possess , neither can they ever afterward be full expel . but now at length they be incorporate with we by the receive of our religion and sacrament , and by take wife of our nation , and by affinity , and marriage . for so the good king Edward ( who be a notable maintainer of peace ) ordain and grant unto they by the general consent of the whole kingdom , so that the people may , and ought from henceforth dwell and remain in this kingdom with we as our love swear brethren . 
 . 