the state of the ship of the cinque port from Edward the confessor and William the conqueror , and so down to Edward the first , faithful gather by the learned gentleman 42 
 m. willaim Lambert in his perambulation of Kent , out of the most ancient record of England . 
 find in the book of the general ! survey the antiquity of the realm , which William the con - °fthe porls-querour cause to be make in the four io7°-yeere of his reign , and to be call domesday , because ( as Matthew Parise say ) it spare no man but judge all man indifferent , as the lord in that great 
 day will do , that Dover , Sandwich , and Rumney , be in the time of king Edward the confessor , discharge almost of all manner of imposition and burden ( which other town do bear ) in consideration of such service to be do by they upon the sea , as in their special title shall hereafter appear . 
 whereupon , although i may ground reasonable conjecture , that the immunity of the haven town ( which we now call by a certain number , the cinque port ) may take their beginning from the same Edward : yet for as much as i read in the chartre of king Edward the first after the conquest ( which be report in our book of entry ) at reci tall of the grant of sundry king to the five port , the same reach no high than to William the conqueror , i will leave my conjecture , and lean to his chartre : content my self to yield to the conqueror , the thanks of other man benefit , see those which be benefit , be wise content ( as the case then stand ) to like better of his confirmation ( or second gift ) then of king Edward first grant , and endowment . 
 and to the end that i may proceed in some manner of array , i will first show , which town be at the beginning take for the five port , and what other be now repute in the same number : second , what service they ought , and do in time pass : and last , what privileges they have therefore , and by what person they have be govern . 
 citizen be call baron in old time . 
 contention between Yarmouth , and the five port . 
 1250. 
 antiquity of Yarmouth fish . 
 if encage shall judge by the common , and rude verse , Dover , Sandwicus , ry , rum , frigmare ventus , 
 i must say , that Dover , Sandwich , rye , Rumney , and Winchelsey , ( for that be , frigmare ventus ) be the five port : again , if i shall be rule by the roll which recite the port that send baron to the parliament , i must then add to these , Hastings and Hyde , for they also have their baron as well as the other : and so shall i not only , not show which be the first five , but also ( by addition of two other ) increase both the number , and doubtfulness . leave the verse therefore , for ignorance of the author and suspicion of his authority , and forsake the roll ( as not assure of the antiquity ) i will flee to Henry Bracton , a man both ancient , learned , and credible , which live under king Henry the third , and write ( above three hundred year since ) learned of the law of this realm . 
 he ( i say ) in the three book of his work , and treatise of the crown , take in hand to show the article inquirable before the justice in Eire , ( or itinerent , as we call they , because they use to ride from place to place throughout the realm , for administration of justice ) set forth a special form of writ , to be direct several to the baliff of Hastings , Hithe , Rumney , Dover , and Sandwich , command they , that they shall cause twenty and four of their baron ( for so their burgess , or townsman , and the citizen of London likewise , be wont to be term ) to appear before the king justice at Shipwey in Kent ( as they accustom to do ) there to inquire of such point , as shall be give in charge . which do , he add moreover , that forso-much as there be oftentimes contention between they of the five port , and the inhabitant of Yarmouth in Norfolk and Donwich in suffblke , there shall be several ! writ direct to they also , returnable before the same justice at the same day and place , recite , that where the king have by his former writ summon the plea of the five port to be hold at Shipwey , if any of the same 
 town have cause to complain of any ( be within the liberty of the say port ) he shall be at Shipwey to propound against he , and there to receive accord to law and justice . 
 thus much i recite out of Bracton , partly to show that Shipwey be before king Edward the first time , the place of assembly for the pleasant of the five port : partly to notify the difference , and controversy that long time since be between these port , and those other town : but purposely , and chief , to prove , that Hastings , and Hithe , Dover , Rumney , and Sandwich , be in bractons time account the five principali haven or port , which be endow with privilege , and have the same ratify by the great chartre of England . 
 neither yet will i deny , but that soon after , winchelsea and rye may be add to the number . for i find in a old record , that king Henry the three take into his own hand ( for the better defence of the realm ) the town of Winchelsey , and rye , which belong before to the monastery of Fescampe in Normandy , and give therefore in exchange , the manor of Chiltham in Gloucestershire , and diverse other land in Lincolnshire . this he do , partly to conceal from the prior alien the intelligence of the secret affair of his realm , and partly because of a great disobedience and excess , that be commit by the inhabitant of Wincelsey , against prince Edward his elder son . and therefore , although i can easy be lead to think , that he submit they for their correction to the order , and governance of the five port , yet i stand doubtful whether he make they partner of their privilege , or no , for that have be a preferment , and no punishment unto they : but i suspect rather , that his son king Edward the first , ( by who encouragement and aid , old Winchelsey be afterward abandon , and the new town bud ) be the first that apparel they with that preeminence . 
 by this therefore let it appear , that Hastings , Dover , Hithe , Rumney , and Sandwich , be the first port of +5 
 1268. 
 Winchelsey first build . 
 ™ 77 - 
 privilege : which ( because they be 5. in number ) both at the first give , and yet continue , to all the residue , the name of cinque port , although not only Winchelsey and rye , be ( since that time ) incorporate with they as principal , but diverse other place also ( for the ease of their charge ) be creep in , as part , limb , and member of the same . 
 now therefore , somewhat shall say , as touch the service that these port of duty owe , and in deed have do , to the prince : whereof the one ( i mean with what number of vessel , in what manner of furniture , and for how long season , they ought to wait on the king at the sea , upon their own charge ) shall partly appear by that which we shall present say , and partly by that which shall follow in Sandwich , and Rumney : the other shall be make manifest by example , draw out of good history : and they both shall be testify by the word of king Edward the first in his own chartre . 
 the book of domesday before remember , charge Dover with twenty vessel at the sea , whereof each to be furnish with one and twenty man for fifteen day together : and say further , that Rumney and Sandwich answer the like service . but now whether this ( like ) ought to be understand of the like altogether , both in respect of the number and service , or of they ( like ) in respect of service , accord to the proportion of their ability only , i may not hereby take upon i to determine . for on the one side , if Rumney , Sandwich , and the residue , shall likewise find twenty vessel a piece , then ( as you shall anon see ) the five port be subject to a great charge at that time , than king Edward the first lay upon they : and on the other side , if they be only chargeable after their proportion , then know i not how far to burden they , see the record of domesday it self , bind they to no certainty . and therefore leave this as i find it , i must elsewhere make inquisition for more lightsome proof . and first i will have recourse to king Edward the first his chartre in which i read , that 
 at each time that the king pass over the sea , the port ought to rig up fifty and seven ship , ( whereof every one to have twenty arm soldier ) and to maintain they at their own cost , by the space of fifteen day together . 
 and thus it stand with the port for their generail > 278-charge , in the sixth year of his reign , for then be this chartre seal . but as touch the particular burden of each one , i have see two diverse testimony , of which the first be a note in French ( bear the countenance of a record ) and be entitle , to have be renew in the two and twenty year of the reign of the same king , by Stephan Penchester , than constable of Dover castle , in which the particular charge be set down in this manner . 
 the port of Hastings ought to find three ship . 
 the lowy of Pevensey , one . 
 Bulverhithe and Petit Jahn , one . 
 Bekesborne in Kent , seven . 
 grenche at Gillingham in Kent , two man and armour , with the ship of Hastings . 
 the town of rye , five . 
 to it be Tenterdene annex , in the time of king Henry the sixth . 
 the town of Winchelsey , ten . 
 the port of Rumney , four . 
 lydde , seven . 
 the port of Hythe , five . 
 the port of Dover , nineteen . 
 the town of Folkestone , seven . 
 the town of Feversham , seven . 
 the port of Sandwich , with Stonor , Fordwich , dale , etc five . 
 these ship they ought to find upon forty day summons , arm and array at their own charge , and in each of they twenty man , beside the master of the mariner : all which they shall likewise maintain five day together at their own cost , give to the master six penny by the day , to the constable six penny , and to 
 each other mariner three penny . and after those five day end , the king shall defray the charge . 
 the other be a latin Custumall of the town of Hyde , the which although it pretend not so great antiquity as the first , yet seem it to i to import as much or more likelihood and credit : it stand thus . 
 these be the five port of our sovereign lord the king have liberty , which other port have not : haste , Romenal , Heth , Dover , Sandwich , the chief town . 
 the service due by the same . 
 haste shall find 21. ship , in every ship 21. man , and a Garcion , or boy , which be call a Gromet . to it pertain ( as the member of one town ) the seashore in Seford , Pevenshey , Hodeney , Winchelsey , rye , ihame , Bekesbourne , Grenge , northie , bulwerh . 
 romenal 5. ship , in every ship 21. man , and a Garcion : to it pertain , as member thereof , promhell , lead , Eastwestone , Dengemareys , old Rumney . 
 Hethe 5. ship , as Romenal before . to it pertain the westhethe . 
 Dover 21. ship , as haste before . to it pertain , Folkstane , Feversham , and saint Margaret , not concern the land , but for the good and cattle . 
 Sandwich 5. ship , as Romenal , and Hethe . to it pertain Fordwich , Reculver , Serre , and deal , not for the soil , but for the good . 
 sum of ship 57 
 sum of the man 1187. and 57 garcion . 
 this service , the baron of the five port do acknowledge to owe to the king , upon summons yearly ( if it happen ) by the space of 15. day together , at their own cost and charge , account that for the first day of the 15. in which they shall spread their sail to go towards those part that the king intend : and to serve so long after 15. day , as the king will , at his own pay and wage . 
 thus much out of these ancient note , whereby your 48 
 self may easy discern the difference : but whether the one or the other , or ( by reason of some latter dispensation ) neither of these , have place at this day , i must refer it to they that be privy , and of counsel with the port : and so leave this also undecided , hold on the way , wherein i be enter . 
 this duty of attendance therefore ( be devise for the honourable transportation , and safe conduct of the king own person or his army over the narrow sea ) the port have not only most diligent ever since that time perform , but furthermore also valiant behave themselves against the enemy from time to time , in sundry exploit by water , as occasion have be proffer , or the necessity of the realm require . 
 and among other feat not unworthy perpetuali re - the good ser-membrance , after such time as Lewes ( the old son of vice of the five the french king ) have enter the realm to aid Stephan ‘ Langton the archbishop , and the nobility , in the life of king John , and have send into France for new supply of soldier after his death , Hubert of Borough ( than 1217. captain of Dover ) follow the opinion of Themistocles in the exposition of the oracle of the wooden wall , by the aid of the port town , arm forty tall ship , and meet with eighty sail of french man upon the high sea , give they a most courageous encounter , in which he take some , sink other , and discomfit the rest . 
 king Henry the three also , after that he come to ripe age , have great benefit by the service of the cinque port : and king Edward the first in his chartre , make their continual faithful service ( and especial their good endeavour , then late show against the Welshman ) the 1278. principali cause , and motive of that his liberali grant . 
 furthermore , about the midst of the reign of the same king , a hundred sail of the navy of the port fight at the sea with a fleet of 200. French man , all which 1293. ( notwithstanding the great odds of the number ) they take , and slay , and sink so many of the mariner , that 
 i 49 n 
 France be thereby ( for a long season after ) in manner destitute , both of seaman , and ship . 
 1406. final , and to conclude this part , in the day of king Henry the four , the navy of the five port , under the conduct of one Henry Paye , surprise one hundred and twenty french ship , all lade with salt , iron , oil , and no worse merchandise . 
 the privl - than privilege of these port , be first grant by ledge s^of the £dward the confessor , and William the conqueror , ’ and then confirm and increase by William Rufus , Henry the second , Richard the first , Henry the three , and king Edward the first , be very great , consider either the honour and ease , or the freedom and exemption , that the inhabitant have by reason of the same . 
 . 