how they be welcome at their return . 
 Basilius and Daniel prince . 
 Ecclus. 39 ver . 4. 
 181 
 182 
 183 
 186 
 190 
 oficium fceminarum est ducere bigas , ponere domus super eas and deponere , mungere vaccas , facere butirum 
 192 
 i 193 n 
 194 
 196 
 197 
 198 
 200 
 201 
 202 
 203 
 204 
 205 
 207 
 208 
 Oceanus . 
 presbyter Johannes . 
 frater Andreas in curia Kencham . 
 tartarorum sedes . 
 cyngi . 
 mangu-can . 
 210 
 211 
 frater Andreas . 
 212 
 213 
 astracan . 
 214 
 lagag flumen 12. dietis of Volga . 
 219 
 221 
 Casale . 
 frater Andreas . 
 Casale . 
 Aurifodina . 
 longissime a perside . 
 Contomanni . 
 222 
 223 
 jugurespopuli , idolatrce . 
 cailac . 
 224 
 i 225 p 
 kalendae ipsi extrahunt predict 
 patria Presbiteri Johannis . 
 boves pilosis caudis : his simile sunt in Quivera America septentrionalis provincia . 
 tangut homines magni sed fusci . 
 - . .... Hispanis , and 
 227 
 228 
 the journal of friar William de rubruquis a french man of the order of the minorite friar , unto the east part of the world . An. Dom. 
 1253 - 
 o his most sovereign , and most christian lord Lewis , by god grace the renown king of France , friar William de rubruk , the mean of the minorite order , wish health and continual triumph in Christ . 
 it be write in the book of Ecclesi - Ecclus. 39 
 asticus concern the wise man : he shall travel for - +• into foreign country , and good and evil shall he try in all thing . the very same action ( my lord and king ) have i achieve : howbeit i wish that i have do it 
 like a wise man , and not like a fool . for many there be , that perform the same action which a wise man do , not wise but more undiscreet : of which number i fear my self to be one . notwithstanding howsoever i have do it , because you command i , when i depart from your highness , to write all thing unto you , which i shall see among the Tartar , and you wish i also that i shall not fear to write long letter , i have do as your majesty enjoin i : yet with fear and reverence , because i want word and eloquence sufficient to write unto so great a majesty . be it know therefore unto your sacred majesty , that in the year of our lord 1253. about the nonce of May , we enter into the sea of Pontus , which the bulgarian call the great sea . it contain in length ( as i learn of certain merchant ) 1008 mile , and be in a manner , divide into two part . about the midst thereof be two province , one towards the north , and another towards the south . the south province be call Synopolis , and it be the castle and port of the sultan of turquoise : but the north province be call of the Latines , Gasaria : of the Greeks , which 
 229 
 inhabit upon the sea shore thereof , it be call Cassaria , that be to say Caesaria . and there be certain head land stretch forth into the sea towards Synopolis . also , there be 300. mile of distance between Synopolis and Cassaria . insomuch that the distance from those point or place to Constantinople , in length and breadth be about 700. mile : and 700. mile also from thence to the east , namely to the country of hiberia which be a province of Gasaria . Georgia . at the province of Gasaria or Cassaria we arrive , which province be , in a manner , three square , have a city on the west part thereof call Kersova , wherein saint Clement suffer martyrdom . And sail before the say city , we see a island , in which a church be say to be build by the hand of angel . but about the midst of the say province towards the south , as it be , upon a sharp angle or point , stand a city call sell ala . Soldaia direct over against Synopolis . and there do 
 all the turquoise merchant , which traffic into the north country , in their journey outward , arrive , and as they return homeward also from Russia , and the say northern region , into turquoise . the foresay merchant transport thither ermine and grey fur , with other rich and costly skin . other carry clothes make of cotton or bombast , and silk , and diverse kind of spice . but upon the east part of the say province stand a city the ritie of call Matriga , where the river Tanais discharge his Matriga . stream into the sea of Pontus , the mouth whereof be twelve mile in breadth . for this river , before it enter into the sea of Pontus , make a little sea , which have in breadth and length seven hundred mile , and it be in no place thereof above six pace deep , whereupon great vessel can sail over it . howbeit the merchant of \\Matriga . Constantinople , arrive at the foresayd ci tie of two Materta , send their bark unto the river of Tanais to buy dry fish , sturgeon , thoss , barbil , and a infinite number of other fish . the foresay province of Cassaria be compass in with the sea on three side thereof : namely on the west side , where Kersova the city of saint 
 230 
 clement be situate : on the south side the city of Soldaia whereat we arrive : on the east side Maricandis , and there stand the city of Matriga upon the mouth of the river Tanais . beyond the say mouth stand zikia , zikia . which be not in subjection unto the Tartar : also the people call Suevi and Hiberi towards the east , who likewise be not under the Tartar dominion . Moreover towards the south , stand the city of Trapesunda , which have a governor proper to it self , name Guydo , be of the lineage of the emperor of Constantinople , and be subject unto the Tartar . next unto that be Synopolis the city of the sultan of turquoise , who likewise be in subjection unto they . next unto these lie the country of Vastacius , who son be call astar , of his grandfather by the mother side , who be not in subjection . all the land from the mouth of Tanais westward as far as Danubius be under their jurisdiction . 
 yea beyond Danubius also , towards Constantinople , Valakia , which be the land of Assanus , and Bulgaria minor as far as Solonia , do all pay tribute unto they . and beside the tribute impose , they have also , of late year , exact of every household a axe , and all such corn as they find lie on heap . we arrive therefore at Soldaia the twelve of the kalend of June . and diverse merchant of Constantinople , which be arrive there before we , report that certain messenger be coming thither from the holy land , who be desirous to travel unto Sartach . notwithstanding i my self have public give out upon palm Sunday within the church of sancta Sophia , that i be not your nor any other man messenger , but that i travail unto those infidel accord to the rule of our order . And be arrive , the say merchant admonish i to take diligent heed what i speak : because they have report i to be a messenger , if i shall say the contrary , that i be no messenger , i can not have free passage grant unto i . 
 then i speak after this manner unto the governor of the city , or rather unto their lieutenant , because the 
 231 
 governor themselves be go to pay tribute unto baatu , and be not as yet return . we hear of your lord sartach ( quoth i ) in the holy land , that he be become a christian : and the Christians be exceed glad thereof , and especial the most christian king of France , who be there now in pilgrimage , and fight against the Saracen to redeem the holy place out of their hand : wherefore i be determine to go unto Sartach , and to deliver unto he you letter of my lord the king , wherein he admonish he concern the good and commodity of all Christendom . and they receive we with gladness , and give we enterteinement in the cathedral church . the bishop of which church be with Sartach , who tell i many good thing concern the say sartach , which afterward i find to be nothing so . then put they we to our choice , whither we will have cart and ox , or pack horse to transport our carriage . and the merchant of Constantinople advise i , not to take cart of the citizen of Soldaia , but to buy cover cart of my own , ( such as the russian carry their skin in ) and to put all our carriage , which i will daily take out , into they : because , if i shall use horse , i must be constrain at every bait to take down my carriage , and to lift they up again on sundry horse back : and beside , that i shall ride a more gentle pace by the ox draw the cart . wherefore , content my self with their evil counsel , i be travel unto sartach 2. month which i can have do in one , if i have go by horse . i bring with i from Constantinople ( be by the merchant advise so to do ) pleasant fruit , muscadel wine , and delicate biscuit bread to present unto the governor of Soldaia , to the end i may obtain free passage : because they look favourable upon no man which come with a empty hand . all which thing i bestow in one of my cart , ( not find the governor of the city at home ) for they tell i , if i can carry they to sartach , that they will be most acceptable unto he . we take our journey therefore about the 
 232 
 kalend of June , with four cover cart of our own and with two other which we borrow of they , wherein we carry our bed to rest upon in the night , and they allow we five horse to ride upon . for there be just five person in our company : namely , i my self and my associate friar Bartholomew of Cremona , and goset the bearer of these present , the man of God turgeman-nus , and Nicolas my servant , who i buy at Constantinople with some part of the alm bestow upon i . Moreover , they allow we two man , which drive our cart and give attendance unto our ox and horse . there be high promontory on the sea shore from Kersova unto the mouth of Tanais . also there be forty castle between Kersova and Soldaia , every one of which almost have their proper language : among who there be many Goth , who speak the dutch tongue . beyond the say mountain towards the north , there be a most beautiful wood grow on a plain full of fountain and freshet . and beyond the wood there be a mighty plain champion , continue five day journey unto the very extremity and border of the say province northward , and there it be a narrow isthmus or neck land , have sea on the east and west side thereof , insomuch that there be a ditch make from one sea unto the other . in the same plain ( before the Tartar spring up ) be the comanians wont to inhabit , who compel the foresay city and castle to pay tribute unto they . but when the Tartar come upon they , the multitude of the comanians enter into the foresay province , and flee all of they , even unto the sea shore , be in such extreme famine , that they which be alive , be constrain to eat up those which be dead : and ( as a merchant report unto i who see it with his own eye ) that the live man devour and tear with their tooth , the raw flesh of the dead , as dog will gnaw upon carrion . towards the border of the say province there be many great lake : upon the bank whereof be salt pit or fountain , the water of which so soon as it enter into 
 233 
 the neck of Taurica Chersonesus . 
 the lake , become hard salt like unto ice . and out of those salt pit baatu and Sartach have great revenue : for they repair thither out of all Russia for salt : and for each cart load they give two web of cotton amount to the value of half a yperpera . there come by sea also many ship for salt , which pay tribute every one of they accord to their burden . the three day after we be depart out of the precinct of Soldaia , we 
 the Tartar , find the Tartar . among who be enter , i think i be come into a new world . who life and manner i will describe unto your highness as well as i can . 
 of the Tartar , and of their house . Chap. 2. 
 they have in no place any settle city to abide in , neither know they of the celestial city to come . 
 they have divide all Scythia among themselves , which stretch from the river Danubius even unto the rise of the sun . and every of their captain , accord to the great or small number of his people , know the bound of his pasture , and where he ought to feed his cattle winter and summer , spring and autumn . for in the winter they descend unto the warm region southward . and in the summer they ascend unto the cold region northward . in winter when snow lie upon the ground , they feed their cattle upon pasture without water , because than they use snow in stead of water . their house wherein they sleep , they ground upon a round foundation of wicker artificial wrought and compact together : the roof whereof consist ( in like sort ) of wicker , meet above into one little roundel , out of which roundel ascend upward a neck like unto a chimney , which they cover with white self , and oftentimes they lie mortar or white earth upon the say felt , with the powder of bone , that it may shine white . and sometime also they cover it with black self . the say self on the neck of their house , they do garnish over with beautiful variety of picture . before the door likewise they hang a felt curious paint over . for 
 234 
 1253-they spend all their colour felt , in paint vine , tree , bird , and beast thereupon . the say house they make so large , that they contain thirty foot in breadth . 
 for measure once the breadth between the wheele-ruts of one of their cart , i find it to be 2 o foot over : and when the house be upon the cart , it stretch over the wheel on each side five foot at the least . i tell 22. ox in one team , draw a house upon a cart , eleven in one order accord to the breadth of the cart , and eleven more before they : the axletree of the cart be of a huge bigness like unto the mast of a ship . and a fellow stand in the door of the house , upon the forestall of the cart drive forth the ox . Moreover , they make certain foursquare basket of small slender wicker as big as great chest : and afterward , from one side to another , they frame a hollow lid or cover of such like wicker , and make a door in the fore side thereof . and then they cover the say chest or little house with black felt rub over with tallow or sheep milk to keep the rain from soak through , which they deck likewise with paint or with feather . and in such chest they put their whole household stuff and treasure . also the same chest they do strong bind upon other cart , which be draw with camel , to you end they may wade through river . neither do they at any time take down the say chest from off their cart . when they take down their dwell house , they turn the door always to the south : and next of all they place the cart lade with their chest , here and there , within half a stone cast of you house : insomuch that the house stand between two rank of cart , as it be , between two wall . the matron make for themselves most beautiful cart , which i be not the benefit of able to describe unto your majesty but by picture only : “ f^ntertn for i will right willing have paint all thing for you , c°un~ have my skill be aught in that art . one rich Moal or Tartar have 200. or 100 such cart with chest . duke baatu have sixteen wife , every one of which have one great house , beside other little house , which they place 
 235 
 behind the great one , be as it be chamber for their maiden to dwell in . and unto every of the say house do belong 200. cart . when they take their house from off the cart , the principal wife place her court on the west frontier , and so all the rest in their order : so that the last wife dwell upon the east frontier : and one of the say lady court be distant from another about a stone cast . whereupon the court of one rich Moal or Tartar will appear like unto a great village , very few man abide in the same . one woman will guide 20. or 30. cart at once , for their country be very plain , and they bind the cart with camel or ox , one behind another . and there sit a wench in the foremost cart drive the ox , and all the residue follow on a like pace . when they chance to come at any bad passage , they let they loose , and guide they over one by one : for they go a slow pace , as fast as a lamb or a ox can walk . 
 of their bed , and of their drink pot . 
 Chap. 3. 
 have take down their house from off their cart , and turn the door southward , they place the bed of the master of the house , at the north part thereof . the woman place be always on the east side , namely on the left hand of the good man of the house sit upon his bed with his face southwards : but the man place be upon you west side , namely at the right hand of their master . Men when they enter into the house , will not in any case hang their quiver on the woman side . over the master head there be always a image , like a puppet , make of self , which they call the master brother : and another over the head of the good wife or mistress , which they call her brother be fasten to the wall : and above between both of they , there be a little lean one , which be , as it be the keeper of the whole house . the good wife or mistress of the house place aloft at her bed foot , on the right hand , the skin of a kid stuff with wool or some other matter , and near unto 
 236 
 that a little image or puppet look towards the maiden and woman . next unto the door also on the woman side , there be another image with a cow udder , for the woman that milk the kine . for it be the duty of their woman to milk kine . on the other side of the door next unto the man , there be another image with the udder of a mare , for the man which milk mere . and when they come together to drink and make merry , they sprinkle part of their drink upon the image which be above the master head : afterward upon other image in order : then go a servant out of the house with a cup full of drink sprinkle it thrice towards the south , and bow his knee at every time : and this be do for the honour of the fire . then perform he the like superstitious idolatry towards the east , for the honour of the air : and then to the west for the honour of the water : and last to the north in the behalf of the dead . when the master hold a cup in his hand to drink , before he taste thereof , he pour his part upon the ground . if he drink sit on horse back , he pour out part thereof upon the neck or main of his horse before he himself drink . after the servant aforesaid have so discharge his cup to the four quarter of the world , he return into the house : and two other servant stand ready with two cup , and two bason , to carry drink unto their master and his wife , sit together upon a bed . and if he have more wife than one , she with who he sleep the night before , sit by his side the day follow : and all his other wife must that day resort unto the same house to drink : and there be the court hold for that day : the gift also which be present that day be lay up in the chest of the say wife . and upon a bench stand a vessel of milk or of other drink and drink cup . 
 237 
 [ of their 
 they use the like custom in Florida . 
 of their drink , and how they provoke one another to drink . Chap. 4. 
 in winter time they make excellent drink of rise , of mill , and of honey , be well and high colour like wine . also they have wine bring unto they from far country . in summer time they care not for any drink , but Cosmos . and it stand always within the entrance of his door , and next unto it stand a minstrel with his fiddle . 1 see there no such citern and vial as we common be , but many other musical instrument which be not use among we . and when the master of the house begin to drink , one of his servant cry out with a loud voice ha , and the minstrel play upon his fiddle . and when they make any great solemn feast , they all of they clap their hand and dance to the noise of music , the man before their master and the woman before their mistress . and when the master have drink , then cry out his servant as before , and the minstrel stay his music . then drink they all around both man and woman : and sometime they carouse for the victory very filthy and drunken . also when they will provoke any man , they pull he by the ear to the drink , and so lug and draw he strong to stretch out his throat clap their hand and dance before he . Moreover when some of they will make great feast and rejoice , one of the company take a full cup , and two other stand , one on his right hand and another on his left , and so they three come sing to the man who be to have the cup reach unto he , still sing and dance before he : and when he stretch forth his hand to receive the cup , they leap sudden back , return again as they do before , and so have delude he thrice or four time by draw back the cup until he be merry , and have get a good appetite , than they give he the cup , sing and dance and stamp with their foot , until he have do drink . 
 238 
 of their food and victual . Chap. 5. 
 / concern their food and victual , be it know unto kJ your highness that they do , without all difference or exception , eat all their dead carrion . and among so many drove it can be , but some cattle must needs die . howbeit in summer , so long as their Cosmos , that be , their mare milk last , they care not for any food . and if they chance to have a ox or a horse dye , they dry the flesh thereof : for cut it into thin slice and hang it up against the sun and the wind , it be dryingofflesh present dry without salt , and also without stench tn the mnd " or corruption . they make better pudding of their horse then of their hog , which they eat be new make : the rest of the flesh they reserve until winter . they make of their ox skin great bladder or bag , which they do wonderful dry in the smoke . of the hinder part of their horse hide they make very fine sandal and pantofle . they give unto 50. or a 100 man the flesh of one ram to eat . for they mince it in a bowl with salt and water ( other sauce they have none ) and then with the point of a knife , or a little fork which they make for the same purpose ( such as we use to take roast pear or apple out of wine withal ) they reach unto every one of the company a morsel ! or twain , accord to the multitude of guest . the master of the house , before the ram flesh be distribute , first of all himself take thereof , what he please . also , if he give unto any of the company a speciali part , the receiver thereof must eat it alone , and must not impart aught thereof unto any other . not be able to eat it up all , he carry it with he , or deliver it unto his boy , if he be present , to keep it : if not , he put it up into his Saptargat , that be to say , his four square buget , which they use to carry about with they for the save of all such provision , and wherein they lie up their bone , when they have not time to gnaw they thorough , that they may burnish they afterward , 
 239 
 1253-to the end that no whit of their food may come to nought . 
 how they make their drink call Cosmos . Chap. 6. 
 their drink call Cosmos , which be mare milk , be prepare after this manner . they fasten a long line unto 2. post stand firm in the ground , and unto the same line they tie the young foy of those mere , which they mean to milk . then come the dam to stand by their foy gentle suffer themselves to be milk . and if any of they be too unruly , then one take her foie , and put it under she , let it suck a while , and present carry it away again , there come another man to milk the say mare . and have get a good quantity of this milk together ( be as sweet as cow milk ) while it be new they power it into a great bladder or bag , and they beat the say bag with a piece of wood make for the purpose , have a club at the low end like a man head , which be hollow within : and so soon as they beat upon it , it begin to boil like new wine , and to be sour and sharp of taste , and they beat it in that manner till butter come thereof . then taste they thereof , and be indifferent sharp they drink it : for it bite a man tongue like the wine of rasp , when it be drink . after a man have take a draught thereof , it leave behind it a taste like the taste of almond milk , and go down very pleasant , intoxicate weak brain : also it cause urine to be avoid in great measure . likewise Caracosmos , that be to say black Cosmos , for great lord to drink , they make on this manner . first they beat the say milk so long till the thick part thereof descend right down to the bottom like the lees of white wine , and that which be thin and pure remain above , be like unto whey or white must . the say lees or dregs be very white , be give to servant , and will cause they to sleep exceed . that which be thin and clear their master drink : and in very deed it be marvelous 
 240 
 sweet and wholesome liquor . duke baatu have thirty cottage or grange within a day journey of his abide place : every one of which serve he daily with the Caracosmos of a hundred mare milk , and so all of they together every day with the milk of 3000. mere , beside white milk which other of his subject bring . for even as the husbandman of Syria bestow the three part of their fruit and carry it unto the court of their lord , even so do they their mare milk every three day . out of their cow milk they first churn butter , boil the which butter unto a perfect decoction , they put it into ram skin , which they reserve for the same purpose . neither do they salt their butter : and yet by reason of the long seethe , it putrefi not : and they keep it in store for winter . the churnmilke which remain of the butter , they let alone till it be as sour as possible it may be , than they boil it and in boil , it be turn all into curd , which curd they dry in the sun , make they as hard as the dross of iron : and this kind of food also they store up in satchel against winter . in the winter season when milk fail they , they put the foresay curd ( which they call gry-ut ) into a bladder , and pour hot water thereinto , they beat it lusty till they have resolve it into the say water , which be thereby make exceed sour , and that they drink in stead of milk . they be very scrupulous , and take diligent heed that they drink not fair water by it self . 
 of the beast which they eat , of their garment , and of their manner of hunt . Chap. 7. 
 great lord have cottage or grange towards the south , from whence their tenant bring they millet and meal against winter . the poor sort provide themselves of such necessary , for you exchange of ram , and of other beast skin . the Tartar slave fill their belly with thick water , and be therewithal ! content . they will neither eat mouse with long tail , i 241 q 
 another strange custom , which i leave to be scan by falconer themselves . 
 nor any kind of mouse with short tail . they have also certain little beast call by they sogur , which lie in a cave twenty or thirty of they together , all the whole winter sleep there for the space of six month : and these they take in great abundance . there be also a kind of cony have long tail like unto cat : and on the outside of their tail grow black and white hair . they have many other small beast good to eat , which they know and discern right well . i see no deer there , and but a few hare , but a great number of roe . i see wild ass in great abundance , which be like unto mule . also i see another kind of beast call artak , have in all resemblance the body of a ram , and crooked home , which be of such bigness , that i can scarce lift up a pair of they with one hand : and of these home they make great drink cup . they have falcon , girfalcon , and other hawk in great plenty : all which they carry upon their right hand : 8c they put always about their falcon neck a string of leather , which hang down to you midst of their gorge , by the which string , when they cast they off the fist at their game , with their left hand they bow down the head and breast of the say hawk , lest they shall be toss up and down , and beat with the wind , or lest they shall soar too high . wherefore they get a great part of their victual , by hunt 8c hawk . concern their garment and attire be it know unto your majesty , that out of Cataya 8c other region of the east , out of Persia also and other country of the south , there be bring unto they stuff of silk , cloth of gold , 8c cotton cloth , which they wear in time of summer . but out of Russia , Moxel , Bulgaria the great , 8c pascatir , that be Hungaria the great , and out of Kersis ( all which be northern region 8c full of wood ) 8c also out of many other country of the north , which be subject unto they , the inhabitant bring they rich and costly skin of diverse sort ( which i never see in our 
 242 
 1253-country ) wherewithal they be clad in winter . and always against winter they make themselves two gown , one with the fur inward to their skin , and another with the fur outward , to defend they from wind and snow , which for the most part be make of wolf skin , or fox skin , or else of papion . and when they sit within the house , they have a fine gown to wear . the poor sort make their upper gown of dog or of goat skin . when they go to hunt for wild beast , there meet a great company of they together , and environing the place round about , where they be sure to find some game , by little and little they approach on all side , till they have get the wild beast into the midst , as it be into a circle , and then they discharge their arrow at they . also they make themselves breech of skin . the rich Tartar sometime fur their gown with pelluce or silk shag , which be exceed soft , light , and warm . the poor sort do line their clothes with cotton cloth which be make of the fine wool they can pick out , and of the courser part of the say wool , they make feel to cover their house and their chest , and for their bed also . of the same wool , be mix with one three part of horse hair , they make all their cordage . they make also of the say feel cover for their stool , and cap to defend great expense their head from the weather : for all which purpose efwmu-they spend a great quantity of their wool . and thus much concern the attire of the man . 
 of the fashion which the Tartar use in cut their hair , and of the attire of their woman . Chap. 8. 
 the man shave a plot four square upon the crown of their head , and from the two foremost corner they shave , as it be , two seam down to their temple : they shave also their temple and the hinder part of their head even unto the nape of the neck : likewise they shave the forepart of their scalp down 243 
 to their forehead , and upon their forehead they leave a lock of hair reach down unto their eye brow : upon the two hindermost corner of their head , they have two lock also , which they twine and braid into knot and so bound and knit they under each ear one . Moreover their woman garment differ not from their man , save that they be somewhat long . but on the morrow after one of their woman be marry , she shave her scalp from the midst of her head down to her forehead , and wear a wide garment like unto the hood of a nun , yea large and long in all part then a nun hood , be open before and gird unto they under the right side . for herein do the Tartar differ from the Turk : because the Turk fasten their garment to their body on the left side : but the Tartar always on the right side . they have also a ornament for their head which they call Botta , be make of the bark of a tree , or of some such other light matter as they can find , which by reason of the thickness and roundness thereof can be hold but in both hand together : and it have a square sharp spire rise from the top thereof , be more than a cubit in length , and fashion like unto a pinnacle . the say Botta they cover all over with a piece of rich silk : and it be hollow within : and upon the midst of the say spire or square top , they put a bunch of quill or of slender cane a cubit long and more : and the say bunch , on the top thereof , they beautify with peacock feather , and round about all the length thereof , with the feather of a malards tail , and with precious stone also . great lady wear this kind of ornament upon their head bind it strong with a certain hat or coif , which have a hole in the crown , fit for the spire to come through it : and under the foresay ornament they cover the hair of their head , which they gather up round together from the hinder part thereof to the crown , and so lap they up in a knot or bundle within the say Botta , which afterward they bound strong under 
 244 
 their throat . hereupon when a great company of such gentlewoman ride together , and be behold a far off , they seem to be soldier with helmet on their head carry their lance upright : for the say Botta appear like a helmet with a lance over it . all their woman sit on horseback bestride their horse like man : and they bound their hood or gown about their waste with a sky colour silk scarf , and with another scarf they gird it above their breast : and they bound also a piece of white silk like a muffler or mask under their eye , reach down unto their breast . Theise gentlewoman be exceed fat , and the lesser their nose be , the fair be they esteem : they daub over their sweet face with grease too shameful : and they never lie in bed for their travel of childbirth . 
 of the duty enjoin unto the tartarian woman , and of their labour , and also of their marriage . Chap. 9 
 the duty of woman be , to drive cart : to lay their house upon cart and to take they down again : to milk kine : to make butter and gry-ut : to dress skin and to sow they , which they usual sow with thread make of sinew , for they divide sinew into slender thread , and then twine they into one long thread . they make sandal and sock and other garment . howbeit they never wash any apparel : for they say that God be then angry , and that dreadful thunder will ensue , if wash garment be hang forth to dry : yea , they beat such as wash , and take their garment from they . they be wonderful afraid of thunder : for in the time of thunder they thrust all stranger out of their house , and then wrap themselves in black feel , they lie hide therein , till the thunder be overpast . they never wash their dish » or bowl : yea , when their flesh be sodden , they wash the platter wherein it must be put , with scald hot broth out of the pot , and then power the say broth into the pot again . they make feel also , and cover their house therewith . the 
 245 
 duty of the man be to make bow and arrow , stirrup , bridle , and saddle : to build house and cart , to keep horse : to milk mere : to churn Cosmos and mare milk , and to make bag wherein to put it : they keep camel also and lay burden upon they . as for sheep and goat they tend and milk they , aswell the man as the woman . with sheep milk thicked and salt they dress and tan their hide . when they will wash their hand or their head , they fill their mouth full of water , and spout it into their hand by little and little , they sprinkle their hair and wash their head therewith . as touch marriage , your highness be to understand , that no man can have a wife among they till he have buy she : whereupon sometime their maid be very stale before they be marry , for their parent always keep they till they can sei they . they keep the first and second degree of consanguinity inviolable , as we do : but they have no regard of the degree of affinity : for they will marry together , or by succession , two sister . their widow marry not at all , for this reason : because they believe , that all who have serve they in this life , shall do they service in the life to come also . whereupon they be persuade , that every widow after death shall return unto her own husband . and herehence arise a abominable and filthy custom among they , namely that the son marry sometime all his father wife except his own mother : for the court or house of the father or mother fall by inheritance always to the young son . whereupon he be to provide for all his father wife , because they be part of his inheritance aswell as his father possession . and then if he will he use they for his own wife : for he think it no injury or disparagement unto himself , although they return unto his father after death . therefore when any man have bargain with another for a maid , the father of the say damsel make he a feast : in the mean while she flee unto some of her kinsfolk to hide her self . then say her father unto the bridegroom : lo , my daughter be you , take 
 246 
 her wheresoever you can find she . than he and his friend seek for she till they can find she , and have find she he must take she by force and carry she , as it be , violent unto his own house . 
 of their execution of justice and judgement : and of their death and burial . Chap. 10. 
 concern their law or their execution of justice , your majesty be to be advertise , that when two man fight , no three man dare intrude • himself to part they . yea , the father dare not help his own son . but he that go by the worst must appeal unto the court of his lord . and whosoever else offer he any violence after appeal , be put to death . but he must go present without all delay : and he that have suffer the injury , carry he , as it be captive . they punish no man with sentence of death , unless he be take in the deed do , or confess the same . but be accuse by the multitude , they put he unto extreme torture to make he confess the truth . they punish murder with death , and carnali copulation also with any other beside his own . by his own , i mean his wife or his maid servant , for he may use his slave as he list himself . heinous theft also or felony they punish with death . for a light theft , as namely for steal of a ram , the party ( not be apprehend in the deed do , but otherwise detect ) be cruel beat . and if you executioner lay on a 100 stroke , he must have a 100 staff , namely for such as be beat upon sentence give in the court . also counterfeit messenger , because they feign themselves to be messenger , when as indeed they be none at all , they punish with death . sacrilegious person they use in like manner ( of which kind of malefactor your majesty shall understand more full hereafter ) because they esteem such to be witch . when any man die , they lament and howl most pitiful for he : and the say mourner be free from pay any tribute for one whole year after . also whosoever be present at the house 
 247 
 where any one grow to man estate lie dead , he must not enter into the court of mangu-can till one whole year be expire . if it be a child decease he must not enter into the say court till the next month after . near unto the grave of the party decease they always leave one cottage . if any of their noble ( be of the stock of Chingis , who be their first lord and father ) decease , his sepulchre be unknown . and always about those place where they inter their noble , there be one house of man to keep the sepulcher . i can not learn that they use to hide treasure in the grave of their dead . the comanians build a great tomb over their dead , and erect the image of the dead party thereupon , with his face towards the east , hold a drink cup in his hand , before his navel . they erect also upon the monument of rich man , pyramid , that be to say , little sharp house or pinnacle : and in some place i see mighty tower make of brick , in other place Pyramides make of stone , albeit there be no stone to be find thereabouts . i see one new bury , in who behalf they hang up 16. horse hide , unto each quarter of the world 4 , between certain high post : and they set beside his grave Cosmos for he to drink , and flesh to eat : and yet they say that he be baptize . i behold other kind of sepulcher also towards the east : namely large flower or pavement make of stone , some round and some square , and then 4. long stone pitch upright , about the say pavement towards the 4. region of the world . when any man be sick , he lie in his bed , and cause a sign to be set upon his house , to signify that there lie a sick person there , to the end that no man may enter into the say house : whereupon none at all visit any sick party but his servant only . Moreover , when any one be sick in their great court , they appoint watchman to stand round about the say court , who will not suffer any person to enter within the precinct thereof . for they fear least evil spirit or wind shall come together with the party that enter in . they esteem of soothsayer , as of their priest . 
 248 
 of our first entrance among the Tartar , and of their ingratitude . Chap. 11. 
 a nd be come among those barbarous people , i think ( as i say before ) y‘ i be enter into a new world : for they come flock about we on horse back , after they have make we a long time to await for they sit in the shadow , under their black cart . the first question which they demand be whether we have ever be with they heretofore , or no ? And give they answer that we have not , they begin impudent to beg our victual from we . and we give they some of our biscuit and wine , which we have bring with we from the town of Soldaia . and have drink off - one flagon of our wine they demand another , say , that a man go not into the house with one foot . howbeit we give they no more , excuse our self that we have but a little . than they ask we , whence we come , and whither we be bind ? i answer they with the word above mention : that we have hear concern duke sartach , that he be become a christian , and that unto he our determination be to travel , have your majesty letter to deliver unto he . they be very inquisitive to know whether i come of my own accord , or whether i be send ? i answer that no man compel i to come , neither have i come , unies in my self have be willing : and that therefore i be come accord to my own will , and to the will of my superior . i take diligent heed never to say that i be your majesty ambassador . than they ask what i have in my cart ; whether it be gold or silver , or rich garment to carry unto Sartach ? i answer that Sartach shall see what we have bring , when we be once come unto he , and that they have nothing to do to ask such question , but rather ought to conduct i unto their captain , and that he , if he think good , shall cause i to be direct unto Sartach : if not , that i will return . for there be in the same province one of baatu he kinsman call scacati , unto who my lord 249 
 the emperor of Constantinople have write letter of request , to suffer i to pass through his territory . with this answer of we they be satisfy , give we horse and ox , and two man to conduct we . howbeit before they will allow we the foresay necessary for our journey , they make we to await a long while , beg our bread for their young brat , wonder at all thing which they see about our servant , as their knife , glove , purse , and point , and desire to have they . i excuse my self that we have a long way to travel , and that we must in no wise so soon deprive our self of thing necessary , to finish so long a journey . than they say that i be a very varlet . true it be , that they take nothing by force from i : howbeit they will beg that which they see very importunately and shameless . and if a man bestow aught upon they , it be but cost lose , for they be thankless wretch . they esteem themselves lord and think y* nothing shall be deny they by any man . if a man give they nought , and afterward stand in need of their service , they will do right nought for he . they give we of their cow milk to drink after you butter be chern out of it , be very sour , which they call Apram . and so we depart from they . and in very deed it seem to i y‘ we be escape out of the hand of devil . on the morrow we be come unto the captain . from the time wherein we depart from Soldaia , till we arrive at the court of Sartach , which be the space of two month , we never lie in house or tent , but always under the starry canopy , and in the open air , or under our cart . neither yet see we any village , nor any mention of building where a village have be , but the grave of the comanians in great abundance . the same evening our guide which have conduct we , give we some Cosmos . after i have drink thereof i sweat most extreme for the novelty and strangeness , because i never drink of it before . notwithstanding i think it be very savoury , as indeed it be . 
 of the court of Scacatai : and how the Christians drink no Cosmos . Chap. 12. 
 on the morrow after we meet with the cart of Scacatai lade with house , and i think that a mighty city come to meet i . i wonder also at the great multitude of huge drove of ox , and horse , and at the flock of sheep . i can see but a few man that guide all these matter : whereupon i inquire how many man he have under he , and they tell i that he have not above 500 in all , the one half of which number we be come past , as they lie in another lodging . then the servant which be our guide tell i , that i must present somewhat unto scacatay : and so he cause we to stay , go himself before to give notice of our come . by this time it be past three of the clock , and they unlade their house near unto a certain water : and there come unto we his interpreter , who be advertise by we that we be never there before , demand some of our victual , and we yield unto his request . also he require of we some garment for a reward , because he be to interpret our say unto his master . howbeit we excuse our self as well as we can . than he ask we , what we will present unto his lord ? and we take a flagon of wine , and fill a maund with biscuit , and a platter with apple and other fruit . but he be not content therewith , because we bring he not some rich garment . notwithstanding we enter so into his presence with fear and bashfulness . he sit upon his bed hold a citron in his hand , and his wife sit by he : who ( as i very think ) have cut and pare her nose between the eye , that she may seem to be more flat and saddle-nosed : for she have leave her self no nose at all in that place , have anoint the very same place with a black ointment , and her eye brow also : which sight seem most ugly in our eye . than i rehearse unto he the same word , which i have speak in other place before . for it stand we in hand to use one and the same speech in all place . for 251 
 a caveat right we be well forewarn of this circumstance by some worthy the which have be among the Tartar , that we shall never vary in our tale . than i beseech he , that he will vouchsafe to accept that small gift at our hand , excuse my self that i be a monk , and that it be against our profession to possess gold , or silver , or precious garment , and therefore that i have not any such thing to give he , howbeit he shall receive some part of our victual in stead of a blessing . hereupon he cause our present to be receive , and immediate distribute the same among his man , who be meet together for the same purpose , to drink and make merry . i deliver also unto he the emperor of Constantinople his letter ( this be eight day after the feast of ascension ) who send they forthwith to Soldaia to have they interpret there : for they be write in greek , and he have none about he that be skilful in the greek tongue . he ask we also whether we will drink any Cosmos , that be to say mare milk ? ( for those that be Christians among they , as namely the russian , grecian , and alanians , who keep their own law very strict , will in no case drink thereof , yea , they account themselves no christian after they have once drink of it , and their priest reconcile they unto the church as if they have renounce the christian faith . ) i give he answer , that we have as yet sufficient of our own to drink , and that when our drink fail we , we must be constrain to drink such as shall be give unto we . he inquire also what be contain in our letter , which your majesty send unto Sartach ? i answer : that they be seal up , and that there be nothing contain in they , but good and friendly word . and he ask what word we will deliver unto Sartach ? i answer : the word of christian faith . he ask again what these word be ? for he be very desirous to hear they . 
 [ i . i O2 . i then encage expound unto he as well as i can , by my 
 interpreter , ( who have no wit nor any utterance of speech ) the apostle creed . which after he have hear , hold his peace , he shake his head . than he assign unto we 252 
 two man , who shall give attendance upon our self , upon our horse , and upon our Oxen. and he cause we to ride in his company , till the messenger who he have send for the interpretation of the emperor letter , be return . and so we travel in his company till the morrow after Pentecost . 
 how the alanians come unto we on Pentecost or Whitsun even . Chap. 13. 
 upon the even of Pentecost , there come unto we certain alanians , who be there call * acias , be Christians after the manner of the grecian , use greek book and grecian priest : howbeit they be not schismatics as the grecian be , but without acception of person , they honour all Christians . and they bring unto we sodden flesh , request we to eat of their meat , and to pray for one of their company be dead . than i say , because it be the even of so great and so solemn a feast day , that we will not eat any flesh for that time . and i expound unto they the solemnity of the say feast , whereat they great rejoice : for they be ignorant of all thing appertain to Christian religion , except only the name of Christ . they and many other Christians , both russian , and Hungarians demand of we , whether they may be save or no , because they be constrain to drink Cosmos , and to eat the dead carcase of such thing , as be slay by the Saracen , and other infidel ? which even the greek and russian priest themselves also esteem as thing strangle or offer unto idol : because they be ignorant of the time of fast , neither can they have observe they albeit they have know they . then instruct i they aswell as i can and strengthen they in the faith . as for the flesh which they have bring we reserve it until the feast day . for there be nothing to be sell among the Tartar for gold and silver , but only for cloth and garment , of the which kind of merchandise we have none at all . when our servant offer they any coin call Yperpera , they 253 
 cloth be the chief merchandise in Tartaric . 
 rub it with their finger , and put it unto their nose , to try by the smell whether it be copper or no . neither do they allow we any food but cow milk only which be very sour and filthy . there be one thing most necessary great want unto we . for the water be so foul and muddy by reason of their horse , that it be not meet to be drink . and but for certain biscuit , which be by the goodness of God remain unto we , we have undoubted perish . 
 of a Saracen which say that he will be baptize : and of certain man which seem to be leper . Chap. 14. 
 upon the day of Pentecost there come unto we a certain Saracen , unto who , as he talk with we , we expound the christian faith . who ( hear of God benefit exhibit unto mankind by the incarnation of our saviour Christ , and the resurrection of the dead , and the judgement to come , and that in baptism be a wash away of sin ) say , that he will be baptize . but when we prepare our self to the baptize of he , he sudden mount on horseback , say that he will go home and consult with his wife what be best to be do . and on the morrow after he tell we , that he dare in no case receive baptism , because than he shall drink no more Cosmos . for the Christians of that place affirm that no true Christians ought to drink thereof : and that without the say liquor he can not live in that desert . from which opinion , i can not for my life remove he . wherefore be it know of a certainty unto your highness , that they be much estrange from the christian faith by reason of that opinion which have be broach and confirm among they by the russian , of who there be a great multitude in that place . the same day scacatay the captain aforesaid give we one man to conduct we to sartach , and two other to guide we unto the next lodging , which be distant from that 
 254 
 place five day journey for ox to travel . they give unto we also a goat for victual , and a great many bladder of cow milk , 8c but a little Cosmos , because it be of so great estimation among they . and so take our journey direct towards the north , i think that we have pass through one of hell gate . the servant which conduct we begin to play the bold thief with we , see we take so little heed unto our self . at length have lose much by their thievery , harm teach we wisdom . and then we come unto the extremity of that province , which be fortify with a ditch from one sea unto another : without the bound whereof their lodging be situate . into the which , so soon as we have enter , all the inhabitant there seem unto we to be infect with leprosy : for certain base fellow be place there to receive tribute of all such as take salt out of the salt salt pit . pit aforesaid . from that place they tell we that we must travel fifteen day journey , before we shall find any other people . with they we drink Cosmos , and give unto they a basket full of fruit and of biscuit . and they give unto we eight ox and one goat , to sustain we in so great a journey , and i know not how many bladder of milk . and so change our ox , ? en we take our journey which we finish in ten j°urned-dayes , arrive at another lodging : neither sound we any water all that way , but only in certain ditch make in the valley , except two small river . and from the time wherein we depart out of the foresay province of Gasaria , we travail direct eastward , have a sea on the south side of we , and a waste desert on the north , which desert , in some place , reach twenty day journey in breadth , and there be neither tree , mountain , nor stone therein . and it be most excellent pasture . here the comanians , which be call capthac , be wont to feed their cattle . howbeit by the dutch man they be call Valani , and the province it self Valania . but Isidore call all that 
 2S5 
 the length of tract of land stretch from the river of Tanais to the Comania . lake of Maeotis , and so along as far as Danubius , the country of Alania . and the same land continue in length from Danubius unto Tanais ( which divide Asia from Europe ) for the space of two month journey , albeit a man shall ride post as fast as the Tartar use to ride : and it be all over inhabit by the comanians , call capthac : yea and beyond Tanais , as far as the river of Edil or Volga : the space between the two which river be a great and long 
 Russia . journey to be travail in ten day . to the north of the same province lie Russia , which be full of wood in all place , and stretch from Polonia and Hungaria , even to the river of Tanais : and it have be waste all over by the Tartar , and as yet be daily waste by they . 
 of our affliction which we sustain : and of the comanians manner of burial . Chap. 15. 
 Prussia . ' | ' hey prefer the Saracen before the russian , a because they be Christians , and when they be able to give they no more gold nor silver , they drive they and their child like flock of sheep into the wilderness , constrain they to keep their cattle there . beyond Russia lie the country of Prussia , which the dutch knight of the order of saint maries hospitali of Jerusalem have of late whole conquer and subdue . and in very deed they may easy win Russia , if they will put to their help hand . for if the Tartar shall but once know , that the great priest , that be to say , the pope do cause the ensign of the cross to be display against they , they will flee all into their desert and solitary place . we therefore go on towards the east , see nothing but heaven and earth , and sometime the sea on our right hand , call the sea of Tanais , and the sepulchre of the comanians , which appear unto we two league off , in which place they be wont to bury their kindred 256 
 altogether . so long as we be travel through the desert , it go reasonable well with we . for i can sufficient express in word the irksome and tedious trouble which i sustain , when i come at any of their place of abode . for our guide will have we go in unto every captain with a present , and our expense will not extend so far . for we be every day eight person of we spend our wayfare provision , for the Tartar servant will all of they eat of our victual . we our self be five in number , and the servant our guide be three , two to drive our cart , and one to conduct we unto Sartach . the flesh which they give we be not sufficient for we : neither can we find any thing to be buy for our money . and as we sit extreme heat under our cart in the code shadow , by reason of the tn sommer-extreame and vehement heat which be there at that time , they do so importunate and shameless intrude themselves into our company , that they will even tread upon we , to see whatsoever thing we have . Having list at any time to ease themselves , the filthy lozel have not the manner to withdraw themselves far from we , than a bean can be cast . yea , like vile sloven they will lay their tail in our presence , while they be yet talk with we : many other thing they commit , which be most tedious and loathsome unto we . but above all thing it grieve i to the very heart , that when i will utter aught unto they , which may tend to their edification , my foolish interpreter will say : you shall not make i become a preacher now : i tell you , i can nor i will not rehearse any such word . and true it be which he say , for i perceive afterward , when i begin to have a little smattering in the language , that when i speak one thing , he will say quite another , whatsoever come next unto his witless tongue end . then see the danger i may incur in speak by such a interpreter , i resolve much rather to hold my peace , and thus we travel with great toil from lodging to lodging , till at the length , 
 i 257 r 
 the breadth of Tanais . 
 he be much deceive . 
 a few day before the feast of saint marie Magdalene , we arrive at the bank of the mighty river Tanais which divide Asia from Europa , even as the river Nilus off . / Egypt disjoin Asia from Africa . at the same place where we arrive , baatu and Sartach do cause a certain cottage to be build , upon the eastern bank of the river , for a company of russian to dwell in to the end they may transport ambassador and merchant in ferry-boat over that part of the river . first they ferry we over , and then our cart , put one wheel into one lyter , and the other wheel into another lyter , have bind both the lyter together , and so they row they over . in this place our guide play the fool most extreme . for he imagine that the say russian , dwell in the cottage , shall have provide we horse , send home the beast which we bring with we , in another cart , y‘ they may return unto their own master . and when we demand to have some beast of they , they answer , that they have a privilege from baatu , whereby they be bind to none other service , but only to ferry over goer and comer : and that they receive great tribute of merchant in regard thereof . we stay therefore by the say river side three day . the first day they give unto we a great fresh turbut : the second day they bestow rye bread , and a little flesh upon we , which the purveyor of the village have take up at every house for we : and the three day dry fish , which they have there in great abundance . the say river be even as broad in that place , as the river of sein be at Paris . and before we come there , we pass over many goodly water , and full of fish : howbeit the barbarous and rude Tartar know not how to take they : neither do they make any reckon of any fish , except it be so great , that they may pray upon the flesh thereof , as upon the flesh of a ram . this river be the limit of the east part of Russia , and it spring out of the fen of Maeotis , which fen stretch unto the north ocean . and it run south - 
 258 
 ward into a certain great sea 700. mile about , before it fall into the sea call Pontus Euxinus . and all the river , which we pass over , run with full stream into those quarter . the foresay river have great store of wood also grow upon the west side thereof . beyond this place the Tartar ascend no far unto the north : for at that season of the year , about the first of August , they begin to return back unto the south . and therefore there be another cottage somewhat low , where passenger be ferry over in winter time . and in this place we be drive to great extremity , by reason that we can get neither horse , nor ox for any money . at length , after i have declare unto they , that my come be to labour for the common good of all Christians , they send we ox and man ; howbeit we our self be fain to travel on foot . at this time they be reap their rye . Wheat prosper not well in that soil . they have the seed of Millium in great abundance . the russian woman attire their head like unto our woman . they imbroder their safeguard or gown on the outside , from their foot unto their knee with particoloured or grey stuff . the russian man wear cap like unto the dutch man . also they wear upon their head certain sharp , and high-crowned hat make of feel , much like unto a sugar loaf . then travel we 3. dale together , not find any people . and when our self and our ox be exceed weary and faint , not know how far off we shall find any Tartar , on the sudden , there come two horse run towards we , which we take with great joy , and our guide and interpreter mount upon their back , to see , how far off they can descry any people . at length upon the four day of our journey , have find some inhabitant , we rejoice like seafaring man , which have escape out of a dangerous tempest , and have new recover the haven . then have take fresh horse , and ox , we pass on from lodging to lodging , till at the last , upon the 
 259 
 about the begin of August , the Tartar return southward . 
 A.D. 
 I253 ’ 
 the people of Moxel be pagan . 
 the people call Merdui be Saracen . 
 the circuit of the caspian sea . 
 [ i . 105. i 
 second of the kalend of August , we arrive at the habitation of duke sartach himself . 
 of the dominion of Sartach , and of his subject . Chap. 16. 
 the region lie beyond Tanais , be a very goodly country , have store of river and wood towards the north part thereof . there be mighty huge wood which two sort of people do inhabit . one of they be call Moxel , be mere pagan , and without law . they have neither town nor city , but only cottage in you wood . their lord and a great part of themselves be put to the sword in high Germany . whereupon they high commend the brave courage of the almain , hope as yet to be deliver out of the bondage of the Tartar , by their mean . if any merchant come unto they , he must provide thing necessary for he , with who he be first of all entertained , all the time of his abode among they . if any lie with another man wife , her husband , unless he be a eiewitnes thereof , regard it not : for they be not jealous over their wife . they have abundance of hog , and great store of honey and wax , and diverse sort of rich and costly skin , and plenty of falcon . next unto they be other people call Merclas , which the Latines call Merdui , and they be Saracen . beyond they be the river of Etilia or Volga , which be the mighty river that ever i see . and it issue from the north part of Bulgaria the great , and so trending along southward , disimboqu into a certain lake contain in circuit the space of 4. month travel , whereof i will speak hereafter . the two foresay river , namely Tanais and Etilia , otherwise call Volga , towards the northern region through the which we travel , be not distant asunder above ten . day journey , but southward they be divide a great space one from another . for Tanais descend into the sea of Pontus : Etilia make the foresay sea or lake , with the help of many 
 260 
 other river which fall thereinto out of Persia . and we have to the south of we huge high mountain , upon the side whereof , towards the say desert , do the people call Cergis , and the Alani or Acas inhabit , who be ker&s or as yet Christians , and wage war against the Tartar . aas-beyond they , next unto the sea or lake of Etilia , there be certain Saracen call Lesgi , who be in subjection unto the Tartar . beyond these be Porta ca ferrea , or the iron gate , now call Derbent , which Alexander build to exclude the barbarous nation out of Persia . concern the situation whereof , your majesty shall understand more about the end of this treatise : for i travail in my return by the very same place . between the two foresay river , in the ’ 
 region through the which we pass do the comanians of old time inhabit , before they be overrun by the Tartar . 
 of the court of Sartach , and of the magnificence thereof . Chap. 17. 
 a nd we find sartach lie within three day journey of the river Etilia : who court seem unto we to 
 be very great . for he himself have six wife , and his elder son also have three wife : every one of which woman have a great house , and they have each one of they about 200. cart . our guide go unto a certain nestorian name Coiat , who be a man of great authority calat the in sartachs court . he make we to go very far unto nestorian . the lord gate . for so they call he , who have the office of entertain ambassador . in the evening Coiac command we to come unto he . than our guide begin to inquire what we will present he withal , and be exceed offend , when he see that we have nothing ready to present . we stand before he , and he sit majestical , have music and dance in his presence . than i speak unto he in the word before recite , tell he , for what purpose i be come unto his lord , and request so much 
 261 
 favour at his hand , as to bring our letter unto the sight of his lord . i excuse my self also , that i be a monk , not have , nor receive , nor use any gold , or silver , or any other precious thing , save only our book , and the vestment wherein we serve God : and that this be the cause why i bring no present unto he , nor unto his lord . for i that have abandon my own good , can not be a transporter of thing for other man . than he answer very courteous , that be a monk , and so do , i do well : for so i shall observe my vow : neither do himself stand in need of aught that we have , but rather be ready to bestow upon we such thing as we our self stand in need of : and he cause we to sit down , and to drink of his milk . and present after he request we to say our devotion for he : and we do so . he inquire also who be the great prince among the Franckes ? and i say , the emperor , if he can enjoy his own dominion in quiet . no ( quoth he ) but the king of France . for he have hear of your highness by lord Baldwine of Henault . i find there also one of the knight of the temple , who have be in Cyprus , and have make report of all thing which he see there . then return we unto our lodging . and on the morrow we send he a flagon of muscadel wine ( which have last very well in so long a journey ) and a box full of biscuit , which be most acceptable unto he . and he keep our servant with he for that evening . the next morning he command i to come unto the court , and to bring the king letter and my vestment , and book with i : because his lord be desirous to see they . which we do accord , lade one cart with our book and vestment , and another with biscuit , wine , and fruit . than he cause all our book and vestment to be lay forth . and there stand round about we many Tartar , Christians and Saracens on horseback . at the sight whereof , he demand whether 
 262 
 i will bestow all those thing upon his lord or no ? which say make i to tremble , and grieve i full sore . howbeit , dissemble our grief as well as we can , we shape he this answer : sir , our humble request be , that our lord your master will vouchsafe to accept our bread , wine , and fruit , not as a present , because it be too mean , but as a benediction , lest we shall come with a empty hand before he . and he shall see the letter of my sovereign lord the king , and by they he shall understand for what cause we be come unto he , and then both our self , and all that we have , shall stand to his courtesy : for our vestment be holy , and it be unlawful for any but priest to touch they . than he command we to invest our self in the say garment , that we may go before his lord : and we do so . than i my self put on our most precious ornament , take in my arm a very fair cushion , and the bible which your majesty give i , and a most beautiful psalter , which the queen grace bestow upon i , wherein there be goodly picture . my associate take a missal and a cross : and the clerk have put on his surplesse , take a censer in his hand . and so we come unto the presence of his lord : and they lift up the felt hang before his door , that he may behold we . than they cause the clerk and the interpreter thrice to bow the knee : but of we they require no such submission . and they diligent admonish we to take heed , that in go in , and in come out , we touch not the threshold of the house , and request we to sing a benediction for he . than we enter in , sing salve regina . and within the entrance of the door , stand a bench with cosmos , and drink cup thereupon . and all his wife be there assemble . also the moal or rich Tartar thrust in with we press we sore . then Coiat carry unto his lord the censer with incense , which he behold very diligent , hold it in his hand . afterwards he carry the psalter 263 
 unto he , which he look earnest upon , and his wife also that sit beside he . after that he carry the bible : then sartach ask if the gospel be contain therein ? yea ( say i ) and all the holy scripture beside . he take the cross also in his hand , and demand concern the image , whether it be the image of Christ or no ? i say it be . the nestorian and the armenian do never make the figure of Christ upon their cross . wherefore either they seem not to think well of his passion , or else they be ashamed of it . than he cause they that stand about we , to stand aside , that he may more full behold our ornament . afterwards i deliver unto he your majesty letter , with the translation thereof into the arabic , and syriake language . for i cause they to be translate at Aeon into the character , and dialect of both the say tongue . and there be certain armenian priest , which have skill in the turkish and arabian language . the aforesaid knight also of the order of the temple have knowledge in the syriake , turkish , and arabian tongue . than we depart forth , and put off our vestment , and there come unto we certain scribe together with the foresay coiat , and cause our letter to be interpret . which letter be hear , he cause our bread , wine and fruit to be receive . and he permit we also to carry our vestment and book unto our own lodging . this be do upon the feast of saint Peter ad vincula . 
 how they be give in charge to go unto baatu the father of Sartach . Chap. 18. 
 the next morning betimes come unto we a certain priest , who be brother unto Coiat , request to have our box of chrism , because sartach ( as he say ) be desirous to see it : and so we give it he . about eventide Coiat send for we , say : my lord your king write good word unto my lord and master sartach . howbeit there be certain matter of difficulty in they concern which he dare not determine aught , without 264 
 the advise and counsel of his father . and therefore of necessity you must depart unto his father , leave behind you the two cart , which you bring hither yesterday with vestment and book , in my custody : because my lord be desirous to take more diligent view thereof . i present suspect what mischief may ensue by his covetousness , say unto he : sir , we will not only leave those with you , but the two other cart also , which we have in our possession , will we commit unto your custody . you shall not ( quoth he ) leave those behind you , but for the other two cart first name , we will satisfy your request . i say that this can not convenient be do : but needs we must leave all with he . than he ask , whether we mean to tarry in the land ? i answer : if you thorough understand the letter of my lord the king , you know that we be even so determine . than he reply , that we ought to be patient and lowly : and so we depart from he that evening . on the morrow after he send a nestorian priest for the cart , and we cause all the four cart to be deliver . then come the foresay brother of Coiat to meet we , and separate all those thing , which we have bring the day before unto the court , from the rest , namely , the book and vestment , and take they away with he . howbeit Coiat have command , that we shall carry those vestment with we , which we wear in the presence of Sartach , that we may put they on before baatu , if need shall require : but the say priest take they from we by violence , say : thou have bring they unto sartach , and will thou carry they unto baatu ? and when i will have render a reason , he answer : be not too talkative , but go your way . than i see that there be no remedy but patience : for we can have no access unto sartach himself , neither be there any other , that will do we justice . i be afraid also in regard of the interpreter , lest he have speak other thing than i say unto he : for his will be good that we shall have give away all 
 265 
 they be come as far as Tolga . 
 the Tartar will be call Moal . 
 that we have . there be yet one comfort remain unto i : for when i once perceive their covetous intent , i convey from among our book the bible , and the sentence , and certain other book which i make speciali account of . howbeit i dare not take away the psalter of my sovereign lady the queen , because it be too well know , by reason of the golden picture therein . and so we return with the two other cart unto our lodging . then come he that be appoint to be our guide unto the court of baatu , will we to take our journey in all posthaste : unto who i say , that i will in no case have the cart to go with i . which thing he declare unto Coiat . then Coiat command , that we shall leave they and our servant with he : and we do as he command . and so travel direct eastward towards baatu , the three day we come to Etilia or Volga : the stream whereof when i behold , i wonder from what region of the north such huge and mighty water shall descend . before we be depart from Sartach , the foresay coiat , with many other scribe of the court say unto we : do not make 
 report that our lord be a christian , but a Moal . because the name of a christian seem unto they to be the name of some nation . so great be their pride , that albeit they believe perhaps some thing concern Christ , yet will they not be call Christians , be desirous that their own name , that be to say , Moal shall be exalt above all other name . neither will 
 this history of they be call by the name of Tartar . for the presbyter John Tartars be another nation , as i be inform by they . in the north - 
 east , be allead - how sartach , and mangu-can , and ken-can ge at large do reverence unto Christians . Chap. 10. by Gerardus * 1 z 
 mercator in a t the same time when the Frenchman take his general Antioch , a certain man name Con can have map . dominion over the northern region , lie thereabouts . 
 con be a proper name : can be a name of authority or dignity , which signify a divine or soothsayer . all 
 266 
 diviners be call can among they . whereupon their prince be call can , because that unto they belong the government of the people by divination . we do read also in the history of Antiochia , that the Turk send for aid against the Frenchman , unto the kingdom of Con can . for out of those part the whole nation of from whence the Turk first come . the say con be of the nation turk of kara-catay . Kara signify black , and catay be the frst spran&-name of a country . so that kara-catay signify the black catay . this name be give to make a difference between the foresay people , and the people of catay , inhabit eastward over against you ocean sea : con - an ocean sea . cern who your majesty shall understand more hereafter . Theise Catayans dwell upon certain Alps , by the which i travail . and in a certain plain country within those Alps , there inhabit a nestorian shepherd , be a mighty governor over the people call Yayman , Nayman . which be Christians , follow the sect of Nestorius . 
 after the death of Con can , the say nestorian exalt 
 himself to the kingdom , and they call he king John , report ten time more of he then be true . for so the nestorian which come out of those part , use to do . for they blaze abroad great rumour , and report upon just nothing . whereupon they give out concern sartach , that he be become a christian , and the like also they report concern mangu can , and ken can : namely because these Tartar make more account of Christians , than they do of other people , and yet in very deed , themselves be not Christians . so likewise there go forth a great report concern the say king John. howbeit , when i travail along by his territory , there be no man that know any thing of he , but only a few nestorian . in his pasture or territory dwell ken can , at who court Frier Andrew be . and i my self pass by it at my return . This John have a brother , be a mighty man also , and a shepherd like himself , call vut , and he inhabit beyond the Alps of cara Catay , be 267 
 presbyter John. 
 the place of ken can his abode . 
 vut can , or une can . 
 distant from his brother John , the space of three week the village of journey . he be lord over a certain village , call cara ( crh^rum carum , have people also for his subject , name crit , or 
 Merkit , who be christian of the sect of Nestorius . but their lord abandon the worship of Christ , follow after idol , retain with he priest of the say idol , who all of they be worshipper of devil and sorcerer . beyond his pasture some ten or Moal in aid fifteen day journey , be the pasture of Moal , who you be a poor and beggarly nation , without governor , 
 and without law , except their soothsay , and their divination , unto the which detestable study , all in the place of those part do apply their mind . near unto the tartan . MoaJ be other poor people call Tartars . the 
 foresay king John die without issue male , and thereupon his brother vut be great enrich , and cause himself to be name can : and his drove and flock range even unto the border of Moal . about the cyngi . same time there be one cyngi , a black smith among the people of Moal . this cyngi steal as many cattle from vut can , as he can possible get : insomuch that the shepherd of Vut complain unto their lord . then provide he a army , and march up into the country of Moal to seek for the say cyngi . but cyngi flee among the Tartar , and hide himself amongst they . and vut have take some spoil both from Moal , and also from the Tartar , return home . then speak cyngi unto the Tartar , and unto the people of Moal , say : sir , because we be destitute of a governor and captain , you see how our neighbour do oppress we . and the Tartar and Moals appoint he to be their chieftain . then have secret gather together a army , he break in sudden upon vut , and overcome he , and vut flee into Cataya . at the same time be the daughter of vut take , which cyngi marry unto one of his son , by who she conceive , and bring forth the great mangu-can . can , which now reign , call mangu-can . than 268 
 cyngi send you Tartar before he in all place where he come : and thereupon be their name publish and spread abroad : for in all place the people will cry out : lo , the Tartar come , the Tartar come . howbeit , through continual ! war , they be now , all of they in a manner , consume and bring to nought . whereupon the moal endeavour what they can , to extinguish the name of the Tartar , that they may exalt their own name . the country wherein they first inhabit , and where the court of cyngi can as yet remain , be call Mancherule . but because Tartary mancheruk . be the region , about which they have obtain their conquest , they esteem that as their royal and chief city , and there for the most part do they elect their great can . 
 of the russian , hungarian , and alanians : and of the caspian sea Chap. 20. 
 now , as concern sartach , whether he believe in Christ , or no , i know not . this i be sure of , that he will not be call a christian . yea rather he seem unto i to deride and skofle at Christians . he lie in the way of the christian , as namely of the russian , the valacfiians , the bulgarian of Bulgaria the lesser , the soldaianes , the Kerkis , and the alanians : who all of they pass by he , as they be go to the court of his father baatu , to carry gift : whereupon he be more in league with they . howbeit , if the Saracen come , and bring great gift than they , they be dispatch soon . he have about he certain nestorian priest , who pray upon their bead , and sing their devotion . also , there be another under baatu call Berta , who feed his cattle towards Porta or , Berea . ferrea , or derbent , where lie the passage of all those Saracen , which come out of Persia , and out of turquoise to go unto baatu , and pass by , they give reward unto he . and he profess himself to be a saracen , and will not permit swine flesh to be eat in his dominion . 
 269 
 howbeit , at the time of our return , baatu command he to remove himself from that place , and to inhabit upon the east side of Volga : for he be unwilling that the Saracen messenger shall pass by the say Berta , because he see it be not for his profit . for the space of four day while we remain in the court of Sartach , we have not any victual at all allow we , but once only a little Cosmos . and in our journey between he and his father , we travel in great fear . for certain russian , hungarian , and alanians be servant unto the Tartar ( of who they have great multitude among they ) assemble themselves twenty or thirty in a company , and so secret in the night convey themselves from home , they take bow and arrow with they , and whomsoever they find in the night season , they put he to death , hide themselves in the day time . and have tire their horse , they go in the night unto a company of other horse feed in some pasture , and change they for new , take with they also one or two horse beside , to eat they when they stand in need . Oure guide therefore be sore afraid , lest we shall have meet with such companion . in this journey we have die for famine , have we not carry some of our biscuit with we . at length we come unto the mighty river of Etilia , or Volga . for it be four time great , than the river of sein , and of a wonderful depth : and issue forth of Bulgaria the great , it run into a certain lake or sea , which of late they call the hircan sea , accord to the name of a certain city in Persia , stand upon the shore thereof . howbeit Isidore call it the caspian sea . for it have the caspian mountain and the land of Persia situate on the south side thereof : and the mountain of musihet , that be to say , of the people call Assassini towards the east , which mountain be conjoined unto the caspian mountain : but on the north side thereof lie the same desert , wherein the Tartar do now inhabit . howbeit heretofore there dwell certain 
 270 
 i253-people call Changlae . and on that side it receive changle . the stream of Etilia ; which river increase in summer time , like unto the river Nilus in . / Egypt . upon the west part thereof , it have the mountain of Alani , and Lesgi , and porta ferrea , or derbent , and the mountain of Georgia . this sea therefore be compass in on three side with the mountain , but on the north side with plain ground . Frier Andrew , in his journey travel Frier round about two side thereof , namely the south and the Andrew east side : and i my self about other two , that be to say , the north side in go from baatu to mangu-can , and in return likewise : and the west side in come home from baatu into Syria . a man may travel round about it in four month . and it be not true which Isidore report , namely that this sea be a bay or gulf come forth of the ocean : for it do , in no part thereof , join with the ocean , but be environ on all side with land . 
 of the court of baatu : and how we be entertain by he . Chap. 21. 
 all the region extend from the west shore of the foresay sea , where Alexander iron gate , otherwise call the city of Derbent , be situate , and from the mountain of Alania , all along by the fen of Maeotis , whereinto the river of Tanais fall , and so forth , to the north ocean , be wont to be call the north Albania . of which country Isidore report , that there be dog of such a huge stature , and so fierce , that they be able in fight to match bull , and to master lion . which be true , as i understand by diverse , who tell i , that there towards the north ocean they make their dog to draw in cart like ox , by reason of their bigness and strength . Moreover , upon that part of Etilia where we arrive , there be a new cottage build , wherein they have place Tartar and russian both together , to ferry over , and transport messenger go and come to and from the court of baatu . for 
 271 
 baatu remain upon the far side towards the east . neither ascend he in summer time more northward than the foresay place where we arrive , but be even then descend to the south . from Januarie until August both he and all other Tartar ascend by the bank of river towards cold and northerly region , and in August they begin to return back again . 
 he descend we pass down the stream therefore in a bark , from dim > ne than the foresay . cottage unto his court . from the same 
 to’barke place unto village of Bulgaria the great , stand 
 towards the north , it be five day journey . i wonder what devil carry the religion of Mahomet thither . for , from Derbent , which be upon the extreme border of Persia , it be above 30. day journey to pass overthwart the desert , and so to ascend by the bank of 
 astracan . Etilia , into the foresay country of Bulgaria . all which way there be no city , but only certain cottage near unto that place where Etilia fall into the sea . those bulgarian be most wicked Saracen , more earnest profess the damnable religion of Mahomet , than 
 the descrip - any other nation whatsoever . Moreover , when i first cion of baatu behold the court of baatu , i be astonish at the sight sscomt . thereof : for his house or tent seem as though they have be some huge and mighty city , stretch out a great way in length , the people range up and down about it for the space of some three or four league . and even as the people of Israel know every man , on which side of the tabernacle to pitch his tent : even so every one of they know right well , towards what side of the court he ought to place his house when he take it from off the cart . whereupon the court 
 call in their language Horda , which signify , the et t e i st . mjjst . because the governor or chieftain among they dwell always in the midst of his people : except only that direct towards the south no subject or inferior person place himself , because towards that region the court gate be set open : but unto the right hand , and the left hand they extend themselves as far as they 
 272 
 will , accord to the conveniency of place , so that they place not their house direct opposite against the court . at our arrival we be conduct unto a sarazen , who provide not for we any victual at all . the day follow , we be bring unto the court : and baatu have cause a large tent to be erect , because his house or ordinary tent can not contain so many man and woman as be assemble . our guide admonish we not to speak , till baatu have give we commandment so to do , and that then we shall speak our mind brief . then baatu demand whether your majesty have send ambassador unto he or no ? i answer , that your majesty have send messenger to ken-can : and that you will not have send messenger unto he , or letter unto Sartach , have not your highness be persuade that they be become Christians : because you send not unto they for any fear , but only for congratulation , and courtesy sake , in regard that you hear they be convert to Christianity . then lead he we unto his pavilion : and we be charge not to touch the cord of the tent , which they account in stead of the threshold of the house . there we stand in our habit barefooted , and bareheaded , and be a great and strange spectacle in their eye . for indeed friar John de Plano John de Plano Carpini have be there before my come : Carpini . howbeit , because he be the pope messenger , he change his habit that he may not be contemn . than we be bring into the very midst of the tent , neither require they of we to do any reverence by bow our knee , as they use to do of other messenger . we stand therefore before he for the space wherein a man may have rehearse the psalm , miserere mei deus : and there be great silence keep of all man . baatu himself sit upon a seat long and broad like unto a bed , guilt all over , with three stair to ascend thereunto , and one of his lady sit beside he . the man there assemble , sit down scatter , some on the right hand of the say lady , and some on the left . those place 
 i 273 s 
 on the one side which the woman fill not up ( for there be only the wife of baatu ) be supply by the man . also , at the very entrance of the tent , stand a bench furnish with cosmo , and with stately great cup of silver , and gold , be rich set with precious stone . baatu behold we earnest , and we he : and he seem to i to resemble in personage , monsieur John de beau mont , who soul rest in peace . and he have a fresh ruddy colour in his countenance . at length he command we to speak . than our guide give we direction , that we shall bow our knee and speak . whereupon 1 bow one knee as unto a man : than he signify that i shall kneel upon both knee : and 1 do so , be loath to contend about such circumstance . and again he command i to speak . than i think of prayer unto God , because i kneel on both my knee , begin to pray on this wise : sir , we beseech the lord , from who all good thing do proceed , and who have give you these earthly benefit , that it will please he hereafter to make you partaker of his heavenly blessing : because the former without these be but vain and improfitable . and i add further . be it know unto you of a certainty , that you shall not obtain the joy of heaven , unless you become a christian : for God say , whosoever believe and be baptize , shall|be save : but he that believe not , shall|be condemn . at this word he modest smile : but the other moal begin to clap their hand , and to deride we . and my silly interpreter , of who especial i shall have receive comfort in time of need , be himself abash and utter dash out of countenance . then , after silence make , i say unto he , i come unto your son , because we hear that he be become a christian : and i bring unto he letter on the behalf of my sovereign lord the king of France : and your son send i hither unto you . the cause of my come therefore be best know unto your self . than he cause i to rise up . and he inquire your majesty name , and my name , and the name of i 
 274 
 associate and interpreter , and cause they all to be put down in writing . he demand likewise ( because he have be inform , that you be depart out of your own country with a army ) against who you wage war ? i answer : against the Saracen , who have defile the house of God at Jerusalem . he ask also , whether your highness have ever before that time send any messenger unto he , or no ? to you sir ? ( say i ) never . then cause he we to sit down , and give we of his milk to drink , which they account to be a great favour , especial when any man be admit to drink Cosmos with he in his own house . and as i sit look down upon the ground , he command i to lift up my countenance , be desirous as yet to take more diligent view of we , or else perhaps for a kind of superstitious observation . for they esteem it a sign of ill luck , or a prognostication of evil unto they , when any man sit in their presence , hold down his head , as if he be sad : especial when he lean his cheek or chin upon his hand . than we depart forth , and immediate after come our guide unto we , and conduct we unto our lodging , say unto i : your master the king request that you may remain in this land , which request baatu can satisfy without the knowledge and consent of mangu-can . wherefore you , and your interpreter must of necessity go unto mangu-can . howbeit your associate , and the other man shall return unto the court of Sartach , stay there for you , till you come back . then begin the man of God my interpreter to lament , esteem himself but a dead man . my associate also protest , that they shall soon chap off his head , then withdraw he out of my company . Moreover i my self say , that without my associate i can not go : and that we stand in need of two servant at the least , to attend upon we , because , if one shall chance to fall sick , we can not be without another . then return unto the court , he tell these say unto baatu . And baatu command saying : let 
 275 
 the two priest and the interpreter go together , but let the clerk return unto Sartach . And come again unto we , he tell we even so . and when i will have speak for the clerk to have have he with we , he say : no more word : for baatu have resolve , that so it shall be , and therefore i dare not go unto the court any more . goset the clerk have remain of the alm money bestow upon he , 26. Yperperas , and no more ; 10. whereof he keep for himself and for the lad , and 16. he give unto the man of God for we . and thus be we part asunder with tear : he return unto the court of Sartach , and our self remain still in the same place . 
 of our journey towards the court of Mangu can . Chap. 22. 
 upon Assumption even our clerk arrive at the court of Sartach . and on the morrow after , the nestorian priest be adorn with our vestment in the presence of the say sartach . than we our self be conduct unto another host , who be appoint to provide we housefoome , victual , and horse . but because we have not aught to bestow upon he , he do they travel all thing untoward for we . than we ride on for-^thubanh^of^ ward whh baatu , descend along by the bank of Etilia , Etilia . i for the space of five week together : sometime my associate be so extreme hungry , that he will tell i in a manner weep , that it fare with he as though he have never eat any thing in all his life before . there be a fair or market follow the court of baatu at all time : but it be so far distant from we that we can not have recourse thereunto . for we be constrain to walk on foot for want of horse . at length Hungarians , certain Hungarians ( who have sometime be after a sort 
 clergy man ) find we out : and one of they can as yet sing many song without book , and be account of other hungarian as a priest , and be send for unto the funeral of his decease country man . there be 276 
 another of they also pretty well instruct in his grammar : for he can understand the meaning of any thing that we speak , but can not answer we . Theise hungarian be a great comfort unto we , bring we Cosmos to drink , yea , and sometime flesh for to eat also : who , when they request to have some book of we , and i have not any to give they ( for indeed we have none but only a bible , and a breviary ) it grieve i exceed . and i say unto they : bring i some ink and paper , and i will write for you so long as we shall remain here : and they do so . and i copy out for they horas beatae virginis , and officium defunctorum . Moreover , upon a certain day , there be a comanian a comanian . that accompany we , salute we in latin , and say : salvete domini . wonder thereat and salute he again , i demand of he , who have teach he that kind of salutation ? he say that he be baptize in Hungaria by our friar , and that of they he learn it . 
 he say moreover , that baatu have inquire many thing of he concern we , and that he tell he the estate of our order . afterward i see baatu ride with kiss company , and all his subject that be householder or master of family ride with he , and ( in my estimation ) they be not five hundred person in all . at length about the end of holy rood , there come a certain rich Moal unto we ( who father be a millenary , which be a great office among they ) saying : i be the man that must conduct you unto mangu-can , and we have thither a journey of four month long to travel , and a journey of there be such extreme cold in those part , that stone and +• month tree do even rive asunder in regard thereof . therefore rome i will wish you thorough to advise your self , whether you be able to endure it or no . unto who i answer : i hope by god help that we shall able to brook that which other man can endure . than he say : if you can endure it , i will forsake you by the way . and i answer he : it be not just deal for you so to do : for we go not thither upon any business of our own , 
 277 
 but by reason that we be send by your lord . wherefore sithence we be commit unto your charge , you ought in no wise to forsake we . than he say : all shall well . afterwards he cause we to show he all our garment : and whatsoever he deem to be less needful for we , he will we to leave it behind in the custody of our host . on the morrow they bring unto each of we a fur gown , make all of ram skin , with the wool still upon they , and breech of the same , and boot also or buskin accord to their fashion , and shoe make of feel , and hood also make of skin after their manner . 
 the 16. of the second day after holy rood , we begin to set forward September . on our journey , have three guide to direct we : and we 46. day . ride continual eastward , till the feast of all saint . 
 throughout all that region , and beyond also do the or , Kangjtt& . people of changle inhabit , who be by parentage descend from the roman . upon the north side of we , we have Bulgaria the great , and on the south , the foresay caspian sea . 
 or , laic . of the river of lagac : and of diverse region or nation . Chap. 23. 
 laic twelve t t aving travel twelve day journey from Etilia , we day journey ten sound a mighty river call lagac : which river jtom oga . issue out of the north , from the land of pascatir , 
 descend into the foresay sea . the language of pascatir . pascatir , and of the hungarian be all one , and they be all of they shepherd , not have any city . and their country border upon Bulgaria the great , on the west frontier thereof . from the north-east part of the say country , there be no city at all . for Bulgaria the great be the far country that way , that have any city therein . out of the forename region of pascatir , descendedfrom proceed the Hun of old time , who afterward be the bascirde . cade Hungarians . next unto it be Bulgaria the great . 
 Isidore report concern the people of this nation , that with swift horse they traverse the impregnable wall and bound of Alexander , ( which , together with the rock 278 
 of Caucasus , serve to restrain those barbarous and bloodthirsty people from invade the region of the south ) insomuch that they have tribute pay unto they , as far as TEgypt . likewise they waste all country even unto France . whereupon they be more mighty than the Tartar as yet be . and unto they the blacians , the ValaMans . bulgarian , and the Vandal join themselves . for out of Bulgaria the great , come those bulgarian . Moreover , they which inhabit beyond Danubius , near unto Constantinople , and not far from pascatir , be call Ilac , which ( save the pronunciation ) be all one with Blac , ( for the Tartar can pronounce the letter b ) from who also descend the people which inhabit the land of Assani . for they be both of they call Ilac ( both these , and the other ) in you language of the russian , the polonians , and the bohemians . the sclavonian speak all one language with the Vandal , all which band themselves with the Hun : and now for the most part , they unite themselves unto the Tartar : who God have raise up from the utmost part of the earth , accord 
 to that which the lord say : i will provoke they to 32 - v-envy ( namely such as keep not his law ) by a people , which be no people , and by a foolish nation will i anger ' ' ' they . this prophecy be fulfil , accord to the literal sense thereof , upon all nation which observe not the law of God . all this which i have write concern the land of pascatir , be tell i by certain friar predicants , which travail thither before ever the Tartar come abroad . and from that time they be subdue unto their neighbour the bulgarian be Saracens , whereupon many of they prove Saracens also . other matter concern this people , may be know out of chronicle . 
 for it be manifest , that those province beyond Constantinople , which be now call Bulgaria , Valachia , and Sclavonia , be of old time province belong to the greek . also Hungaria be heretofore call Pannonia . and we be ride over the land of cangle , from the feast of holy rood , until the feast of all saint : travail - country . 
 279 
 ing almost every day ( accord to my estimation ) as far , as from Paris to Orleans , and sometime far , as we be provide of post horse : for some day we have change of horse twice or thrice in a day . sometime we travail two or three day together , not find any people , and then we be constrain not to ride so fast . of 20. or 30. horse we have always the worst , because we be stranger . for every one take their choice of the best horse before we . they provide i always of a strong horse , because i be very corpulent and heavy : but whether he amble a gentle pace or no , i dare not make any question . neither yet dare i complain , although he trot full sore . but every man must be content with his lot as it fall . whereupon we be exceed trouble : for oftentimes our horse be tire before we can come at any people . and then we be constrain to beat and whip on our horse , and to lay our garment upon other empty horse : yea and sometime two of we to ride upon one horse . 
 of the hunger , and thirst , and other misery , which we sustain in our journey . 
 Chap. 24. 
 of hunger and thirst , cold and weariness , there be no end . for they give we no victual , but only in the evening . in the morning they use to give we a little drink , or some sodden millet to sup off . in the evening they bestow flesh upon we , as namely , a shoulder and breast of ram mutton , and every man a measure quantity of broth to drink . when we have sufficient of the flesh-broth , we be marvellous well refresh . and it seem to i most pleasant , and most nourish drink . Every Saturday i remain fast until night , without eat or drink of aught . and when night come , i be constrain , to my great grief and sorrow , to eat flesh . sometime we be fain to eat flesh half sodden , or almost raw , and all for want of fuel to seethe it withal : especial when we lie in the field , or be 280 
 1253-benighted before we come at our journey end : because we can not then convenient gather together the dung of horse or ox : for other fuel we find but seidome , except perhaps a few thorn in some place . likewise certain upon the bank of some river , there be wood grow nver " here and there . howbeit they be very rare . in the beginning our guide high disdain we , and it be tedious unto he to conduct such base fellow . after - 
 ward , when he begin to know we somewhat better , he direct we on our way by the court of rich moal , and we be request to pray for they . wherefore , have 1 carry a good interpreter with i , i shall have have opportunity to have do much good . the foresay Chingis , who be the first adhere can or emperor of the Tartar , have four son , of who proceed by natural descent many child , every one of which do at this day enjoy great possession : and they be daily multiply and disperse over that huge and waste desert , which be , in dimension , like unto the ocean sea Oure guide therefore direct we , as we be go on our journey , unto many of their habitation . and they marveil exceed , that we will receive neither gold , nor silver , nor precious and costly garment at their hand . they inquire also , concern the great pope , whether he be of so last a age as they have hear ? for there have go a report among they , that he be 500 year old . they inquire likewise of our country , whether there be abundance of sheep , ox , and horse or no ? concern the ocean sea , they can not conceive of it , because it be without limit or bank . upon the even of you feast of all saint , we forsake the way lead towards the east , ( because the people be now descend 
 very much south ) and we go on our journey by certain Alps , or mountain direct southward , for the space of eight jay 8. day together . in the foresay desert i see many j°urney ass ( which they call Colan ) be rather like unto mule : wjrd ' ■ f these do our guide and his companion chase very eager : f00te 0 i howbeit , they do but lose their labour : for the beast 
 281 
 1253-high mountain . manure ground . 
 Kenchat a village of the Saracen . 
 be two swift for they . upon the 7. day there appear to the south of we huge high mountain , and we enter into a place which be well water , and fresh as a garden , and find land till and manure . the eight day after the feast of all saint , we arrive at a certain town of the Saracen , name Kenchat , the governor whereof meet our guide at the town end with ale and cup . for it be their manner at all town and village , subject unto they , to meet the messenger of baatu and mangu-can with meat and drink . at the same time of the year , they go upon the ice in that country . and before the the 7. day of feast of saint Michael , we have frost in the desert . i November . inquire the name of that province : but be now in a strange territory , they can not tell i the name thereof , but only the name of a very small city in a gnat river , the same province . and there descend a great river down from the mountain , which water the whole region , accord as the inhabitant will give it passage , by make diverse channel and sluice : neither do this river exonerate it self into any sea , but be swallow up by a hideous gulf into the bowel of the earth : many lake , and it cause many fen or lake . also i see many vine . vine , and drink of the wine thereof . 
 the mountain of Caucasus be extend unto the eastern sea 
 the city of Talas , or Chincitalas . Frier Andrew . 
 how Ban be put to death : and concern the habitation of the dutch man . Chap. 25. 
 the day follow , we come unto another cottage near unto the mountain . and i inquire what mountain they be , which i understand to be the mountain of Caucasus , which be stretch forth , and continue on both part to the sea , from the west unto the east : and on the west part they be conjoin unto the foresay caspian sea , whereinto the river of Volga discharge his stream . i inquire also of the city of Talas , wherein be certain Dutchman servant unto one Buri , of who friar Andrew make mention . concern who also i inquire very diligent in the court of Sartach 8c baatu . howbeit i can have no intelligence 282 
 of they , but only that their lord and master Ban be put to death upon the occasion follow : this Ban be not place in good and fertile pasture . and upon a certain day be drunken , he speak on this wise unto his man . be not i of the stock and kindred of Chingis can , as well as baatu ? ( for in very deed he be brother or nephew unto baatu . ) why then do i not pass and repass upon the bank of Etilia , to feed my cattle there , as free as baatu himself do ? which speech of he be report unto baatu . whereupon baatu write unto his servant to bring their lord bind unto he . and they do so . then baatu demand of he whether he have speak any such word ? and he confess that he have . howbeit , ( because it be the Tartar manner to pardon drunken man ) he excuse himself that he be drunken at the same time . Howe dare thou ( quoth baatu ) once name i in thy drunkenness ? and with that he cause his head to be chop off . concern the foresay Dutchman , i can not understand aught , till i be come unto the court of mangu-can . and there i be inform that mangu-can have remove they out of the jurisdiction of baatu , for the space of a month journey from Talas eastward , unto a certain village , call Bolac : where they be set to dig gold , and to make armour . whereupon i can neither go nor come by they . i pass very near the say city in go forth , as namely , within three day journey thereof : but i be ignorant that i do so : neither can i have turn out of my way , albeit i have know so much . from the foresay cottage we go direct eastward , by the mountain aforesaid . and from that time we travail among the people of mangu-can , who in all place sing and dance before our guide , because he be the messenger of baatu . for this courtesy they do afford each to other : namely , the people of mangu-can receive the messenger of baatu in manner aforesaid : and so likewise the people of baatu entertain the messenger of mangu-can . notwithstanding the people 283 
 the village of Bolac . 
 he enter into the territory of mangu-can . 
 certain Alps wherein the cara catalan inhabit . a mighty river . 
 a lake of fifteen day journey in compass . 
 cailac a great city , and full of merchant . 
 Contomanni . 
 of baatu be more surly and stout , and show not so much courtesy unto the subject of mangu-can , as they do unto they . a few day after , we enter upon those Alps where the cara catayan be wont to inhabit . and there we find a mighty river : insomuch that we be constrain to embark our self , and to sail over it . afterwards we come into a certain valley , where i see a castle destroy , the wall whereof be only of mud : and in that place the ground be till also . and there we find a certain village , name equius , wherein be Saracen , speak the persian language : howbeit they dwell a huge distance from Persia . the day follow , have pass over the foresay Alps which descend from the great mountain southward , we enter into a most beautiful plain , have high mountain on our right hand , and on the left hand of we a certain sea or lake , which contain fifteen day journey in circuit . all the foresay plain be most commodious water with certain freshet distil from the say mountain , all which do fall into the lake . in summer time we return by the north shore of the say lake , and there be great mountain on that side also . upon the forename plain there be wont to be great store of village : but for the most part they be all waste , in regard of the fertile pasture , that the Tartar may feed their cattle there . we find one great city there name Cailac , wherein be a mart , and great store of merchant frequent it . in this city we remain fifteen day , stay for a certain scribe or secretary of baatu , who ought to have accompany our guide for the dispatch of certain affair in the court of Mangu . all this country be wont to be call Organum : and the people thereof have their proper language , and their peculiar kind of writing . but it be altogether inhabit of the people call Contomanni . the nestorian likewise in those part use the very same kind of language and writing . they be call Organa , because they be wont to be most 
 284 
 skilful in play upon the organ or cithern , as it be report unto i . here first do i see worshipper of idol , concern who , be it know unto your majesty , that there be many sect of they in the east country . 
 how the nestorian , Saracens , and idolater be join together . Chap. 26. 
 the first sort of these idolater be call jugure : the people who land border upon the foresay land of jusure Organum , within the say mountain eastward : and in all their city nestorian do inhabit together , and they be disperse likewise towards Persia in the city of the Saracen . the citizen of the foresay city of Cailac have 3. idole-temple : and i enter into two of they , to behold their foolish superstition . in the first of which i find a man have a cross paint with ink upon his hand , whereupon i suppose he to be a christian : for he answer like a christian unto all question which i demand of he . and i ask he , why therefore have you not the cross with the image of Jesus Christ thereupon ? and he answer : we have no such custom . whereupon i conjecture that they be indeed christian : but , that for lack of instruction they omit the foresay ceremony . for i see there behind a certain chest ( which be unto they in steed of a altar , whereupon they set candle and oblation ) a image have wing like unto the image of saint Michael , and other image also , hold their finger , as if they will bless some body . that evening i can not find any thing else . for the Saracen do only invite man thither , but they will not have they speak of their religion . and therefore , when i inquire of the Saracen concern such ceremony , they be offend thereat . on the morrow after be the kalend , and the Saracen feast of Passeover . And change my inn or lodging the same day , i take up my abode near unto another idole-temple . for 
 285 
 the citizen of the say city of Cailac do courteous invite , and love entertain all messenger , every man of they accord to his ability and portion . And enter into the foresay idole-temple , i find the priest of the say idol there . for always at the kalend they set open their temple , and the priest adorn themselves , and offer up the people oblation of bread and fruit . First therefore i will describe 
 Frier William be at caracarum . 
 unto you those rite and ceremony , which be common unto all their idole-temple : and then the superstition of the foresay jugure , which be , as it be , a sect distinguish from the rest . they do all of they worship towards the north , clap their hand together , and prostrate themselves on their knee upon you earth , hold also their forehead in their hand . whereupon the nestorian of those part will in no case join their hand together in time of prayer : but they pray , display their hand before their breast . they extend their temple in length east and west : and upon the north side they build a chamber , in manner of a vestry for themselves to go forth into . or sometime it be otherwise . if it be a four square temple , in the midst of the temple towards the north side thereof , they take in one chamber in that place where the choir shall stand . and within the say chamber they place a chest long and broad like unto a table : and behind the say chest towards the south stand their principali idol : which i see at Caracarum , and it be as big as the idol of saint Christopher . also a certain nestorian priest , which have be in catay , say that in that country there be a idol of so huge a bigness , that it may be see two day journey before a man come at it . and so they place other idol round about the foresay principal idol , be all of they fine gild over with pure gold : and upon the say chest , which be in manner of a table , they set candle and oblation . the door of their temple be always open towards the south , contrary to the custom of the Saracen . they have also great 
 286 
 belles like unto we . and that be the cause ( as i think ) why the Christians of the east will in no case use great bell . notwithstanding they be common among the russian , and grecian of Gasaria . 
 of their temple and idol : and how they behave themselves in worship their false god . Chap. 27. 
 a li their priest have their head and beard shave quite over : and they be clad in saffron colour garment : and be once shave , they lead a unmarried life from that time forward : and they live a hundred or two hundred of they together in one cloister or covent . upon those day when they enter into their temple , they place two long form therein : and so sit upon the say form like sing man in a quire , namely the one half of they direct over against the other , they have certain book in their hand , which sometime they lie book . down by they upon the form : and their head be bare so long as they remain in the temple . and there they read soft unto themselves , not utter any voice at all . whereupon come in among they , at the time of their superstitious devotion , and find they all site mute in manner aforesaid , i attempt diverse way to provoke they unto speech , and yet can not by any mean possible . they have with they also whithersoever they go , a certain string with a hundred or two hundred nutshell thereupon , much like to our beadroll which we carry about with we . and they do always utter these word : ou mam hactani , God thou know : as one of they expound it unto i . and so often do they expect a reward at God hand , as they pronounce these word in remembrance of God . round about their temple they do always make a fair court , like unto a churchyard , which they environ with a good wall : and upon the south part thereof they build a great portal , wherein they sit and confer together . and upon the top of the say portali they pitch a long pole right up , 
 287 
 exalt it , if they can , above all the whole town beside . and by the same pole all man may know , that there stand the temple of their idol , these rite and ceremony aforesaid be common unto all idolater in those part . go upon a time towards the foresay idol-temple , i find certain priest sit in the outward portal . and those which i see , seem unto i , by their shave beard , as if they have be French man . they wear certain ornament upon their head make of paper . the priest of the foresay jugure do use such attire whithersoever they go . they be always in their saffron colour jacket , which be very straight be lace or butten from the bosom right down , after the french fashion . and they have a cloak upon their left shoulder descend before and behind under their right arm , like unto a deacon carry the houssel-boxe in time paper . of Lent . their letter or kind of write the Tartar do so do the receive . they begin to write at the top of their paper people of China drawjng their line right down : and so they read and “ draw'mgfheir multiply their line from the left hand to the right . they line perpendi - do use certain paper and character in their magical cular down - practise . whereupon their temple be full of such short ward , not scrou ] es hang round about they . also mangu-can righthand send letter unto your majesty write in the to the lefie . language of the moal or Tartars , and in the foresay hand or letter of the jugure . they burn their dead accord to the ancient custom , and lie up the ash in the top of a pyramid . now , after i have sit a while by the foresay priest , and enter into their temple and see many of their image both great and small , i demand of they what they believe concern God ? and they answer : we believe that there be only one God . and i demand far : whether do you believe that he be a spirit , or some bodily substance ? they say : we believe that he be a spirit . then say i : do you believe that God ever take man nature upon he ? they answer : no and again i say : since you believe that he be a spirit , to what end do you make so 
 288 
 many bodily image to represent he ? since also you believe not that he be make man : why do you resemble he rather unto the image of a man then of any other creature ? than they answer say : we frame not those image whereby to represent God . but when any rich man among we , or his son , or his wife , or any of his friend decease , he cause the image of the dead party to be make , and to be place here : and we in remembrance of he doe reverence thereunto . than i reply : you do these thing only for the friendship and flattery of man . Noe ( say they ) but for their memory . than they demand of i , as it be in scoff wise : where be God ? to who i answer : where be your soul ? they say , in our body . then say i , be it not in every part of your body , rule and guide the whole body , and yet notwithstanding be not see or perceive ? Even so God be every where and rule all thing , and yet be he invisible , be understanding and wisdom it self . then be desirous to have have some more conference with they , by reason , that my interpreter be weary , and not able to express my meaning , i be constrain to keep silence . the moal or Tartars be in this regard of their sect : namely they believe that there be but one God : howbeit they make image of felt , in remembrance of their decease friend , cover they with five most rich and costly garment , and put they into one or two cart , which cart no man dare once touch : and they be in the custody of their soothsayer , who be their priest , concern who i will give your highness more at large to understand hereafter . Theise soothsayer or diviner do always attend upon the court of Mangu and of other great personage . as for the poor or mean sort , they have they not , but such only as be of the stock and kindred of Chingis . and when they be to remove or to take any journey , the say diviner go before they , even as the cloudy pillar go before the child of Israel . and they appoint ground where the tent must 
 i 289 t 
 be pitch , and first of all they take down their own house : and after they the whole court do the like . 
 also upon their festival day or kalend they take forth the foresay image , and place they in order round , or circle wise within the house . then come the moal or Tartars , and enter into the same house , bow themselves before the say image and worship they . Moreover , it be not lawful for any stranger to enter into that house . for upon a certain time i my self will have go in , but i be chide full well for my labour . 
 of diverse and sundry nation : and of certain people which be wont to eat their own parent . Chap. 28. 
 but the foresay jugure ( who live among the christian , and the Saracen ) by their sundry disputation , as i suppose , have be bring unto this , to believe , that there be but one only God . and they dwell in certain city , which afterward be bring in subjection unto Chingis can : whereupon he give his daughter in marriage unto their king . also the city of Caracarum it self be in a manner within their territory : the country and the whole country of king or presbyter John , and of ofpresbiter bis brother vut lie near unto their dominion : save , that they inhabit in certain pasture northward , and the say jugure between the mountain towards the south . whereupon it come to pass , that the moal receive letter from they . and they be the Tartar principali scribe : and all the nestorian almost can skill of their letter . next unto they , between the foresay tangut . mountain eastward , inhabit the nation of tangut , who be a most valiant people , and take Chingis in battle . but after the conclusion of a league he be set at liberty by they , and afterward subdue they . Theise strange ox , people of tangut have ox of great strength , with tail like unto horse , and with long shag hair upon their back and belly . they have leg great than other ox have , and they be exceed fierce . Theise ox 
 290 
 draw the great house of the moal : and their horn be slender , long , straight , and most sharp point : insomuch that their owner be fain to cut off the end of they . a counterfeit we will not suffer her self to be couple unto one of they , unless they whistle or sing unto she . they have also the quality of a buff : for if they see a man clothe in red , they run upon he immediate to kill he . next unto they be the people of tebet , man which be wont to eat the carcase of their decease parent : that for pity sake , they may make no other sepulchre for they , than their own bowel . howbeit of late they have leave off this custom , because that thereby they become abominable and odious unto all other nation . notwithstanding unto this day they make fine cup of the skull of their parent , to the end that when they drink out of they , they may amid all their jollity and delight call their dead parent to remembrance . this be tell i by one that see it . the say people of tebet have great plenty of gold in their land . whosoever therefore want gold , dig till he have find some quantity , and then take so much thereof as will serve his turn , he lay up the residue within the earth : because , if he shall put it into his chest or storehouse , he be of opinion that God will withhold from he all other gold within the earth . i see some of those people , be very deform creature . in tangut i see lusty tall man , but brown and swart in colour . the jugure be of a middle stature like unto our french man . among the jugure be the originali and root of the turkish , and comanian language . next unto tebet be the people of Langa and Solanga , who messenger i see in the Tartar court . and they have bring more than ten great cart with they , every one of which be draw with six ox . they be little brown man like unto Spaniards . also they have jacket , like unto the upper vestment of a deacon , save that the sleeve be somewhat straight . and they have mitre upon their head like bishop . but the fore part of their 
 291 
 the people of tebet . 
 abundance of glide . 
 the stature of the people of tangut , and of the jugure . 
 the people ofSolanga resemble Spaniards . 
 miter be not so hollow within as the hinder part : neither be it sharp point or corner at the top : but there hang down certain square flappe compact of a kind of straw which be make rough and rugged with extreme heat , and be so trim , that it glitter in the sun beam , like unto a glass , or a helmet well burnish . and about their temple they have long band of the foresay matter fasten unto their mitre , which hover in the wind , as if two long home grow out of their head . and when the wind toss they up and down too much , they tie they over the midst of their miter from one temple to another : and so they lie circle wise overthwart their head . Moreover their principal messenger Atabkofele - come unto the Tartar court have a table of elephant phant tooth , about he of a cubit in length , and a handful in 
 breadth , be very smoothe . and whensoever he speak unto the emperor himself , or unto any other great personage , he always behold that table , as if he have find therein those thing which he speak : neither do he cast his eye to the right hand , nor to the left , nor upon his face , with who he talk . yea , go too and fro before his lord , he look no where but only upon ne people be table . beyond they ( as i understand of a certainty ) call Muc. there be other people call Muc , have village , but no one particular man of they appropriate any cattle unto 
 himself . notwithstanding there be many flock and drove of cattle in their country , and no man appoint to keep they . but when any one of they stand in need of any beast , he ascend up unto a hill , and there make a shout , and all the cattle which be within hear of the noise , come flock about he , and suffer themselves to be handle and take , as if they be tame . and when any messenger or stranger come into their country , they shut he up into a house , minister there thing necessary unto he , until his business be dispatch . for if any stranger shall travel through that country , the cattle will flee away at the very send of he , and so will become wild . beyond Muc be great 
 292 
 Cathaya , the inhabitant whereof ( as i suppose ) be of great old time , call Seres . for from they be bring most cat^a-excellent stuff of silk . and this people be call seres of a certain town in the same country . i be credible inform , that in the say country , there be one town have wall of silver , and bulwark or tower of gold . there be many province in that land , the great part whereof be not as yet subdue unto the Tartar . and amongst* 
 somewhat be want . 
 . 