the great charter grant unto foreign merchant by king Edward the first , in the 31 year of his reign common call Carta mercatoria , anno domini 1303. 
 328 
 329 
 9 - 
 331 
 332 
 the aforesaid general charter in English . 
 edward by the grace of God king of England , lord of Ireland , duke of Aquitaine , to archbishop , bishop , abbot , prior , earl , baron , justice , viscount , governors , officer , and all bailiff , and his faithful people send greeting . we have speciali care for the good estate of all merchant of the kingdom , land , and country follow : to wit of almain , France , Spain , Portugal , Navarre , Lombardie , Florence , Provence , Catalonia , of our duchy of Aquitaine , Tholosa , catur-lune , Flanders , Brabant , and of all other foreign country and place by what name soever they be call , which come into our kingdom of England , and there remain , that the say merchant may live in quiet and full security under our dominion in time to come . wherefore that their heart desire may be more ready incline to our service and the service of our kingdom , we favourable agree to their petition , for the full asring of their estate , have think good to grant to the say merchant for we and our heir for ever these privilege under write , ordain in form as follow . 
 first , that all merchant of the say kingdom and country may come into our kingdom of England , and any where else into our dominion with their merchandise whatsoever safe and secure under our defence and protection without pay wharfage , pontage , or pannage . and that in city , borough , and market town of the say kingdom and dominion they may traffic only by the great as well with the natural subject and inhabitant of our aforesaid kingdom and dominion , as with foreigner , stranger , or private person . yet so , that 333 
 a exception for traffic with you know enemy oj the kingdom . 
 2. 
 3 - 
 merchandise which be common call mercery ware , and spice , may be sell by the small , as heretofore have be accustom . and that all the aforesaid merchant may carry or cause to be carry whither they will , aswell within our realm or dominion , as out of the same ; save unto the country of the manifest and know enemy of our kingdom , those merchandise which they shall bring into our foresay realm and dominion , or buy , or otherwise purchase in our say realm and dominion , pay such custom as they ought to do : except only wine , which it shall not be any way lawful for they to carry out of our say realm and dominion without our speciali favour and licence , after they be once bring into our realm and dominion . 
 item that the aforesaid merchant may at their pleasure lodge and remain with their good in the city , borough , and town aforesaid , with the good like of those which be owner of their lodging . 
 item that every bargain make by the say merchant with any manner of person , of what place soever they be , for any kind of merchandise whatsoever , shall firm and stable , so that none of both the merchant shall shrink or give back from that bargain , after that the earnest penny be once give and take between the principali bargainers . and if peradventure any strife arise about the same bargain , the trial and inquiry thereof shall be make accord to the use and custom of the fair and town where it chance that the say bargain be make and contract . 
 item , we promise the aforesaid merchant grant for ever for we and our heir , that from hence forth we will not in any wise make nor cause to be make any stay or arrest , or any delay by reason of arrest of their ware , merchandise or other good , by our self , or by any other or other for any need or accident against the will of the say merchant , without present payment of such a price as the merchant will have sell those merchandise for to other man , or without make of they other 334 
 satisfaction , so that they shall hold themselves well content : and that no price or valuation shall|be set upon their ware , merchandise , and good by we or by any officer of we . 
 item , we will that all bailiff and officer of fair , city , borough , and market town shall do speedy justice from day to day without delay accord to the law of merchant to the aforesaid merchant when they shall complain before they , touch all and singular cause , which may be determine by the same law . and if default be find in any of the bailiff or officer aforesaid , whereby the say merchant or any of they have sustain , or do sustain any damage through delay , though the merchant recover his loss against the party principali , yet the bailiff or other officer shall be punish to we ward , accord to the quality of the default . and we do grant this punishment in favour of the aforesaid merchant in regard of the hasten of their justice . 
 item , that in all manner of plea , save in case where punishment of death be to be inflict , where a merchant be implead , or sue another , of what condition soever he be which be sue , whether stranger or home bear , in fair , city , or borough , where sufficient number of merchant of the foresay country be , and where the trial ! ought to be make , let the one half of the jury be of the say merchant , and the other half of good and lawful man of the place where the suit shall fall out to be : and if sufficient number of merchant of the say country can be find , those which shall be find fit in that place shall be put upon the jury , and the rest shall be choose of good and fit man of the place where such suit shall chance to be . 
 A.D. 
 1303. 
 5 - 
 where it this law now become ? 
 6. 
 item we will , we ordain , and we appoint , that in 7-every market town and fair of our realm aforesaid and elsewhere within our dominion our weight shall be set in some certain place ; and that before the weigh 
 335 
 the balance shall be see empty in the presence of the buyer and of the seller , and that the scale be equal : and that afterward the weigh weigh in the equal balance . and when he have set the balance even , let he straightway remove his hand , so that the balance way remain even : and that throughout all our kingdom and dominion there be one weight and one measure , and that they be mark with the mark of our standard . and that every man may have a weight of one quarter of a hundred , and under , where the same have not be contrary to the liberty of the lord of the place , and contrary to the liberty grant by we and our predecessor , or contrary to the custom of town and fair which have hitherto be observe . 
 8 - item we will and we grant that some certain faithful and discreet man resident in London be appoint to do justice to the aforesaid merchant , before who they may have their suit decide , and may speedy recover their debt , if the sheriff and mayor shall not from day to day give they speedy justice . and hereof let a commission be make : which we grant unto the aforesaid merchant beside this present charter : to wit of such thing as between merchant and merchant be to be decide accord to the law of merchant . 
 9 item we ordain and appoint , and we will that this ordinance and statute shall firm be observe for ever for we and our heir , that the aforesaid merchant shall [ i . i37-j not loose the aforesaid liberty nor any of they , for any liberty whatsoever , which we or our heir hereafter shall grant . and for the obtain of the aforesaid liberty and free custom , and for remission of our arrest of their good , the aforesaid merchant all and every of they for themselves and all other of their party with one accord and one consent have grant unto we , that of every ton of wine , which they shall bring or cause to be bring into our realm and dominion , for which they shall be bind to pay 
 336 
 fraught unto the mariner , beside the old custom which be due and be wont to be pay unto we , they will pay unto we and to our heir in the name of a custom two shilling in money , either out of hand , or else within forty day after the say wine shall be bring on land out of the ship . item for every sack of wool , which the say merchant or other in their name shall buy and carry out of the realm , or cause to be bring and carry out , they will pay forty penny above the old custom of half a mark , which be pay heretofore : and for a last of hide to be carry out of our realm and dominion half a mark above that which heretofore be pay by the old custom . and likewise for three hundred fell with the wool on they to be transport out of our realm and dominion forty penny , above that certain rate which before be pay by the old custom : also two shilling upon every scarlate and every cloth die in grain . item eighteen penny for every cloth wherein any kind of grain be mingle . item twelve penny upon every cloth die without grain . item twelve penny upon every quintali of copper . 
 and whereas sundry of the aforesaid merchant be wont to exercise other merchandise , as of haver de pois , and other fine ware , as sarcenet , lawn , cindalle , and silk , and diverse other merchandise , and to sell horse and other beast , corn , and sundry other thing and merchandise , which can easy be reduce unto a certain custom : the say merchant have grant to give unto we , and to our heir of every pound of silver of the estimation and value of these kind of good and merchandise , by what name soever they be call , three penny in the pound in the bring in of these good into our realm and dominion aforesaid , within twenty day after these good and merchandise shall be bring into our realm and dominion , and shall be there unlade and sell . and likewise three penny upon every pound of silver in the carry out of any such i 337 y 
 good and merchandise which be buy in our realm and dominion aforesaid above the custom beforetime pay unto we or any of our progenitor . And touch the value and estimation of these good and merchandise , whereof three penny of every pound of silver , as be aforesaid , be to be pay , credit shall|be give unto they upon the letter which they be able to show from their master or partner . and if they have no letter in this behalf , we will stand to the oath of the foresay merchant if they be present , or in their absence to the oath of their servant . 
 moreover , it shall be lawful for such as be of the company of the aforesaid merchant within our realm and dominion aforesaid , to sell wool to other of their company , and likewise to buy of they without pay of custom . yet so , that the say wool come not to such hand , that we be defraud of the custom due unto we . and furthermore it be to be understand , that after that the aforesaid merchant have once pay in one place within our realm and dominion , the custom above grant unto we in form aforesaid for their merchandise , and have their warrant thereof , whether these merchandise remain within our kingdom or be carry out ( except wine , which in no wise shall|be carry forth of our realm and dominion aforesaid , without our favour and licence as be aforesaid ) we will and we grant for we and our heir , that no execution , attachment , or loan , or any other burden be lay upon the person of the aforesaid merchant , upon their merchandise or good in any case , contrary to the form before mention and grant . the faithful and principali witness of these present be these , Robert archbishop of Canterbury , primate of all England , Walter bishop of coventrey and Lichfield , Henry Lacie of Lincoln , Humphrey de bohume , earl of Herford and Essex , high constable of England , adornare of Valentia , Geoffrey of Gaymal , huge Spenser , Walter Beauchampe seneschal of our house , Robert of Bures , and other . give by our 338 
 own hand at windesore the first day of February , in the year of our reign xxxi . 
 . 