339 
 the letter of Edward the second unto Haquinus king of Norway , concern the english merchant arrest in Norway , and their good to be free from arrest . 
 o the mighty prince , lord Haquinus , by the grace of God the famous king of Norway his most dear friend , Edward by the same grace of God , king of England , lord of Ireland , duke of Aquitaine , greeting and sincere love . we marvel not a little , and be much this - 
 quiet in our cogitation , consider the grievance and oppression , which ( as we have be inform by pitiful complaint ) be at this present , more than in time past , without any reasonable cause inflict upon our subject , which do usual resort unto your kingdom for traffic sake . for of late one William the son of Laurence of wainfleete , and one Simon the son of Alan of the same town , and Guido the son of Matthew , and their associate our merchant , in complain wise declare unto we : that have send certain of their factor and servant , with three ship into your dominion , there to exercise traffic , and the say ship be lade in the haven of your town of Tonnesbergh , with herring and other commodity , to a great value : and also the say mariner , man , and servant of the foresay ship , be licence by virtue of the safe conduct which you have grant they , free to return from your kingdom unto the part of England with their ship and good aforesaid , but afterward not be able to depart out of your haven by reason of contrary wind : certain of your bailiff upon occasion of the slaughter of a knight be himself also of late your bailiff of vikia , commit by malefactor and pirate upon the sea , while the say ship remain in the haven aforesaid , 341 
 the town of Tonesbergh . 
 do at your commandment ( as they say ) arrest , and for a long season also detain under that arrest , the foresay 
 ship , with all the man and good that be in they : namely until such time , as the man and mariner aforesaid ( be drive perforce , and constrain thereunto ) shall lay in sufficient security for the payment of forty pound sterling , upon a certain day appoint , unto your use , for every of the foresay ship : and also until they have moreover deliver three pledge , for the bring of the say ship and man back again into the foresay haven , before the feast of the nativity of saint John the baptist next ensue , then and there to stand unto your favour and courtesy , as touch the say person , and those ship of they : which deal , the party themselves take very grievous , yea , and all other that hear thereof think it to be a strange and unwonted course . and because it be most undoubted contrary to all reason , equity , justice , and law , that the fault or demerit of offender shall in any sort be punish in such person , or in their good , as neither have be accessary nor partaker in the crime , nor have have any society with the say offender : we do hearty entreat and request your highness , that weigh and ponder the matter in the balance of justice , you will of your love and friendship , command the foresay pledge to be set at liberty , and the say security utter to be release and acquit . and know you this for a certainty , that if the foresay malefactor , who ( as it be report ) slay your knight aforesaid , shall any where within our realm and dominion be find , we will cause justice and judgement to be execute upon they , accord to the law and custom of our say de realm . for we can in these time convenient and well endure , that the ship aforesaid , or any other ship of our kingdom ( which ought always to be in a readiness for our service ) shall without speciali licence , depart out of our say kingdom , unto foreign dominion . now , what you shall think good at this our request to perform in the premise , 
 342 
 may it please you by the bearer of these present to return a answer unto we . give at Windsor the 16. of April . 
 . 