a agreement make by the ambassador of England and Prussia , confirm by king Richard the second . 
 Richard by the grace of God , king of England , and France , and lord of Ireland , to all , unto who these present letter shall come , greeting . we have see and consider the composition , ordination , concord , and treaty , between our well-beloved clerk , master Nicholas Stocket , licentiate in both law , Walter Sibil , and Thomas Graa , citizen of our city of London and York , our messenger and ambassador on the one part : and the honourable and religious personage , Conradus de Walrode , great commander , Sifridus walpode de Bassenheim , chief hospitalary commander in Elburg , and Ulricus Hachenberg treasurer , the messenger and ambassador of the right reverend and religious lord , lord Conradus Zolner de Rothenstein , master general of the knightly order of the dutch hospital of saint marry at Jerusalem on the other part , late conclude and agree upon in these word . in the name of the supreme and indivisible Trini tie , the father , the son , and the holy ghost , amen . forasmuch as the author of peace will have peacemaker to be the son of blessedness , and the execrable enemy of peace to be 
 expel out of the dominion of Christians : therefore for the perpetuali memory of the thing , be it know unto all man who shall see or hear the tenor of these present : that there be matter of dissension and discord breed between the most renown prince and king , Richard by the grace of God king or England and France , and lord of Ireland , and his subject on the one part : and the right reverend and religious lord , lord Conradus Zolner de Rothinstein , master general of the knightly order of the dutch hospitali of saint marry at Jerusalem , and his land of Prussia , and his subject also , on the other part : the foresay lord and general master , upon mature counsel and deliberation have , send his honourable ambassador towards England unto the forename most sovereign prince and king , to propound and make their complaint unto he of violence and injury offer ( as it be say ) by the english unto the Prussians : in consideration whereof certain good of the merchant of England be arrest in the land of Prussia . who complaint the foresay most gracious prince do courteous and friendly admit , receive , and accept , and after many speech utter in this treaty , love dismiss they unto their own country again , promise by his letter unto the foresay reverend master general , that he will dispatch his ambassador unto the land of Prussia . whereupon , in the year 1388. he send the hono : and reverend person - 1388. age master Nicholas Stocket licentiate of both law , Thomas Graa , and Walter Sibil , citizen of London and York , with sufficient authority and full commandment , to handle , discuss , and final to determine the foresay business , and with letter of credence unto the right reverend lord and master generail aforesaid . which ambassador , together with John Bevis of London their informer , and the letter aforesaid , and their ambassage , the say right reverend lord and master general , at his castle of Marienburgh , the 28. of July , in the year aforesaid , reverent and honourable receive and enter - 
 tein : and in his mind esteem they worthy to treat and decide the cause aforesaid : and so unto the say ambassador he join in commission on his behalf , three of his own counseller , namely the honourable and religious personage Conradus de Walrode great commander , Seiffridus walpode de Bassenheim chief hospitalary and commander in Elburg , Wolricus hachen-berge treasurer , be all of the order aforesaid . which ambassador so entreat about the premise , and sundry conference and consultation have pass between they , friendly and with one consent , conclude a agreement and concord in manner follow : that be to say : 
 1. first , that all arrestment , reprisal , and impignoration of whatsoever good and merchandise in England and Prussia , make before the date of these present , be from henceforth quiet , free , and release , without all fraud and dissimulation : insomuch that the damage , charge and expense occasion on both part by reason of the foresay good arrest , be in no case hereafter to be require or challenge by any man : but the demand of any man whatsoever propound in this regard , be and ought to be altogether frustrate and void , and all action which may or shall be commence by occasion of the say good arrest , be to be extinct and of none effect . 
 2. Moreover , it be second conclude and agree , that all and singular Prussians pretend themselves to be injury by the english at the porte of Swen , or elsewhere , howsoever , and whensoever , before the date of these present , have receive the letter of the foresaid right reverend lord and master generail , and of the city of their abode , be to repair towards England , unto the say hon : ambassador who be to assist they , and to propound and exhibit their complaint , unto the forename lord and king . the most gracious prince be bind to do his endeavour , that the party damnify may have restitution of their good 
 1390. make unto they , or at least complete justice and judgement without delay . also in like manner all english man affirm themselves to have be endamage by Prussians , wheresoever , howsoever , and whensoever , be to have recourse unto the often forename right reverend lord the master general , with the letter of their king and of the city of their abode , propound their complaint and cause unto he . who likewise be bind to do his endeavour that the say loss and damage may be restore , or at the least that speedy judgement may be , without all delay , execute . this caveat be premise in each clause , that it may and shall be free grant and permit unto every man that will civil make his suit and complaint , to do it either by himself , or by his procurator or procurator . 
 also three it be agree , that whosoever of Prussia be 3. determine criminal to propound his criminal complaint in England : namely that his brother or kinsman have be slay , wound , or maim , by english man , the same party be to repair unto the city of London in England , and unto the say ambassador , bring with he the letter of the say right reverend lord the master general , and of the city of their abode : which ambassador be to have free and full authority , accord to the complaint of the man of Prussia , and the answer of the english man , to make and ordain a friendly reconciliation or honest recompense between such party : which reconciliation the say party reconcile be bind [ i . 15 2. i undoubted and without delay to observe . but if there be any english man find , who shall rash contradict or contemn the composition of the foresay ambassador : then the say ambassador be to bring the forename prussian plaintiff before the presence of the king majesty : and also to make supplication on the behalf of such plaintiff , that complete justice and judgement may without delay be administer , accord as those suit be commence . Moreover whatsoever english man , 
 against who any one of Prussia will enter his action , shall absent himself at the term , the say ambassador be to summon and ascite the foresaid english man to appear at the term next ensue , that the plaintiff of Prussia may in no wise seem to depart or to return home , without judgement or the assistance of law . now if the say english man be summon shall be find stubborn or disobedient , the forename ambassador be to make their appeal and supplication in manner aforesaid . and in like sort in all respect shall the english plaintiff be deal withal in Prussia , namely in the city of Dantzik , where the deputy of the say city and of the city of Elburg shall take unto themselves two other head borough , one of Dantzik , and the other of Elburg : which four commissioner be to have in all respect , the very like authority of decide , discuss , and determine all criminali complaint propound criminal , by english man against any prussian or Prussians , by friendly reconciliation , or honest recompense , if it be possible . but if it can friendly be determine , or if any prussian shall not yield obedience unto any such order or composition , but shall find to contradict and to contemn the same : from thenceforth the say four deputy and headborough be to make their appeal and supplication unto the master general of the land aforesaid , that unto the say english plaintiff speedy judgement and complete justice may be administered . but if it shall so fall out that any of the principali offender shall decease , or already be decease in either of the say country , and then it shall be free and lawful for the plaintiff to prosecute his right against the good or heir of the party decease . also , for the execute of the premise the term under write be appoint : namely the first , from the Sunday whereupon quasi modo geniti be to be sing next ensue , until the seven day follow : the second upon the feast of the holy Trinity next to come , and for seven day follow : the three upon the eight day after saint John 
 Baptist next to come , and for seven day follow : the four , last , and peremptory term shall be upon the feast of saint Michael next to come , and upon seven day next follow . and from thenceforth all cause which concern death , or the maim of a member , with all action proceed from they , be to remain altogether void and extinct . and if peradventure any one of the foresay ambassador , shall in the mean season dye , than the other two shall have authority to choose a three unto they . and if after the date of these present any cause great or small do arise or spring forth , it must be decide in England and in Prussia , as it have be a ancient accustom in time past and from ancient time . custom . 
 also , it be far conclude and agree upon , that all 4. lawful merchant of England whosoever shall have free the privi-licence and authority , with all kind of ship , good , dge and merchandise , to resort unto every port of the land i^r ' of Prussia , and also to transport all such good and Prussia . merchandise up far unto any other place in the say land of Prussia , and there with all kind of person free to bargain and make sale , as heretofore it have from ancient time be accustom . which privilege be grant in all thing and by all circumstance unto the Prussians in England . and if after the date of these present , between the say kingdom of England , and land of Prussia any dissension or discord ( which God forefend ) shall arise : then the foresay sovereign prince and king of England , and the say right reverend lord the master generail be mutual by their letter and messenger to give certificate and intimation one unto another , concern the matter and cause of such dissension and discord : with intimation , on the behalf of the foresay sovereign prince and king of England , shall be deliver in the forename castle of Marienburg : but on the behalf of the say right reverend lord the master generail , such intimation shall be give in the city of London aforesaid , unto the mayor of the say city : that than such a denunciation or intimation be make , the 
 merchant of England and the subject of the land of Prussia may , within the space of one year next follow , free and safe return home with all their good and merchandise : if at the least , in the mean while , some composition , and friendly league between the two foresay country be not in some sort conclude . and that all the premise may more firm and faithful be put in due practice and execution on both part , for the strong and inviolable keep of peace and tranquillity : and also for the full confirmation and strengthen of all the say premise , the three foresaid honourable and religious personage be by the say right reverend lord the master general appoint as commissioner to deal in the above write ordination and composition , have cause their seal unto these present to be put : and the say ordination also , and letter in the same tenor word for word , and in all point even as it be insert into these present , they have mutual receive from the abovename three ambassador of the right sovereign king of England under their seal . give at the castle of Marienburg in the year of our lord aforesaid , upon the twenty day of the month of August . and we therefore do accept , approve , ratify , and by the tenor of these present do confirm , the composition , ordination , concord , and treaty aforesaid . in testimony whereof we have cause these our letter to be make patent . witness our self a Westminster the 22. of October , in the thirteenth year of our reign . 
 by the king and his counsel . 
 Lincoln . 
 . 