the letter of the chancellor and treasurer of England , unto frater Conradus de Jungingen , master generail of Prussia 1403. 
 right reverend and mighty lord , your honourable messenger John Godeke , and Henry Moneke , the bearer hereof come of late before the presence of our most sovereign lord the king of England and of 38 
 France , and be welcome by our say lord with a cheerful and favourable countenance , they present certain letter on your behalf unto the king majesty , with that reverence which beseem they : expound unto his highness , sundry piracy and molestation offer of late upon the sea , by his liege people 8c subject unto you , contrary to the league of peace and amity , which hitherto ( by God grace ) have be maintain and continue on both part . in consideration of which piracy and molestation , your messenger demand full restitution and recompense to be make , either unto the damnify party , or unto their procurator . we therefore at that time , especial be in the presence of our sovereign ( who with his puissant army take his progress towards the remote part of Wales be subject unto his dominion , to see justice execute upon his people of those part , who very rash have presume to rebel against he their sovereign , contrary to their allegiance ) right well perceive that it be his highness intention , that every one shall have due justice faithful administer unto he , especial your subject , and that with all favour , who he have always in time past right gracious entreat , as if they have be his own liege subject and native country man , who also he purpose hereafter friendly to protect : insomuch that between he and his subject on the one party , and between you and you on the other party , great abundance and perfection of mutual amity may increase . and therefore we offer unto your foresay messenger , after they have particular declare unto we such piracy and wrong , to send the king letter unto they of who complaint be make , firm enjoin they , under grievous penalty , that without delay they restore or cause to be restore unto the party damnify , or unto their procurator , all ship , merchandise , ware , and good , by they take or violent steal from your subject . and that your say messenger may partly attain their desire , we have 
 \ namely the ship of Edgard scoff at Caleis . the ship of Tidman dor-deviant and Tidman War-owen , atorwel and^episwich . 
 command certain i ship , merchandise , ware , and good , find in certain haven , to be deliver unto they . howbeit , as touch other good , which be perhaps perish or want by infortunate dissipation or destruction , and for the which the say messenger of you demand satisfaction to be make unto they within a certain time by we limit : may it please your honour to understand , that in the absence of our say sovereign lord the king , be as yet far distant from we , we can in no wise limit or set down any such term of time . notwithstanding , at the prosperous return of our sovereign , we be determine to commune with he about this matter . of who 
 answer so soon as we be certify , we purpose to signify his intention unto you by our letter . since also ( right reverend and mighty lord ) your say messenger be content , for the present , to accept of our offer aforesaid , as indeed by all reason they ought thereat to rest content , especial whereas by this mean they shall the more speedy attain unto the effect of their purpose ( to the short and wish execution and performance of which offer , we will , by god help , endeavour , to the utmost of our ability ) may it be your will and pleasure , that as in the kingdom of England , your merchant and subject be courteous entreat : even so the merchant and liege people of our sovereign lord the king and of his kingdom peaceable frequent your part , either in regard of traffic or of any other just occasion , may there in like manner friendly be use , and with your merchant and subject suffer to communicate , and to have intercourse of traffic , enjoy the commodity of the ancient league . by this also the fervent zeal and affection which you bear unto the royal crown of England shall undoubted appear : albeit between the famous house of England and of Prussia , the band of unfeigned love and friendship have be successive confirm and keep inviolable in time note well . past . and thus ( right reverend and mighty lord ) 
 •wishing unto you increase of honour and prosperity , we take our leaf . write at London the five of October , in the year of our lord 1403. 
 by the chancellor , the treasurer , and other lord of the hono : counsel of the king of England and France , be personal present at London . 
 A.D. 
 1404. 
 1403. 
 . 