now as concern the city of the Hans . 
 Hamburg . t nprimis the hamburger exhibit nine article , wherein ten they demand restitution for certain damage offer , as they say , by the english man , the value of which loss amount unto the sum of 9117. noble , 20. penny . for the which , after due examination , there be promise restitution to the sum of 416. noble , 5. shilling . beside the two article propound against they of Scardeburg , the sum whereof be 231. pound , 15. S. 8.d . concern they which there be sentence give in England by the commissioner of our lord the king , the 34 
 execution whereof be promise unto the say hamburger by the ambassador of England : leave and licence be reserve unto the say hamburger , of declare or explaining certain obscure article by they exhibit , which declaration be to be make at the feast of easter then next to come , or within one year next ensue the say feast , unto the chancellor of England for the time be , and of prove the say article and other also , which have not as yet sufficient be prove . which be do they be to have full compliment and execution of justice . 
 also by the hamburger there be demand 445. noble from certain of the inhabitant of Linne in England . which sum , if it shall|be prove to be due unto any english man , the hamburger be to rest content with those good , which they have already in their possession . 
 item , they of Breme propound six article , wherein Breme . the sum contain amount unto 4414. noble . and there be no satisfaction promise unto they . but the same liberty and licence be reserve unto they , in like manner as before unto the hamburger . 
 item , they of Stralessund propound 23. article , stralessund . whereof the sum amount unto 7415. noble , 2o . d . for the which there be promise satisfaction of 253 
 noble , 3-q . also here be a caveat to be observe : that they of stralessund have of english man good at great sum particular to be declare , which will peradventure suffice for a recompense . and some of their article be concern injury offer before 20 , 22 , 23 , 24. year past . also their article be so obscure that they will never , or very hardly be able to declare or prove they . howbeit there be reserve the very same liberty unto they , that be before unto the hamburger . 
 item , they of Lubec propound 23. article , the Lubec . sum whereof extend unto 8690. noble and a half : whereupon it be agree , that they shall have pay unto they 550. noble . there be reserve the same liberty unto they , which be unto the man of stralessund . 
 gnpeswm . item , they of Gripeswold exhibit 5. article , the sum whereof amount unto 2092. noble and a half . for the which there be promise satisfaction of 153. noble and a half . and the say man of Gripeswold have of the good of english man in possession , to the value of 22015. noble , 18. s , as it be report by they of linne . and the same liberty be reserve unto they that be unto the hamburger . 
 Campen . item , they of Campen propound ten article , the sum whereof extend unto 1405. noble . there be no satisfaction promise unto they : but the same liberty be reserve unto they , which be unto the other above mention . 
 item , the ambassador of England demand of the citizen of rostok and Wismer , for damage and injury by they commit against the subject of the foresay sovereign king 32407. noble , 2 . s . ro . d . and albeit every of the foresay city send one of their burgomaster unto the town of Hage in holland , to treat with the english ambassador , it be in the end find out , that they have not any authority of negotiate or conclude aught at all and therefore they make their faithful promise , that every of the say city shall send unto our sovereign lord the king one or two procurator or procurator sufficient instruct to treat and conclude with our say sovereign lord the king about the damage and injury aforesaid at the feast of the nativity of saint John the baptist . 
 . 