to the most renown prince and mighty lord , Henry king of England etc our gracious lord . 
 our humble recommendation , with our most instant and continual prayer for you be gracious by your majesty take in good part 8cc . most sovereign king , mighty prince , gracious lord , and unto we most unfeigned belove , we receive of late your gracious letter by your majesty liege subject John brown , the content whereof seem to be these follow : first that of long time heretofore , there have be between the merchant of your realm and of our land , not only quiet and peaceable access one unto another , but also mutual participation , and common traffic of their ware , be right commodious and available for they both : howbeit , that now the foresay profitable conversation , by reason of certain notorious robbery , commit upon the sea by pirate against both part , 8c the wont access also of your subject unto our dominion , be altogether forbid . Moreover , you call to remembrance the ancient amity 8c friendship between both our land , with the invaluable commodity of sweet amiable peace , which be by all faithful Christians , to the utmost of their endeavour to be embrace . whereupon you of your exceed clemency , do offer your majesty fill consent , that the foresay prohibition be release until the feast of easter next ensue , the say merchant of your dominion may in our territory , and our merchant likewise may in your realm ( all molestation cease ) exercise their wont traffic : especial since in the mean season your royal wisdom have determine to direct unto we your hono : ambassador in friendly sort to treat and parley with we as touch the pretend injury , so far forth as they may concern your subject . add moreover in particular that when your people shall repair unto the part of Sconia to fish for herring , have consideration and regard unto 
 your majesty , we will have they especial recommend unto our protection etc most sovereign lord and king , and gracious prince , we do with unfeigned and hearty affection embrace the oracle of your majesty most courteous and acceptable offer : wherein you have use most diligent and effectual persuasion , that compliment of justice shall be do unto the party injury , and that peace and friendship shall take place , make no doubt of your own royal person , nor of our self or of any appertain unto we , but that our inclination and desire in this regard be all one and the same : neither will we light transgress the limit of your persuasion without some just , weighty , and reasonable cause , forasmuch as the matter persuade be in very [ i . 161. i deed most happy preservative of a common weal , yea 8c of nature it self . Moreover whereas your highness have far request we , that the prohibition of your subject access unto our dominion may , until the feast of easter next ensue , be release : we answer ( under correction of your majesty more deliberate counsel ) that it be far more expedient for both part to have the say prohibition continue then release , until such time as satisfaction be perform on both side unto the party endamage , not in word only , but actual 8c real in deed , or by some course of law or friendly composition . for there be no equal nor indifferent kind of consort or trade between the impoverish party and he that be enrich , between the party which have obtain justice and he that have obtain none between the offender and the party offend : because they be not move with like affection . for the remembrance of injury easy stir up inconsiderate motion of anger . also , such a kind of temperature or permixtion , as it be , by way of contrariety breed more bitterness than sweetness , more hate than love : whereupon moor grievous complaint aswell unto your highness as unto our self , may be occasion . the lord know , that even now we be too 
 much weary and disquiet with the importunate and instant complaint of our subject , insomuch that we can at this present by any convenient mean release or dissolve the say prohibition , before we be sufficient inform by your majesty ambassador , of the satisfaction of our endamage subject . Furthermore , whereas your majesty request , concern your subject that shall come unto the part of Sconia , be that we will defend they under our protection : be it know unto your highness , that for diverse consideration we reasonable Margaret move , be provoke by the queen of Denmark ^denm an ber peop^e > be also urge thereunto full sore ' against our will , for the repel and avoid of injury , we have send forth our army against they . howbeit for a certain time a truce be conclude on both part , so that our people be actual return home . far be it from we also , that our subject be occupy in war , shall in any sort willing molest or reproach any stranger , of what land or nation soever , not be our profess enemy . for this shall be to oppress the innocent in stead of the guilty , to condemn the just for the unjust : than which nothing can be more cruel , nor a revenge of great impiety . in very deed ( most gracious prince and lord ) we be move with right hearty sympathy and compassion for any inconvenience which may happen in your regiment : wish from the bottom of our heart , that all affair may right prosperous and happy succeed , about the royal person and regiment of your most excellent majestic , and that continual . the like whereof we hope from you : most humble commend our self , and our whole order unto your highness . give at our castle of Marienburgh , the 16. day the month of July , in the year of our lord 1404. 
 . 