a letter of Henry the four king of England etc unto frater Conradus de Jungingen the master general of Prussia . 
 HEnrie etc to the most noble and mighty personage of sacred religion fr : Conradus de Jungingen 
 master general of the order of the dutch knight of saint marie , our most dear friend , greeting , and continual perfection of amity . 
 when as your messenger and ambassador be of late personal present in holland , and there expect 83 
 the arrival of our ambassador until the first day of the month of November last expire , that there may be by way of friendly conference a remedy provide in regard of certain injury pretend to be offer , by both our subject one against another , for the public commodity of both part , we be determine to have send unto dordract , at the foresay day , our well-beloved and faithful knight William sturmy , and our well-beloved clerk John Kington , upon our ambassage-affair : have as yet in our desire , for a peaceable end of the matter , ( which , our foresay ambassador , by reason of the shortness of time , or the find out of some other remedy and happy conclusion of all and singular the foresay attempt concern the principali business , can by no mean at that instant attain unto ) that upon some other more convenient day ( to the end your ambassador may not return home altogether frustrate of their expectation ) there may be , after the wont friendly manner , a conference and agreement with your foresay ambassador , even as by other letter of we direct unto your say ambassador the second day of the month of November aforesaid we have deliver our mind unto they . but it fortune not long before the departure of your ambassador into their own country , that no sufficient ship can be find wherein our say ambassador may have secure and safe passage unto dordract , or Middleburgh , neither be it think that they shall get any passage at all , till the ship at Middleborough be return into our kingdom , by the force whereof they may be the more strong waft over . and so by reason of the departure of your ambassador , all matter remain in suspense till such time as the say ambassador shall again meet with we to add perfection unto the business as yet imperfect . wherefore ( our friend unfeigned belove ) desire from the bottom of our heart that the integrity of love , which have from ancient time take place between our and your subject , may in time to come 
 also be keep inviolable , we have think good once again to send one of our foresay ambassador , namely William esturmy knight to dordract , give he charge thither to make haste , and there to stay , till some of your messenger , at your commandment do in time convenient repair unto that place , there ( by God assistance ) to bring the matter unto a happy conclusion . may it please you therefore of your unfeigned friendship , without all inconvenience of delay , to return , not unto we , but unto our forename knight a answer in write , what your will and determination be . neither let it seem strange unto you , that we have not at this present send our forename John Kington clerk together with the say William : for the cause of his abode with we be , that he may in the mean season employ his care and diligence about those matter which must be preparative for the final conclusion of the foresay business . honourable sir , and most dear friend , we do most hearty wish increase of prosperity and joy unto your person . give in our palace of Westminster the 14. day of Feb. in the year of our lord 1407. 1407. 
 . 