a agreement make between king Henry the four and the common society of the merchant of the Hans . 
 this indenture make between the honourable sir William esturmy knight , and John Kington clerk , procurator , messenger , and commissioner sufficient depute and authorize by the most mighty prince , lord Henry , by the grace of God king of England , and France , and lord of Ireland , for the performation of the thing underwrite , on the one part : and the hon . personage m. Henry Uredeland , m. Riman Salum chief notary , Thederic knesvolt secretary , m. Simon Clovesten chief notary , and John Zotebotter citizen , be sufficient make and ordain procurator and messenger , on the behalf of the city of Lubec , Bremen , Hamburg , Sund , and Gripeswold , for the demand and obtain several , of due reformation , and recompense at the hand of our say sovereign lord the king , and of his messenger and commissioner aforesaid , for all injury , damage , grievance , and manslaughter , any way unjust do , and offer several by the liege people and subject of our sovereign lord the king , unto the common society of the merchant of the Hans , and unto any of the citizen , people and inhabitant of the city aforesaid whatsoever on the other part , witness : that between all and every of the say procurator , messenger , and commissioner , by virtue 55 
 A.D. 
 I405 . 
 of the authority commit unto they , it have be and be appoint , conclude , and decree : that the liege merchant and subject of our say sovereign lord the king , and the merchant of the common society of the dutch Hans aforesaid , from henceforth for one whole year and seven month immediate next ensue and follow , shall|be permit and licence friendly , free , and secure , to exercise mutual traffic , and like merchant to buy and sell together , one of , and unto another , 1400. even as in time past , namely , in the year 1400. and before that time also , they have be accustom to exercise mutual traffic and merchandise , and to buy and sell . 
 also the say William and John agree and consent , that they themselves , or some other perhaps to be appoint in this behalf by their say lord the king in their stead , shall upon the first day of the month of May next to come , with the continuation of the day follow , at the town of dordract in holland , or upon any other term or term , then perhaps to be limit , competent satisfy , and perform convenient recompense unto the say common society , citizen , people , and inhabitant of the city aforesaid , and also of other city , town , and village of the Hans , of and for all injury , damage , grievance , and drown , or manslaughter do and commit , as they allege , against they , deliver and exhibit in write article , unto the above name William and John , or else hereafter to be deliver and exhibit , either by the same procurator or by some other , which shall perhaps be authorize in their stead , or by the messenger procurator and commissioner of other city , town , and place of the Hans , in equal and like manner and form , even as at the say term limit , or then perhaps to be prorogued , there be appoint by the say William and John , reparation , reformation , and recompense unto the inhabitant of Prussia , and Livonia , for the injury , damage , and grievance unjust do and commit against 56 
 hanse merchant ’ agreement they by the liege people and subject of the say sovereign lord the king , in the presence of the mighty lord the master general of Prussia , in his land of Prussia , as in certain letter indent , bear date in the castle of Marienburgh in Prussia the eight day of the month of October , in the year of our lord 1405. and be make and write about the reparation , reformation , and recompense of such like injury etc ( the tenor whereof ought here to be understand as if it be insert ) it be more manifest contain . 
 it be furthermore promise by the say William and John , that they shall not enforce nor compel the citizen , people , or inhabitant of the common society of the Hans , or of the above name city , or of any other city of the Hans aforesaid ( have receive sufficient information of their dwell and place of abode ) to more difficult or district proof of their article of complaint already exhibit , and in the foresay term to come , to be exhibit , then unto the inhabitant of the land of Prussia and Livonia , accord to the form of the indenture above mention . 
 moreover the say William and John do promise , that so soon as they shall come into the kingdom of England , and before the presence of their king , they shall provide , that all and singular the privilege grant unto the merchant of the say Hans by the renown king of England , and confirm by the say sovereign lord the king that now be , must , accord to all their content , be inviolable observe by the say sovereign king and his subject : and also , that from henceforth nothing be unjust to be attempt , upon any occasion , pretense , or colour , by the say sovereign prince , and the inhabitant of the realm of England , to the prejudice of the say privilege . they shall provide also , that all thing heretofore . attempt and practise against the say privilege , shall , by reasonable amendment and just reformation , utter be abolish . 
 but if after the date of these present ( which God 
 forfend ) within the space of the say one year and seven month prescribe any damage , injury or grievance , in ship , good , or person , shall , either by the english and the inhabitant of England be unjust inflict upon the city , and merchant of the city , town , and place of the Hans aforesaid , or by any merchant or other of the city or town of the say Hans , either unto the english , or unto any of the inhabitant of that realm , upon any feign pretense whatsoever , all and singular the foresay messenger , commissioner , ambassador , and procurator have promise , that all such damage , injury and molestation so inflict by they who shall oft and commit they , must be reform and amend , after the very same form and manner , that in the like case reformation , reparation and amends of injury , damage , and‘molestations commit by the english against they of Prussia be to be perform , accord unto a certain clause contain in the letter above mention , which begin : caeterum ne per etc in English : howbeit lest that etc continue unto that clause : et ut praescripta omnia etc in English : and that all the covenant above write etc 
 it be also conclude between the foresay messenger , commissioner , and procurator , and with one general consent agree upon , that if from the first day of the month of May next to come , within one whole year follow , some convenient , just , and reasonable reformation be not perform unto the party injury and damnify general above mention , in regard of their damage , molestation , and injury : then , within three month after the say year be expire , the merchant of the Hans city aforesaid be bind , without any molestation , perturbation , and impediment whatsoever ( none other intimation or admonition be necessary in this behalf ) to avoid ( and if no lawful impediment shall hinder they ) to abstain and depart from the realm and dominion of the say sovereign king of 
 England , with their merchandise and other good buy or get within the space of the say three month : and also the english likewise in all respect shall avoid , abstain , and depart from the territory and dominion of the Hans city aforesaid . 
 also it be promise by the say William and John , that at the term appoint , namely upon the first of May next follow , or at some other term or term then limit or to be limit , there must be make a due recompense , and a proportionali satisfaction , for all those person of the land of Prussia , Livonia , and of the city , town , and other place of the Hans , who have unjust be drown , and slay by the english : and that accord to the tenor of a certain schedule write concern a recompense to be have in regard of the say person drown and slay , and present unto they by Albertus ride consul of the city of Thoren , and by the forename procurator and messenger of the city aforesaid , they must faithful and effectual , to the utmost of their ability endeavour , for the obtain of the say recompense and amends . in witness whereof ( these letter of indenture remain in the possession of the say William and John the messenger , procurator , and commissioner of England aforesaid , and leave in their custody , by the above name procurator and messenger Henri Rimarus , Thedericus , Simon , and John sotebotter , of their certain knowledge and assurance ) and for the full confirmation and testimony of all the premise , the foresay procurator and messenger have put to their seal . give in the town of dordract the 15. day of December in the year of our lord 1405. 
 William esturmy knight , and John Kington canon of Lincoln ( be in this behalf sufficient authorize and depute as ambassador , procurator , messenger and commissioner , by our say sovereign lord the king , namely in regard of the molestation , injury and damage unjust do and commit against the liege people and subject of the foresay most excellent 59 
 prince and lord , lord Henry by the grace of God king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , by the commonalty of the city of Wismer and Rostok underwrite , their common counsel be assemble for the same purpose , and authorize also , and as well close as express maintain and ratify , by the whole company of the common society of the merchant of the dutch Hans ) doe , in this present diet at the town of Hage situate in the country of holland , be appoint for the very same occasion , demand of you sir John de Aa knight , and Hermannus Meyer deputy for the city of Wismer and Rostok , and sufficient ordain by authority requisite in this behalf , to be the procurator and messenger of the say city , that convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction and recompense may certain and effectual be do unto the injury and endamage party , who be specify in the article under write . 
 Newcastle . imprimis , that about the feast of easter , in the year of our lord 1394. Henry van pomeren , godekin Michael , clay shield , Hans howfoote , Peter hawfoote , clay Boniface , Rainbek , and many other , with they of Wismer and of rostok , be of the society of the Hans , a english take , by main force , a ship of Newcastle upon Tine , 1tun-ms'2'qq ' ca^ed Godezere sail upon the sea towards Prussia , be of the burden of two hundred ton , and belong unto Roger de Thorneton , Robert Gabiford , John Paulin , and Thomas de Chester : which ship , together with the furniture thereof amount unto the value of four hundred pound : also the woollen cloth , the red wine , the gold , and the sum of money contain in the say ship amount unto the value of 200. mark of english money : moreover they unjust slay John Patanson and John Russell in the surprise of the ship and good aforesaid , and there they imprison the say party take , and , to their utter undo , detain they in prison for the space of three whole year . 
 hull . item , that in the year of our lord 13 94 - certain 60 
 person of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans their confederate rob one Richard horuse of Hull 
 of diverse good and merchandize in a ship call the Shipper berline of Prussia , be then value at 160. noble . 
 item , that in the year of our lord 1395. Hans van Hull . wethemonkule , clay Scheid , godekin Mighel , and one call Strotbeker , by force of arm , and by the assistance of the man of Wismer and Rostok , and other of the Hans , do upon the sea near unto Norway , wicked and unjust take from John Tutteburie , five piece of wax , four hundred of work , and half a last of osmunde , and other good , to the value of four hundred seventie six noble . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1396. one John van Hull . Derlowe , hans van gelder , and other their complice of the Hans villainous and unjust take a ship of William Terry of hui call the cog , with thirty woollen broad clothes , and a thousand narrow clothes , to the value of 200. pound . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1398. one John van Hull . Derlowe , Wilmer , hans van gelder , clay Scheid , everade pilgrimson , and diverse other of the Hans , do upon the sea near unto Norway villainous and unjust take a ship of John wisdom of Hull call the Trini tie , with diverse good and merchandize , namely oil , wax , and work , to the value of 300. pound . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1399. one clay hull . Scheid , and other above write of Wismer and Rostok , with certain other of the Hans , their confederate , wicked and unjust take from one William pound merchant of Hull , two cake of wax , to the value of 18. pound , out of the ship call the Hawkin Berlin of Dantzik . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1394. one Goddekin York . Mighel , clay Scheid , Storbiker , and diverse other of Wismer and Rostok , and of the Hans , wicked and unjust take out of a ship of Elbing ( the master 
 whereof be call Henry puy ) of the good and merchandize of Henry Wyman , John Topcliffe , and Henry lakenswither of York , namely in work , wax , osmunds , and bowstave , to the value of 1060. noble . 
 York . item , in the year of our lord 1394. certain malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans , their confederate , wicked and unjust take out of a ship of holland ( the master whereof be call hinkensman ) 140. woollen clothes ( the price of one of the which clothes be eight noble ) from Thomas Thester of York , and a chest , with armour , silver and gold of the foresay Thomas , to the value of 9 pound . 
 London . item , in the year of our lord 1393. certain malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , and other their complice of the Hans , wicked and unjust take from one Richard Abel of London woollen cloth , green cloth , meal and fish , to the value of 133. il 6 . s . 
 London . item , in the year of our lord 1405. about the feast of saint Michael , one Nicholas Femeer of Wismer merchant of the Hans , with the assistance of other his complice of the Hans aforesaid , wicked and unjust take from one Richard Morley citizen of London five last of herring , beside 32. pound , in the sea call northsound . 
 Colchester . item , in the year of our lord 1398. about the month of September , one Godekin Wisle , and Gerard Sleyre of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans , their confederate wicked and unjust take out of a ship of Prussia ( whereof the master be name Rorebek ) from John Seburgh merchant of Colchester two pack of woollen cloth , to the value of a 100 mark : from Stephan Flispe , and John Plumer merchant of the same town two pack of woollen cloth , to the value of 60. pound : from Robert wight merchant of the same town , two pack of woollen cloth to the value of a 100 mark : from William Munde merchant of the same town , two fardel of woollen cloth , worth 40 . fi . 
 and from John daw , and Thomas Cornwall merchant of the same town , three pack of woollen cloth , worth 200. mark . Moreover they take and imprison certain english man , which be in the say ship , namely William fubborne servant unto John diere , Thomas Mersh servant unto Robert wight , which Thomas pay for his ransom 20. noble of English money , William Munde merchant of the town aforesaid , which William , by reason of the extremity of that imprisonment , lose the sight of his eye , and Thomas Cornwall , merchant of the foresay town , which Thomas pay for his ransom twenty noble . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1394. certain male - Vermouth . factor of Wismer and Rostok , upon the coast of Denmark and Norway , beneath scawe , and at Anold , take Thomas Adam and John welter merchant of Yermouth : and Robert Caumbrigge and Reginald leman merchant of Norwich , in a certain ship of Elbing ' Norwich . in Prussia ( whereof one clay goldsmith be master ) with diverse woollen clothes of the say Thomas , John , Robert , and Reginald , to the value of one thousand mark English , and carry the person and good afore - say , away with they : and the say Thomas , John , Robert , and Reginald they imprison at courtbuttres-sow , and there detain they , until they pay a hundred mark for their redemption . 
 item in the year of our lord 1401. some of the Vermouth . inhabitant of Wismer and of rostok wicked take at longsound in Norway , a certain ship of west-stow Longsound in in Zealand ( the master whereof be one Gerard Dedissen ) Norway . lade with diverse good and merchandise of John Hughson of Yermouth , namely with the hide of ox and of sheep , with butter , mast , sparre , board , questingstone and wild work , to the value of a hundred mark , and do as yet detain the say thing in their possession , some of the Hans be their assistant in the premise . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1402. certain of Vermouth . 
 Cley . 
 Cley . 
 the hans , of rostok , and of Wismer , take upon the coast of England , near unto Plymouth a certain barge call the Michael of Yarmouth ( whereof Hugh ap Fen be the owner , and Robert rigwey the master ) lade with bay salt , to the quanti tie of 130. way , and with a thousand canvas clothes of Britain , and do as yet detain the say good in their possession , the say Hugh be endamage , by the loss of his ship , and of his good aforesaid 800. noble and the foresay master and the mariner loose , in regard of their wage , canvas , and armour , 200. noble . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1405. certain malefactor of Wismer wicked and unjust take , in a certain port of Norway call Selaw , a ship of Yarmouth ( the owner whereof be William oxney and the master Thomas smith ) lade with salt , cloth , and salmon , to the value of 40. pound , and do as yet detain the say ship and good in their possession , some of the Hans their confederate aid and assist they at the same time . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1395. one Godekin Mighel , clay Scheid , Stertebeker , and other their accomplice of the Hans take upon the sea a certain ship of one John Dulwer of Cley , call the Friday ( whereof Laurence take of Cley be master ) and convey the say ship unto maustrond in Norway , and the say master and mariner they rob of diverse commodity , namely of artillery , furniture , and salt fish be in the same ship , to the value of 500 noble . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1395. Godekin Mighel , clay Scheid , Stertebeker , and other their accomplice of the Hans , unlawful take upon the sea a certain ship of one William bet of Cley call the Margaret ( wherein Robert robines be master ) and convey the ship it self unto mawstrond in Norway , and there rob the master and his partner of diverse commodity , namely of artillery , furniture , and salt fish , to the value of 400. noble , and one of the say master mate they malicious drown . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1395. about the feast Cley . 
 of the nativi tie of saint John Baptist , the forename Godekin and Stertebeker , with other their accomplice of the Hans , unlawful take upon the sea a certain ship of Nicholas Steyhard and John Letis of Cley call the Nicholas ( whereof John breast be master ) and convey the say ship unto mawstrond , and there rob the say master and his company of diverse commodity , namely of furniture and salt fish , be in the say ship , to the value of 320. noble . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1395. about the feast Cley . aforesaid , the say Godekins and Stertebeker , and their companion of the Hans unjust take upon the sea a certain ship of Thomas Peirs of Cley call the Isabel ( whereof William Noie be master ) and convey it unto mawstrond , and there rob the say master and his company of diverse commodity , as namely of furniture , and salt fish , be in the say ship , to the value of 406. noble . 
 item , in the year next above mention , upon the cley . Saturday , about the foresay feast , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker , and other their accomplice of the Hans unlawful take upon the sea , a certain ship of one Thomas Lyderpole of Cley , call the Helena , wherein Robert alway be master , and also wicked and unjust drown in the bottom of the sea diverse commodity , as namely salt fish , together with the ship it self . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1398. about the feast Cley . 
 of s. Michael the archangel , the foresay Godekin and Stertebeker , with other their confederate of the Hans , take at langsound in Norway a certain crayer of one Thomas Motte of Cley , call the Peter , ( wherein Thomas smith be master ) and the foresay crayer they wicked and unjust carry away , be worth 280. noble . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1395 - about the feast Wiveton . of the nativi tie of saint John Baptist , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker , and other of the Hans unjust take a certain ship of Simon Durham , call the 
 two 65 e 
 dogger-ship , and the Peter of Wiveton , lade with salt fish ( whereof John Austen be master ) upon the coast of Denmark . and they carry away the say Dogger , with the furniture thereof , and the foresay salt fish , to the value of 170. pound . Moreover , the master , and 25. mariner in the same ship they malicious slay , and a certain lad of the say Dogger they carry with they into Wismer . 
 Wiveton . item , in the foresay year , and about the feast aforesaid , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker , with other their complice , unjust take upon the sea a certain ship of Thomas Lyderpole , and John Coote of Wiveton : and the master and mariner which be in the say ship , they villanous slay , among who they put to death one Simon Andrew , the godson , nephew , and servant of the foresay Simon Durham . which ship , with the good and furniture that be therein be worth 410. noble . 
 Wiveton . item , in the very same year , about the feast aforesaid , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker and other their complice wicked spoil a certain ship of the foresay Simon Durham call the Dogger , wherein Gervase cat be master , lie at a anchor , while the company be occupy about fish , and likewise unjust take away with they the salt fish , and furniture of the say ship . Moreover , the master and his company that be in the say Dogger they beat and wound , so that they utter lose their fish for that year , the master and his say company be endamage thereby , to the sum of 200. noble . 
 Wiveton . item , in the year of our lord 1396. the foresaid Godekins and Stertebeker , and other their complice unjust take upon the sea a certain crayer , call the buss of Zealand , which one John Ligate merchant , and servant unto the forename Simon Durham have lade in Prussia , on the behalf of the say Simon , to sail for England , and spoil the say craier , and also take and carry away with they the good and merchandise 66 
 of the say Simon , be in the foresay ship , to the value of 66. pound . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1397. certain male - w’weton . factor of Wismer and Rostok , with certain other of the Hans , take a crayer of one Peter coal of Zealand , call the bussship , which Alan Barret the servant and factor of the foresay Simon Durham have lade with mast , sparre , and other merchandise , for the behalf of the say Simon , and unjust take from thence the good of the say Simon , to the value of 24. pound , and carry the same away . 
 item , in the year of our lord 1394. certain male - lenne . factor of Wismer and other of the Hans unjust take upon the sea , and carry away with they a pack of woollen cloth of the foresay Simon , worth 42. pound , out of a certain crayer of one Thomas fowler of lenne be lade and bind for Dantzik in Prussia . 
 item , pitiful complain the merchant of lenne lenne . do avouch , verify , and affirm , that about the feast of saint George the martyr , in the year of our lord 1394. sundry malefactor and robber of Wismer and Rostok , and other of the Hans , with a great multitude of ship , arrive at the town of Norbern in Norway , and take the say town by strong assault , and also wicked and unjust take all the merchant of lenne there reside with their good and cattle , and burn their house and mansion in the same place , and put their person unto great ransom : even as by the letter of safeconduct deliver unto the say merchant it may more evident appear , to the great damage and impoverishment of the merchant of lenne : namely , inprimis they burn there 21. house of 21. house belong unto the say merchant , to the english mar-value of 440. noble . item , they take from Edmund ^Norternln belyetere , Thomas hunt , John Brandon , and from other Norway . merchant of lenne , to the value of 1815. pound . 
 67 
 . 