a new concord conclude between king Henry the 4. and ulricus de Jungingen master general of Prussia , in the year of our lord 1409. 
 y this indenture or letter indent be it evident know ( for the perpetual memory of the matter ) unto all faithful Christians , that the noble and honourable personage Richard Merlowe mayor and citizen of London , master John Kington clerk , and William Askham citizen and 
 Aiderman of the same city , the commissioner of the most sovereign prince and lord , lord Henry by the grace of God king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , and Tidericus de Longenthorpe knight , lefardus de Hereford burgomaster of Elbing , and John crolowe citizen of the city of Dantzik , the procurator , commissioner , deputy and messenger of the right noble and religious personage Fr. Ulricus de Jungingen master general of the order of the dutch knight of saint Mary hospital of Jerusalem , have in the name of the say king and master by virtue of the power on both part commit unto they , sufficient authority , have appoint and with one consent agree upon all and singular the thing underwritten . 
 imprimis for the conservation of mutual love and 1. wont amity , and for the tranquillity of sweet amiable peace , it be decree and ordain , that all and singular the liege people and subject of the realm of England and the merchant of the territory and dominion of the say realm and all other person of what state or condition soever , shall and may safe and secure , as well by land as by water enter into the part of Prussia , and there mutual converse , and free after the manner of merchant exercise traffic aswell with the Prussians as with other , of what nation or quality soever , there also make their abode , and thence unto their own home and dwell place return , and depart unto any place whither and so often as they shall think good , as well by land as by water , with their good , merchandise , and ware whatsoever ; faithful pay in the mean time all right and custom due in regard of their say ware and merchandise . reserve always unto the say master and . his successor all right and remedy ordain , grant , and vouchsafe in certain obligation by our lord the king , whereof mention shall be make in the article follow . 
 item it be ordain , that all and singular than subject 2. of the say master generail and of his order , of what state and condition soever , shall and may , as well by water as by land enter into the kingdom of England and into the territory and dominion thereof , and there mutual converse , and free after the manner of merchant exercise traffic as well with all english people as with other of what nation or quality soever , and there also make their abode , and thence return unto their own habitation and dwell place , and to depart whither they will and as oft as they shall think good , as well by land as by water , with their good , merchandise and ware whatsoever : true pay in the mean time all right and custom due in regard of their say ware and merchandise . reserve always unto the say sovereign king , his heir and successor , 
 all right and remedy ordain and grant unto they in certain obligation , by the commissioner and procurator of the say master general abovenamed , and in the name of the say master general . 
 3. item it be with one consent agree upon , promise , and grant that for all and singular damage , grievance , and robbery howsoever do and commit before the date of these present against the foresay sovereign prince and his subject whatsoever , and all other which at the time of the grievance , damage , and robbery aforesaid , be , or at this present be the say sovereign king his subject ; there be due to be pay unto the say king or his successor by the say master general or his successor , in full satisfaction and recompense of the damage , grievance , and robbery abovewritten , certain sum of english money : even as in the letter obligatory make by the say master generail his procurator , and messenger abovenamed in this behalf , and seal with their seal , and deliver unto the forename procurator and commissioner of our say lord the king it be express more at large . 
 4. item it be covenant , grant , and promise , that no subject of the say master general or of his successor , by reason or . occasion of the damage , grievance , and robbery aforesaid , shall , by the say sovereign king or his successor , or by their authority or commandment , or by ally other person whatsoever who in regard of the foresay loss , grievance and robbery have be molest and damnify , or at the procurement or instant suit of any , be attach , arrest , imprison , or detain ; nor that the good of the say master general , or of his successor , or of any of they , shall lay hold on , arrest , or detain . 
 5. item it be covenant and ordain , that if any of the liege people and subject of the say master generail or of his successor shall , contrary to the form of the concord and grant next abovewritten , chance to be molest or endamage : that than the foresay sovereign ioo 
 lord the king and his successor the king of England be bind to make full satisfaction for all such loss as the subject of the say master general or of his successor or any of they shall for that cause have unjust sustain , unto the party endamage . which thing , if the foresay sovereign prince , or his successor in the realm of England , be convenient request by the letter of the say master general or of his successor , shall refuse to do , that then after the term of six month immediate follow the say denial or refusal , it shall right lawful for the master general that now be and for any of his successor in time to come ( have first make convenient proof that the foresay request be by he or they exhibit ) to arrest so many good of the foresay king his subject find in the land of Prussia , as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and recompense of any person or person whatsoever unjust molest in this behalf ; and also to detain the say good under arreste , until condign satisfaction and amends be make unto the party or party molest . 
 item by the commissioner and procurator often 6. abovenamed it be covenant , promise , and grant , that for all and singular the damage , molestation , and robbery by the foresay sovereign king his liege people and subject howsoever before the date of these present commit and offer against the say master general or against any of his subject whether Prussians or livonians , and against all other who at the time of the damage , grievance and robbery aforesaid be , or at this present be the subject of the master generail aforesaid ( except notwithstanding certain damage and grievance hereafter to be mention , whereof also some proviso shall|be have in the article follow , which damage be before the date of these present by you say sovereign king his liege people and subject inflict upon certain subject of the foresay general master , especial they of Prussia which hereafter shall name ) 
 ioi 
 there be certain sum of money due to be pay unto the say master general or unto his successor by the say sovereign prince or his successor for the full satisfaction of the foresay damage , molestation and robbery inflict upon the Prussians and livonians , and the other above mention , even as in the letter obligatory of the say sovereign lord the king make in this behalf , be give and deliver unto the say master generail his procurator and messenger , it be declare more at large . 
 7. item , it be covenant , grant and promise , that none of the liege people or subject of the foresay sovereign prince or of his heir shall , by reason or occasion of the damage , grievance , and robbery aforesaid , by the say master generail or his successor or by their authority and commandment , or by any other who in respect of the say damage , grievance and robbery above mention , have be molest or damnify , or by any of their procurement or instant suit , shall|be attach , arrest , imprison or detain ; nor that any good of the subject of the say sovereign king or his heir or any of they , shall be attach , arrest , or detain . reserve always unto the forename master general and his subject all right and remedy any way requisite or competent unto they by mean of the obligation aforesaid . 
 8. item it be covenant and agree that if any of the liege people or subject of the say sovereign prince or of his heir and successor shall ( contrary to the form of concord and grant next abovewritten ) chance to be molest or endamage ; that than the say master general and his successor , for all loss and hindrance which the liege people and subject then foresay sovereign prince or of his heir or successor , shall by that mean have unjust sustain , be bind to make full satisfaction unto the party endamage . which if the master general aforesaid or his successor be convenient request by the letter of the say 
 102 
 sovereign prince or of his heir , shall refuse to do ; that then , after the space of six month next ensue the time of the foresay request , it may be right lawful for the forename sovereign prince that now be , or that then for that time shall be ( convenient proof be first bring , that the foresay request have convenient be exhibit ) to arrest so many good of the say master generail his subject find in the realm of England , as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and amends of any person or person unjust molest in this behalf ; and also to detain the say good under safe custody , until condign satisfaction and amends be make unto the party or party aggrieve . 
 item it be covenant , that beside the sum due 9 unto the say master general and his successor in the behalf of his subject both of Prussia and of Livonia ( whereof mention be make in the former article ) there be due to be pay unto the say master generail and his successor , for sundry other damage , grievance , and robbery against himself and diverse other of his subject of Prussia , namely Matthew Ludekensson , Arnold Ashen , henri culeman , John Unkeltop , John Halewater , Egghard scoff of Dantzik , and Nicolas Wolmerstene of Elbing , do and commit by the say sovereign king his liege people and subject underwritten , even before the date of these present , for the full satisfaction of the say damage , grievance and robbery , certain sum of noble hereafter follow . namely inprimis by Tutburie , and Terry of Hull , 82. noble , which be due unto the foresay Matthew lude-kinson . item by Nicholas scot of Caleis the son of Tutbury , and Hilg of Hull , 256. noble , which be due unto the foresay Arnold de Aschen . item by the inhabitant of Scardeburgh , Blakeney , and crowmer ( who have one John jolly of Blakeney for their captain ) 156. noble , which be due unto Henry culeman aforesaid . item by the inhabitant of Bayon ( who Capitaine be 
 103 
 one Pideville ) 125. noble which be due unto the say John Unkel top . item by the inhabitant of Plymmouth and Dertmouth ( who captain be Henry pay , and William gadel ) 600. noble which be due unto the foresay John Halewater , in respect of his good by they violent take away . item 334. noble to be pay by the self same party , be due unto the say a ship of the John halewater by reason that they detain his ship burden of from he three month and more , which ship be of the 300. onne . hurthen of three hundred ton of wine , and have in it all the foresay time five and fourty servant maintain at the expense of the say John Halewater . item that sir William de Ethingham knight , who be 
 viceadmiral for the sea , must be summon to allege a reasonable cause ( for that the say sir William with his servant expel the say John Halewater out of his ship for the space of fifteen day together , and take of the good and victual of the say John to the sum of 114. noble ) why he ought not to pay the say sum of 114. noble unto John Halewater aforesaid : which if he shall not be willing nor able to allege before the first of April next ensue , that then by the king authority he must be compel to pay unto the foresay John the say 114 noble . item by the inhabitant of Caleis ( who captain be Michael Scot , bishop , and William Horneby ) 1900. noble , which be due unto the foresay eggard scoff , because the say sovereign king have give they in charge by the say Michael Scot and the rest concern the payment of the sum aforesaid . item by John Bilis near unto Crowmer , 68 noble , which be due unto Nicholas wolmersten of Elbing . which sum of noble must by the king authority be levy at the hand of his subject abovemention , between the time that now be and the feast of the purification of the bless virgin which shall fall in the year of our lord 1411. effectual to be deliver and pay unto the say master general or his lawful procurator , or unto his successor or their lawful pro - 
 104 
 curator , at the city of London , upon the feast aforesaid . 
 item it be covenant that beside the sum specify in the foresay letter obligatory make in the behalf of the say sovereign prince , there be due to be pay unto one John Marion of Wersingham late decease being in his life-time the liege subject of the foresay sovereign prince 200. noble of English money in regard of certain injury and robbery do and commit before the date of these present against the foresay John , by one Eghard Scoff7 subject unto the say master generail , for the full satisfaction of the say damage and robbery to be make unto the say decease John , his wife , child , heir or executor by the say Egghard , his heir , or by the administrator of his good at the time and place abovementioned . 
 item it be covenant , confirm , and promise , that 10. for all the injury and robbery do and commit against one John dordewant of Elbing , be in his life time subject unto the say master generail , by the liege people and subject of the say sovereign king the inhabitant of Scardeburgh before the date of these present ; for the full recompense of all such injury and robbery , there must be pay unto one John gruk of Dantzik eight hundred noble of English money , upon the feast of easter next follow in the city of London by they of Scardeburgh be guilty and culpable in this behalf ; who be by definitive sentence condemn unto the say John in the sum of 800. noble by reason of the injury and robbery aforesaid . except the lawful expense in this behalf lay out : they be also tax in due time for the issue . and therefore the foresay condemn party ( who name be in the sentence against they pronounce in this behalf , more express contain ) must in the mean season by the king authority be compel and constrain real and actual to obey the foresay sentence , namely by deliver and pay unto John gruk the sum of 800. 
 105 
 noble at the time and place above mention , with reasonable expense , wherein also the say party stand condemn , their lawful taxation be reserve . 
 item it be covenant and grant , that the heir of lord Henry de Percy the young after they shall come unto lawful age , and shall have attain unto the possession and good of their inheritance , must be compel by the king authority ( justice go before ) to make satisfaction unto the great procurator of Marienburgh with the sum of 838. noble in lieu of certain corn and grain which the foresay lord Henry , in the year 1403 , buy and receive of the say great procurator , for the use of the castle of Zutberwik . in testimony and confirmation of all the which premise , the say Tedericus , Lefardus , and John Crolow , of their certain knowledge have put their seal unto these present letter indent , in the presence of the abovenamed Richard Merlow , John Kington , and William Askam , commissioner for the behalf of England . give at the city of London in England the four day of December , in the year of our lord 1409. 
 . 