another branch of a statute make in the ten year of the reign of Henry the sixth concern the state of the english merchant in the dominion of the king of Denmark . 
 item because that our sovereign lord the king at the grievous complaint to he make in this parliament by the commons of his realm of England be in this parliament be inform , that many of his faithful liege people be great impoverish , undo , and in point to be destroy by the king of Denmark and his liege , which be of the amity of the king our sovereign lord , because that they do daily take of his say faithful subject their good , so that they have take of merchant of York and Kingston upon hui good and merchandise to the valour of v. m.li . within a year , and of other liege and merchant of the realm of England good and cattal to the valour of sheet . m.li . whereof they have no remedy of the say king of Denmark , nor of none other , forasmuch as none of they come within the realm of England , nor nothing have in the same realm of England , and that the good be take out of the same realm : the king willing to provide remedy for his say liege people , have ordain and establish , that if the good of any of you say his liege be or shall|be take by the say king of Denmark or any of his say liege , the keeper of the privy seal for you time be , shall have power to make to you party grieve letter of request under the privy seal , w‘out any other pursuit to be make to any for restitution to be have of the good so take and to be take . and if restitution be not make by 
 n 113 h 
 such letter , the king our sovereign lord by the advice of his counsel shall provide to the party grieve his covenable remedy , accord as you case require . 
 incipit libre de custodia maris praserAm arcti inter Doveram 13 Galisiam . 
 Sigismond die •438-he be here 14.16 . 
 videns imperator sigismun-dus duas villa inter catera singlice scilicet cait st be i3 doveream , ponens suos duos digitos super duos suos oculos , ait reg : frater , custodite istas duas villa sicut duos vestros oculos . 
 the noble be coin by Edward the three . anno 
 . 