206 
 208 
 king Edward vi present the charter 
 of Bridewell to the citizen of London 
 i Thomas Goodrich bishop of Ely 
 2 sir Robert Bowes master of the roll 
 3 earl of Pembroke 
 the copy of the letter missive , which the right noble prince Edward the sixth send to the king , prince , and other potentate , inhabit the north-east part of the world , towards the mighty empire of Cathay , at such time as sir Hugh Willoughby knight , and Richard chancellor , with their company , attempt their voyage thither in the year of Christ 1553. and the seven and last year of his reign . 
 Dward the sixth , by the grace of God , king of England , France , and Ireland , etc to all king , prince , ruler , judge , and governor of the earth , and all other have any excellent dignity on the same , in all place under the universali heaven : peace , tranquillity , and honour be unto 
 you , and your land and region , which be under your dominion , and to every of you , as be convenient . 
 forasmuch as the great and almighty God have give unto mankind , above all other live creature , such a heart and desire , that every man desire to join friendship with other , to love , and be love , also to give and receive mutual benefit : it be therefore the duty of all man , accord to their power , to maintain and increase this desire in every man , with well deserve to all man , and especial to show this good affection to such , as be move with this desire , come unto they from far country . for how much the long voyage they have attempt for this intent , so much the more doe they thereby declare that this desire have be ardent in they . Furthermore also , the example of our father and predecessor do invite we hereunto , forasmuch as they have ever gentle and love entreat such as of friendly mind come to they , aswell in 209 0 
 from country near hand , as far remote , commend themselves to their protection . and if it be right and equity to show such humanity towards all man , doubtless the same ought chief to be show to merchant , who wander about the world , search both the land and the sea , to carry such good and profitable thing , as be find in their country , to remote region and kingdom , and again to bring from the same , such thing as they find there commodious for their own country : both aswell that the people , to who they go , may not be destitute of such commodity as their country bring not forth to they , as that also they may be partaker of such thing , whereof they abound . for the god of heaven and earth great provide for mankind , will not that all thing shall be find in one region , to the end that one shall have need of another , that by this mean friendship may be establish among all man , and every one seek to gratify all . for the establish and furtherance of which universali amity , certain man of our realm , move hereunto by the say desire , have institute and take upon they a voyage by sea into far country , to the intent that between our people and they , a way may be open to bring in , and carry out merchandise , desire we to further their enterprise . who assent to their petition , have license the right valiant and worthy sir Hugh Willoughby , knight , and other our trusty and faithful servant , which be with he , accord to their desire , to go to country to they heretofore unknown , aswell to seek such thing as we lack , as also to carry unto they from our region , such thing as they lack . so that hereby not only commodity may ensue both to they and we , but also a indissoluble and perpetuali league of friendship be establish between we both , while they permit we to take of their thing , such whereof they have abundance in their region , and we again grant they such thing of we , whereof they be destitute . we therefore desire you king and prince , 
 210 
 and all other , to who there be any power on the earth , to permit unto these our servant free passage by your region and dominion : for they shall not touch any thing of you unwilling unto you . Consider you that they also be man . if therefore they shall stand in need of any thing , we desire you of all humanity , and for the nobility which be in you , to aid and help they with such thing as they lack , receive again of they such thing as they shall be able to give you in recompense . show your self so towards they , as you will that we and our subject shall show ourselves towards your servant , if at any time they shall pass by our region . 
 thus do , we promise you by the god of all thing that be contain in heaven , earth , and the sea , and by the life and tranquillity of our kingdom , that we will with like humanity accept your servant , if at any time they shall come to our kingdom , where they shall as friendly and gentle be entertain , as if they be bear in our dominion , that we may hereby recompense the favour and benignity which you have show to our man . thus after we have desire you king and prince , etc with all humanity and favour , to entertain our well-beloved servant , we will pray our almighty God , to grant you long life , and peace , which never shall have end . write in London , which be the chief city of our kingdom , in the year from the creation of the world , 5515. in the month of liar , the fourteenth day of the month , and seven year of our reign . 
 this letter be write also in other language . 
 1553 - 
 liar . i will read more , that be , in the sarasen lan - 
 greek , and diverse gwge , mixtof turkish and egyptian , February , interpret by they the 
 month to set 
 ship to the 
 [ the sea ' 
 . 