the book of the great and mighty emperor of Russia , and duke of Moscovia , and of the dominion order and commodity thereunto belong ; draw by Richard chancellor . 
 | | Duyna . 
 note . 
 orasmuch as it be meet and necessary for all those that mind to take in hand the travel into far or strange country , to endeavour themselves not only to understand the order , commodity , and fruitfulness thereof , but also to apply they to the set forth of the same , 
 whereby it may encourage other to the like travail : therefore have i now think good to make a brief rehearsal of the order of this my travail in Russia and Moscovia , and other country thereunto adjoin ; because it be my chance to fall with the north part of Russia before i come towards Moscovia , i will partly declare my knowledge therein . Russia be very plentiful both of land and people , and also wealthy for such commodity as they have . they be very great fisher for salmon and small cod : they have much oil which we call treine oil , the most whereof be make by a river call two Duina . they make it in other place , but not so much as there . they have also a great trade in seethe of salt water . to the north part of that country be the place where they have their fur , as sable , martern , grief Bevers , fox white , black , and red , minx , ermine , Miniver , and heart . there be also a fish tooth , which fish be call a morsse . the taker thereof dwell in a place call 224 
 1553-postesora , which bring they upon heart to Lampas to sell , and from Lampas carry they to a place call Colmogro , where the high market be hold on saint Nicholas day . to the west of Colmogro there be a place call Gratanove , in our language novogorode , where much fine flax and hemp grow , and also much wax and honey . the dutch merchant have a Staplehouse there . there be also great store of hide , and at a place call Plesco : and thereabouts be great store of flax , hemp , wax , honey ; and that town be from colmogro 120 mile . 
 there be a place call Vologda ; the commodity whereof be tallow , wax , and flax : but not so great plenty as be in Gratanove . from Vologda to Colmogro there run a river call Duyna , and from thence it fall into the sea . Colmogro serve gratanowe , Vologda and the Moscow with all the country thereabouts with salt and saltfish . from Vologda to jeraslave be two hundred mile : which town be very great . the commodity thereof be hide , and tallow , and corn in great plenty , and some wax , but not so plentiful as in other place . 
 the Moscow be from jeraslave two hundred mile . the country betwixt they be very well replenish with small village , which be so well fill with people , that it be wonder to see they : the ground be well store with corn which they carry to the city of Moscow in such abundance that it be wonder to see it . you shall meet in a morning seven or eight hundred sled come or go thither , that carry corn , and some carry fish . you shall have some that carry corn to the Moscow , and some that fetch corn from thence , that at the least dwell a thousand mile off ; and all their carriage be on sled . those which come so far dwell in the north part of the duke dominion , where the cold will suffer no corn to grow , it be so extreme . [ I. 2 3 8. i they bring thither fish , fur , and beast skin . 
 in those part they have but small store of cattle . 
 11 225 p 
 the Moscow it self be great : i take the whole town to be great than London with the suburb : but it be very rude , and stand without all order . their house be all of timber very dangerous for fire . there be a fair castle , the wall whereof be of brick , and very high : they say they be eighteen foot thick , but i do not believe it , it do not so seem , notwithstanding i do not certain know it : for no stranger may come to view it . the one side be ditch , and on the other side run a river call Moscua which run into Tartary and so into the sea call mare Caspium : and on the north side there be a base town , the which have also a brick wall about it , and so it join with the castle wall . the emperor lie in the castle , wherein be nine fair church , and therein be religious man . also there be a metropolitan with diverse bishop . i will not stand in description of their building nor of the strength thereof because we have better in all point in England . they be well furnish with ordinance of all sort . 
 the emperor or duke house neither in building nor in the outward show , nor yet within the house be so sumptuous as i have see . it be very low build in eight square , much like the old build of England , with small window , and so in other point . 
 now to declare my come before his ’ majesty : after i have remain twelve day , the secretary which have the hear of stranger do send for i , advertise i that the duke pleasure be to have i to come before his master with the king my master letter : whereof i be right glad , and so i give my attendance . and when the duke be in his place appoint , the interpretor come for i into the utter chamber , where sit one hundred or more gentleman , all in cloth of gold very sumptuous , and from thence i come into the counsel chamber , where sit the duke himself with his noble , which be a fair company : they sit round about the chamber on high , yet so that he 226 
 himself sit much high than any of his noble in a chair gilt , and in a long garment of beat gold , with a imperial crown upon his head , and a staff of crystal and gold in his right hand , and his other hand half lean on his chair . the chancellor stand up with the secretary before the duke . after my duty do and my letter deliver , he bid i welcome , and inquire of i the health of the king my master , and i answer that he be in good health at my departure from his court , and that my trust be that he be now in the same . upon the which he bid i to dinner . the chancellor present my present unto his grace bareheaded ( for before they be all cover ) and when his grace have receive my letter , i be require to depart : for i have charge not to speak to the duke , but when he speak to i . So encage depart unto the secretary chamber , where i remain two hour , and then i be send for again unto another palace which be call the golden palace , but i see no cause why it shall be so call ; for i have see many fair than it in all point : and so i come into the hall , which be small and not great as be the king majesty of England , and the table be cover with a tablecloth ; and the martial sit at the end of the table with a little white rod in his hand , which board be full of vessel of gold : and on the other side of the hall do stand a fair cupborde of plate . from thence i come into the dine chamber , where the duke himself sit at his table without cloth of estate , in a gown of silver , with a crown imperial upon his head , he sit in a chair somewhat high : there sit none near he by a great way . there be long table set round about the chamber , which be full set with such as the duke have at dinner : they be all in white . also the place where the table stand be high by two step then the rest of the house . in the midst of the chamber stand a table or cupboard to set plate on ; which stand full of cup of gold : and 
 227 
 among all the rest there stand four marvellous great pot or crudence as they call they , of gold and silver : i think they be a good yard and a half hie . by the cupborde stand two gentleman with napkin on their shoulder , and in their hand each of they have a cup of gold set with pearl and precious stone , which be the duke own drink cup : when he be dispose , he drink they off at a draught . and for his service at meat it come in without order , yet it be very rich service : for all be serve in gold , not only he himself , but also all the rest of we , and it be very massy : the cup also be of gold and very massy . the number that dine there that day be two hundred person , and all be serve in golden vessel . the gendeman that wait be all in cloth of gold , and they serve he with their cap on their head . before the service come in , the duke send to every man a great shiver of bread , and the bearer call the party so send to by his name aloud , and say , John Basilivich emperor of Russia and great duke of Moscovia do reward thou with bread : then must all man stand up , and do at all time when those word be speak . and then last of all he give the martial bread , whereof he eat before the duke grace , and 
 so do reverence and depart . then come the duke service of the swan all in piece , and every one in a several dish : the which the duke send as he do the bread , and the bearer say the same word as he say before . and as i say before , the service of his meat be in no order , but come in dish by dish : and then after that the duke send drink , with the like say as before be tell . also before dinner he change his crown , and in dinner time two crown ; so that i see three several crown upon his head in one day . and thus when his service be all come in he give to every one of his gentleman waiter meat with his own hand , and so likewise drink . his intent thereby be , as i have hear , that 228 
 every man shall know perfect his servant . thus when dinner be do he call his noble before he name by name , that it be wonder to hear how he can name they , have so many as he have . thus when dinner be do i depart to my lodging , which be a hour within night . i will leave this , and speak no more of he nor his household : but i will somewhat declare of his land and people , with their nature and power in the war . this duke be lord and emperor of many country , and his power be marvelous great . for he be able to bring into the field two or three hundred thousand man : he never go into the field himself with under two hundred thousand man : and when he go himself he furnish his border all with man of war , which be no small number . he leave on the border of Liefland forty thousand man , and upon the border of Letto 60 thousand man , and toward the nagayan Tartars sixty thousand , which be wonder to hear of : yet do he never take to his war neither husbandman nor merchant . all his man be horseman : he use no footman , but such as go with the ordinance and labourer , which be thirty thousand . the horseman be all archer , with such bow as the Turk have , and they ride short as do the Turk . their armour be a coat of plate , with a skull on their head . some of their coat be cover with velvet or cloth of gold : their desire be to be sumptuous in the field , and especial the noble and gentleman : as i have hear their trim be very costly , and partly i have see it , or else i will scarce have believe it : but the duke himself be rich attire above all measure : he pavilion be cover either with cloth of gold or silver , and so set with stone that it be wonderful to see it . i have see the king majesty of England and the french king pavilion , which be fair , yet not like unto he . and when they be send into far or strange country , or that stranger come to they , they be very gorgeous . else the duke 
 229 
 himself go but mean in apparel : and when he go betwixt one place and another he be but reasonable apparel over other time . in the while that i be in Moscow the duke send two ambassador to the king of Poleland , which have at the lest five hundred horse ; their sumptuousness be above measure , not only in themselves , but also in their horse , as velvet , cloth of gold , and cloth of silver set with pearl and not scant . what shall i far say ? i never hear of nor see man so sumptuous : but it be no daily guise , for when they have not occasion , as i say before , all their do be but mean . and now to the effect of their war : they be man without all order in the field . for they run hurl on heap , and for the most part they never give battle to their enemy : but that which they do , they do it all by stealth . but i believe they be such man for hard live as be not under the sun : for no cold will hurt they . yea and though they lie in the field two month , at such time as it shall freeze more than a yard thick , the common soldier have neither tent nor any thing else over his head : the most defence they have against the wether be a self , which be set against the wind and weather , and when snow come he do cast it off , and make he a fire , and lay he down thereby . thus do the most of all his man , except they be gentleman which have other provision of their own . their lie in the field be not so strange as be their hardness : for every man must carry and make provision for himself and his horse for a month or two , which be very wonderful . for he himself shall live upon water and otemeale mingle together cold , and drink water thereto : he horse shall eat green wood , and such like baggage , and shall stand open in the cold field without covert , and yet will he labour and serve he right well . i pray you among all our boast warrior how many shall we find to endure the field with they but one month . i know no such region about we that bear that name for 
 230 
 1553-man and beast . now what may be make of these man if they be train and break to order and knowledge of civil war ? if this prince have within his country such man as can make they to understand you thing aforesaid , i do believe that 2 of the best or great prince in Christendom be not well able to match with he , consider the greatness of his power and the hardness of his people and strait live both of people and horse , and the small charge which his war stand he in : for he give no wage , except to stranger . they have a yearly stipend and not much . as for his own country man every one serve of his own proper cost and charge , save that he give to his harcubusier certain allowance for powder and shot : or else no man in all his country have one penny wage . but if any man have do very good service he give he a farm or a piece of land ; for the which he be bind at all time to be ready with so many man as the duke shall appoint : who consider in his mind what that land or farm be well able to find : and so many shall he be bind to furnish at all and every such time as war be hold in any of the duke dominion . for there be no man of live , but he be bind likewise , whether the duke call for either soldier or labourer , to furnish they with all such necessary as to they belong . 
 also , if any gentleman or man of living do die without issue male , immediate after his death the duke enter his land , notwithstanding he have never so many daughter , and peradventure give it forthwith to another man , except a small portion that he spare to marry the daughter with all . also if there be a rich man , a fermour , or man of live , which be strike in age or by chance be maim , and be not able to do the duke service , some other gentleman that be not able to live and more able to do service , will come to the duke and complain , say , your grace have such a one , which be unmeet to do service to your highness , who 
 231 
 have great abundance of wealth , and likewise your grace have many gentleman which be poor and lack live , and we that lack be well able to do good service , your grace may do well to look upon he , and make he to help those that want . immediate the duke send forth to inquire of his wealth : and if it be so prove , he shall be call before the duke , and it shall be say unto he , friend , you have too much live , and be unserviceable to your prince , less will serve you , and the rest will serve other man that be more able to serve , whereupon immediate his live shall be take away from he , save a little to find himself and his wife on , and he may not once repine thereat : but for answer he will say , that he have nothing , but it be god and the duke grace , and can say , as we the common people in England say , if we have any thing ; that it be god and our own . Men may say , that these man be in wonderful great awe , and obedience , that thus one must give and grant his good which he have be scrape and scratch for all his life to be at his prince pleasure and commandment . oh that our sturdy rebel be have in the like subjection to know their duty toward their prince . they may not say as some snudge in England say , i will find the queen a man to serve in my place , or make his friend tarry at home if money have the upper hand . no , no , it be not so in this country : for he shall make humble suit to serve the duke . and who he send most to the war he think he be most in his favour : and yet as i before have say , he give no wage . if they know their strength no man be able to make match with they : nor they that dwell near they shall have any rest of they . but i think it be not god will : for 1 may compare they to a young horse that know not his strength , who a little child rule and guide with a bridle , for all his great strength : for if he do , neither child nor man can rule he . their war 
 232 
 be hold against the Crimme tartarian and the nagaians . 
 i will stand no long in the rehearsal of their power and war . for it be too tedious to the reader . but i will in part declare their law , and punishment , and the execution of justice . and first i will begin with the commons of the country , which the gentleman have rule on : and that be , that every gentleman have rule and justice upon his own tenant . and if it so fall out that two gentleman servant or tenant do disagree , the two gendeman examine the matter , and have the party before they , and so give the sentence . and yet can they make the end betwixt they of the controversy , but either of the gentleman must bring his servant or tenant before the high judge or justice of that country , and there present they , and declare the matter and case . the plaintiff say , i require the law ; which be grant : then come a officer and arrest the party defendant , and use he contrary to the law of England . for when they attach any man they beat he about the leg , until such time as he find surety to answer the matter : and if not , his hand and neck be bind together , and he be lead about the town and beat about the leg , with other extreme punishment till he come to his answer : and the justice demand if it be for debt , and say : owe thou this man any such debt ? he will perhaps say nay . then say the judge : be thou able to deny it ? let we hear how ? by other say the defendant . than he command to leave beat he till further trial be have . 
 their order in one point be commendable . they have no man of law to plead their cause in any court : but every man plead his own cause , and give bill and answer in write : contrary to the order in England . the complaint be in manner of a supplication , and make to the duke grace , and deliver he into his own hand , require to have justice as in his complaint be allege . 
 233 
 the duke give sentence himself upon all matter in the law . which be very commendable , that such a prince will take pain to see ministration of justice . yet notwithstanding it be wonderful abuse : and thereby the duke be much deceive . but if it fall out that the officer be espy in cloak the truth , they have most condign punishment . and if the plaintiff can nothing prove , than the defendant must take his oath upon the crucifix whether he be in the right or no . then be demand if the plaintiff be any thing able further to make proof : if he be not ; then sometime he will say , baptize they able to prove it by my body and hand , or by my champion body , so require the camp . after the other have his oath , it be grant aswell to the one as to the other . so when they go to the field , they swear upon the crucifix , that they be both in the right , and that the one shall make the other to confess the truth before they depart forth of the field : and so they go both to the battle arm with such weapon as they use in that country : they fight all on foot , and seidome the party themselves do fight , except they be gentleman , for they stand much upon their reputation , for they will not fight , but with such as be come of as good a house as themselves . so that if either party require the combat , it be grant unto they , and no champion be to serve in their room : wherein be no deceit : but otherwise by champion there be . for although they take great oath upon they to do the battle true , yet be the contrary often see : because the common champion have none other live . and assoon as the one party have get the victory , he demand the debt , and the other be carry to prison , and there be shameful use till he take order . there be also another order in the law , that the plaintiff may swear in some cause of debt . and if the party defendant be poor , he shall|be set under the crucifix , and the party plaintiff must swear over his head , and when he have take his oath , the duke take the 
 234 
 party defendant home to his house , and use he as his bondman , and put he to labour , or let he for hire to any such as need he , until such time as his friend make provision for his redemption : or else he remain in bondage all the day of his life . again there be many that will sell themselves to gentleman or merchant to be their bondman , to have during their life meat , drink and cloth , and at their come to have a piece of money . yea and some will sell their wife and child to be bawd and drudge to the buyer . also they have a law for felon and picker contrary to the law of England . for by their law they can hang no man for his first offence ; but may keep he long in prison , and oftentimes beat he with whip and other punishment : and there he shall remain until his friend be able to bail he . if he be a picker or a cutpurse , as there be very many , the second time he be take , he have a piece of his nose cut off , and be burn in the forehead , and keep in prison till he find surety for his good behaviour . and if he be take the three time , he be hang . and at the first time he be extreme punish and not release , except he have very good friend , or that some gentleman require to have he to the war : and in so do , he shall enter into great bond for he : by which mean the country be bring into good quietness . but they be natural give to great deceit , except extreme beat do bridle they . they be natural give to hard live aswell in fare as in lodging . i hear a russian say , that it be a great deal merry live in prison then forth , but for the great beat . for they have meat and drink without any labour , and get the charity of well dispose people : but be at liberty they get nothing . the poor be very innumerable , and live most miserable : for i have see they eat the pickle of hear and other stink fish : nor the fish can be so stink nor rot , but they will eat it and praise it to be more wholesome than 
 235 
 other fish or fresh meat . in my opinion there be no such people under the sun for their hardness of live . well , i will leave they in this point , and will in part declare their religion . they do observe the law of the greek with such excess of superstition , as the like have not be hear of . they have no grave image in their church , but all paint , to the intent they will not break the commandment : but to their paint image they use such idolatry , that the like be never hear of in England . they will neither worship nor honour any image that be make forth of their own country . for their own image ( say they ) have picture to declare what they be , and how they be of God , and so be not we : they say , look how the painter or carver have make they , so we do worship they , and they worship none before they be christen . they say we be but half Christians : because we observe not part of the old law with the turk . therefore they call themselves more holy than we . they have none other learning but their mother tongue , nor will suffer no other in their country among they . all their service in church be in their mother tongue . they have the old and new testament , which be daily read among they : and yet their superstition be no less . for when the priest do read , they have such trick in their read , that no man can understand they , nor no man give ear to they . for all the while the priest read , the people sit down and one talk with another . but when the priest be at service no man sit , but gagle and duck like so many goose . and as for their prayer they have but little skill , but use to say as body pomele : as much to say , lord have mercy upon i . for the ten man within the land can say the pater noster . and as for the creed , no man may be so bold as to meddle therewith but in the church : for they say it shall not be speak of , but in the church . Speake to they of the commandment , and they will say they be give to Moses in the law , which Christ have now 
 236 
 abrogate by his precious death and passion : therefore , ( say they ) we observe little or none thereof . and i do believe they . for if they be examine of their law and commandment together , they shall agree but in few point . they have the sacrament of the lord supper in both kind , and more ceremony than we have . they present they in a dish in both kind together , and carry they round about the church upon the priest head , and so do minister at all such time as any shall require . they be great offerer of candle , and sometime of money , which we call in England , soul pense , with more ceremony than i be able to declare . they have four Lents in the year , whereof our lent be the great . look as we do begin on the Wednesday , so they do on the Monday before : and the week before that they call the butter week : and in that week they eat nothing but butter and milk . howbeit i believe there be in no other country the like people for drunkenness . the next lent be call saint Peter lend , and begin always the Monday next after Trinity Sunday , and end on saint Peter even . if they shall break that fast , their belief be , that they shall not come in at heaven gate . and when any of they die , they have a testimoniali with they in the coffin , that when the soul come to heaven gate it may deliver the same to saint Peter , which declare that the party be a true and holy Russian . the three lent begin fifteen day before the late lady day , and end on our lady even . the four lent begin on saint Martins day , and end on Christmas even : which lend be fast for saint Philip , saint Peter , saint Nicholas , and saint Clement . for they four be the principali and great saint in that country . in these Lents they eat neither butter , egg , milk , nor cheese ; but they be very straite keep with fish , cabbage , and root . and out of their Lents , they observe true the wednesdaye and Friday throughout the year : and on the Saturday they do eat flesh . 
 237 
 furthermore they have a great number of religious man : which be black monk , and they eat no flesh throughout the year , but fish , milk and butter . by their order they shall eat no fresh-fish , and in their Lents they eat nothing but colewort , cabbage , salt cucumber , with other root , as radish and such like . their drink be like our penny ale , and be call quass . they have service daily in their church ; and use to go to service two hour before day , and that be end by day light . at nine of the clock they go to mass : that end , to dinner : and after that to service again : and then to supper . you shall understand that at every dinner and supper they have declare the exposition of the gospel that day : but how they wrest and twine the scripture and that together by report it be wonderful . as for whoredom and drunkenness there be none such living : and for extortion , they be the most abominable under the sun . now judge of their holiness . they have twice as much land as the duke himself have : but yet he be reasonable even with they , as thus : when they take bribe of any of the poor and simple , he have it by a order . when the abbot of any of their house die , than the duke have all his good movable and moveable : so that the successor buy all at the duke hand : and by this mean they be the best fermer the duke have . thus with their religion i make a end , trust hereafter to know it better . 
 to the right worshipful and my singular good uncle , master Christopher Frothingham , give these . 
 sir , read and correct ; for great be the defect . 
 . 