certain note unperfect write by Richard Johnson servant to master Richard chancellor , which be in the discovery of Vaigatz and Nova Zembla , with Steven Burrowe in the serchthrift 1556. and after - i$56 ward among the samoede , who devilish rite he describe . 
 Norway . 
 roast Etf Lofoot . Finmarke . 
 Wardhouse . 
 Lappia . 
 the Serie - 
 irst , after we depart out of England we fall with Norway , and on that cost lie northbern or Northbergen , and this people be under the king of Denmark : but they differ in their speech from the Dane , for they speak norsh . and north of Northbern lie the isle of roast 
 and Lofoot , and these island pertain unto Finmarke , and they keep the law and speak the language of the islander . and at the eastermost part of that land be a castle which be call the ward house , and the king of Denmark do fortify it with man of war : and the russes may not go to the westward of that castle . and east southeast from that castle be a land call Lappia : in which ’ land be two manner of people , that be to say , the lappians , and the scrickfinne , which scrickfinne be a 
 wild people which neither know God , nor yet good fames-order : and these people live in tent make of deer skin : and they have no certain habitation , but continue in herd and company by one hundred and two hundred . and they be a people of small stature , and be clothe in deer skin , and drink nothing but water , and eat no bread but flesh all raw . and than the lappians . lappians be a people adjoin to they and be much like to they in all condition : but the emperor of Russia have of late overcome many of they , and they be in subjection to he . and this people will say that they believe in the russes God . and they live in tent as the other doe . and southeast and by south from Lappia 
 345 
 Corelia . lie a province call Corelia , and these people be call Kerilli . and south southeast from Corelia lie a Novogardia . country call Novogardia . and these three nation be the russes , under the emperor of Russia , and the russes keep the law of the greek in their church , and write somewhat like as the greek write , and they speak their own language , and they abhor the latin tongue , neither have they to do with the pope of Rome , and they hold it not good to worship any carve image , yet they will worship paint image on table or board . and in Russia their church , steeple , and house be all of wood : and their ship that they have be sow with withe and have no nail . the kerille , russian and moscovians bee much alike in all condition . and south from the moscovians lie the Tartary . tartarian , which bee Mahumetans , and live in tent and wagon , and keep in herd and company : and they hold it not good to abide long in one place , for they will say , when they will curse any of their child , i will thou may tarry so long in a place that thou may smell thy own dung , as the christian doe : and this be the great curse that they have . 
 Lampasamart and east north-east of Russia lie Lampas , which be orfaire of the a place where the russes , Tartar and samoed meet tatar and tw^se a yeerej and make the fair to barter ware for samoed . ware . and Northeast from Lampas lie the country the samoed of the samoed , which be about the river of Pechere , country . and these samoed be in subjection to the emperor of Russia , - and they lie in tent make of dear skin , and they use much witchcraft , and shoot well in bow . 
 or , Pechora . and Northeast from the river Pechere lie Vaygatz , Taigatz . and there be the wild samoed which will not suffer the russes to land out of the sea , but they will kill they and eat they , as we be tell by the russes : and they live in herd , and have all their carriage with dear , for they have no horse . beyond Vaygatz NovaZembla . lie a land call Nova Zembla , which be a great land , but we see no people , and there we have 346 
 foul enough , and there we see white fox and white bear . and the say samoed which be about the bank of Pechere , which be in subjection to the emperor of Russia , when they will remove from one place to another , than they will make sacrifice in manner follow . every kindred do sacrifice in their own tent , and he that be most ancient be their priest . and first the priest do begin to play upon a thing like to a great sieve , with a skin on the one end like a drum : and the stick that he play with be about a spann e long , and one end be round like a ball , cover with the skin of a heart . also the priest have upon his head a thing of white like a garland , and his face be cover with a piece of a shirt of mail , with many small rib , and tooth of fish , and wild beast hang on the same mail . than he sing as we use here in England to hallow , whope , or shout at hound , and the rest of the company answer he with this Owtis , Igha , Igha , Igha , and then the priest repli again with his voice . and they answer he with the selfsame word so many time , that in the end he become as it be mad , and fall down as he be dead , have nothing on he but a shirt , lie upon his back i may perceive he to breathe . i ask they why he lie so , and they answer i , now do our god tell he what we shall do , and whither we shall go . and when he have lie still a little while , they cry thus three time together , Oghao , Oghao , Oghao , and as they use these three call , he rise with his head and lie down again , and then he rise up and sing with like voice as he do before : and his audience answer he , Igha , Igha , Igha . than he command they to kill five olens or great deer , and continue sing still both he and they as before . than he take a sword of a cubit and a span long , ( i do mete it my self ) and put it into his belly halfway and sometime less , but no wound be to be see , 347 
 A.D. 
 1556. 
 store offoule . white fox . White bear . 
 the manner of the samoed sacrifice , about the river of Pechere . 
 ( they continue in their sweet song still ) than he put the sword into the fire till it be warm , and so thrust it into the slit of his shirt and thrust it through his body , as i think , in at his navel and out at his fundament : the point be out of his shirt behind , i lay my finger upon it , than he pull out the sword and sit down . This be do , they set a kettle of water over the fire to heat , and when the water do seethe , the priest begin to sing again they answer he , for so long as the water be in heat , they sit and sing not . than they make a thing be four square , and in height and squareness of a chair , and cover with a gown very close the forepart thereof , for the hinder part stand to the tent side . their tent be round and be call Chome in their language . the water still seethe on the fire , and this square seat be ready , the priest put off his shirt , and the thing like a garland which be on his head , with those thing which cover his face , and he have on yet all this while a pair of hose of dear skin with you hair on , which come up to his buttock . so he go into the square seat , and sit down like a tailor and sing with a strong voice or hallow . than they take a small line make of dear skin of four fathom long , and with a small knot the priest make it fast about his neck , and under his left arm , and give it unto two man stand on both side of he , which hold the end together . then the kettle of hot water be set before he in the square seat , all this time the square seat be not cover , and then it be cover wl a gown of broad cloth without line , such as the russes do wear . then the 2. man which do hold you end of the line still stand there , begin to draw , and draw till they have draw the end of the line stiff and together , and then i hear a thing fall into the kettle of water which be before he in the tent . thereupon i ask they that sit by i what it be that fall into the 
 348 
 water that stand before he . and they answer i , that it be his head , his shoulder and left arm , which the line have cut off , i mean the knot which i see [ i . 285. i afterward draw hard together . than i rise up and will have look whether it be so or not , but they lay hold on i , and say , that if they shall see he with their bodily eye , they shall live no long . and the most part of they can speak the ruff tongue to be understand : and they take i to be a russian . than they begin to hallow with these word , oghaoo , oghaoo , oghaoo , many time together . and as they be thus sing and out call , i see a thing like a finger of a man two time together thrust through the gown from the priest . 
 i ask they that sit next to i what it be that i see , and they say , not his finger ; for he be yet dead : and that which i see appear through the gown be a beast , but what beast they know not nor will not tell . and i look upon the gown , and there be no hole to be see : and then at the last the priest lift up his head with his shoulder and arm , and all his body , and come forth to the fire . thus far of their service which i see during the space of certain hour : but how they do worship their idol that i see not : for they put up their stuff for to remove from that place where they lie . and i go to he that serve the priest , and ask he what their god say to he when he lie as dead . he answer , that his own people do not know : neither be it for they to know : for they must do as he command . this i see the lift day of Januarie in the year of our lord 1556. after the english account . 
 . 