a letter of master Anthony Jenkinson upon his return from Boghar to the worshipful master Henry lane agent for the Moscovie company resident in Vologda , write in the Moscow the 18. of September , 1559. 
 worshipful sir , after my hearty commendation premise with most desire to God of your welfare and prosperous success in all your affair . it may please you to be advertise that the four of this present i arrive with Richard Johnson and Robert Johnson all in health , thanks be to God . we have be as far as Boghar , and have proceed far on our voyage towards the land of Cathay , have it not be for the uncessant and continual war , which be in all these brutal and wild country , that it be at this present impossible to pass , neither go there any Caravan of people from Boghar that way these three year . and although our journey have be so miserable , dangerous , and chargeable with loss , charge and expense , as my pen be not able to express the same : yet shall we be able to satisfy the worshipful company mind , as touch the discovery of the caspian sea , with the trade of merchandise to be have in such land and country as be thereabouts adjacent , and have bring of the ware and commodity of those country able to answer the principali with profit : wish that there be utterance for as great a quantity of kersy and other ware as there be profit to be have in the sale of a small quantity , ( all such evil fortune be escape as to we have chance this present voyage , ) for than it will be a trade worthy to be follow . sir , for that i trust you will be here short ( which i much desire ) i will defer the discourse with you at large until your come , as well touch my travel , as of other thing . sir , John luck depart from hence towards England the 
 400 
 seven of this present , and intend to pass by the passage to and way of Sweden , by who i send a letter to the worshipful company , and have write that i intend to come down we n' 
 unto Colmogro to be ready there at the next ship to embark my self for England , declare that my service shall not be needful here , for that you be a man able to serve their worship in great affair than they have here to do , so far as i perceive . as touch the company affair here , i refer you to Christopher Hudsons letter , for that i be but new arrive . have here but little business to do , i send you Richard Johnson to help you there in your affair . thus give you most hearty thank for my wench Aura soltana , i commend you to the tuition of God , who send you health with heart desire . 
 your assure to command , Anthony Jenkinson . 
 this be a young tartar girl which he give to the queen afterward . 
 . 