a discourse of the honourable receive into England of the first ambassador from the emperor of Russia , in the year of Christ 1556. and in the three year of the reign of queen marie , serve for the three voyage to Moscovie . register by master John Incent protonotary . 
 t be here record by writing and authentical testimony , partly for memory of thing do , and partly for the verity to be know to posterity in time to come , that whereas the most high and mighty Ivan Vasilivich emperor of all Russia , great duke of volodemer , Mos - 
 covia and Novogrode , emperor of Cassan , and of Astrachan , lord of Pleskie , and great duke of smolensky , Tuerskie , Yowgoriskie , Permskie , Viatskie , Bolgarskie and Sibierskie , emperor and great duke of many other , as novogrode in the nether country , Chernigoskie , Rezanskie , Polodskie , Rezewskie , Bielskie , Rostoskie , Yeraslaveskie , Bealozarskie , Oudarskie , ob-dorskie , condenskie , and many other country , and lord over all those part , in the year of our lord God , follow the account of you latin church , 1556. send by the sea from the port of saint Nicholas in Russia , his right honourable ambassador surname Osep Napea , his high officer in the town and country of Vologda , to the most famous and excellent prince , Philip and marry by the grace of God , king and queen of England , Spain , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , archduke of Austria , duke of Burgundy , Milan , and Brabant , county of haspurge , Flanders and Tyroll , his ambassador and orator with certain letter tender conceive , together with certain present and gift mention in the foot of this memorial , as a manifest argument and token of a mutual amity and friendship 35° 
 first ambassage from Russia a.d. ... J556 . 
 to be make and continue between their majesty and subject respective , for the commodity and benefit of both the realm and people : which orator be the 20. day of July embark and ship in , and upon a good english ship name the Edward Bonaventure , belong to the governor , consul and company of english merchant , Richard chancellor be grand pilot , and John Buckland master of the say ship . in which be lade at the adventure of the foresay ambassador , and merchant at several account , good and merchandize , viz. in wax , trane oil , tallow , fur , felt , yarn and such like , to the sum of 2oooo . li . sterling , together with 16. russy attendant upon the person of the say ambassador . over and above ten tower ship . other russy ship within the say bay of S. Nicholas , in one other good ship to the say company also belong call the bona Speranza , with good of the say orator and merchant to the value of 6000. lib . sterling , as by the invoise and letter of lade of the say several ship ( whereunto relation be to be have ) particular appear . 
 which good ship come in good order into the sea , and traverse the same in their journey towards the coast of England , be by contrary wind and extreme tempest of weather sever the one from the other , that be to say , the say bona Speranza with two other english ship also appertain to the say company , the one surname the fillip and marry , the other the Confidentia , be drive on the coast of Norway , into Drenton water , where the say Confidentia be see to perish on a rock , and the other , videlicet , the bona Speranza , with her whole company , be to the number of four and twenty person seem to winter there , whereof no certainty at this present day be know . the three , videlicet , the fillip and marry arrive in the Thames nigh London the eighteenth day of April , in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred fifty and seven . the Edward Bonaventure traverse the sea four month , the Edward final the ten day of November of the aforesaid year Bonaventure 351 
 1556. arrive in Scotland , in the bay of Pettislego , Novemb. 7. 1556. 
 Richard chancellor drown . 
 of our lord one thousand five hundred , fifty and six , arrive within the scottish coast in a bay name pettislego , where by outrageous tempest , and extreme storm , the say ship be beat from her ground tackle , be drive upon the rock on shore , where she break and split in piece in such sort , as the grand pilot use all carefulness for the safety of the body of the say ambassador and his train , take the boat of the say ship , trust to attain the shore , and so to save and preserve the body , and seven of the company or attendant of the say ambassador , the same boat by rigorous wave of the sea , be by dark night overwhelm and drown , wherein perish not only the body of the say grand pilot , with seven russes , but also diverse of the mariner of the say ship : the noble personage of the say ambassador with a few other ( by God preservation and speciali favour ) only with much difficulty save . in which shipwreck not only the say ship be break , but also the whole mass and body of the good lade in she , be by the rude and ravenous people of the country thereunto adjoin , rifle , spoil and carry away , to the manifest loss and utter destruction of all the lade of the say ship , and together with the ship , apparel , ordinance and furniture belong to the company , in value of one thousand pound , of all which be not restore towards the cost and charge to the sum of five hundred pound sterling . 
 as soon as by letters'address to the say company , and in London deliver the sixth of December last pass , it be to they certain know of the loss of their pilot , man , good and ship , the same merchant with all celerity and expedition , obtain not only the queen majesty most gracious and favourable letter to the lady dowager , and lord of the council of Scotland for the gentle comfortment and entertainment of the say ambassador , his train and company , with preservation and restitution of his good , as in such miserable cases^ to christian pity , princely honour and mere 
 35 2 
 justice appertain , but also address two gentleman of good learning , gravity and estimation , videlicet , master Laurence Hussie doctor of the civil law , and George Gilpin with money and other requisite into the realm of Scotland , to comfort , aid , assist , and relieve he and his there , and also to conduct the ambassador into England , send with they by post a talmach or Speachman for the better furniture of the service of the say ambassador , trust thereby to have the more ample and speedy redress of restitution : which personage use diligence , arrive at Edinburgh ( where the queen court be ) the three and twenty day of the say month of December , who first visit the say ambassador , declare the cause of their come and commission , show the letter address in his favour , the order give they for his solace and furniture of all such thing as he will have , together with their daily and ready service to attend upon his person and affair , repair consequent unto the dowager queen , deliver the letter . 
 whereupon they receive gentle answer , with hope and comfort of speedy restitution of the good , apparel , jewel and letter : for the more appearance whereof , the queen send first certain commissioner with a Harold of arm to Pettislego , the place of the shipwreck , commanding by proclamation and other edict , all such person ( no degree except ) as have any part of such good as be spoil and take out or from the ship to bring they in , and to restore the same with such further order as her grace by advice of her council think expedient : by reason whereof not without great labour , pain and charge ( after long time ) diverse small parcel of wax , and other small trifle thing of no value , be by the poor sort of the Scot bring to the commissioner , but the jewel , rich apparel , present , gold , silver , costly fur , and such like , be convey away , conceal and utter embezzle . whereupon , the queen at the request of the say ambassador , cause in 353 z 
 A.D. 
 1556. 
 he departure from Scotland towards England . 
 > 557 - 
 Eebr . 27. 
 diverse person to the number of 180. or more , to be call personal before her princely presence , to answer to you say spoil , and real to exhibit and bring in all such thing as be spoil and violent take , and carry out of the same , whereof not only good testimony by writing be show , but also the thing themselves find in the hand of the scottish subject , who by subtle and crafty deal , by connivance of the commissioner , so use or rather abuse themselves towards the same orator and his attendant , that no effectual restitution be make : but he fatigate with daily attendance and charge , the 14. day of February next ensue , distrust any real and effectual render of the say good and merchandizes and other the premise , upon leave obtain of the say queen , depart towards England , have attend upon he the say two english gentleman and other ( leave nevertheless in Scotland three Englishman to pursue the delivery of such thing as be collect to have be send by ship to he in England : which be in April next , and not before embark for London , be not at this present day here arrive ) come the 18. day of February to Barwike within the dominion and realm of England , where he be by the queen majesty letter and commandment honourable receive , use and entertain by the right honourable lord Wharton , lord warden of the east march , with goodly conduct from place to place , as the daily journey do ordinary do lie , in such order , manner and form , as to a personage of such estate appertain . he prosecute his voyage until the 27. of February approach to the city of London within twelve english mile , where he be receive with fourscore merchant with chain of gold and goodly apparel , as well in order of man servant in one uniform livery , as also in and upon good horse and gelding , who conduct he to a merchant house four mile from London , receive there a quantity of gold , velvet and silk , with all furniture thereunto requisite , wherewith he make he a ride garment , 
 354 
 repose himself that night . the next day be Saturday and the last day of February , he be by the merchant adventure for Russia , to the number of one hundred and forty person , and so many or more servant in one livery , as abovesaid , conduct towards the city of London , where by the way he have not only the hunt of the fox and such like sport show he , but also by the queen majesty commandment be receive and embrace by the right honourable viscount Montague , send by her grace for his entertainment : he be accompany with diverse lusty knight , esquire , his honourable gentleman and yeoman to the number of three hundred horse lead he to the north part of the city of London , where by four notable merchant rich apparel be present to he a right fair and large gelding rich trap , together with a foot-cloth of orient crimson velvet , enrich with gold lace , all furnish in most glorious fashion , of the present , and gift of the say merchant : where upon the ambassador at instant desire mount , ride on the way towards Smithfield bar , the first limit of the liberty of the city of London . the lord Maior accompany with all the aiderman in their scarlet do receive he , and so ride through the city of London in the middle , between the lord Maior and Viscount Montague , a great number of merchant and notable personage ride before , and a large troop of servant and apprentice follow , be conduct through the city of London ( with great admiration and plausibility of the people run plentiful on all side , and replenish all street in such sort as no man without difficulty may pass ) into his lodging situate in Fant church street , where be provide for he two chamber rich hang and deck , over and above the gallant furniture of the whole house , together with a ample and rich cupboard of plate of all sort , to furnish and serve he at all meal , and other service during his abode in London , which be , as be underwritten , until the three day of May : during which 
 355 
 time daily diverse aiderman and the grave personage of the say company do visit he , provide all kind of victual for his table and his servant , with all sort of officer to attend upon he in good sort and condition , as to such a ambassador of honour do and aught to appertain . 
 it be also to be remember that at his first entrance into his chamber , there be present unto he on the queen majesty behalf for a gift and present , and his better furniture in apparel , one rich piece of cloth of tissue , a piece of cloth of gold , another piece of cloth of gold raise with crimosin velvet , a piece of crimosin velvet in grain , a piece of purple velvet , a piece of damask purple , a piece of crimosin damask , which he most thankful accept . in this beautiful lodging refresh and prepare himself and his train with thing requisite he abide , expect the king majesty repair out of Flanders into England , who highness arrive the one and twenty of march , the same ambassador the five and twenty of March be the annunciation of our lady ( the day twelvemonth he take his leave from the emperor his master ) be most honourable bring to the king and queen majesty court at Westminster , where accompany first with the say viscount and other notable personage , and the merchant , he arrive at Westminster bridge , be there receive with six lord , conduct into a stately chamber , where by the lord , chancellor , treasurer , privy seal , admiral ! , bishop of Elie , and other counselor , he be visit and salute : and consequent be bring unto the king and queen majesty presence , sit under a stately cloth of honour , the chamber most rich deck and furnish , and most honourable present . where , after that he have deliver his letter , make his oration , give two timber of sable , and the report of the same make both in english and spanish , in most love manner embrace , be with much honour and high entertainment , in sight of a great confluence of people , lord and 356 
 lady eftsoon remit by water to his former lodging , to the which , within two day after by the assignment of the king and queen majesty , repair and confer with he secret two grave counseller , that be , the lord bishop of Elie , and sir William Peter knight , chief secretary to their highness , who after diverse secret talk and conference , report to their highness their proceed , the gravity , wisdom , and stately behaviour of the say ambassador , in such sort as be much to their majesty contentation . 
 final conclude upon such treaty and article of amity , as the letter of the king and queen majesty most gracious under the great seal of England to he by the say counseller deliver , do appear . 
 A.D. 
 < 557 ' 
 a league and article of amity conclude and confirm under the 
 the three and twenty of April , be the feast of saint great seal of George , wherein be celebrate the solemnity of the England . noble order of the garter at Westminster , the same lord ambassador be eftsoon require to have audience : and therefore conduct from the say lodging to the court by the right noble the lord Talbot and Lumley to their majesty presence : where , after his oration make , and thank both give and receive , he most honourable take his leave with commendation to the emperor . which be do , he be with special honour lead into the chapel , where before the king and queen majesty , in the sight of the whole order of the garter , be prepare for he a stately seat , wherein he accompany with the duke of Norfolk , the lord last above mention , and many other honourable personage , be present at the whole service , in ceremony which be to he most acceptable : the divine service end , he eftsoon be remit and reduce to his barge , and so repair to his lodging , in like order and gratulation of the people universal , as before . 
 the time of the year haste the profection and four goodly departure of the ambassador , the merchant have prepare four goodly and well trim ship lade for with all kind of merchandise apt for Russia , the same Russia , 15 5 q . 
 357 
 ambassador make provision for such thing as he please , the same ship in good order vale down the river of Thames , from London to Gravesend , where the same ambassador with his train and furniture be embark to ward his voyage homeward , which God prosper in all felicity . 
 it be also to be remember , that during the whole abode of the say ambassador in England , the agent of the say merchant do not only prosecute and pursue the matter of restitution in Scotland , and cause such thing to be lade in a english ship hire purposely to convey the ambassador good to London , there to be deliver to he , but also during his abode in London , do both invite he to the mayor , and diverse worshipful man house , feast and banquet he right friendly , show unto he the most notable and commendable sight of London , as the king palace and house , the church of Westminster and Paul , the tower and guild hall of London , and such like memorable spectacle . and also the say 29. day of April , the say merchant assemble themselves together in the house of the draper hall of London , exhibit and give unto you say ambassador , a notable supper garnish with music , interlude and banquet : in the which a cup of wine be drink to he in the name and lieu of the whole company , it be signify to he that the whole company with most liberal and friendly heart , do frank give to he and his all manner of cost and charge in victual ride from Scotland to London during his abode there , and until set of sail aboard the ship , request he to accept the same in good part as a testimony and witness of their good heart , zeal and tenderness towards he and his country . 
 it be to be consider that of the bona Speranza no word nor knowledge be have at this present day , nor yet of the arrival of the ship or good from Scotland . 
 the three of May the ambassador depart from London to Gravesend , accompany with diverse aiderman 358 
 1557-and merchant , who in good guard set he aboard the noble ship , the primrose admiral to the fleet , where leave be take on both side and part , after many embracement and diverse farewell not without express of tear . 
 Memorandum , that the first day of may the counseller , the king and videlicet , the bishop of Elye , and sir William Peter on queen second the behalf of the king and queen majesty repair r^nurof to the lord ambassador do not only deliver unto he Russia . their highness letter of recommendation under the great seal of England to the emperor , very tender and friendly write , but also on their majesty behalf give and deliver certain notable present to the emperor person , and also gift for the lord ambassador proper use and behoof , as by the particular under write appear , with such further good word and commendation , as the more friendly have not be hear , whereby it appear how well affect their honour be to have and continue amity and traffic between their honour and their subject : which thing as the king and queen majesty have show of their princely munificence and liberality , so have likewise the merchant and fellowship of the adventurer , for and to Russia , manifest to the world their good will , mind and zeal bear to this new commence voyage , as by the discourse above mention , and other the notable act over long to be recite in this present memoriali , do and may most clear appear , the like whereof be not in any precedent or history to be show . 
 forasmuch as it may be doubt how the ship name the Edward Bonaventure suffer shipwreck , what become of the good , how much they be spoil and detain , how little restore , what charge and expense ensue , what personage be drown , how the rest of the ship either arrive or perish , or how the disposition of almighty God have wrought his pleasure in they , how the same ambassador have be after the miserable 
 359 
 case of shipwreck in Scotland unreverent abuse , and consequent into England receive and conduct , there entertain , use , honour , and final in good safety towards his return , and repair furnish , and with much liberality and frank handle friendly dismiss , to the intent that the truth of the premise may be to the most mighty emperor of Russia sincere signify in eschewment of all event and misfortune that may chance in this voyage ( which God defend ) to the ambassador person , train , and good , this present memoriali be write , and autentike make , and by the say ambassador his servant , who name be underwrite , and train in presence of the notary , and witness undername , recognize , and acknowledge . give the day , month , and year underwritten , of which instrument into every of the say ship one testimoniali be deliver , and the first remain with the say company in London . 
 gift send to the king and queen majesty of England by the emperor of Russia , by the report of the ambassador , and spoil by the Scot after the shipwreck . 
 i First , six timber of Sables rich in colour and hair . 
 2 item , twenty entire sable exceed beautiful with tooth , ear and claw . 
 3 item , four live sable with chain and collar . 
 4 item , thirty lusarne large and beautiful . 
 5 item , six large and great skin very rich and rare , wear only by the emperor for worthiness . 
 6 item , a large and fair white jerfawcon for the wild swan , crane , goose , and other great fowl , together with a drum of silver , the hoop gild , use for a lure to call the say hawk . 
 360 
 gift send to the emperor of Russia by the king and queen majesty of England . 
 i First , two rich piece of cloth of tissue . 
 2 item , one fine piece of scarlet . 
 3 item , one fine violet in grain . 
 4 item , one fine azure cloth . 
 5 item , a notable pair of brigandine with a murrian cover with crimson velvet and gild nail . 
 6 item , a male and female lion . 
 gift give to the ambassador at his departure , over and above such as be deliver unto he at his first arrival . 
 i First , a chain of gold of one hundred pound . 
 2 item , a large basin and Ewer , silver and gilt . 
 3 item , a pair of pottle pot gild . 
 4 item , a pair of flagon gild . 
 the name of all such russy as be attendant upon the ambassador , at and before his departure out of England . 
 ' Isaak Fwesscheneke . 
 Demetre . 
 gorbolones . 
 symonde . 
 1 Yeroffia . 
 Stephen . 
 lowca . 
 Andria . Foma . 
 Memorandum , the day and year of our lord above mention , in the house of the worshipful John dim-mocke citizen and draper of London , situate within the famous city of London in the realm of England , 361 
 the above name honourable Osep Gregorywich Napea ambassador and orator above mention , personal constitute and present , have declare unto he by the mouth of the right worshipful master Anthony Hussie esquire , the effect of the cause and content , of , and in this book , at the interpretation of Robert best his interpreter swear , recognize , and knowledge in presence of i the notary and personage underwritten , the content of this book to be true , aswell for his own person as for his servant above name , who do not subscribe their name as be above mention , but only recognize the same . in witness whereof , i John Incent notary public , at the request of the say master Anthony Hussie , and other of the merchant have to these present underwritten set my accustom sign , with the subscription of my name , the day and year above write , be present the right worshipful , 
 ' Andrew judde . 0 ) 
 George bairn . > knight a 
 William Chester . i > alder man of London . 
 Ralph greeneaway . --------- i 
 > John Mersh esquire . 
 John Dimmock . 
 blaze Sanders . 
 Hubert Hussie , and 
 Robert best above mention . 
 . 