a letter of the company of the merchant adventurer to Russia unto George Killingworth , Richard grey , and Henry Lane their agent there , to be deliver in Colmogro or else where : send in the John Evangelist . 
 ft our hearty commendation unto you 1557. and to either of you : your general letter and other particular letter with two book of the sale and remainder of our good , and the buy of ware there with you , we receive about the end of November out of the Edward , with 
 heavy news of the loss of the say good ship and good at Petslego in Scotland , with the death of Richard chancellor and his boy , with certain of the ambassador servant , and he himself with nine of his servant escape very hardly only by the power of God : but all his good and we in manner be lose and pilfer away by the Scot , and that that be save be not yet come to our hand , but we look for it daily , and it will scant pay the charge for the recover of it . no remedy but patience : and to pray to God to send we better fortune hereafter . as touch the receive and entertain of the ambassador and his retinewe since his come to England at the king and queen majesty hand , with the counsel and lord of this realm , and the merchant that be free in Russia with feast and benevolence give he , we refer it to his report and other . the like we think have not be see nor show here of a long time to any ambassador . the fillip and Marie arrive here ten day past : she winter in Norway . the confidence be lose there . and as for the bona Esperanza , as yet we have no news of she . we fear it be wrong with she . by your bill of lade receive in your general letter we perceive what ware be lade in they both . your 
 379 
 letter have no date nor mention where they be make , which be write by Henry lane , and firm by you George Killingworth , and Richard grey : both it and the other letter and book come so sore spoil and break with water that we can make our reckon by they . you shall understand we have freight for the part of Russia four good ship to be lade there by you and your order : that be to say , the primerose of the burden of 240. ton , master under God John Buckland : the John Evangelist of 170. ton , master under God Laurence roundal : the anne of London of the burden of 160. ton , master under God David Philly , and the Trinity of London of the burden of 140. ton , master under God John Robins , as by their charter party may appear : which you may require to see for diverse cause . you shall receive , God will , out of the say good ship , God send they in safety for the use of the company , these kind of ware follow , all mark with the general mark of the company as ware send follow . 25. fardel contain 207. sort clothes , 
 into Russia one fine violet in grain , and one scarlet , and 40. cotton 
 out of England . for wrapper ) begin with number 1. and end with 
 number 52. the sort clothes may cost the first penny 5-li . 9 S. the cloth , one with the other . the fine violet 18 . 1i . 6 . s . 6.d . the scarlet 17. il 13. S. 6.d . the cotton at 9 il lo . s . the pack , account 7. cotton for a pack . moor 500 piece of Hampshire kersy , that be 400. watchet , 43. blow , 53. red , 15. green , 5. ginger colour , and 2. yelowe which cost the first penny 4. il 6 . s . the piece , and 3. pack contain 21 cotton at 9 il lo . s . the pack : and part of the clothes be measure the arshine by arshine . moor 9 barrel of pewter of Thomas be a Russie hasel make , etc also the ware be pack and 
 measure . lade as be aforesaid , as by a Invoyce in every ship more plain may appear . so that when it shall please God to send the say good ship to you in safety , you be to receive our say good , and to procure the sale 380 
 to our most advantage either for ready money , time or barter : have consideration that you do make good debt , and give such time , if you give any , as you may employ and return the same against the next voyage ; and also foresee that you barter to a profit , and for such ware as be here most vendible , as wax , tallow , train oil , hemp and flax . of fur we desire no great plenty , because they be dead ware . and as for Felts , we will in no wise you send any . and whereas you have provide tar , and as we suppose , some hemp ready buy , our advice be , that in no wise you send any of they hither unwrought , because our fraught be 4. H. a ton or little less : which be so dear , as it will not bear the charge : and therefore we have send you 7. ropemaker , as by the copy of their i . ropemakers covenant here enclose shall appear . who we will you set to work with all expedition in make of ’ cable and rope of all sort , from the small rope to 
 twelve . inch : and that such tar and hemp as be already bring to the water side , they may there make it out , and after that you settle their work in Vologhda or Colmogro as you shall think good , where their stuflfe may be near to they : at which place and place you do assign they a principali overseer aswell to see the delivery of the stuflfe unwrought , as also to take charge of the stuflfe wrought , and to foresee that neither the yarn be burn in tarring , nor the hemp rot in the water ; and also to furnish they so with labourer , workman and stuflfe , as hereafter when these workman shall come away , we be not destitute of good workman , and that these may dispatch as much as possible they may , do it substantial : for we esteem it a principal commodity , and that the counsel Cables and of England do well allow . let all diligence be a 1 ™ - use , that at the return of these ship we may see clp^commq ' sample of all rope and cable if it be possible , and so after to continue in work , that we may have good store against the next year . therefore they have need to 
 381 
 dansk the old chief place for cable . 
 commodity not bear 
 have a place to work in , in the winter : and at any hand let they have help enough to spin their stuff : for see you have great plenty of hemp there , and at a reasonable price , we trust we shall|be able to bring as good stuff from thence , and better cheap than out of dansk : if it be diligent use , and have a good overseer . 
 let the chief lade of these four ship be principal in wax , flax , tallow and train oil . and if there be any more ware than these ship be able to take in , then leave that which be least in value and gross in stouage until the next ship : for we do purpose to ground our self chief upon these commodity , as wax , cable and rope , train oil , flax and some linen yarn . as for mast , tar , hemp , feather , or any such other like , they will not bear 
 oflmgfraigkt charge to have any , consider our dear fraught . 
 we have send you a Skinner to be there at our charge for meat , drink and lodging , to view and see such fur as you shall cheap or buy , not mind nevertheless , that you shall charge your self with many , fum most except those which be most vendible , as good martern , 
 vendible . minivers , otherwise call lettuce and mynke . of 
 these you may send we plenty , find they good and at a reasonable price . as for sable and other rich fur , they be not every man money : therefore you may send the few , use partly the discretion of the skinner in that behalf . 
 steel . we hear that there be great plenty of steel in 
 Russia and Tartary , whereof we will you send we part for a example , and to write your mind in it what store be to be have : for we hear say there be great plenty , and that the Tartar steel be better than that in Russia . and likewise we be inform that there copper . be great plenty of copper in the emperor dominion : we will be certify of it what plenty there be , and whether it be in plate or in round flat cake , and send we some for a example . also we will have you to 382 
 woollen cloth of rye and revel , of Poland and Lettowe . 
 russianlether . 
 letter to the agent 
 certify we what kind of woollen cloth the man of rye and revel , and the pole and lettoe do bring to Russia , and send the skantling of they with part of the list , and a full advice of the length and breadth , colour and price , and whether they be strain or not : and what number of they may be utter in a year , to the intent we may make provision for they for the like sort , and all other flemish ware which they bring thither and be most vendible there . and to certify we whether our set clothes be vendible there or not : and whether they be row and shear : because ofttimes they go undress . Moreover , we will you send we of every commodity in that country part , but no great quantity other then such as be before declare . and likewise every kind of leather , whereof we be inform there be great store buy yearly by the esterling and duchess for high Almaigne and Germany . 
 more , that you do send we for proof a quantity of such earth , herb , or what thing soever it be , that the russes do die and colour any kind of cloth linen or woollen , leather or any other thing withal : and also part of that which the Tartar and Turk do bring thither , and how it must be use in die and colour . Moreover , that you have a speciali foresight in the choose of your tallow , and that it may be well purify and try , or else it will in one year putrify and consume . 
 also that you certify we the truth of the weight and measure , and how they do answer with we , and to send we 3. roble in money , that we may try the just value of they . 
 also we do send you in these ship ten young ten young man man that be bind prentice to the company , who tent into rus-we will you to appoint every of they as you shall there sia-finde most apt and meet , some to keep account , some to buy and sell by your order and commission , and some to send abroad into the notable city of the country for understanding and knowledge . and we 
 3^3 
 thing good to die withal . 
 will you send we advertisement from time to time as well of the demeanour of our prentice which we do send now , as also of such other as be already there with you . and if you find any of they remiss , negligent , or otherwise misuse themselves and will not be rule , that than you do send he home , and the cause why . 
 and because we do perceive the country to be large , and that you have three household , we do appoint Henry lane to be one of our agent , and to join with you in all your do , and to have like authority and power as you George Killingworth and Richard Gray have : not doubt but you three will so confer together , as both our prentice and other may be appoint and divide every of they to his office , and to that he can best skill of : and you also so divide your self every of you to a house , as by advertisement one from another , our business and traffic may take good success . and for diverse consideration , to avoid many trouble and business that may happen , we have appoint that he which shall abide at Colmogro ( which we do think to be most meet Henry lane ) shall have with he there such of our young man , as can best skill in keep of account after the manner of merchant , that be , by debtor and creditor : and that there shall be the place , where our book shall|be keep : because it be near the sea side , where our good shall|be discharge and our ship lade . and the say Henry lane to be charge with all such good as we shall discharge there out of our ship , accord to our invoyce . which good be to be send from Colmogro to Vologhda or to Moscow , or to any other place where you three or two of you do appoint they to be sell , so that Henry lane be one . and so from time to time immediate as any thing be sell , do you certify . the same to Henry lane , that he may enter it into the book as appertain : otherwise he shall be too far behind in his book 
 384 
 * 557-at the come of our ship , when he shall send we the account of the whole year pass . and we will also that you George Killingworth and Richard grey doe in the fine of April next send either of you unto Henry lane a whole , perfect , and just account firm with your own hand of all the good you have sell and buy until that time , and what remain unsold : and also the account of all manner cost of ware , and charge of you and the young man under you particular in such sort as the say account may be with he in colmogro at the fine of may at the further : to the intent that he may make all our account perfect against the come of our ship : and in any wise to keep account of every voyage by it self , and not mingle one voyage with another at no hand . and as we will have you to keep account of every voyage by it self , even so we will have all the whole cost and charge of every year put into the voyage of that year . as the charge of all the last year must be put to the account of the three voyage : and the charge of this year present , must 
 in the fine of April next , be put to the four voyage . the four not doubt but your wisdom be such , that you will not take it in evil part , that we do appoint Henry lane to take the account of the rest . for we do it for none other cause , but to keep a good order in our book , that his book and we may by this mean agree : and he be the young man , may best take pain : and that you do keep account of every kind of ware by it self , to the intent we may perceive wherein be our most gain . and also in the make of your return , in any wise name in your bill of lade , letter , and account , what ware do appertain to the first , second , and three voyage : and that we may know the same by the number or otherwise as you shall think good by your wisdom , put the charge of the say ware unto they , as nigh as you can . and all such money as shall be 
 n 385 2 b 
 the old traffic of Russia to rye , revel and Poland turn to sainttl icholas . 
 make of your good in any place , we refer that to your discretion , where it shall remain until it be employ , either at Vologhda , Moscow , or else where . and likewise we will that Henry lane do make in a readiness about the begin of June every year our whole account of the voyage in that year pass : in such sort that we may receive the same by our ship : and that we may plain perceive what sale be make , and what remain of the first , second , three , and four voyage , and what charge have be lay out for the say voyage , and what ware be buy , and lade , and what they cost , and for what voyage every parcel thereof be : and to send we a copy of the same account in every ship . and also forasmuch as at this time we have send you but small store of ware in comparison of that we have hope will be utter in short space , and yet nevertheless much more than you write for , whereby there shall not be sufficient to make any ample return : and understand that there be great quantity of good stay for our trade there by the emperor , we have move the ambassador that you may have credit for such quantity as shall seem good to you to provide for our benefit . which credit if you may by his mean obtain , or otherwise have , we will you buy as much wax principal as you may get . for if there be in that country so great quantity , as we be inform there be , it will be the best commodity we may have : for have that whole in our hand , we may serve our own country and other . therefore see the emperor do mind , that such commodity as be in his dominion shall not pass to rye and revel and Poland as they have do , but be reserve for we : therefore we must so lay for it , that it may not lie upon their hand that have it to sell , always have consideration in the price and time as our next dispatch may correspond . whereof you may send a certain advice , as well what you shall receive of credit , and to what quantity , 386 
 the article of their first commission elven quoth . 
 letter to the agent 
 as also what ware be remain in your hand : which together well consider , you may advertise we as well for how many hundred ton we must provide fraught against the next year , as also what sort , quantity and quality of ware we shall send you , as well to pay your credit , as also to furnish the next adventure after . of this we will be answer large . for we trust by this time you be able to give full instruction of the state of the country : accord to the article of your first commission , and what commodity do principal abound there with their price : and likewise what of our commodity have most utterance there , and what price will be give for they there : and all other thing requisite and necessary to be know . 
 also we do understand that in the country of Permia or about the river of Pechora be great quantity of yew , and likewise in the country of Ugory , which we be desirous to have knowledge of , because it be a speciali commodity for our realm . therefore we have send you a young man , who name be Leonard Leonard Brian , that have some knowledge in the wood , to show ™ nt t0 you in what sort it must be cut and cleave . so our yew - in tfie mind be if there be any store , and that it be find north part off to be good , that there you do provide a good quantity Russia . against the next year for the come of our ship : and if there can be find none that will serve for our purpose , than you may set the say Leonard Brian to any other business that you shall find most fit for he , until the return of our ship the next year . for he be hire by the year only for that purpose . 
 we doubt not but that he shall do you good service there . for he have good knowledge of ware of that country : for he bring up have be most in dansk , and have good understanding in make of rope and cable . also we do send you two Cooper 2. Cooper to remain there with you at our find for meat send ™ t0 and drink and lodging to make in a readiness all russta-such cask as shall needful for train oil , tallow , 
 387 
 or any thing else . one of they may go with Leonard Brian to cut and cleve such yew as he shall like there . and because we be not sure what timber they shall find there to make cask , we have lade in these ship 140. ton empty cask , that be 94. ton shake cask and 46. ton whole , and ten thousand hoop , and 480. wreathe of twig : they may be do with that till they can provide other timber , which we will be glad to hear of . they have a example with they of the bigness of the cask they shall make . nevertheless , all such butt and hogshead as may be find to serve we will shall|be fill with train oil . 
 also we charge you that you suffer no good nor marchandy of any person be not free of the company , and of the account of the company to be lade in any wise in our ship either now or at any time hereafter : except the emperor or ambassador mind to send any thing to the king and queen majesty , or to any noble man , or to the merchant of the company : nor likewise that you suffer any good that go in these ship to be bring on land there , except the ambassador good , and the physician and apothecary , and other that he have with he , who carry no merchandise . and because our ship be freight by the great , it shall|be very needful that you do appoint certain to see the rummage of the ship , and to give the master or boatswain , or he that will take upon he to rummage , a good reward for his labour to see the good well rummage . if it be three . d . or four . d . the ton , it shall not be amiss . for if it be not substantial well look unto , it may be a great deal of money out of our way . 
 also because we reckon that from the Moscow will be always better conveyance of letter to we by land : our mind be that from time to time as occasion shall serve , our agent shall write to he that shall lie at Moscow of all thing that shall pass , that he may give 388 
 we large instruction , aswell what be sell and buy , as also what lade we shall take , and what quantity and kind of good we shall send . for hitherto we have have but a slender advice , more like a bill to serve a chapman , then for quantity of ware to serve a kingdom . for we must procure to utter good quantity of ware , especial the commodity of our realm , although we afford a good pennyworth , to the intent to make other that have trade thither , weary , and so to bring our self and our commodity in estimation , and likewise to procure to have the chief commodity of that country in our hand , as wax and such other , that other nation may be serve by we and at our hand . for we do understand that the great quantity of wax that come to dansk , Lubeck , and Hambourgh , come out of Russia . therefore if we shall buy part , and they also buy , it will raise the price there , and will be little worth here . 
 and all such letter of importance and secrecy as you themarchant do send by land for any ware or otherwise , you must letter over write they in cipher , after the order of a book send write you in the ship : always take good heed in place of your letter and cipher , that we may understand they by the same book here , and to send they in such sort , that we may have they here by Christmas or Candlemas , if it be possible . and because you can so certain advertise we by letter of your do , but some doubt may arise , whereof we will most glad be certify : our mind be therefore that with these ship you send we home one such young man as be most expert in knowledge of that country , and can best certify we in such question as may be demand , who we will remit unto you again in the next ship . 
 we think Arthur Edwards will fit for that purpose : nevertheless use your discretion in that matter . 
 as touch our good that be rob and pilfer out of our ship at colmogro and Vologda we trust by this time they be restore again , and the malefactor 389 
 the voyage of Steven burrow for the discovery of the river of Ob. 
 m. Anthony Jenkinson his first travail intend for Cathay by the caspian sea and boghar . 
 good cask make in Russia . 
 so punish that other may take example for do the like , otherwise it will be a evil precedent . Moreover , we do perceive that Richard Gray do buy mast to send into England , they will not quit the cost , except we have a ship of purpose for they . and likewise that Steven Burrow be return from his discovery with the serchthrift , and winter at Colmogro , and be mind to set forth in the begin of June next to seek the river of Ob. we pray God to speed he well , and trust to have he here in England this year to bring we good news . 
 we do perceive there be a river find about the mouth of saint Nicholas bay that have thirteen foot upon the bar at a low water , and be as near colmogro as S. Nicholas : which will be a great pleasure unto we . we will that Steven Burrowe do proceed on his voyage to discover . also we have send you one Anthony Jenkinson gentleman , a man well travel , who we mind to use in further travel , accord to a commission deliver he , subscribe by master Anthony Huse and other . wherefore we will you deliver he one or more of such painful young man as he shall think meet for his purpose : and likewise such money and ware as he shall think best to take with he . he must have forty pound a year for four year , to be pay he by the half year , or as he will demand it of you , so let he have it from easter last . also the price of ware here at this present be , bale flax twenty pound the pack and better , tow flax twenty eight pound the hundred , train oil at nine pound the ton , wax at four pound the hundred , tallow at sixteen shilling the hundred , cable and rope very dear : as yet there be no ship come out of dansk . 
 keep until the ten day of this present . as this day come the good out of Scotland that be recover out of the Edward Bonaventure : and now we do perceive that the cask that the train oil come in , be very good , and much better than we . therefore our 390 
 mind be , that you shall lade it all in such barrel of the big sort as you jade in the Edward , and no long barrel nor small . and that cask that we have send may serve for the tallow or any other ware that be not leakage . nevertheless , this voyage you must take such as you can get . 
 also if the emperor be mind to deliver you any sum of money , or good wax at as reasonable a price as you may buy for ready money , we will that you shall take it and lade it for our account , and to come at our adventure , and he to be pay at the return of the ship in velvet , satin , or any other kind of silk , or cloth of gold , cloth of tissue , or accord as his commission shall be that he shall send we in the ship , and accord to such pattern as he shall send . we do not find the ambassador now at the last so conformable to reason as we have think we shall . he be very mistrustful , and think every man will beguile he . therefore you have need to take heed how you have to do with he or with any such , and to make your bargain plain , and to set they down in writing . for they be subtle people , and do not always speak the truth , and think other man to be like themselves . therefore we will have none of they to send any good in our ship at any time , nor none to come for passenger , unless the emperor do make a bargain with you , as be aforesaid , for his own person . 
 also we charge you not to suffer any of our nation to send any ware to their wife or friend in any of our ship ; but to take their money there to be pay here by the company and not otherwise : and to have consideration how you do take the roble . for although we do rate it after sixteen shilling eight penny of our money , yet it be not worth past 12. or 13. shilling sterling . Moreover , you have need to send new account , for they that come in the 
 391 
 Edward be mar and tear , so that we can make no reckon by they : and likewise to write we a perfect note of all the good which you receive the last voyage out of the Edward , and herein not to fail . 
 ' Andrew judde . 
 George bairn . Anthony Huse . William Garrard . William Chester . 
 < 557 - 
 John Sedgewick at Novogrode . 
 . 