a letter of the Moscovie company to their agent in Russia , master Henry lane , Christopher Hudson , and Thomas Glover send in their seven voyage to saint Nicholas with three ship , the swallow , the fillip and marry , and the Jesus the five of May , 1560. 
 after our hearty commendation to you . the twelve day of the last month here arrive in safety , thank be to God , our two ship , and by they we receive your letter and invoice very well perceive what you have lade in they . the tallow come evil Trifax condition and break , by reason it come in Corrobias , we lose and spoil more than the cask will cost , and much of this tallow be very evil , black , soft and putrify . touch the wax , as yet we know not wax . how the weight will rise , by reason that some of it be lose in the bark . the weight of the last year wax do not rise so well as the other year before it do . there have need good heed to be take in the 
 n 401 2 c 
 weigh . also much of this wax have a great foot and be not so fair wax as in time past we have have . you must cause the foot to be take off before you do weigh it , or else you must seek to have a good allowance train oil . for it . the train oil which you jade this year come well condition , and the cask be good and of a good size . but if they be make a little big it be the better , for they be not hogshead . you have write to we to send you cask which be not here to be have , neither do we think it so best if it be here , consider it must go either shake and bind up , or else empty , which will be pesterable , and likewise will shrink and dry , and not be fit to lade oil in . therefore our mind be , you shall cause so much cask to be make there of the size of hogshead as will serve both for your oil and tallow , and let they be well trim with pitch on the head and seam , and stand full of water three or four day before you put oil in they . your Cowper may be overseer to they that make they , that they be well hoop and clear timber without knot , the worst cask you may put the tallow in . he that see the fill of the oil have need to look well to it , for there be much water in this that come now . we perceive you have buy and have in a readiness one hundred and fourty ton of oil , and that if need be you may have more store . wherefore we do mind to send you ship for three hundred ton and upward , because we will have this next summer as great a return as you can of the commodity of that country , as also such of our ware as you have that be not vendible , or will not be sell or barter , because we will have a full knowledge sable . and state of our account . the sable which you send this year be very base , among they all we can not make one principali timber : we have always write unto you to send they that be good or else none . wolverines . the wolvering be indifferent , and some of the lusem . wolf , the rest very base , the luserne but mean , 
 402 
 1560. the lettes not so large skin as we have have : the let . best be , they be of a new death . as for the ermine , ermine . they cost more there with you , than we can sell they for here . therefore buy no more of they , nor of squirrel , for we lose the one half in the other . the squirrel . ware that we will have you provide against the come of the ship be , wax , tallow , trey ne oil , flax , cable and rope , and fur , such as flax . we have write to you for in our last letter by the cable and . ship : and from henceforth not to make any great provision of any rich fur except principali Sables and 
 lettes : for now there be a proclamation make that no a proclama-fiirres shall be wear here , but such as the like be cion against grow here within this our realm . also we perceive foreign that there may be a great deal of tallow more provide in a year than you send . therefore our mind be , you shall enlarge somewhat more in the price , and to send we if you can three thousand podes a year : for we 3000. podes doe most good in it . and likewise the russes , if °f tallow a you will give they a reasonable price for their ware , t ” 6 ' will be the willing to buy and sell with you , and not to carry so much to novogrode as they do , but will rather bring it to Vologda to you , both wax , tallow , flax , hemp , and all kind of other ware fit for our country . our mind be you shall provide for the next ship five hundred Losh hide , of 5°°-them that be large and fair , and thick in hand , and to be circumspect in the choose , that you buy they that be kill in season and well dry and whole . if they be good we may sell they here for sixteen shilling and better the piece , we will have the whole skin , that be , the neck and leg withal , for these that you send now lack their neck and leg . nevertheless note , for this time you must send they as you may get they : if you can find the mean that the hair may be clip off they , they will not take so much room in the ship as they do . we perceive by your letter that the price of wax do rise there with you , by reason 
 403 
 [ i - 3°7-j hope of trade to be find by master Antony Jenkinson . 
 seal skin taw . 
 small cable best vendible . 
 that the pole and lifelander do trade into Russia by licence : which , if there shall be peace between they , will be a occasion that all other commodity in Russia will rise to a big price , and not be sufficient to serve they and we too , and likewise will bring down there the price of our commodity . therefore we think it good you shall make a supplication to the emperor in the name of the company to return the trade from rye and revel to we , especial for such ware as we do buy : promise that we will be bind to take they at a reasonable price , as we have buy they in time past : and likewise that we will bring to they such ware of we , as be think fit for the country , and to sell they at such reasonable price as we have do . if this shall not come to pass , we may be out of hope of do any good by the trade there : but that we have a further hope of some good trade to be find out by master Antony Jenkinson : by reason we do perceive by your letter , that raw silk be as plentiful in Persia , as flax be in Russia : beside other commodity that may come from thence . we understand by your letter that you be at a point with the ruff for the wax , tallow , and train oil that he ship the last year for 311 roble 20 altines , which be well : although much be not get by it , but because they shall not understand our reckon we much marvel what you mean to buy seal skin and tanne they . all that you have send in time past lie here unsold , and will yield no money . if you send 100 of they taw with the hair on , they will be sell , or else not . in our ship we will send you such thing as you write to have for the roper : and we will they shall make more store of small cable and rope , as cable of 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. inch . for these great cable be not for every man ; and the great cable be not best jade : and likewise small rope for shroud , shoal , and other small tackle : and that you look better to the spin of their yarn 
 4°4 
 that it be even and well tar . the sable that you do mind to send we let they be principali and fair , and not past four or five timbar . for they will not be so common wear here as they have be with noble man : and likewise of lusern send few and principal good . we mind to send you in our ship 100 ton of salt . and because we perceive that ballast be hardly to be have at our lade place there with you , we will you shall have in a readiness 100 ton of the white stone whereof you send we home a example two year past . and likewise to have in a readiness mast of all mast of all sort for our ship : for we know not sort i0 J* what need we shall have of they . the bringer hereof p p ' be Thomas Alcock , he can not be suffer the last year to pass through Poland . and as we write unto you in our ship , he be our servant for year : and for that we know he to be honest , true and painefiill , our mind be he shall|be place where he may do best service . he do know the commodity and discommodity of all kind of ware which you do send we . 
 therefore we will you shall credit his say both in quantity of ware and goodness , as also wherein be most our profit . we see by your letter that your opinion be that the ropemaker shall remain there two year more ; and that you have provide great plenty of hemp , which we be content withal . but as yet we have sell none of our cable nor halser , neither be the proof of they know ; because the first you send we be make of flax , which be worth not money : for after they be once wet they will rot and moulder away like moss . and those which you send we now last , by misfortune there with you at the lade be wet and fret in many place , and have lose their colour : by mean whereof they be not so vendible as if they have come well condition . of a hard beginning we trust God will send we a good end . we hope in your next letter to hear good news of the proceed of master Antony Jenkinson . we 
 405 
 Christopher Hodson and Thomas Glover appoint agent 1560. 
 perceive by his letter that astracan be not so good a mart town as the fame have go of it : and marvel much that round pewter shall be so good , and good cheap there , and from whence it shall come . and whereas you write that you will come for England in our next ship , we will glad have you to remain there until the next year follow , for the better instruction of our servant there ; who have not have so long time of continuance for the language , and knowledge of the people , country , and ware as you have have . nevertheless if you will needs come away , we have no doubt , but that you will leave good order with our servant there , namely with Christopher Hodson and Thomas Glover , who we appoint to remain there as agent in your room , till further order be take : not doubt but that they will use themselves so discreet and wise in all their do , as shall be to the worship and benefit of this company . and as we have a good hope in they that they will be careful , diligent and true in all their do : so have we no less hope in all the rest of our servant there , that they will be not only obedient to they ( consider what room they be in ) but also will be careful , painful , diligent , and true every one in his room and place for the benefit and profit of the company : that hereafter in the absence of other they may be call and place in the like room there or elsewhere . and if you find any to be disobedient and stubborn , and will not be rule ; we will you shall send he home in our ship : who shall find such small favour and friendship during the time that he have to serve , as by his disobedience and evil service he have deserve . and whereas Christopher Hodson have write to come home , as partly he have good cause , consider the death of his father and mother : yet in regard that sir George bairn and the lady his wife be his special friend in his absence , we doubt not but that he will remain in the room , which we 
 406 
 have appoint he , if you do not tarry and remain there , till far order be take : and for his service and pain he shall be consider , as reason be , as friendly as if his friend be live . thus we trust you will take such order the one to remain at the Moscow , and the other at Colmogro , or elsewhere , as most need be . Thomas Alcocke be desirous to be in the Moscow : nevertheless you shall find he reasonable to serve where he may do most good . the 62 roble which you receive of John Boucher we have pay he here , and also the 8 roble , which you receive the year before of Christopher rise , and the money which you receive more of George Burton , for the which we have you our debtor . thus we rest , refer that which be here omit to the report of the bringer : and so God have you in his keep . also we will that you shall send we in our ship 200 horse-clothe more . the thing before write we will that you shall let our servant see and read , to the intent they may perceive our mind . 
 . 