another letter to the foresay party . 1560. 
 this letter before write be the copy of one send you by Thomas Alcock , trust that he be with you long since . the 26 day of the last month we receive a letter from he , date in Stockholme in Sweden the 14 day of January , and we perceive by his letter that he have talk with a dutch man that come late from the Moscow , who inform he that our friend master Antony Jenkinson be return to the Moscow in September last pass , but how far he have be , or what he have do , he can not tell . also he write that one John Lucke a joiner be take by the liefelander , and put in prison . as yet we have not hear from the say John luck , nor know not whether he be release out of prison or not . we suppose that by he you write some letter which as yet be not come to our hand : so that we think he be yet in prison , or 
 Stockholme . 
 John luck take prisoner in lieflande . 
 4°7 
 otherwise dispatch out of the way . the fifteen day of December we receive a letter from Christopher Hodson , date in the Moscow the 29 of July , by the way of dansk : which be in effect a copy of such another receive from he in our ship . you shall understand that we have lade in three good ship of we these kind of ware follow : to wit , in the the swallow . swallow of London , master under God Steven Burrow , 
 34 fardel N° 136 broad short clothes , and four fardel N° 58 Hampshire kersey : and 23 pipe of bastard and secke , and 263 piece of raisin and 4 hogshead N° 154 piece of round pewter , and ten hogshead and poncheon of prune , and one dryfatte with almond . the fillip and in the fillip and marry , master under God Thomas and Marie . 25 fardel N° 100 broad clothes , and three 
 fardel N° 42 Hampshire kersey , and thirty pipe of secke and bastard , and 100 piece of raisin . and in the Jesus . the Jesus of London , master under God Arthur Pette , 
 10 fardel N° 40 broad short clothes , and twenty seven pipe of bastard and secke , as by the invoice herewith enclose may appear : also you shall receive such necessary as you do write to be send for the rope maker : trust that you shall have better success with they which you shall send we in these ship , then with the rest which you have send we yet : for we as yet have sell none of they . and whereas we write unto you in our former letter , that we will send you a hundred ton of salt , by reason it be so dear here we do send you but nine ton and a half , for it cost here ten penny the bushel the first penny : namely in the swallow 6 ton and a half , in the fillip and marry one ton and a half , and in the Jesus one ton and a half . the 4 hogshead of round pewter go in the swallow and in the fillip and marry N° 154 piece , as be aforesaid . we send you three ship , trust that you have provide accord to our former writing good store of lade for they . if you have more ware then will lade the ship , let it be train 408 
 oil that you leave behind : the price be not here so good as it be : it be worth here 9 pound the ton . we think it good you shall let the small ship bring as much of the train as she can carry : and that the master of the ship do look well to the rummage , for they may bring away a great deal more than they do , if they will take pain in the rummage : and bestow the train by it self , and the wax and tallow by it self : for the leakage of the train do foul the other ware much . as for Allard the skinner , if you think good , he may come home in these ship . we have no doubt but that you Henry lane , if you mind to come home now in these ship as you request , will leave such good order there with our servant as shall be for our most profit and their preferment , if they do their duty diligent and true . if our friend master Antony Jenkinson be return , and mean to come away in these ship to declare his mind and opinion of his travail , if need require and he be so mind he may return thither by land and be there by the fine of Januarie or before . but as we be uncertain whether he be return or not : so we know not what he have do , nor what benefit may rise hereafter of his travail . therefore in this we remit it to his and your good discretion . we send you Thomas Hawtrey which be our servant for year : our mind be he shall be place , where he may do best service . 
 also we send you Nicholas chancellor to remain Nicholas there , who be our apprentice for year : our mind be chancellor . he shall be set about such business as he be most fit for : he have be keep at write school long : he have his algorisme , and have understanding of keep of book of reckon . we send you now but 100 kersey : but against the next year , if occasion serve , we will send you a great quantity , accord as you shall advise we : one of the pipe of secke that be in the swallow , which have 2 round compass upon the 
 409 
 the salt of Russia be not so good as bay salt . 
 fox skin white , black , and russet vendible in England . 
 May^ . 1560. 
 bung , be to be present to the emperor : for it be special good . the neat weight of the 10 puncheon of prune be 4300. 2 three 1 pound . it be write particular upon the head of every puncheon : and the neat weight of the fat of almond be 500 livre . two quarter . the raisin , prune , and almond you be best to dispatch away at a reasonable price , and principal the raisin , for in keep of they will be great loss in the weight , and the fruit will decay . we think it good that you provide against the next year for the come of our ship 20 or 30 bullock kill and salt , for beef be very dear here . therefore you be best to save some of this salt that we do send you in these ship for the purpose . the salt of that country be not so good . in this you may take the opinion of the master of the ship . Foxe skin , white , black , and russet will be vendible here . the last year you send none : but there be mariner that buy many . if any of the mariner do buy any trifle fur or other commodity , we will they shall be register in our purser book , to the intent we may know what they be . we desire to know how the emperor take the letter which we send in our ship , as a answer to the letter that come in his name and under his seal for the six thousand daller . thus we rest , commit you to God , from London the five day of May 1560. 
 for lack of time the governor have not firm this letter : which be the copy of the other two letter firm by they . 
 you , William mericke . 
 you , blaze Sanders . 
 . 