certain note gather by Richard Johnson ( which be at Boghar with m. Anthony Jenkinson ) of the report of russes and other stranger , of the way of Russia to Cathaya , and of diverse and strange people . 
 the first note give by one name sarnichoke a tartarian subject to the prince of Boghar , which be also Tartars border upon Kizilbash or Persia , declare the way from astracan , be the further part of Russia , to Cathaya as follow . 
 wllrst from astracan to Serachick by land , travail ml sail by leisure as merchant use with ware , be io . day journey . 
 * or , urgeme . from Serachick to a town name * urgenshe , 15. day . 
 from urgenshe to Boghar , 15. day . 
 from Boghar to Cascar , 30. day . 
 from Cascar to Cathaya , 30. day journey . 
 by the same party a note of another way more sure to travel , as he report . 
 from astracan to turkeman by the caspian sea , 10. day with bark . 
 from turkeman by land special with camel , bear the weight of 15. poode for their common burden , be 10. day to urgenshe . 
 from urgenshe to Boghar , 15. day . 
 note . at this city of Boghar be the mart or meeting place between the Turk and nation of those part and the cathayans . 
 also the toll there be the 40. part to be pay of merchandize or good . 
 from thence to Cascar be one month journey , and from Cascar ( be the frontier of the great can , have many town and fort by the way ) be also a month travel for merchant by land to Cathay . 
 480 
 further , as he have hear ( not have be in those part himself ) ship may sail from the dominion of Cathaia unto India . but of other way , or how the sea lie by any coast he know not . 
 the instruction of another tartarian merchant dwell in the city of Boghar , as he have learn by other his countryman which have be there . 
 first from astracan by sea to serachick be 15 day : affirm also that a man may travel the other way before write by turkeman . 
 from Serachick to urgence be 15 day . 
 from urgence to Boghar also 15 day . 
 note . Theise last 30 day journey be without habitation of house : therefore traveller lodge in their own tent , carry with they to eat , their several provision : and for dryness there be many well of fair water at equal bait place not far distant daily to be have . 
 from Boghar to Taskent easy travel with good , be 14 day by land . 
 from Taskent to occient 7 day . 
 from occient to Cascar 20 day . This Cascar be the head town or city of another prince , lie between Boghar and Cathaia , call reshit can . 
 from Cascar to Sowchick 30 day journey , which sowchick be the first border of Cathay . 
 from Sowchick to Camchick 5 day journey , and from camchick to Cathay be 2 month journey , all the way be inhabit , temperate , and well replenish with innumerable fruit , and the chief city in that whole land be call Cambalu , which be yet 10 day journey from Cathay . 
 beyond this land of Cathay , which they praise to be civil and unspeakeable rich , be the country name in the tartarian tongue cara-calmack inhabit with black people : but in Cathay , the most part thereof stretch to the sun rise , be people white and of fair 
 n 481 2 h 
 Angrim . Mandeville speak hereof . 
 or kiss faith . 
 small people . 
 Pechora but six day journey by land or water from Ob. 
 complexion . their religion also , as the Tartar report , be Christian , or after the manner of Christians , and their language peculiar , differ from the tartarian tongue . 
 there be no great and furious bear in travel through the wale aforesaid , but wolf white and black . and because that wood be not of such quantity there , as in these part of Russia , but in manner rather scant then plentiful , as be report , the bear breed not that way , but some other beast ( as namely one in Russe call Barse ) be in those coast . This Barse appear by a skin of one see here to sell , to be near so great as a big lion spot very fair and therefore we here take it to be a leopard or tiger . 
 note that 20 day journey from Cathay be a country name Angrim , where live the beast that bear the best musk , and the principali thereof be cut out of the knee of the male . the people be taunie , and for that the man be not beard nor differ in complexion from woman , they have certain token of iron , that be to say : the man wear the sun round like a boss upon their shoulder , and woman on their privy part . their feed be raw flesh in the same land , and in another call * titay : the duke there be call can . they worship the fire , and it be 34 day journey from great Cathay , and in the way lie the beautiful people , eat with knife of gold , and be call Comorom , and the land of small people be near than Mosko than Cathay . 
 the instruction of one of Permia , who re-porteth he have be at Cathay the way before write , and also another way near the sea coast , as follow , which note be send out of Russia from Giles Holmes . 
 first from the province of Dwina be know the way to Pechora , and from Pechora travel with Olens or heart , be six day journey by land , and in the summer as much by water to the river of Ob. 
 483 
 the ob be a river full of flat , the mouth of it be 70. 
 Russe mile over . and from thence three day journey on the right hand be a place call chorno-lese , to say in english , black wood , and from thence near hand be a people call pechey-cony , wear their hair by his description after the irish fashion . 
 from pechey-cony to jolt Calmachey three day journey , and from thence to Chorno Callachay three day tend to the southeast . 
 these two people be of the tartarian faith , and tributary to the great can . 
 here follow certain country of the samoed which dwell upon the river ob , and upon the sea coast beyond the same , take out of the ruff tongue word by word , and travail by a ruff bear in Colmogro , who name be Pheodor towtigin , who by report , be slay in his second voyage in one of the say country . 
 Pon the east part beyond the country of Ugori , the river ob be the most westermost part thereof . upon the sea coast dwell samoeds , and their country be call Molgomsey , who meat be flesh of Olens , or heart , and fish , and do eat one another sometime among they - 
 self . and if any merchant come unto they , than they kill one of their child for their sake to feast they withal . and if a merchant chance to die with they , they bury he not , but eat he , and so do they eat they of their own country likewise . they be evil of sight , and have small nose , but they be swift and shoot . very well , and they travail on heart and on dog , and their apparel be Sables and heart skin . they have no merchandise but Sables only . 
 2 item , on the same coast or quarter beyond those 483 
 [ i . 337-j 
 travel on dog in heart . 
 people , and by the sea side also do dwell another kind of samoed in like manner , have another language . one month in the year they live in the sea , and do not come or dwell on the dry land for that month . 
 3 item beyond these people , on the sea coast , there be another kind of samoed , their meat be flesh and fish , and their merchandise be sable , white and black fox ( which the russes call pselt ) and heart skin , and fawn skin . 
 the relation of Chaggi Memet a persian merchant , to Baptista Ramusius , and other notable citizen of Venice , touch the way from Tauris the chief city of Persia , to Campion a city of Cathay over land : in which voyage he himself have pass before with the Caravans . 
 from Tauris to Soltania . 
 from Soltania to Casbin . 
 from Casbin to Veremi . 
 from veremi to Eri . 
 from eri to Boghara . 
 from Boghara to Samarchand . 
 from Samarchand to Cascar . 
 from Cascar to Acsu . 
 from Acsu to Cuchi . 
 from Cuchi to Chialis . 
 from chialis to Turfon . 
 from Turfon to Camul . 
 from camul to Succuir . 
 from Succuir to Gauta . 
 from Gauta to Campion . 
 20 
 5 
 25 
 20 
 20 
 10 
 13 
 15 
 5 
 6 
 ► day journey . 
 6 
 4 
 6 
 which Campion be a city of the empire of Cathay in the province of tangut , from whence the great quantity of rhubarb come . 
 . 