a letter of Sigismond king of Polonia , write 1559. in the 39 year of his reign to Elizabeth the queen most excellent majestic of England , etc 
 QIgismudus Augustus by the grace of God king of 0 Polonia , great duke of Lituania , Russia , Prussia , Massovia , and Samogetia , etc lord and heir etc to the most noble princess lady Elizabeth by the same grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , etc our dear sister and kinswoman , greeting and increase of all felicity . whereas your majesty write to we that you have receive two of our letter , we have look that you shall have answer to they both . first to the one , in which we entreat more at large in forbid the voyage to narve , which if it have be do , we have be unburden of so often write of one matter : and may have answer your majesty much better to the purpose . now we thus answer to your majesty to those matter of the which you write to we the 3 of October from Windsor . first , forasmuch as your majesty at the request of our letter have discharge the arrest of merchant good , and of the name of the man of dansk our subject , which be set upon they by the commandment of your majesty : and also have restore the old and ancient liberty of traffic , we acknowledge great pleasure do unto we in the same : and also think it to be do according to common agreement make in time past . neither be we ever at any time of any other opinion touch your majesty , but that we shall obtain right and reason at your hand . forasmuch as we likewise shall at all time be ready to grant to your majesty , make any request for your subject , so far as shall stand with justice , yet neither will you yield any thing to your majesty in contention of love , benevolence , and mutual office , but that we judge every good turn of you to be recompense by we to the utter-485 
 the trade to narve forbid by the king of Poland . 
 the ancient covenant oj traffic be-ttoeene England wonderful Prussia . 
 most : and that shall we prove as occasion shall serve . therefore we shall command the arrest , if any be make by our subject ( as it be unknown to we ) of merchant the old libre - good and english name to be discharge : and shall tie oftrafficke . conserve the old liberty of traffic , and all other thing which shall seem to appertain to neighbourhood between we and your majesty : so that none of the subject of your majesty hereafter presume to use the navigation to the narve forbid by we , and full of danger not only to our part , but also to the open destruction of all the mean of Christians and liberali nation . the which as we have increase of the wr^fen afore so now we write again to your majesty ot the f oh • i i 
 Moscovite . know and feel of a surety , the Moscovite , enemy 
 to all liberty under the heaven , daily to grow mighty by the increase of such thing as be bring to the narve , while not only ware but also weapon heretofore unknown to he , and artificer and art be bring unto he : by mean whereof he make himself strong to vanquish all other . which thing , as long as this voyage to narve be use , can not be stop . and we perfect know your majesty can not be ignorant how great the cruelty be of the say enemy , of what force he be , what tyranny he use on his subject , and in what servile sort they be under he . we seem hitherto to vanquish he only in this , that he be rude of art , and ignorant of policy . if so be that this navigation to the narve continue , what shall be unknown to he ? therefore we that know best , and border upon he , do admonish other Christian prince in time , that they do not betray their dignity , liberty and life of they and their subject to a most barbarous and cruel enemy , as we can no less do by the duty of a christian prince . for now we do foresee , except other prince take this admonition , the Moscovite puff up in pride with those thing that be bring to the narve , and make more perfect in warlike affair with engine of war and ship , will make assault this way on Christendom , to slay or make bind all that shall withstand he : which God defend . with 
 486 
 which our admonition diverse prince already content themselves , and abstain from the narve . the other that will not abstain from the say voyage shall|be impeach by our navy , and incur the danger of loss of life , liberty , wife and child . now therefore if the subject of your majesty will forbear this voyage to narve , there shall|be nothing deny to they of we . let your majesty well weigh and consider the reason and occasion of our stop of ship go to the narve . in which stop , our subject of dansk be in no fault , as we have already write to your majesty , neither use we their counsel in the same . in any other matter , if there be any fault in they against your majesty or your subject , we will glad do justice upon they , that your majesty may well understand that we be careful of you and your subject . neither think we it meet to take Hamburgh , or any other place to judge the matter : for we have our council and judgement seat at rye , where your majesty and your subject , or any other , shall have justice administer unto they , with who we have have ancient league and amity . and thus much we have think good to let your majesty understand . fare you well . Dated the sixth of December the 39 of our reign . 
 Sigismundus Augustus rex . 
 . 