the queen majesty letter to the great sophy of Persia , send by m. Anthony Jenkinson , 1561. 
 the same in english . 
 ELizabeth , by the grace of God , queen of England , this letter etc to the right mighty , and right victorious 
 prince , the great sophy , emperor of the persian , Medes , parthian , hircans , carmanians , Margians , of the people on this side , and beyond the river of Tigris , and of all man , and nation , between the caspian sea , and the gulf of Persia , greeting , and most happy increase in all prosperity . by the goodness of the almighty god it be ordain , that those people , which not only the huge distance of the land , and the invincible wideness of the sea , but also the very quarter of the heaven do most far separate , and set asunder , may nevertheless through good commendation by write , both ease , and also communicate between they , not only the conceive thought , or deliberation , and grateful office of humanity , but also many commodity of mutual intelligence . therefore whereas our faithful , 7 
 and right well-beloved servant Anthony Jenkinson , bearer of these our letter , be determine with our licence , favour , and grace , to pass out of this our realm , and by God sufferance to travel even into Persia , and other your jurisdiction : we mind true with our good favour , to set forward , and advance that his right laudable purpose : and that the more willing , for that this his enterprise be only ground upon a honest intent , to establish trade of merchandise with your subject , and with other stranger traffic in your realm es . wherefore we have think good , both to write to your majesty , and also to desire the same , to vouchsafe at our request , to grant to our say servant , Anthony Jenkinson , good passport , and safe conduct , by mean , and authority whereof , it may be free and lawful for he , together with his familiar , servant , carriage , merchandise , and good whatsoever , through your realm , dominion , jurisdiction , and province , free , and without impeachment , to journey , go , pass , repass , and tarry so long as he shall please , and from thence to return whensoever he or they shall think good . if these holy duty of entertainment , and sweet office of natural humanity may be willing conclude , sincere embrace , and firm observe between we , and our realm , and subject , than we do hope that the almighty god will bring it to pass , that of these small beginning , great moment of thing shall hereafter spring , both to our furniture and honour , and also to the great commodity , and use of our people : so it will be know that neither the earth , the sea , nor t^e heaven , have so much force to separate we , as the godly disposition of natural humanity , and mutual benevolence have to join we strong together . God grant unto your majesty long and happy felicity in earth , and perpetuali in heaven . Dated in England , in our famous city of London , the 25 day of the month of April , in the year of the creation of the world , 5523 , and of our lord and God Jesus Christ , 1561 , and of our reign the three . 
 . 