the third voyage into Persia , begin in the year 1565 - l5f > 5 - by Richard Johnson , Alexander kitchen , 
 and Arthur Edward . 
 a letter of Arthur Edward to m. Thomas Nicols , secretary to the worshipful company trade into Russia and other the north part , concern the preparation of their voyage into Persia . 
 jeraslave a town upon the riverofVolga . 
 Richard Johnson chief of the three voyage into Persia . 
 after Nicols , my bind duty remembered , with desire of God for the preservation of you and you : you shall understand that the second of march i be send by m. Thomas Glover ( your agent ) unto jeraslave , appoint to receive such good as shall come from 
 Vologhda , as also such kind of ware as shall be buy and send from Moscow by your agent , and m. Edward Clarke , think meet for your voyage of Persia . and further , i be to provide for biscuit , beer , and beef , and other victual , and thing otherways needful accord to advise . thus i remain here until the come of your agent , which be the 12. of may , who tarry here three day , to see we set forward on our voyage , and then he depart towards Colmogro , have appoint ( as chief for your voyage of Persia ) Richard Johnson . for my part i be willing , as also have be and shall|be content to submit my self under he , who the agent shall appoint , although he be 44 
 such a one as you shall think in some respect unmeet . thirty two pack of carsei be all of that kind of cloth that we shall have with we . the other 18. 
 pack that shall have go , be sell in Moscow . what other good be ship for our voyage , you shall understand by your agent letter . whereas Edward Clarke ( be a honest man ) be appoint agent for Persia , as one for those part more fit than any i do know here , God have take he unto his mercy , who depart this present life the 16. of march last pass . i wish of God for my part he have live : for my desire be in his company to have travel into Persia . your bark or craer make here for the river of Volga and the caspian sea be very little , of the burden of 30. ton at the most . it be handsome make after the english fashion : but i think it too little for your good and provision of victual . if the worshipful company will send hither a shipwright , be skilful to make one of the burden of 60. ton or more , draw but six foot water at the most when it be lade , i think it shall be profitable . for if your own good will not lade the same , here be merchant that will be glad and fain to give great fraught to lade their good with we , whereby your charge will be much lessen : and so it may happen , the wage of your man hire here may be save , and your servant and good in far great assurance : for their boat here be dangerous to sail with and to pass the caspian sea . there be carpenter here that will do well enough have one to instruct they . your ware buy here , and order take for those that go for your voyage of Persia be yet unknown unto i : wherefore i can ( as i will at this present ) write to you thereof . yet , ( as you do know ) it be the governor mind i shall be acquaint with great affair than these . howbeit i doubt not but i shall be inform of they 
 a bark of thy . ton make at jeraslave 
 to pass the caspian sea . 
 that be appoint , and all thing shall be buy when they shall see time and have more laisure . thus in haste ( as appear ) i commit you and you into the hand of 
 almighty God ; who preserve you in perfect health with increase of worship . 
 from jeraslave the 15. of May 1565. 
 by you to command here or elsewhere during life . Arthur Edward . 
 another letter of the say m. Arthur Edward , 1566. write they 26. of April 1566. inn Shamaki 
 in media , to the right worshipful sir Thomas lodge knight and Aiderman : and in his absence to m. Thomas Nicols , secretary to the right worshipful company trade into Russia , Persia , and other the north and east part , touch the success of Richard Johnson in the three voyage into Persia . 
 worshipful sir , my bind duty remember , with hearty prayer unto God for the preservation of you and you in perfect health with increase of worship . it may please you that my last letter i send they depart you be from astracan the 26 of July 1565. from from astracan whence Richard Johnson , my self , and Alexander Khchin , depart as the 30 of the same . and by mean of contrary wind , it be the 23 of August before we come to our desire port name Nazavoe . there , after we have get your good on land , with much labour and strength of man , as also windless devise and make , we hale your bark over a bar of beach or peeble stone into a small river , send your ship apparel with other thing to a house hire in a village thereby . and as soon as we may get camel , September . be the five of September we depart thence , and come to this town of Shamaki the 11. of the same : and the present to they . day follow , we present unto Abdollocan the king k^qidolow of this country , one timber of sable , one ton or nest ‘ of silver cup parsill gilt , three morse tooth , 4. arshine of scarlet , 3. piece of karsei , with 40. red fox . 
 he receive our present with give we thank for our good will , demand if m. Jenkinson be in good health , and whether he will return into these part again . he will we also himself to sit down before he the distance of a quoit cast from his tent , where he sit with diverse of his counsel and nobility , send we from his table such meat as be before he : and after certain talk have with we , he say , if he may perceive or know any manner of person to do we any wrong , he will punish they in example of other , whereby we shall live in quietness , and have no cause to complain , give we a little house for the time , until a better may be provide in such place as we shall think most meet , never will we to rise or depart , until such time as we of our self think it convenient . at the take of our leave , he will we to put our whole mind and request in writing , that he may further understand our desire . but while we be about to do so , God take this good king our friend out of this present life the 2. of October past . the want of he have be the cause that as yet we can receive certain debt . howbeit , we doubt not but we shall recover all such sum of money as be owe we for this voyage . as for Thomas alcocks debt they be past hope of recovery , which have not be lose if the king have live . we trust in the place of he , God will send as friendly a king towards we : who by report ( and as we be credible inform , ) shall be his son name the mursay : who since the death of his father , at our being with he , promise to show we more friendship than ever we find : God grant the same . 
 great trouble have chance in these part . of those which be of the old king counsel or bare any rule about he in these quarter , some be in prison , some be pinch by the purse , and other send for unto the shaugh . Theise trouble have partly be the let that ware be not sell as they may , to more profit . your agent Richard Johnson buy four horse , mind to have 47 
 a house give our man in Zhamaki by the king . 
 the death of Abdollocan the 2. of October 1565. 
 mursay the new king of Media . 
 the death of Alexander kitchen the 23. of October 1565. 
 the caspian sea veryshoald in diverse place . 
 send to Casbin Alexander kitchen , who God take to his mercy the 23. of October last : and before he depart Richard Davis one of your mariner , who soul i trust the lord have receive to his mercy . we be now destitute of other to supply their room . four mariner be few enough to sail your bark , whereof at this present we have but one , who name be William smith , a honest young man , and one that do good service here . for want and lack of mariner that shall know their labour , we all be like to be cast away in a storm . for all the broad side of our bark lie in the water , and we have much ado to recover it , but God of his mercy deliver we . mariner here may do you good service all the winter otherways : and merchant here will be glad to ship their good in we give good fraught . one merchant at this present be content to pay 20. rubble for twenty camel lade fraught to astracan . such bark as must pass these sea , may not draw above five foot of water , because that in many place be very shallow water . we mind hereafter to make the russian boat more strong , and they shall serve our turn very well . 
 and whereas some in time past take great pain , travel and care , and can not have their desire in the get of the shaugh letter or privilege : now , i trust ( with God help ) they may be obtain : which be have , will be beneficial to the company , and great quietness to those that shall remain here , although heretofore thing have chance ill , as the like in other country have be . but i doubt not , this privilege once get and obtain , we shall live in quietness and rest , and shall short grow into a great trade for silk both raw and wrought , with all kind of spice and drug , and other commodity here , as to m. Anthony Jenkinson be well know , who ( i doubt not ) have long ago thorough advertise the company thereof . 
 the truth of the slaughter of Thomas Alcock your the murther-servant , be not certain know . some think it be ing < f Thomas by the mean of a noble man , with who your say Alcock it servant be earnest in demand of your debt : upon who word he be so offend , that he procure his death . but other do think very , that in ride from the court without company , false knave lay in wait , think he have much about he , and so slay he . 
 i doubt not though this misfortune have chance , that thing shall come well to pass , and that we shall be better belove when we shall be more know . 
 honest merchant be glad of our be here , and seek to grow in acquaintance with we , be glad to further we in that they may , and have speak in our favour to the chief of this country : one be a noble man , with who your agent and i be enter into friendship , who be at this time in great favour with the shaugh . he have here and in other place of these part set a good stay in thing since the king death : he be well know to m. Jenkinson , his name Cozamomet a be Cozamomet . also another duke name ameddin-beck be our great friend : and his sister be the shaughes wife . Theise two have promise your agent by their law , not only to procure to get the shaughes privilege , but also that i shall have the debt pay i of those that go from hence to Casbin , if we will send one with they . in consideration whereof , i be upon short warning ( for want of a better ) appoint by your agent m. Richard Johnson , all excuse lay apart , present to put my self in readiness , and to depart in company with these nobleman : with charge , when God shall send i to Casbin , to use my discretion with their advice , for the recover of your debt and privilege . i shall have with i one interpreter and two buy servant : one of which partly understand this tongue , and may be put in trust whatsoever shall become of i . i have receive 6. the value of tumen in ready money , 200. shaugh be a tumen , atumen - 
 in 49 d 
 reckon every shaugh for six penny Russe . i have further receive two timber of sable , one to be sell , the other to be give to Thomas the shaugh : and have order further to give as i shall see good to those that shall further my suit , and as occasion serve . and forasmuch as i be command to go , i shall willing do my best , put my trust in God that he will send i well to speed in this journey . 
 for all kind of ware buy or sell , you shall thorough be advertise by your agent Richard Johnson , who reckon or account at no hand i may see or be privy unto . your karsei be good and well sort , they be and will be sell from 150. shaugh , to 160. the piece . two hundred piece be sell under , that need not : one 100 piece at 146. and 147. the piece but more will have be give , if circumspection have be use . they be sell to those noble man aforesaid , when as yet it be not know that i shall have go with they . they may stand we much in stead , as they have promise we their good will in that they may do . here be at this time buy for England 11. pack of raw silk , 25. and 26. batman be in every pack : the batman be 7. pound , which may be 6. pound and a half of english weight , be buy here from 66. to 70. shaughes the batman . it be fine and good , little course at this time be to be have . and where course silk may be have be at grosin , we can not send thither : for that time be neglect at the first . when we shall have lidger here to remain in summer , we may buy it at the first hand of the country people that bring it to sell hither , and to other place . i will to God the company can find the mean to have a vent to make sale for the one half that we may buy here . the company may have for 30. or 40. thousand pound yearly . and as appear by your agent word be at Varas , he and other see there so great abundance , that by report of diverse , 5° 
 Johnson , kitchen and Edward a.d. 1566. you may bestow ( if it be not for the Turk ) for a two hundred thousand pound : beside silk of all colour die in grain , bind up in pound weight , i think 15. of our ounce to their pound weight , and here sell for 23. shaugh , at 6.d . then shaugh , may be two . s . 6 . penny . 
 from astracan in 7. or 8. day , we may sail with Gilan i-daye our bark to a place name Gilan : the which place in time to come , ( i think ) shall serve our purpose best ’ to go unto . atom be there good cheap , be bring atom . from thence hither to Shamaki , and sell here for two bist their batman , which may be 5. penny in our money : and so i have buy to be send home 223. batman for example . and at Gilan there be raw silk enough for the company stock . i believe , if any great store of ware be send from you , that must be the place : and from thence a man may travel in 4. Gilan day day to Casbin , and there make quick and better sale , at which place your commodity be to be sell . 
 for there be the chief and best merchant , and diverse other city round about , to wit , teveris , Ardouil , and Caishan , be the heart of the country , where there be more civility and merchant be better use . concern this point i have inquire of diverse merchant both russes and other that have be in those part , and find they all agree in one tale , and perceive the same to be true , and that all kind of ware come from thence into these part . and from Casbin to ormus , be about Gasbin 30. day travel with camel . i have write the price of ware in my letter to the governor both for ajM camel . spice and some drug which i do know . 
 also you shall understand here be plenty of yew for bowstave . i cause three horse load to be buy we for to know the truth : but they be cut out of season this month of April , the sap be in they . three month i never leave speak to the country man to bring some . your agent will send some home for example . 
 this day be the 26. of Aprili i depart towards Casbin : God give i a good hour and well to speed , with a merry heart in return again , as my hope be i shall . i have write my mind to m. Glover your agent , what russian ware i think best to be buy for this country , and to send some one hither that have the ruff tongue , for we have need . and the company shall do well hereafter in take of servant to be send hither , to see that they be such as have discretion , and be something break in the world , and see in the trade of merchandise , and one ( if they can get some such ) as can speak the Portugal tongue , may do they as good service , as those that shall be here two year before he : for than we may buy a slave that can speak this language and the portingal tongue the secret do - also , which shall then interpret unto we in all your secret do , not make the russes privy : for they pany be sorry that we ^oe trade into these part , for we be better belove than they be : because they be give to be drunkard , they be much hate of these people . it be to be wish that none shall serve your worship in these part that be give to that kind of vice : and that your chief agent and factor shall be able to rule and govern himself , that no dishonesty shall be impute to he and we . by his evil usage he pay here 24 rubble , be in this country 4. tumen for a boy , that he be charge to have convey away from a tesicke one of this country man , who will he to swear that he know not where the boy be become , and he shall not pay it . if he be honest he may do your worship good service because of his russian tongue . 
 your London red be not to be send hither , for they will not give above 18. shaughes their arshine . 
 orient red of here be red of more orient colour , be Venice die . temce die . the people be give much to wear cloth : the common people special wear karsei , and the merchant of more wealth wear broad cloth . you shall do well to send five or six broad clothes , some black , puke , or other 52 
 sad colour , that may be afford at 20. shaughes the arshine , and not above . it be here report that king Philip have give the Turk a great overthrow at Malta , and take 70. or 80. of his chiere captain . 
 thus wish i have more time to write , i pray you to bear with this my scribble letter , and after you have read it , that m. Nicols may have a sight thereof . 
 by your servant to command , 
 Arthur Edward . 
 commodity to be carry out of England into Persia , with their prize there . 
 ' 1 1^ " arsei be sell there for 180. shaughes : so AX. that a karsey be sell there in Persia for four pound ten shilling : for every shaugh be six shaugh be penny english , and every bist be two penny halfpenny English , and in Russe money three penny . 
 - 2 tin be sell in Persia for 14. and 18. shaughes the batman . the batman contain as i have mention before . 
 3 Brasil be at 10. and 12. shaughes the batman . 
 4 red cloth fine , at 25. and 30. shaughes the yard . 
 5 copper at 20. and 25. shaughes the batman . 
 commodity to be bring out of Persia for t1 - 3 5 8 - ] England . 
 i ta awe silk at 60. shaugh you batman . 
 2 axe pepper at 32. shaugh you batman . 
 3 ginger at 18. and 20. shaugh you batman . 
 4 nutmeg at 30. shaugh the batman . 
 5 brimstone at 4 shaugh the great batman . the 
 5 great batman be 12. livre . English . 
 6 Allom at 2. bist and a half the batman and less . 
 7 rice at half a bist the batman . 
 8 Gals at half a bist the batman . 
 9 clove at 40. shaugh the batman . 
 0 10 yew for bow staff , at 
 . 