the way discover by water by we Thomas Southam and John spark , from the town of Colmogro , by the western bottom of the bay of S. Nicholas , unto the city of novgorod in Russia , contain many particular of the way , and distance of mile , as hereafter follow . anno 1566. 
 e depart from Colmogro about 10. of the clock afore noon in a lodia or bark , which we hire to bring we along the coast to a place call Soroka , and in the say bark we hire 6. mariner , and a boy to conduct we to the place before rehearse . 
 the lodia or bark be of the burden of 25. ton or thereabouts , wherewith we vale down the river of Dwina , the wind be then calm , unto a monastery call S. Michael where we be constrain to anchor because of a contrary wind which there meet we . 
 from Colmogro to this monastery be 50. verst or a verse be but mile of Russia , at which place we tarry till the 21. 3-liters of day in the morning , and then have the wind some - a^^ts what fair , we set sail and depart thence . 
 21 we depart from the monastery of saint Michael , have the wind somewhat fair , and arrive at rose island , over and against the monastery of saint Nicholas , the 22. day at 2. of the clock in the morning , which be 35. mile distant from the monastery of saint Michael . by reason of contrary wind and tide we be constrain to tarry there all that day . 
 23 we depart from the monastery of saint Nicholas at 7. of the clock in the evening , and come to a anchor at the beacon , and continue there until half a hour past 10. of the clock , and then set from thence , the wind be south : our course be west until 5. of the clock in the morning , when as we come to a anchor 
 at this town Newnox Richard chancellor in his first voyage , with his company aship-board be relieve . 
 against newnox town , where we continue until the 25. day . 
 the say town of Newnox be from the monastery of saint Nicholas 35. mile . 
 25 we depart from Newnox haven at one of the clock in the after noon , the wind at south and southeast , and our course northwest and by west . 
 the point of tolstick which be the headland before the entrance of Newnox haven , and the headland of Sevsemski lie next southeast and by south , northwest and by north . we come to a anchor there this day at 4. of the clock in you afternoon , be from Newnox haven 15. mile , where we continue in harbour till the 27. day of the month , by reason of contrary wind . 
 27 we depart from Sevsemski in the morning at 5. of the clock , the wind next at east and by north , and our course northwest and by west . 
 the say land of Sevsemski and the headland go into Owna river lie east and by south , west and by north , and between they be 25. mile . 
 this day at sun set we come to a island call Sogisney pass betwixt it and the main , with the wind at south and by east , our course be west and by south , be 85. mile from Owna river . 
 be past the say island 10. mile , the wind come contrary , whereupon we return to the island of Sogisney , where we remain until the 29. day . 
 29 the 29. day we depart from Sogisney aforesaid , at 5. of the clock in the afternoon , the wind at east north-east , and our course be Southwest and by west , pass by a island call anger , be 30. mile from Sogisney , and keep on our course , we come by the headland of a island call Abdon , be from the island of anger 15. mile , where we find many rock : and if the great providence of God have not preserve we , we have there perish , be fall among they in the night time , and our pilot none of the perfect , which be contrary to his profession as we find it . 
 but whosoever will travel that way must either keep hard aboard the shore , for that there be a channel which go along the coast within the rock , or else give the headland a birth of 6. mile at the least , and so go a seaboord all : for there be ledge of rock that lie five mile from the headland . 
 we give the headland a birth of 3. mile , notwithstanding there lay two rock two mile to sea board of [ i . we , so that we be enclose with they , and sit upon the high of they : but it please God to make it calm , and give we the day also , or else we have miscarry . 
 30 we depart from the headland of the island of Abdon , at 4. of the clock in the morning , direct our course west , and at 10. of the clock before noon , we arrive at a monastery name solofky , which be 15. mile from Abdon . 
 at this monastery we continue until the 31. day of this month . we have here deliver we by the chief monk of the monastery , their letter and house seal , and a servant of they to conduct we safe through the dangerous river of Owiga . 
 the people of all those part be wild , and speak another kind of language , and be for the most part all tenant to the monastery . the effect of the letter be , that they shall be ready to help and assist we in all dangerous place , and carry our boat and good over land in place needful , as in deed they do , as hereafter shall appear . 
 note , that at our being at the monastery , there be no abbot for the place as then choose : for 15. day before our arrival there , the abbot be send for by the emperor , and make metropolitan of the realm , as he now be . the number of monk belong to the monastery be at the least 200. 
 31 we depart from the monastery of solofky , as be aforesaid , to a fair stone house of they , which be 5. mile from the monastery , lie from it south and by west . 
 75 
 366. ] 
 August . i we depart from the stone house at 3. of the clock in the morning : our course be west for 60. verst , and then pass betwixt diverse and sundry rock , with many small island round about we for the space of 20 mile , keep most common the same course still , we then shape a new course , and yet sundry time shift , but we always keep the southwest , and near of all south southwest , until we come within two mile of the entrance of the river Owiga where we be to bear in , west and by north . 
 the river from the river Owiga , to the island and rock before Owiga . mention , be 20. mile . 
 we arrive about 4. of the clock in the after noon within the river of Owiga , at a place name Soroka , at which place we forsake our bark or lodia , and continue there in make provision for small boat to carry we up the river until the 3. day of the same . 
 3 we depart from Soroka at two of the clock in the afternoon , with 3. boat and 12. man to row , and set the foresay boat up the river of Owiga , which we hire . 
 we go this day 7. mile to a place call ostrove , where we lay all night , but in the way 4. mile from the fall of a Soroka , at a place where the water fall from the rock , river . as if it come steep down from a mountain , we be constrain to take out our good and ware out of the say boat , and cause they to be carry a mile over land , and afterward also have our boat in like sort carry or draw over land by force of man which there dwell , be tenant to the monastery aforesaid . 
 and when our boat be come to the place where our ware be lay , we launch our boat and jade our ware again , and go to the place before name , where we continue and remain that night . 
 we depart from ostrove in the morning before sun rise , row and set up the river 5. mile , where we come to a place whereas we be again constrain to take out our ware , and to carry they 76 
 1566. and our boat three mile over land , so that with row , draw and set , we go this day 7. mile more to a place call sloboday , where we lay all night . 
 5 we depart from sloboday in the morning at sun rise , and at six of the clock in the afternoon , we come to a village call Paranda , which be from sloboday 30. mile , where we remain all that night . 
 6 we depart from Paranda at 6. of the clock in the morning , and all that day what with set and draw our boat , we go but 11. mile , for we twice unlade our ware , and draw our boat overland , in one place a mile and a half , in another place as it be the eight part of a mile , and so we come to a place call voyet , where we tarry all that night . 
 7 we depart from voyet at 4. of the clock in the morning , and so come to a Ozera or lake , call after the name of the river , and unto a place call quequenich , we row all this day , and come thither by one of the clock in the afternoon , which be 25. mile from voyet , and there we remain all night to hire man and boat to carry we forward on our journey . 
 here depart back from we the servant which we have at the monastery , be send by the monk to go thus far with we . and after that he have hire the boat and take the man name that shall conduct we , and give they charge to deliver we with all thing in safety , at a place be a little town call povensa , than he depart from we without take any reward for his pain , for so he be charge and command by the monk . 
 8 we depart from Quequenich at sun rise , and all that day row upon the lake among many island , the inhabitant do there report that there be as many five san ' island in their lake , as there be day in the year . in the evening we come to a village name Tellekina , which be 60. mile from Quequenich . 
 9 we depart from Tellekina in the morning at 5. of the clock , and so enter into a river , we go that day 
 13. mile . in one place we carry our boat and good overland 3. mile . at evening we come to a place call Oreiche na maelay , where we lay all night . 
 10 we depart thence at 5. of the clock in the morning , and so row , come to a place where the river end , be 20. mile distant from the place where we lay all night , at which place we forsake our boat and unlade our ware , and send a man to the town of povensa , which be seven mile off , for horse to carry we and our ware to the say place . the horse come , and we jade our good , and at six of the clock in the afternoon we arrive at the town of povensa , with all thing in safety . 
 this town of povensa stand within one mile of the famous lake or Ozera of Onega , which be 320. mile long , and in some place 70. mile over . but where it be narrow it be 25. mile over , be feed with many goodly river which fall into it . Hard aboard the shore within 6. mile , you shall have 40. and 45. fathom of depth . 
 here it be to be note that from this place of povensa unto the village of Soroka down those dangerous river which we come through , at no time of the year can or may any man carry or transport any good that come from Novogrod , or the narve , and such other place : for in the summer it be impossible to carry down any ware by reason of the great false of water that do descend from the rock . likewise in the winter by reason of the great force and fall of water which make so terrible raise , that in those'place it never freeze , but all such ware as come from Novogrod to povensa , be transport by land to a place call some in the winter , which some stand on the sea side , as do Soroka . the ready way from povensa by land to this place of some , with the distance of mile i will show hereafter . 
 12 we depart from povensa at 9 of the clock in the morning , with 2. small boat which we hire to carry 
 we to a place call Toivo upon the lake of Onega , be 50 mile from povensa , where we arrive the 13. day in the morning , where we buy a boat that carry we and all our ware from thence to the city of Novogrod . 
 14 we depart from Toivo at 3. of the clock in the afternoon , and at the evening arrive at a certain island name Salasalma , upon the say lake 7. mile from Toivo , and by reason of contrary wind we there tarry until the 16. day of this month . 
 16 we depart from Salasalma , at 8. of the clock in the morning , and come to a island the 17. day in the morning , name Vorronia , where we continue by reason of contrary wind , until the 21. day of the say month , and it be 60. mile from Salasalma . 
 21 we depart from Vorronia island two hour saint Clement he before day , and arrive at saint Clement monastery at monastery . 1. of the clock in the after noon , be from Vorronia 48. mile . 
 22 we depart from saint Clement monastery at the break of the day , have a fair wind all a long the lake : we sail without strike of sail until two hour within night , and then enter into a river call Swire , at a monastery call Vosnessino Christo , five mile from the entrance of the river , where we tarry all night . it be from saint Clement monastery 160. mile : the stream of that river go with we . 
 23 we depart from Vosnessino Christo before sun rise , and vale down the river sometime sail , and sometime row , so that this day we go 90. mile and lay at night at a place call Vassian . 
 24 we depart from Vassian at the break of the day , and come to a place call two selucax , where we lay all \\or , sermaxe . night , and be 10. mile from Vassian . 
 25 we depart from selucaxe at 4 of the clock in the morning , and enter upon the lake of ladiskaie , the wind be calm all that day save 3. hour , and then it be with we , so that we sail and row that day 
 the monastery of Gosnopoli . 
 the city of Novogrod . 
 10 . mile , along upon the say lake , and enter into the river of Volhuski , which river have his beginning 20. mile above Novogrod , and run through the midst of the city , and so fall into this lake , which be far long than the lake of Onega , but it be not so broad . this lake fall into the sea that come from the sound : where any vessel or boat , have a good pilot , may go through the sound into England . 
 as soon as we be enter into the river , we come to a monastery call S. Nicholas Medved , where we lay all that night . 
 26 we depart from saint Nicholas Medved , at five of the clock in the morning , row and draw our boat all day , and come at night to another monastery call Gosnopoli , which be 30 mile from saint Nicholas Medved , where we lay all that night . 
 27 we depart from Gosnopoli at 6. of the clock in the morning , and at evening come to a place call moislave , where we lay all night , be 46. mile from the monastery of Gosnopoli . 
 28 we depart from moislave , and the say day at night come to a place call Grussina , 35. mile from moislave where we lodge . 
 29 we depart from Grussina in the morning , and the same day at evening come to a place call Petroe Svetoe , where we lay all night , be 40 mile from Grussina . 
 30 we depart from Petroe Svetoe in the morning , and at two of the clock in the afternoon we arrive at the city of Novogrod , be twenty mile from Petroe Svetoe . here we find William Rowlie agent to the company , who be there stay with all his company , and be not licence to depart thence for the Moscow , by reason that the plague be then in the city of Novogrod . unto he we deliver all the ware that we bring from Colmogro , for by the way we sell not a penny worth , the people of the country every where be so miserable . 
 the right way to bring and transport ware from Novogrod to rose island into S. Nicholas bay , where our ship yearly lade , with the distance of mile from place to place , be as follow : 
 20 mile from Novogrod to Petroe Svetoe . 
 40 mile from thence to Grusina . 
 3 5 mile from thence to moislave . 
 46 mile from thence to the monastery Gosnopoli . 
 15 mile from thence to Ladega town . 
 15 mile from thence to Selvnaz over the lake of Ladega , albeit there be many village all along the lake . 
 180 mile from Ladega town up the river of Swire , unto the monastery of Vosnessino Christo , albeit there be many village upon the river : for within every five or six mile you shall have village or small town . 
 160 mile from Vosnessino Christo to saint Clement monastery , albeit there be many village all along the lake of Onega . 
 48 mile from thence to Voronia . 
 67 mile from thence to Toivo town : and there be diverse village all along the lake where the carrier may lie , and have meat for man and horse . 
 50 mile from thence to povensa , where Onega lake end . 
 the way from povensa to some town be this : 
 30 mile from povensa to Mastelina . 
 10 mile from thence to Tellekina . 
 30 mile from thence to Tolvich . 
 35 mile from thence to Carraich . 
 20 mile from thence to Varnich . 
 10 mile from thence to Ostrovo . 
 15 mile from thence to Lapina . 
 20 mile from thence to some it self . 
 note , that from the city of Novogrod unto the town of some be 936. mile , and from the town of some unto the monastery of saint Nicholas or rise island , over and against where our ship do ride , be just as many mile as 
 in 81 f 
 2000 sleds belong to one town . 
 a good caveat for seasonable travel . 
 be Soroka village from saint Nicholas , as the russes do account it , as also we do judge it , namely 325. mile . so that from Novogrod to saint Nicholas road , be by our account 1261. mile or verst . 
 furthermore it be to be note that all such ware as shall be buy at Novogrod , and send to some town , must be send by sled way in the winter : for if any ware shall be send from Novogrod by water in the spring of the year after the ice be go , then must the say ware remain at povensa town all that summer , by reason that in the summer there be no way to go from povensa unto some town . 
 at povensa there be many warehouse to be hire , so that if there be as much good as ten ship can carry away , you may have warehouse to put it in : but if there shall remain much ware all the summer , to be carry in the winter to some town , than horse be not easy to be get at that place to carry it thither : so that your ware once buy at Novogrod , you must have carrier there to carry it to the town of some by sled , whereof you may there have 2000 if you will , by the report of the russes . 
 for from Novogrod yearly there go many sled in the winter to fetch salt from some , with carrier and empty sled there to buy it , and to bring it to Novogrod to sell it in the market or otherwise . 
 from Novogrod unto some town you may have a pood of ware carry for eight penny or nine penny : but in any wise your ware must be send from Novogrod by the sixth of January , so that the ware may be at some by Candlemas , or soon after : for if your ware shall tarry by the way until the 15. of February when the sun be of some power , then be it dangerous : for the heat of the sun in the day cause the deep lake of Ladega , and special of Onega to cleave : and if there shall come then a sudden thaw , as oftentimes in that time of the year do , then do . these lake open and break , whereby many man be lose , and both man and 82 
 1566. horse drown , although other river do remain freeze a long time after . 
 in the town of some also there be many warehouse , whereof we can be destitute for the repose of our ware , as also as many bark as you will to transport your ware from thence to saint Nicholas road , and that for three penny a poods carriage : so that from the ci tie of Novogrod unto saint Nicholas road you may have ware carry for two all tine . the pood come unto 23. all tine the ton . 
 provide always , that you buy your ware there your novgorod self , and send it thence : for there be no hope that the native will bring their ware from Novogrod to some , in hope to sell unto we , consider the great trade that they have at the narve , which be within 180 mile off they . 
 write by Thomas Southam a servant to the company . 
 . 