the name of such country as i Anthony Jenkinson have travel unto , from the second of October 1546 , at which time i make my first voyage out of England , until the year of our lord 1572 , when i return last out of Russia . 
 first , i pass into Flanders , and travel through all the base country , and from thence through germanic , pass over the Alps i travel into Italy , and from thence make my journey through Piedmont into France , throughout all which realm i have thorough journey . 
 i have also travel through the kingdom of Spain and portingal , i have sail through the Levant sea every way , and have be in all the chief island within the same sea , as Rhodes , Malta , Sicilia , Cyprus , Candie , and diverse other . 
 i have be in many part of Grecia , Morea , Achaia , and where the old city of Corinth stand . 
 i have travel through a great part of turquoise , Syria , and diverse other country in Asia minor . 
 i have pass over the mountain of Libanus to Damascus , and travel through Samaria , Galile , philistine or Palestine , unto Jerusalem , and so through all the holy land . 
 i have be in diverse place of Africa , as Algiers , Cola , bona , Tripoli , the gollet within the gulf of Tunis . 
 195 
 A.D. 
 1572. 
 [ i . 412. i i have sail far northward within the mare glacial , where we have have continual day , and sight of the sun ten week together , and that navigation be in Norway , Lapland , Samogitia , and other very strange place . 
 i have travel through all the ample dominion of the emperor of Russia and Moscovia , which extend from the north sea , and the confine of Norway and Lapland , even to the mare Caspium . 
 i have be in diverse country near about the caspian sea , gentile , and mahomean , as Cazan , Cremia , rezan , Cheremisi , mordoviti , Vachin , Nagaia , with diverse other of strange custom and religion . 
 i have sail over the caspian sea , and discover all the region thereabouts adjacent , as Chircassi , Comul , shascal , Shirvan , with many other . 
 i have travel 40 day journey beyond the say sea , towards the oriental India , and Cathaia , through diverse desert and wilderness , and pass through 5 kingdom of the Tartar , and all the land of turkeman and zagatay , and so to the great city of Boghar in Bactria , not without great peril and danger sundry time . 
 after all this , in An. 1562 , i pass again over the caspian sea another way , and land in Armenia , at a city call Derbent , build by Alexander the great , and from thence travel through MMia , Parthia , Hyrcania , into Persia to the court of the great sophy call Shaw Tamasso , unto who i deliver letter from the queen majesty , and remain in his court 8 month , and return homeward , pass through diverse other country . final i make two voyage more after that out of England into Russia , the one in the year 1566 , and the other in the year 1571. and thus be weary and grow old , i be content to take my rest in my own house , chief comfort my self , in that my service have be honourable accept and reward of her majesty and the rest by who i have be employ . 
 . 