the copy of a letter send to the emperor of Moscovie , by Christopher Hodsdon and William Burrough , anno 1570. 
 often mighty emperor , etc whereas sir William Garrard and his fellowship the company of english merchant , this last winter send hither to the narve three ship lade with merchandise , which be leave here , and with it Christopher Hodsdon one of the say fellowship , and 
 their chief doer in this place , who when he come first hither , and until such time as he have dispatch those ship from hence , be in hope of good to lade twelve or thirteen sail of good ship , against this ship , wherefore he write unto the say sir William Garrard and his company to send hither this spring the say number of thirteen ship . and because that in their come hither we find the freebooter on the sea , and suppose this year that they will be very strong , he therefore give the say sir William and his company advise to furnish the say number of ship so strong , as they shall be able to withstand the force of the freebooter : whereupon they have according to his advice send this year thirteen good ship together well furnish with man and munition , and all other necessary for the war , of which 13. ship William Burrough one of the say fellowship be captain general , unto who there be give in charge , that if he meet with any the dansk freebooter , or whatsoever robber and thief that be enemy to your highness , he shall do his best to apprehend and take they . it so happen that the ten day of this month the say William with his fleet , meet with six ship of the freebooter near unto a island call Tuttee , which be about 50. verst from narve , unto which freebooter he with his fleet give chase , and take of they the admiral , 167 
 A.D. 
 1570 
 five ship of freeboter take . 
 wherein be leave but three man , the rest be flee to shore in their boat among the wood upon tutty , on which ship he set fire and burn she . he also take four more of those ship which be now here , and one ship escape he : out of which four ship some of the man flee in their boat and so escape , other be slay in fight , and some of they when they see they can not escape , cast themselves willing into the sea and be drown . so that in these five ship be leave but 83. man . 
 the say Wil. Borough when he come hither to narve , find here Christopher Hodsdon aforenamed , both the say Christopher and William together , in the name of sir William Garrard and the rest of their whole company and fellowship , do present unto your highness of those freebooter take by our ship 82. man , which we deliver here unto knez Voivoda , the 13. of this month . one man of those freebooter we have keep by we , who name be Hans snarke a captain . and the cause why we have do it be this : when we shall have deliver he with the rest of his fellow unto the voivodaes officer , there be of our Englishman more than 50. which fall on their knee unto we , request that he may be reserve in the ship , and carry back into England : and the cause why they so earnest entreat for he , be , that some of those our Englishman have be take with freebooter , and by his mean have their life save , with great favour beside , which they find at his hand . wherefore if it please your highness to permit it , we will carry he home with we into England , wherein we request your majesty favour : notwithstanding what you command of he shall|be observe . 
 we have also send our servant to your highness with such bestelling and write as we find in those ship : whereby your majesty may see by who , and in what order they be set out , and what they pretend , which write we have commend unto Knez yorive 168 
 your majesty Voivoda at Plesco , by our servant . and have request his furtherance for the safe delivery of they to your majesty hand : which write when you have peruse , we desire that they may be return unto we by this our servant , as speedy as may be : for these ship which we now have here will be soon dispatch from hence , for that we have not good to lade above the half of they . and the cause be , we have this winter ( by your majesty order ) be keep from trafficking , to the company great loss . but hope your [ i . 402. i majesty will hereafter have consideration thereof , and that we may have free liberty to traffic in all part of your majesty country , accord to the privilege give unto we , we pray for your majesty health , with prosperous success to the pleasure of God . from narve the 15 of July , anno 1570. 
 your majesty most humble and obedient , Christopher Hodsdon . William Borough . 
 . 