a remembrance of advice give to the merchant , touch a voyage for Cola abovesaid . 1578. 
 whereas you require my counsel after what order the voyage for Cola be to be set forth , i answer that i know no better way then have be heretofore use , which be after this manner . first of all we have hire the ship by the great , give so much for the wear of the tackle and the hull of the ship , as the ship may be in bigness : as if she be about the burden of a hundred ton , we pay fourscore pound , and so after that rate : and thereunto we do victual the ship our self , and do ship all our man our self , ship no more man , nor give they more wage than we shall do if they go of a merchant voyage , for it have be a great help to our voyage hitherto , to have our man to fish with one boat , and cost we no more charge than it shall do , if our man shall lie and do nothing save the charge of salt , and of line , which be treble pay for again . for this last year past our man kill with one boat betwixt 9 or 10. thousand fish , which yield to we in money with the oil that come of it , about 15. or 16. score pound , which be a great help to a voyage . and beside all this , our ship do take in so much oil and other commodity as we bestow 100 whole clothes in . but because , as i do suppose , it be not the use of London to take ship to fraught after that order before prescribe , neither i think that the mariner will take such pain as our man will : therefore my counsel be , if you think good , to freight some ship of hui or Newcastle , for i be sure that you may have they there better cheap to freight , then here at London . beside all this , one may have such man as will take pain for their merchant . and 
 208 
 c 1598. furthermore when it shall please God that the ship shall return to come to discharge at Hull , which will be have the best the most for your profit for the sale of all such like commodity as come from that place , as for fish , oil , saieoffish . and Salmon chief , he that will seek a better market for the sale then at Hull , he must seek it out of England , for the like be not in England . this be the best way that i can devise , and most for your profit , and if you will , i will also set you down all the commodity that be necessary for such a voyage , and which way also that the Hollander may within two or three year be force to leave off the trade of Cola which may easy be do . for if my ability be to my will , i will use the matter so that they shall either leave off the trade , or else carry light ship with they home again . 
 . 