certain direction give by m. Richard Hackluit of the middle temple , to m. 
 Morgan Hubblethorne , Dier , send into Persia , 1579 - 
 i TTOr that England have the best wool and cloth of the X1 world , and for that the clothes of the realm have no good vent , if good die be not add : therefore it be much to be wish , that the die of foreign country be see , to the end that the art of die may be bring into the realm in great excellency : for thereof will follow honour to the realm , and great and ample vent of our clothes : and of the vent of clothes , will follow the set of our poor on work , in all degree of labour in clothe and die : for which cause most principal you be send over at the charge of the city : and therefore for the satisfy the lord , and of the expectation of the merchant and of your company , it behoove you to have care to return home with more knowledge than you carry out . 
 2 the great dearth of clothes be a great let in the ample vent of clothes , and the price of a cloth , for a five , six and seven part rise by the colour and die : and therefore to devise to die as good colour with the one half of the present price be to the great commodity of the realm , by save of great treasure in time to come . and therefore you must have great care to have knowledge of the material of all the country that you shall pass through , that may be use in die , be they herb , weed , bark , gum , earth , or what else soever . 
 3 in Persia you shall find carpet of course thrum wool , the best of the world , and excellent colour : those city and town you must repair to , and you must use mean to learn all the order of the die of those thrum , which be so die as neither rain , wine , nor yet vinegar can stain : and if you may attain to that 
 249 
 cunning , you shall not need to fear die of cloth : for if the colour hold in yarn and thrum , it will hold much better in cloth . 
 4 for that in Persia they have great colour of silk , it behoove you to learn that also , for that cloth die and silk die have a certain affinity , and your merchant mind to bring much raw silk into the realm , and therefore it be more requisite you learn the same . 
 5 in Persia there be that slay linen cloth : it be not amiss you learn it if you can : it have be a old trade in England , whereof some excellent clothes yet remain : but the art be now lose , and not to be find in the realm . 
 6 they have a cunning in Persia to make in buskin of spanish leather flower of many kind , in most lively colour , and these the courtier do wear there : to learn which art be no harm . 
 7 if any dier of China , or of the east part of the world , be to be find in Persia , acquaint yourself with he , and learn what you may of he . 
 8 you shall find anile there , if you can procure the herb that it be make of , either by seed or by plant , to carry into England , you may do well to endeavour to enrich your country with the same : but withal learn you the make of the anile , and if you can get the herb , you may send the same dry into England , for possible it grow here already . 
 9 return home with you all the material and substance that they die withal in Russia , and also in Persia , that your company may see all . 
 io in some little pot in your lodging , i wish you to make daily trial in your art , as you shall from time to time learn aught among they . 
 two set down in write whatsoever you shall learn from day to day , lest you shall forget , or lest God shall call you to his mercy : and by each return i wish you to send in write whatsoever you have learn , or at the least keep the same safe in your coffer , that 25° 
 commission to pet and Jackman aj > . 
 1580. come death or life your country may enjoy the thing that you go for , and not lose the charge , and travel bestow in this case . 
 12 learn you there to fix and make sure the colour to be give by log wood : so shall we not need to buy woad so dear , to the enrich of our enemy . 
 13 inquire of the price of leckar , and all other thing belong to die . 
 14 in any wise set down in write a true note from whence every of they do come , and where , and in what country each of they do grow , i mean where the natural place of each of they be , as how near to such a city , or to such a sea , or to such a portable river in Russia , Persia , or elsewhere . 
 15 if before you return you can procure a singular good workman in the art of turkish carpet make , you shall bring the art into this realm , and also thereby increase work to your company . 
 . 