the deposition of m. William Burrough to certain interrogatory minister unto he concern the narve , Kegor , etc to what king or prince they do appertain and be subject , make the 23 of June , 1576. 
 these article seem to have be minister upon the quarrel between Aiderman bind the elder , and the Moscovie company , for his trade to the narve without their consent . 
 first , whether the village or town vulgar call the first ln-the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo and Cola , and the port erogatorie . 
 of the same town , as well at the time of the grant of 
 the letter of privilege by the emperor to our mere - [ i . 415. i chant , as also in the year of our lord , 1566 , 1567 , 1568 , 1569 , 1570 , 1571 , 1572 , 1573 , 1574 , and 1575. 
 respective be ( as present they be ) of the jurisdiction , and subject to the mighty prince the emperor of 203 
 Russia : and whether the say emperor of Russia , by all the time aforesaid , be chief lord and governor respective of the say place , and so vulgar know , have , and repute : and whether the say town and place , and either of they be situate towards the north and Northeast or northwest , and between the north and the east point : and be the same place whereunto by force of the say privilege , it be forbid to any other subject to have traffic , save to the society aforesaid . 
 to this interrogatory the deponent say , that it be true that the village , town and place vulgar call the narve , Kegor , Pechingo and Cola , and the port thereof , at the time of the grant of the say privilege ( as he judge ) be repute respective to be under the jurisdiction , and subject to the emperor of Russia , and so from the time of the say grant , unto the year , 1566 , and that in the year of our lord , 1566 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 725 73 , 74 , and 1575. respective they be ( as present they be ) of the jurisdiction , and subject unto the mighty prince the emperor of Russia , and the same emperor of Russia , by all the time aforesaid , be chief governor respective of the say place , and so vulgar know , have and repute . and that all the say place be situate from London northwards , between the east and the north , and within the grant of the letter patent , and privilege of the say company of merchant for the discovery of new trade , and the same place whereunto by force of the say letter patent , it be forbid to any other subject to have traffic save to the society aforesaid . 
 notwithstanding the deponent say , that he have hear it credible report by diverse , that the king of Denmark of late year , or every year once , have have one of his subject or moor by he self , or with his guide a lappian , that have at the place Cola , Kegor , and diverse other place in Lappia , take of the lappy certain tribute or head penny , which the say lappy 
 204 
 have willing give to win favour of the say prince , and to live quiet by his subject , the people of finmark which border upon their country , whereof Wardhouse be the strong hold , and border near unto they . he have also hear that in the time of peace between the say emperor of Russia , and the king of Sweden , there be yearly for the king of Sweden one or moor that come into Lappia unto diverse place , in manner as the king of Denmark servant use to do , and do demand of they some tribute or duty which they willing pay : but since the late war between the say emperor and king of Sweden , he have not hear of any thing that have be pay by they to the king of Sweden : such be the simplicity of this people the lappy , that they will rather give tribute to all those that border upon their country , then by deny it have their ill will . 
 but the truth be , as this deponent say , that the say mighty prince the emperor of Russia be the chief lord and governor of the say country of Lappia , his law and order be observe by they , he take toll and custom etc of they . they be infidel , but if any of they become Christians it be after the ruff law . if there happen any controversy between those people , such as can be end among themselves , or by the emperor deputy in that country , they repair to the Mosko as their high court , and there have it end . between the place specify Kegor , and the confine of Finmarke aforesaid in Lappia , be the monastery Pechingo , which be monk , and use the peek ) ruff law , the chief or head of that abbey be always appoint by the clergy in Mosko . 
 also in the year of our lord 1557. then say deponent be at the place Kegor , in the month of June , the 29. day be saint Peter day , at which time be a great assembly of people at a mart there , the russes , keril and lappians on the one side subject to the say mighty prince the emperor of Russia , and the norwegian 
 205 
 or norse and people of Finmarke subject to the king of Denmark on the other part , they do barter and exchange fish for other commodity . the deputy for the ruff have the chief government of the say mart , and take toll of those people the be subject to his master , and the captain of Wardhouse have then the government of the people subject to his master the king of Denmark . he say also , that between the abbey Pechingo , and the abbey of saint Nicholas in Russia , upon the border of the say coast of Lappia , he have be upon the shore at diverse place , where fresh river fall into the sea , where be common take fresh salmon , all which place he do know for certain , that they be farm out to the subject of the say emperor , and he the say emperor receive yearly the rent for they . and further he say that it have be further credible report unto he , that there be not any such river or creek of fresh water which fall out of the say country of Lappia into the sea , between the say abbey Pechingo , and the bay of saint Nicholas , but they be all and every of they farm out , and the emperor receive the rent for they . 
 the second item , whether as well before , as also within the interroga - memory of man , till the time of the grant of the say letter patent any of the english merchant ( save the merchant of the say society ) subject of this realm of England , have common exercise or frequent business or trade in the say village or town call the narve , Kegor , Pechingo , and Cola , or in any of they , or in any port or territory of the say emperor of Russia . 
 thejeponent to tbis interrogatory the deponent answer , that answer . the subject of reajme before the grant of the say letter patent do not common exercise , neither frequent or trade to any of the say place call the narve , Kegor , Pechingo or Cola , or to any of they . 
 . 