Instructions make by the company of english merchant for discovery of new trade , unto Richard Gibs , William Biggat , John Backhouse , William freeman , John Haly , and James woodcock , etc master of the 9 ship , and one bark that we have freight for a voyage with they to be make ( by the grace of God ) from hence to saint Nicholas in Russia , and back again : which ship be now in the river of Thames be present ready to depart upon the say voyage , with the next apt wind that may serve thereunto : and with this fleet afterward be join m. Christopher Carlisle with the tiger . the 1 of June 1582. 
 orasmuch as the number of ship which we purpose to send in this fleet together for saint Nicholas in Russia be great than at any time heretofore we have send thither , as also for that some speech be give out that you shall be meet withal by such as with force and 
 violence will assault you as enemy , to the end that good 3°3 
 order may be establish among you for keep together in company , and unite your force , as well for the better direction to be have in your navigation , as also for your moor safety and strength against the enemy , we have think good to appoint among you a admiral and vice-admiral , and that all of you and every one particular shall be bind in the sum of one hundred pound to keep company together . 
 2 because the Salomon be the big ship , best appoint , and of great force to defend or offend the enemy , we do therefore appoint that ship admiral , which shall wear the flag in the main top . 
 3 than Thomas Allen be a good ship and well appoint , and for that the master of she be the ancient master of the fleet that have take charge that way , we do appoint the same ship to be vice-admiral , and to wear the flag in the foretop . 
 4 and for that the master of the prudence be of great experience , and knowledge in that voyage , we do appoint that he with the master of the admiral and vice-admiral shall confer , consult and agree upon the course and direction that shall be use in this voyage , and it shall be lawful unto the master of the admiral , with the consent of m. Gibs , and m. Biggat , or one of they to make his course and direction from time to time during the whole voyage , and all the fleet be to follow and observe the same without stray or break of company at any time upon the penalty before specify . 
 5 the appoint of the ship for admiral and viceadmiral , and those man to consult and agree upon the course and direction of the voyage , as aforesaid , have be do by the consent and with the like of you all , and therefore we doubt not but that you will all careful and willing observe the premise . 
 6 item , we have think good to put you in mind , that at such time as you may convenient from time to time , you do assemble and meet together , to consider , consult , and determine upon such article as you shall 3°4 
 instruction for russian fleet a.d. 
 1582. 
 think necessary to be propound touch your best safety and defence against all force that may be offer you in this voyage , as well outward bind , and while you shall remain in the road and bay of saint Nicholas , as also homewards bind , and that which you shall agree upon , or that which most of you shall consent unto , cause it to be set down in write for record , which may serve for a act among your self to bind you all to observe the same . 
 7 we have appoint James woodcock in the small bark to attend upon you , and to receive his direction from you . you be therefore to remember well what conference and talk have be have with you here before your go touch you say bark , to what purpose she may best serve , and the manner how to employ she , and thereupon to give your order and direction unto he , as the time and place shall require . 
 8 item , if you shall understand as you be outward bind , that the enemy be go before you to saint Nicholas , remember what advice have be give you for your stay at Berozova Ustia , till you have by espial view and Berozova understand the force , and the manner of their abode at Ustia . that place . 
 9 and if in the sea either outward or homeward , or in the time of your abode at anchor at saint Nicholas , you shall be assault by force of any , as enemy whatsoever , you be to defend your self with such force as you may or can : trust not too far , neither give place to inconvenience . 
 10 you will not forget what conference we have touch your pass outward bind by Wardhouse , to view and understand what you can at that place , and to show your self , to see if there be any there that have a mind to speak with you , for that we think it better then , and thereabouts , then afterward or else where . 
 11 while you shall remain in the road at saint Nicholas , be circumspect and careful to have your ship in readiness , and in good order always , and upon all sudden . 
 in 3°5 u 
 the great danger unto you in that place will be while you shall shift your ship : therefore you be to consider of it , but the fit time for you to do the same , will be when the wind be southerly off the shore , or calm , and at such time you may the better do it without danger . you must take such order among you , that your company may be always willing and ready to help one the other , and appoint among your self such ship to shift first , and such after , in such sort and form as you shall think best and most convenient . and while they shall be in discharge , shift , and lade , let the rest of your company which have not then to do in lade or discharge , help those ship that shall have labour to do , as well for carry the bark from ship to the shore , or from shore to the ship with your boat , as also for any other help that they shall have need of . 
 12 remember what have be say unto you touch 
 the more of your ship , etc for use advantage against the enemy , if you shall be assault in that place . 
 13 see that you serve God , abolish swear and game , be careful of fire and candle , etc 
 14 you be to consult and agree among your self upon sign , token , and good order for the better keep of company together , and also the manner how and by what mean , rescue , aid , or help may be give by one to the other in fight , if you happen to come to it . 
 thus we pray God to send you a prosperous voyage and safe return . 
 . 