the opinion of master William Burrough send to a friend , require his judgement for the fit time of the departure of our ship towards saint Nicholas in Russia . 
 whereas you request i to persuade the company not to send their ship from hence before the fine of may , i do not think the same so good a course for they to observe : for you know that the soon we 306 
 send they hence , the soon we may look for their return . if we send they in the begin of May , the russian then may they be at saint Nicholas by the fine of the same month : and by that time the great part or beam of your lade of necessity must be come down , especial may . the flax : but if it shall fall out so lateward a break up of the river of Duyna , that by the end of may the good can be bring to saint Nicholas , yet this be always to be account for certain , that before our ship can come thither , the good may be bring down to that place : and if through ice the ship be keep back any time , the loss and charge of that time touch not the company at all , but the owner of the ship , and yet will the owner put that in adventure , rather than tarry long time before their go hence . 
 now see by send our ship hence in the begin of May , their arrival at saint Nicholas may be at the end of the same month , and remain thirty day there , they may be lade and come thence by the last of June , and return home hither by the 10 of August with commodity to serve the market then , it can be deny but we shall reap thereby great commodi tie . 
 but it may be object , that if all our ship be send then to return as aforesaid , you shall not be able to send we in so much cordage , wax and oil , as otherwise you shall do if they remain a month long , neither can you by that time perfect your account to be send in they as you will do . 
 for answer thereunto this be my meaning : though i wish the great part of our ship to go as aforesaid , yet will i have one good ship or two at the most well furnish in all point that shall depart always from hence , between the beginning and the 10 day of June : and the same to be condition withal to remain at saint Nicholas from the first arrival there until the midst of August , or to be dispatch thence soon , 3°7 
 at the will and like of our factor for the same : by this order these commodity follow may ensue 
 1 you may have our commodity there timely to send up the river before it wax shallow , to be disperse in the country at your pleasure . 
 2 the great part of our good may be return hither timely to serve the first market . 
 3 our late ship remain so long here may serve to good purpose , for return answer of such letter as may be send over land , and receive here before their departure . 
 4 their remain so late with you shall satisfy your desire for perfect your account , and may bring such cordage , wax , oil , and other commodity , as you can provide before that time : and chief may serve we in 
 stead to bring home our good that may be send we 
 from Persia . 
 now see it may be so many way commodious to the company to observe this order , without any charge unto they , i wish that you put to your help hand to further the same . 
 . 