a letter of m. Henry lane to the worshipful m. William Sanderson , contain a brief discourse of that which pass in the north-east discovery for the space of three and thirty year . 
 after Sanderson , as you late request i , so have i seek , and though i can find thing that heretofore i keep in writing , and lend out to other , yet peruse at London copy of my old letter to content one that mean to pleasure many , i have brief and as 
 true as i may , draw out as follow : the rough hew may be plane at your leisure , or as please he that shall take the pain . 
 first the honourable attempt to discover by sea Northeast and northwest name for Cathay , be chief 
 33° 
 procure by privilege from king Edward the sixth , and other his nobility , by and at the cost and suit of m. Sebastian Cabota , than governor for discovery with sir Andrew Judde , sir George Barnes , sir William Garrard , m. Anthony Hussie , and a company of merchant , be in the last year of his majesty reign 1553. the generail charge whereof be commit to one sir Hugh Willoughbie knight , a goodly gentleman , accompany with sufficient number of pilot , master , merchant and mariner , have three ship well furnish , to wit , the bona speranda , the Edward bonadventure , and the Confidentia . the Edward bonadventure , Richard 
 A.D. 
 < 554 - 
 anno 1553. m. William Burrough be then young , and with his brother in this first voyage . 
 Chanceller be pilot , and Steven Burrough master , have discover Wardhouse upon the coast of fin-mark , by storm or fog depart from the rest , find Newnox be , the bay of saint Nicholas now the chief port for Russia , - m t e rm-there winter in safety , and have aid of the people at 
 a village call Newnox . 
 the other two ship attempt further northwards ( as appear by pamphlet find after write by sir Hugh Willoughbie ) be in September encounter with such extreme cold , that they put back to seek a winter place : and miss the say bay fall upon a desert coast in Lappia , enter into a river immediate freeze up , since discover , name Arzina Reca , distant east from a russian monastery of monk call Pechingho , from whence they never return , but all to the number of 70. person perish , which be for want of experience to have make cave and stove . Theise be find with the ship the next summer anno 1554. by Russe fisherman : and in anno 1555. the place send unto by english merchant as hereafter appear . 
 anno 1554. then say ship Edward bonadventure ( although rob homewards by Flemings ) return with her company to London , show and set forth their entertainment and discovery of the country even to the city of Moscow , from whence they bring a privilege write in Russe with the king or great duke 
 of s. Nicholas Westward 35 mile . 
 note . 
 anno 1554. 
 331 
 seal , the other two ship look for and unknown to they where they be . 
 anno 1555. An. 1555. then say company of merchant for discovery upon a new supply , send thither again with two ship , to wit , the Edward bonadventure , and another bear the name of the king and queen , Philip and the king and Marie , who majesty by their letter to the say betters5 Moscovite , recommend sundry their subject then 
 ' pass , whereof certain , to wit , Richard Chanceller , 
 George Killingworth , Henry lane , and Arthur Edward , after their arrival at the bay , and pass up Dwina to Vologda , go first up to Moscow , where , upon knowledge of the say letter , they with their train have speciali entertainment , with house and diet appoint , and short permit to the prince presence , they be with gentleman bring through the city of Moscow , to the castle and palace , replenish with number of people , and some gunner . they enter sundry room , ftir-nished in show with ancient grave personage , all in long garment of sundry colour , gold , tissue , baldekin , and violet , as our vestment and cope have be in England , suitable with cap , jewel , and chain . Theise be find to be no courtier , but ancient moscovite , inhabitant , and other their merchant of credit , as the manner be , furnish thus from the wardrobe and treasury , wait and wear this apparel for the time , and so to restore it . 
 then enter into the presence , be a large room floore with carpet , be man of more estate , and rich show , in number above a hundred set square : who after the say english man come in , do reverence , they all stand up , the prince only sit , and yet rise at any occasion , when our king and queen name be read or speak . then after speech by interpretation , our man kiss his hand , and bid to dinner , be stay in another room , and at dinner bring through , where may be see massy silver and gild plate , some like and as big as kilderkin , and washbowle , and enter 33 2 
 the dine place , be the great room , the prince be set bare head , his crown and rich cap stand upon a pinnacle by . not far distant sit his metropolitan , with diverse other of his kindred , and chief tartarian captain : none sit over against he , or any , at other table , their back towards he : which table all furnish with guest set , there be for the Englishman , name by the russes , Ghosti Carabelski , to wit , stranger or merchant by ship , a table in the midst of the room , where they be set direct against the prince : and then begin the service , bring in by a number of his young lord and gentleman , in such rich attire , as be above specify : and still from the prince table ( notwithstanding their own furniture ) they have his whole mess set over all in massy fine gold , deliver every time from he by name to they , by their several christian name , as they sit , viz. Richard , George , Henry , Arthur . likewise bread and sundry drink of purify mead , make of fine white and clarify honey . at their rise , the prince call they to his table , to receive each one a cup from his hand to drink , and take into his hand master George killingworths beard , which reach over m. kilrng-the table , and pleasant deliver it the metropolitan , w^rths beard who seem to bless it , say in Russe , this be God gift . as in deed at that time it be not only thick , broad , and yellow colour , but in length five foot and two inch of assize . then take leave , be night , they be accompany and follow with a number , carry pot of drink , and dish of meat dress , to our lodging . 
 this year the two ship , with the dead body of sir Hugh Willoughbie , and his people , be send unto by master Killingworth , ( which remain there in Moscow agent almost two year ) and much of the good and victual be recover and save . 
 anno 1556. the company send two ship for Russia , anno 1556. with extraordinary master and sailor to bring home the two ship , which be freeze in Lappia , in the river of 
 333 
 Arzina aforesaid . the two ship send this year from England sail from Lapland to the bay of S. Nicholas , take in lade with passenger , to wit , a ruff ambassador , name Joseph Napea , and some of his man ship with Richard Chanceller in the Edward . but so it fall out that the two which come from Lappia , with all their new master and mariner , never be hear of , but in foul weather , and wrought sea , after their two year winter in Lapland , become , as be suppose , unstanch , and sink , wherein be drown also diverse russes merchant , and servant of the ambassador . a three ship the Edward aforesaid , fall on the north part of Scotland , upon a rock be also lose , and master Chanceller , with diverse other , drown . the say Russe ambassador hardly escape , with other his man , mariner , and some good save , be send for into Scotland , from the king , queen , and merchant ( the messenger be m. doctor Laurence Hussie , and other : ) and then , as in the chronicle appear , honorable entertain and receive at London . 
 this year also the company furnish and send out a pinnace , name the serchthrift , to discover the harborowes in the north coast from Norway to Wardhouse , and so to the bay of S. Nicholas . there be in her master and pilot , Stephen Burrough , with his brother William , and eight other . their discovery be beyond the bay , toward the samoed , people dwell near the river of ob , and find a sound or sea with a island call vaigat , first by they put into the card or map . in that place they throw snow out of their say pinnace , with shovel in August , by which extremity , and lack of time , they come back to Russia , and winter at Colmogro . 
 anno 1557. the company with four good ship , send back the say Russe ambassador , and in company with he , send as a agent , for further discovery , master Anthony Jenkinson , who afterward anno 1558 , with great favour of the prince of Moscovia , and his letter 334 
 pass the river Volga to Cazan , and mean to seek Cathay by land , be by many troop and company of Boghar uncivil tartarian encounter , and in danger : but keep company with merchant of Bactria , or Boghar , and urgeme , travel with camel , he with his company , go to Boghar , and no further : who entertainment of the king be to be have of master Jenkinson , which return anno 1559. to Moscovie . and in anno 1560. he , with 1560. Henry lane , come home into England : which year be the first safe return , without loss or shipwreck , or dead 
 ffaight , and burn . and at this time be the first the first trade traffic to the narve in Livonia , which confine with t0 blarve . Lituania , and all the dominion of Russia : and the ’ ' market , fair , commodity , great town and river , be send unto by diverse servant : the report be take by Henry lane , agent , and deliver to the company , 1561. the trade to rye , and revel , of old time have be long since frequent by our english nation , but this trade to the narve be hitherto conceal from we 
 by the Dansker and lubecker . 
 anno 1561. then say master Anthony Jenkinson go agent into Russia , who the next year after , pass all the river of Volga to astracan , and over the caspian sea , arrive in Persia , and open the trade thither . 
 also between the year of 1568. and 1573. sundry voyage after master Jenkinsons , be make by Thomas Alcock , Arthur Edwards , master Thomas Bannister , and master Geffrey Ducket , who return ( if spoil near Volga have not prevent by rove thief ) have altogether salve and recover the company ( call the old company ) great loss , charge , and damage : but the say be true , by unity small thing grow great , and by contention great thing become small . this may be understand best by the company . the forwardness of some few , and evil do of some unjust factor , be cause of much of the evil success . 
 Arthur Edward be send again 1579. and die in the voyage at astracan . about which matter , be to be 335 
 Alcock slay in Persia . Bannister die in Media . 
 Edward die at astracan . 
 remember the voyage of master Thomas Randolph esquire , ambassador , anno 1567. and late of sir Jerome bow , anno 1583. both tend and treat for further discovery , freedom , and privilege , wherewith i meddle not . but in conclusion , for their pain and 
 adventure this way ( as diverse do now adays other way ) as worthy gentleman send from prince , to do their country good , i put they in your memory , with my hearty farewell . from saint magarets near Dartforth in Kent . t 
 you Henry . lane . 
 . 