the most solemn , and magnificent coronation | | or Theodor . of | | Pheodor Ivanowich , emperor of Russia etc the ten of June , in the year 1584. see and observe by master Jerom Horsey gentleman , and servant to her majesty , a man of great travel , and long experience in those part : wherewith be also join the course of his journey over land from Moscow to Emden . 
 the death of Ivan vasiliwich 1584. 
 Apr. 18. 
 hen the old emperor Ivan Vasiliwich die , ( be about the eighteenth of April , 1584. after our computation ) in the ci tie of Moscow , have reign 54. year , there be some tumult and uproar among some of the nobility , and commonalty , which notwithstanding be quick 
 pacify . immediate the same night , the prince Boris 
 Pheodorowich godonova , knez Ivan Pheodorowich , 
 L. Boris adopt as the emperor three son . 
 Mesthis Slafsky , knez Ivan Petrowich susky , Mekita Romanowich and Bodan Jacovlewich Belskoy , be all noble man , and chief in the emperor will , especial the lord Boris , who he adopt as his three son , and be brother to the empress , who be a man very well like of all estate , as no less worthy for his valour and wisdom : all these be appoint to dispose , and settle 336 
 his son Pheodor Ivanowich , have one swear another , and all the nobili tie , and officer whosoever . in the morning you dead emperor be lay into the church of Michael the Archangel , into a hew sepulchre , very rich deck with vesture fit for such a purpose : and present proclamation be make , ( emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia etc ) throughout all the city of Moscow be great watch and ward , with soldier , and gunner , good order establish , and officer place to subdue the tumulter , and maintain quietness : to see what speed and policy be in this case use be a thing worth the behold . This be do in Moscow , great man of birth and account be also present send to the border town , as smolensko vobsko , Kasan , novo-gorod etc with fresh garrison , and the old send up . as upon the 4. of May a parliament be hold , wherein be assemble , the metropolitan , archbishop , bishop , prior , and chief clergy man , and all the nobility whatsoever : where many matter be determine not pertinent to my purpose , yet all tend to a new reformation in the government : but especial the term , and time be agree upon for the solemnize of the new 
 young son send to ouglet . 
 emperor coronation . in the mean time you empress , Em~ wife to the old emperor , be with her child the 
 emperor son , Charlewich demetrie Ivanowich , of Jatier , a er one year age or there about , send with her father Pheodor Pheodorowich Nagay , and that kindred , be 5. 
 brother , to a town call ouglet , which be give unto she , and the young prince her son , with all the land belong to it in the shire , with officer of all sort appoint , have allowance of apparel , jewel , diet , horse etc in ample manner belong to the estate of a princess . the time of mourning after their use be expire , call Sorachyn , or forty orderly day , the day of the solemnize of this coronation , with great preparation , be come , be upon the 10. day of June , 1584. and that day than Sunday , he be of the age of 25. year : at which time , master Jerom Horsey be 
 the day of Pheodor his coronation . 
 in 
 337 
 orderly send for , and place in a fit room to see all the solemnity . the emperor come out of his palace , there go before he , the metropolitan , archbishop , bishop , and chief monk , and clergy man , with very rich cope , and priest garment upon they , carry picture of our lady etc with the emperor angel , banner , censer , and many other such ceremonious thing , sing all the way . the emperor with his nobility in order enter the church name Blaveshina , or blessedness , where prayer , and service be use , accord to the manner of their church : that do , they go thence to the church , call Michael the Archangell , and there also use the like prayer , and service : and from thence to our lady church , Prechista , be their cathedral church . in the midst thereof be a chair of majesty place , wherein his ancestor use to sit at such extraordinary time : his robe be then change , and most rich and unvaluable garment put on he : be place in this princely seat , his nobility stand round about he in their degree , his imperiali crown be set upon his head by the metropolitan , his sceptre globe in his right hand , his sword of justice in his left of great riches : he 6. crown also , by which he hold his kingdom be set before he , and the lord Boris Pheodorowich be place at his right hand : then the metropolitan read open a book of a small volume , with exhortation to the emperor to minister true justice , to enjoy with tranquillity the crown of his ancestor , which God have give he , and use these word follow . 
 through the will of the almighty and without beginning God , which be before this world , who we glorify in the Trinity , one only God , the father , the son , and the holy ghost , maker of all thing , worker of all in all every where , fulfiller of all thing , by which will , and work , he both live , and give life to man : that our only God which enspire every one of we his only child with his word to discern God through our lord 338 
 jesus Christ , and the holy quicken spirit of life , now in these perilous time establish we to keep the right sceptre , and suffer we to reign of our self to the good profit of the land , to the subdue of the people , together with the enemy , and the maintenance of virtue . and so the metropolitan bless and lay his cross upon he . after this , he be take out of his chair of majesty , have upon he a upper robe adorn with precious stone of all sort , orient pearl of great quantity , but always augment in riches : it be in weight two hundred pound , the train , and part thereof bear up by 6. Dukes , his chief imperiali crown upon his head very precious : he staff imperiali in his right hand of a unicorns horn of three foot and a half in length beset with rich stone , buy of merchant of Ausburge by the old emperor in An. 1581 , and cost he 7000 mark sterling . this jewel m. Horsey keep sometime , before the emperor have it . his sceptre globe be carry before he by the prince Boris Pheodorowich , his rich cap beset with rich stone and pearl be carry before he by a duke : he 6. crown also be carry by Demetrius Ivanowich Godonova , the emperor uncle , Mekita Romanowich the emperor uncle , Stephan vasiliwich , Gregory Vasiliwich , Ivan Vasiliwich brother of the blood royal . thus at last the emperor come to the great church door , and the people cry , God save our emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia . his horse be there ready most rich adorn , with a cover of embroider pearl and precious stone , saddle , and all furniture agreeable to it , report to be worth 300000. mark sterling . 
 there be a bridge make of 150. fathom in length , three manner of way , three foot above ground and two fathom broad , for he to go from one church to the other with his prince and noble from the press of the people , which be in number infinite , and some at that time press to death with the throng . as the emperor return out of the church , they be spread under foot 339 
 with cloth of gold , the porch of the church with red velvet , the bridge with scarlet , and stammell cloth from one church to another : and as soon as the emperor be pass by , the cloth of gold , velvet and scarlet be cut , and take of those that can come by it , every man desirous to have a piece , to reserve it for a monument : silver and gold coin , then mynt of purpose be cast among the people in great quantity . the lord Boris Pheodorowich be sumptuous , and rich attire , with his garment deck with great orient pearl , beset with all sort of precious stone . in like rich manner be apparel all the family of the godonovaes in their degree , with the rest of the prince , and nobili tie , whereof one name Knez Ivan Michalowich Glynsky , who robe , horse , and furniture , be in register find worth one hundred thousand mark sterling , be of great antiquity . the empress be in her palace , be place in her chair of majesty also before a great open window : most precious , and rich be her robe , and shine to behold , with rich stone , and orient pearl beset , her crown be place upon her head , accompany with her princess , and lady of estate : then cry out the people , God preserve our noble empress Irenia . after all this the emperor come into the parliament house which be rich deck : there he be place in his royal seat adorn as before : he 6. crown be set before he upon a table : the basin , and ewer royal of gold hold by his knight of guard with his man stand two on each side in white apparel of cloth of silver , call Kindry , with sceptre , and battle axe of gold in their hand : the prince , and nobility be all place accord to their degree all in their rich robe . 
 the emperor after a short oration , permit every man in order to kiss his hand : which be do , he remove to a princely seat prepare for he at the table : where he be serve by his noble in very princely order . the three out room be very great , and large be beset with plate of gold , and silver round , from the 340 
 ground up to the vaut one upon the other : among which plate be many barrel of silver and gold : this solemnity , and triumph last a whole week , wherein many royal pastime be show and use : after which the chief man of the nobility be elect to their place of office , and dignity , as the prince Boris Pheodorowich be make chief counsellor to the emperor , master of the horse , have the charge of his person , lieutenant of the empire , and warlike engine , governor or lieutenant of the empire of Cazan , and astracan and other : to this dignity be by parliament , and gift of the emperor give he many revenue , and rich land , as there be give he , and his for ever to inherit a province call Vaga , of 300. English mile in length , and 250. in breadth , with many town and great village populous and wealthy , his yearly revenue out of that province , be 35. thousand mark sterling , be not the 5. part of his yearly revenue . further , he and his house be of such authority , and power , that in 40. day warning they be able to bring into the field 100 thousand soldier well furnish . 
 the conclusion of the emperor coronation be a peal of ordinance , call a peal royal two mile without the city , be 170. great piece of brass of all sort , as fair as any can be make , these piece be all discharge with shot against bulwark make of purpose : 20. thousand hargubuser stand in 8. rank two mile in length , apparel all in velvet , colour silk and stammel , discharge their shot also twice over in good order : and so the emperor accompany with all his prince and noble , at the least 50. thousand horse depart through the city to his palace . this royal coronation will ask much time , and many leaf of paper to be describe particular as it be perform : it shall suffice , to understand that the like magnificence be never see in Russia . 
 the coronation , and other triumph end , all the nobility , officer , and merchant accord to a accustom order every one in his place , and degree bring 
 341 
 A.D. 
 i584 - 
 rich present unto the emperor , wish he long life , and joy in his kingdom . 
 the same time also master Jerom Horsey aforesaid , remain as servant in Russia for the queen most excellent majesty , be call for to the emperor , as he sit in his imperiali seat , and then also a famous merchant of Netherlands be new come to Moscow , ( who give he self out to be the king of Spain subject ) call John de Wale , be in like sort call for . some of the nobility will have prefer this subject of the Spaniard before master Horsey servant to the queen of England , whereunto master Horsey will in no case agree , say , he will have his leg cut off by the knee , before he will yield to such a indignity offer to his sovereign the queen majesty of England , to bring the emperor a present , in course after the king of Spain subject , or any other whatsoever . the emperor , and the prince Boris Pheodorowich perceive the controversy , send the lord treasurer Peter Ivanowich Galavyn , and Vasili Shalkan , both of the counsel , to they , who deliver the emperor back , master Horseys speech : whereupon he be first in order ( as good reason ) admit and present the emperor in the behalf of the english merchant trade thither , a present wish he joy , and long to reign in tranquillity , and so kiss the emperor hand , he accept the present with good like , and avouch , that for his sister sake queen Elizabeth of England , he will be a gracious lord to her merchant , in as ample manner as ever his father have be : and be dismiss , he have the same day send he 70. dish of sundry kind of meat , with 3. cart lade with all sort of drink very bountiful . after he be the foresay subject of the spanish king admit with his present , who the emperor will to be no less faithful and serviceable unto he , than the queen of England subject be and have be , and then the king of Spain subject shall receive favour accord . 
 342 
 all these thing thus in order perform , praise be sing in all the church . the emperor and empress very devout resort on foot to many principal church in the city , and upon Trinity Sunday betake themselves to a progress in order of procession , to a famous monastery call Sergius and the Trinity , 60. mile distant from the city of Moscow , accompany with a huge army of nobleman , gentleman and other , mount upon goodly horse with furniture accord . 
 the empress of devotion take this journey on foot all the way , accompany with her princess and lady , no small number : her guard and gunner be in number 20000 , her chief counsellor or attendant , be a noble man of the blood royal her uncle of great authority call Demetri Ivanowich Godonova . all this progress end , both the emperor and empress return to Moscow : short after the emperor by the direction of the prince Boris Pheodorowich , send a power into the land of Siberia , where all the rich sable and fur be get . this power conquer in one year and a half , 1000 mile . in the performance of this war , there be take prisoner the emperor of the country call chare Siber - ChareSiberski sky , and with he many other duke and noble man , ^ce . , / / , i , a i . a r u - alberta take 
 which be bring to Mosko with a guard or soldier prism an ( i and gunner , who be receive into the city in very bring to honourable manner , and do there remain to this day . Moscow . 
 hereupon the corrupt officer , judge , justice , captain and lieutenant through the whole kingdom be remove , and more honest man substitute in their place , with express commandment , under severe punishment to surcease their old bribe and extortion which they have use in the old emperor time , and now to execute true justice without respect of person : and to the end that this may be the better do , their land and year stipend be augment : the great task , custom , and duty , which be before lay upon the people in the old emperor time , be now abate , and some whole remit , and no punishment com-343 
 sophet Keri Alli king of the crimme arrival at Moscow . 
 mand to be use , without sufficient and due proof , although the crime be capitali , deserve death : many duke and noble man of great house , that be under displeasure , and imprison 20. year by the old emperor , be now set at liberty and restore to their land : all prisoner be set at liberty , and their trespass forgive . in sum , a great alteration universal in the government follow , and yet all be do quiet , civil , peaceable , without trouble to the prince , or offence to the subject : and this breed great assurance and honour to the kingdom , and all be accomplish by the wisdom especial of Irenia the empress . 
 these thing be report and carry to the ear of the king and prince that be borderer upon Russia , they grow so fearful and terrible to they , that the monarch of all the scythian call the Crimme tartar or great can himself , name sophet Keri Alli , come out of his own country to the emperor of Russia , accompany with a great number of his nobility well horse , although to they that be christian they seem rude , yet they be personable man , and valiant : their come be grateful to the emperor , and their entertainment be honourable , the tartar prince have bring with he his wife also , receive of the ruff emperor entertainment , and princely welcome accord to their estate . 
 not long after , 1200. polish gentleman , valiant soldier , and proper man come to Mosko offi their service to the emperor , who be all entertain : and in like sort many chirkass , and people of other nation come and offy service . and assoon as the report of this new create emperor be spread over other kingdom of Europe , there be send to he sundry ambassador to wish he joy and prosperi tie in his kingdom : thither come ambassador from the Turk , from the persian , the bogharian , the Crimme , the georgian , and many other tartar prince . there come also ambassador from the emperor of almain , the 
 344 
 pole , the swethen , the Dane , etc and since his coronation no enemy of he have prevail in his attempt . 
 it fall out not long after , that the emperor be 2% em-desirous to send a message to the most excellent queen perorPheodore of England , for which service he think no man fit kttmand “ then m. Jerome Horsey , suppose that one of the request to the queen own man and subject will be the more queen . acceptable to she . the sum of which message be , that the emperor desire a continuance of that league , friendship , amity and intercourse of traffic which be between his father and the queen majesty and her subject , with other private affair beside , which be not to be make common . 
 . 