hunc ego sic imitor , 
 haffniae 1593. Mense Mart. 
 Gudbrandus Thorliacus Episcopus Holensis in Islandia . 
 authoris ad lectorem . 
 commentarii de ISLANDIA INITIUM . 
 [ sectio 
 munsterus islandiam collocat sub longit . latitude . 68 
 hersee : 7. 40 60. 42 
 thirte : 5. 50 64. 44 
 Nadar : 6. 40 57 - 20 
 madher promontorium 21. 20 65. 10 
 civitate in ea mediterraneae sunt holen Episcopalis 28. 67. 5° 
 sectio SECUNDA . 
 et penitus toto divisos orbe britannos . Quartus unam ex farensibus . Quintus Telemarchiam Noruagiae . Sextus schrichfinniam . 
 sectio QUINTA . 
 [ sectio 
 sectio SEXTA . 
 iv 17 b 
 sectio septima . 
 A.D. 
 1592. 
 i . cap . 7. 
 [ i - $25-1 
 sectio OCTAVA . 
 27 
 [ sectio 
 sectio decima . 
 sectio undecima . 
 iv 33 c 
 Baiano sed ne fumare in littore thermas [ i . 529. i 
 sectio duodecima . 
 sectio decimatertia . 
 pictoribus atque poetis , 
 41 
 A.D. 
 1592. 
 Munst. 
 sectio prima . 
 iv 49 d 
 974 - 
 53 
 1000 
 anno christi . Episcopi schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . anno christi 
 two i 
 1083 redit in islandiam cum ordinatur peregre : anno 1106 
 episcopatu . aetat . 64. cognomentum 
 1133 moritur . ” 45 
 four three 
 magnus . Biorno . 
 1134 ordinatur . Ordinatus venit in be - II+7 
 five five 
 1151 eligitur . Bonus . 
 1176 moritur . moritur . 1237 
 anno christi . Episcopi schalholtenses . Episcopi holtenses . anno christi . 
 vi vi 
 Thorlacus . Botolphus . 
 praedecessoris moritur . 1246 
 1178 1193 ordinatur . moritur . Vii 
 vtt henricus . 
 121 i moritur . Viii 
 1216 magnus . Abbas peregre abit . 1262 
 ordinatur . Cathedram adit . 1263 
 ix moritur . 1264 
 1239 Cathedram adit . 
 ten moritur . 1313 
 1269 Cathedram adit . ten 
 ut Cathedram adit . 1314 
 1304 ordinatur . 
 1310 redit ex itinere . 
 1320 moritur . Xiii 
 twelve ormus . 
 1323 Cathedram adit . [ xiiii 
 1338 moritur . [ Xiii 
 55 
 anno christi . Episcopi schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . anno christi , . 
 thirteen xiiii 
 1341 Cathedram adit . Skalle . 
 moritur . Cathedram Holensem 1358 
 xiiii aditurus venit in island - Gron - 
 iam . hic Jonas , olim landiae ! 
 Xvi 
 xvii est , ut ea res arbitrio 
 Oddgeirus . Regis componeretur . 
 1381 moritur in assumpt . beat virginis , in portu norvagiae bergensi , e mere - bus favente Cathedram Holensem obtinuit . 
 moritur . I391 
 tus bergis in aede sal - Petrus . 
 Michael Danus . Cathedram adit holen - 1392 
 1385 Cathedram adit . sem . 
 1388 Resignat profectus in moritur . 
 daniam . Xvi 
 moritur . holensi . 1432 
 anno christi . Episcopi schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . anno christi . 
 [ twenty-five 5 [ twenty 7 
 Episcopi Holenses . 
 anno christi . 
 1494 
 1519 
 1522 
 1541 
 1544 
 twenty-five Stephanus . 
 Cathedram adit . 
 Cathedram adit . 
 xxvii 
 twenty 
 1525 
 1548 
 1550 
 1551 
 anno christi . Episcopi schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . anno christi . 
 1556 reverso , Martinussponte superstitionibus abro - 
 anno christi . Episcopi schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . anno christi . 
 a . d 
 1592. 
 iv 65 e 
 sectio Quarta . 
 sectio QUINTA . 
 858. 
 1260. 
 Margareta . 
 hoc loco praemittit Krantzius talem ironiam . 
 69 
 [ sectio 
 item : 
 sectio OCTAVA . 
 [ sectio 
 sectio NONA . 
 sectio decima . 
 sectio undecima . 
 omnibus bonis nauseam movere posse , ac sva spurcitie ab iis legendis absterrere . 
 sectio duodecima 
 sectio decimatertia . 
 sectio DECIMAQUARTA . 
 sectio DECIMAQUINTA . 
 sectio DECIMASEXTA . 
 a brief commentarie of island : wherein the error of such as have write concern this island , be detect , and the slander , and reproach of certain stranger , which they have use overboldly against the people of 
 island be confute . 
 by arngrimus Jonas , of island . 
 to the most mighty prince and lord , lord Christian the 4. of Denmark , Norway , and of the Vandal and Goth , king elect : of Sleswic , Holste , stormar , and dithmarse duke : earl of Oldenburg , and Delmenhorst : he most gracious lord . 
 hat heroical attempt of Anchurus , son of king Midas ( most gracious prince ) and that piety towards his country in manner peerless , deserve high to be renown in history : in that free and courageous he offer his own person , for the stop up of a huge gulf of 
 earth , about Celoena , a town in Phrigia , which daily swallow multitude of man , and whatsoever else come near unto it . for when his father Midas be advertise by the oracle , that the say gulf shall not be shut up , before thing most precious be cast into it : Anchurus deem nothing to be more invaluable than life , plunge himself alive down headlong into that bottomeles hole ; and that with so great vehemency of mind , that neither by his father request nor by the allurement and tear of his most amiable wife , he suffer himself to be draw back from this his enterprise . 
 Sperthius also and bull , two lacedaemonian , be not much inferior to the former , who to turn away the revenge of Xerxes that most puissant king of the 89 
 persian , intend against the lacedaemonian , for kill the ambassador of his father Darius , hie they unto the say king , and that he may avenge the ambassadors death upon they , not upon their country , with hardy , and constant mind present themselves before he . 
 the very same thing ( most gracious prince ) which move they , and many other be inflame with the love of their country , to refuse for the benefit thereof , no danger , no trouble , no nor death it self , the same thing ( i say ) have also enforce i , not indeed to undergo voluntary death , or free to offer my self unto the slaughter , but yet to assay that which i be able for the good of my country : namely , that i may gather together and refute the error , and vain report of writer , concern the same : and so take upon i a thing very dangerous , and perhaps subject to the sinister judgement of many . 
 in this purpose the example of Cneius Pompeius have likewise confirm i : who be choose procurator for corn among the roman , and in a extreme scarcety and dearth of the city , have take up some store of grain in Sicilia , Sardinia , and Africa , be report to have have great regard of his country , then of himself . for when he make haste towards room , and a mighty and dangerous tempest arise , he perceive the pilot to tremble , and to be unwilling to commit themselves to the rigor of the stormy sea , himself first go on board , and command the anchor to be weigh , break forth into these word : that we shall sail necessity urge : but that we shall live , it urge not . in which word he seem wise to infer , that great care be to be have of our country lie in danger , then of our own private safety . 
 sif small with great as equal may agree : 
 and fly with elephant compare be . 
 namely that gather together and lay up in store those thing which may be apply to succour the fame and credit of our nation , have now this long time be oppress with stranger , through the envy of certain malicious person , i bold adventure to present these few meditation of i unto the view of the world , and so hoist up sail to commit my self unto a troublesome sea , and to break forth into the like speech with he : that i shall write necessity urge : but that my write in all place shall satisfy every delicate taste , or escape all peevishness of carper it urge not . i doubt not but many will allow this my enterprise : the success perhaps all man will not approve . nevertheless , i think that there be great regard to be have of my country , sustain so many man mock and reproach , then of my own praise or dispraise , redound perhaps unto i upon this occasion . for what cause shall move i to shun the envy and hate of some man , be join with a endeavour to benefit and gratify my country ? 
 but if i shall seem somewhat too bold in censure the error of the error of writer , or too severe in reprehend the writer oj slander of some man : yet i hope all they will judge r 
 indifferent of i , who shall serious consider , how intolerable the error of writer be , concern our nation : how many also and how grievous be the reproach of some , against we , wherewith they have sundry way provoke our nation , and as yet will not cease to provoke . they ought also to have i excuse in regard of that inbred affection root in the heart of all man , towards their native soil , and to pardon my just grief for these injury offer unto my country . and i in very deed , so much as lie in i , have in all place moderate my self , and have be desirous to abstain from reproach : but if any man think , we shall have use more temperance in our stile , i trust , the former reason will content he . 
 since therefore , i be to undergo the same hazard , 
 which i see be common incident to all man , that publish any write : i must now have especial regard of this one thing : namely , of seek out some patron , and Meccenas for this my brief commentary , under who name and protection it may more safe pass through the hand of all man . 
 but for this purpose i can not find out , nor wish for any man more fit than your royal majesty , most gracious prince . for unto he , who have receive under his power and tuition our life and good , unto he ( i say ) do we make humble suit , that he will have respect also unto the credit of our nation , so injurious disgrace . 
 yea very ( most gracious king ) we be constrain to crave your majesty merciful aid , not only in this matter , but in many other thing also which be want in our country , or which otherwise belong to the public commodity and welfare thereof : which not by i , but by the letter supplicatory of the chief man of our nation , be at this time declare , or will shordy be declare . for we doubt not but that your sacred majesty , after the example of your christian predecessor , will vouchsafe unto our country also , among other island of your majesty dominion , your kingly care and protection . for as the necessity of flee for redress unto your sacred majesty , be we : so the glory of relieve , regard , and protect we , shall whole redound unto your sacred majesty : as also , there be lay up for you , in respect of your foster and preserve of God church , upon the extreme northerly part almost of the whole earth , and in the uttermost bound of your majesty dominion ( which by the singular goodness of God , enjoy at this present tranquillity and quiet safety ) a reward and crown of immortali life in the heaven . 
 but consider these thing be not proper to this place , i will leave they , and return to my purpose which i have in hand : most humble beseech your 92 
 s. m. that you will of your clemency vouchsafe to become a favourer and patron unto these my labour and study , for the behalf of my country . 
 it now remain ( most gracious and merciful sovereign ) for we to make our humble prayer unto almighty God , that king of king , and disposer of all humane affair , that it will please he of his infinite goodness , to advance your majesty ( yearly grow up in wisdom and experience , and all other heroical virtue ) to the high pitch of sovereignty : and be advance , continual to bless you with most prosperous success in all your affair : and be bless , long to preserve you , as the chief ornament , defence and safeguard of these kingdom , and as the shield and fortress of his church : and hereafter in the life to come , to make you shine glorious like a star , among the principali nurse father of God church , in the perfect joy of his heavenly kingdom . the same most merciful father likewise grant , that these prayer , the often they be daily repeat and multiply in every corner of your majesty most ample territory and island , so much the more sure and certain they may remain , amen . at Haffhia , or copen Hagen 1593. in the month of march . 
 Y. s. m. 
 most humble subject , arngrimus Jonas , islander . 
 to the courteous and Christian reader Gudbrandus thorlacius , bishop of holen in island , wish health . 
 here come to light about the year of Christ 1561 , a very deform imp , beget by a certain pedlar of Germany : namely a book of germane rhyme , of all that ever be read the most filthy and most slanderous against the nation of island . neither do it suffice the base printer once to send abroad that base brat , but he must publish it also thrice or four 93 
 great error grow upon mariner fabulous report . 
 time over : that he may thereby , what lie in he , more deep disgrace our innocent nation among the german , and Dane , and other neighbour country , with shameful , and everlasting ignominy . so great be the malice of this printer , and his desire so greedy to get lucre , by a thing unlawful . and this he do without controlment , even in that city , which these many year have traffic with island to the great gain , and commodity of the citizen . his name be Joachimus Leo , a man worthy to become lion food . 
 moreover , there be many other writer find , who when they will seem to describe the miracle of nature , which be think to be very many in this island , and the manner , and custom of the islander , have altogether swerve from the matter and truth it self , follow mariner fable more trifle then old wife tale , and the most vain opinion of the common sort . Theise writer , although they have not leave behind they such filthy and reproachful stuff as that base rimer : yet there be many thing in their write that will not suffer they to be excuse , and altogether acquit from cause a innocent nation to be have in derision by other . wherefore mark , read , and weigh these thing with my self , and consider that there daily spring up new writer , which offer injury to the fame and reputation of the islander , be such man also as do shameless filtch out of other man labour , delude their reader which feign description , and a new rehearsal of monster , i often wish that some one man will come forth , to make answer to the error of historiographer and other unjust censurer : and by some writing , if not to free our innocent nation from so many reproach , yet at leastwise , in some sort to defend it , among christian and friendly reader . and for this cause i have now procure a honest and learned young man one Arngrimus Fitz-Jonas , to peruse the work of author , that have write any thing concern island , and by sound reason to detect their error , and falsehood . 
 and albeit at the first he be very loath , yet at length my friendly admonition , and the common love of his country prevail with he so far , that he compile this brief commentary , take his proof , not out of the vain fable of the people , but from his own experience , and many other man also of sufficient credit . 
 now , he that undertake this matter at my procurement , do again as it be by his own authority challenge at my hand , that i shall in two or three word at least , make a preface unto his book ; think it may gain some credit , and authority thereby . wherefore to speak my mind in a word : for my part , i judge he to have take both honest and necessary pain , who have do his endeavour not only to weigh the diverse opinion of wrighter concern thing unknown , and to examine they by the censure of truth , and experience , but also to defend his country from the venomous bite of certain sycophant . it be thy part therefore ( gentle reader ) to accept this small treatise of he , be as it be guard with the sacred love of truth , and of his country , against the perverseness of carper . farewell . anno 1592. Julii 29. 
 here begin the commentary of island . 
 Ven as in war , daily experience teach we , that some upon no just and lawful ground ( be egg on by ambition , envy , and covetise ) be induce to follow the army , and on the contrary side , that other 
 arm themselves upon just and necessary cause : namely such as go to battle for the defence and propagation of the gospel , or such as be any way provoke thereunto , do withstand present violence and wrong , or at least ( not be provoke ) by reason of the enemy approach be constrain to be up in arm : right so , they that fight under Apollo banner . among who , a great part , not upon any honest , philosophical , or indeed Christian intention , address themselves to wright : especial such as for desire of glory , for envy 
 and spite , or upon malicious and affect ignorance , carp at other : and , that they may be account superior , sometime whet their stile against the person , name and fame of this or that particular man , sometime inveigh against a whole country , and by shameless untruth disgrace innocent nation and people . again , other of a ingenuous mind , do by great industry , search and bring to light thing profitable : namely , they that write of divinity , Philo - 
 sophy , history and such like : and they who ( take use and experience for their guide ) in the say science have bring thing obscure to light , thing maim to perfection , and thing confuse to order : and they that have faithful commend to everlasting posterity , the story of the whole world : that by their infinite labour have advance the knowledge of tongue : to be short , that endeavour themselves to repress the insolency , confute the slander , and withstand the unjust violence of other , against themselves , their nation or their country : 
 and i for my part , have scarce attain the sight of good letter , and be the mean of all the follower of Minerva ( that i may free acknowledge my own want ) can do no less than become one of their number , who have apply themselves to rid their country from dishonour , to avouch the truth , and to shake off the yoke of railer and reviler . my estate enable i only to write ; howbeit the excellency of truth , and the inbred affection i bear to my country enforce i to do the best i can : since it have please some stranger by false rumour to deface , and by manifold reproach to injury my say country , make it a byeword , and a laughingstock to all other nation . to meet with who insolency and false accusation , as also to detect the error of certain writer concern this hand , unto good and well affect man ( for the common people will be always like themselves , stubbornly maintain that which be false and foolish , neither 96 
 can i hope to remove they from this accustom and stale opinion ) i have pen the treatise follow . 
 and albeit island be not destitute of many excellent man , who , both in age , wit , and learning , be by many degree my superior , and therefore more fit to take the defence of the country into their hand : notwithstanding , be earnest persuade thereunto , by that godly and famous man Gudbrandus thorlacius bishop of Hola in island , i think good ( to the utmost of my ability ) to be no whit want unto the common cause : both that i may obey his most reasonable request , and also that i may encourage other of my countryman , who have be better train up in good learning , and endue with a great measure of knowledge than i my self , to the defence of this our nation : so far be i from hinder any man to undertake the like enterprise . 
 but to return to the matter , because they ( whatsoever they be ) that reproach and malign our nation , make their boast that they use the testimony of writer : we be serious to consider , what thing , and how true , writer have report of island , to the end that if they have give ( perhaps ) any occasion to other of inveigh against we , their error be lay open ( for i will not speak more sharp ) all the world may see how just they do reproach we . and albeit i nothing doubt to examine some ancient writer of this hand , by the rule of truth and experience : yet ( otherwise ) their memory be precious in our eye , their dignity reverend , their learning to be have in honour , and their zeal and affection towards the whole common wealth of learned man , high to be commend : but as for novice ( if there be any such writer or rather pasquille ) when they shall hear and know true matter concern island , than they themselves have write , they shall seem by their inconstancy and perverse wit to have gain nought else but a black mark of envy and reproach . 
 and that this commentary of i may have some order , it shall be divide into two generail part : the 
 iv 97 g 
 first of the hand , the second of the inhabitant : and of these two but so farforth as those writer which be come to our hand have leave record : because i be not determine to wander out of these list , or to handle more than these thing and some other which pertain unto they . for i profess not my self a historiographer , or geographer , but only a disputer . wherefore omit a long preface , let we come to the first part concern the situation , the name , miracle , and certain other adjunct of this hand . 
 the first section . 
 the isle of Island be sever from other country an infinite distance , stand far into the ocean , and be scarce know unto sailor . 
 albeit a discourse of those thing which concern the land , and the adjunct or property thereof be of little moment to defend the nation or inhabitant from the bite of slanderer , yet seem it in no case to be omit , but to be entreat of in the first place , that the friendly reader perceive how true those writer of island have report in this respect , may thereby also easy judge what credit be to be give unto they in other matter which they have leave write concern the inhabitant , and which other have receive from they as oracle , from whence ( as they say ) they have borrow scoff and taunt against our nation . 
 first therefore , that the distance of island from other country be not infinite , nor indeed so great as man common imagine , it may easy be provide , if one do but in some sort know the true longitude and latitude of the say hand . for i be of opinion that it can exact be know any other way then this , whenas it be manifest how the mariner course ( be it never so direct , as they suppose ) do at all time swerve . in you mean while therefore i will set down diverse opinion of author , concern the situation of island , that from hence every man may gather that of the distance which 98 
 seem most probable ; until perhaps my self be one day teach by my own experience , may , if not intrude , yet at least adjoin , what i shall think true as 
 touch this matter . Longit . latitude . deg . min. 
 deg . min. 
 Munster place island almost in 20 68 
 gemma Frisius place the midst 
 of island 7 O 65 30 
 thirte 5 50 64 44 
 Nadar 6 40 57 10 
 the west shore of island 20 O 63 0 
 the promontory of Chos 22 46 63 0 
 the east shore be extend North - 
 ward , and have bound of 
 the north shore be extend West - 
 ward , and have bound of 
 extension in 28 o 69 0 
 the description of the west side . 
 the promontory of Heckelfell 25 O 67 0 
 the promontory of madher 21 20 65 10 
 the inland city of island 
 holen the seat of a bishop 28 O 67 50 
 schalholten the seat of a bishop 22 63 30 
 by mid-island 69 
 island stretch it self 3 degree within the circle arctic from the equinoctial , insomuch that you say circle arctic do almost divide it in the midst etc 
 seven day sail from island to Hamburg . island but two day sail distant from faar-lslands , y from the desert shore of Norway . 
 there be other also , who either in their map , or write have note the situation of island : notwithstanding it be to no purpose to set down any more of their opinion , because the more you have , the more contrary shall you find they . for my part , albeit i have probable conjecture persuade i not to believe any of the former opinion , concern the situation of island , but to dissent from they all : yet have i rather leave the matter in suspense then affirm a uncertainty , until ( as i have say ) i may be able perhaps one day not to guess at the matter , but to bring forth my own observation , and experience . 
 a certain writer have put down the distance between the mouth of Elbe and batzende in the south part of island to be 400 league : from whence if you shall account the difference of longitude to the meridian of Hamburgh , island must have none of the forename longitude in that place . i be able to prove by three sundry voyage of certain hamburger , that it be but seven day sail from island to Hamburgh . beside all those island , which by reason of the abundance of sheep , be call fareyiar , or more right faareyiar , as likewise the desert shore of Norway , be distant from we but two day sail . we have four day sail into habitable Gronland : and almost in the same quantity of time we pass over to the province of Norway , call Stad , lie between the town of Nidrosia or Trondon , and Bergen , as we find in the ancient record of these nation . 
 100 
 in this hand , at the summer solstitium , the sun pass through the sign of cancer , there be no night , and therefore at the winter solstitium there be no day . also : Vadianus . but in that hand , which far within the arctic circle be seat in the main ocean , at this day call island , and next unto the land of the freeze sea , which they call Engrontland , there be many month in the year without night . 
 at the solstitium of winter , that there be no day ( that be to say , no time , wherein the sun be see above the horizon ) we confess to be true only in that angle of island ( if there be any such angle ) where the pole be elevate full 67 degree . but at holen ( which be the bishop seat for the north part of island , and lie in a most deep valley ) the latitude be about 65 degree and 44 minute , as i be inform by the reverend father , gudbrand , bishop of that place : and yet there , the short day in all the year be at least two hour long , and in south-island long , as it appear by the table of mathematician . heerehence it be manifest , first that island be not situate beyond the arctic circle : second , that in island there be not want in summer solstitium many night , nor in winter solstitium many day . 
 the three section . 
 it be name of the ice which continual cleave unto the north part thereof . another write : from the west part of Norway there lie a hand which be name of the ice , environ with a huge sea , and be a country of ancient habitation , etc Zieglerus . this be Thyle , whereof most of the ancient writer have make mention . 
 it be name of ice , etc island have be call by three name , one after another . for one Naddocus a norvagian bear , who be think to be the first 101 
 Olaus magnus and other . 
 island be not within the circle arctic . 
 Saxo. 
 islandfirst discover by Naddocus in a tempest . 
 discoverer of the same , as he be sail towards the faar-iland , through a violent tempest do by chance arrive at the east shore of island ; where stay with his whole company certain week , he behold abundance of snow cover the top of the mountain , and there-sneland . upon , in regard of the snow , call this hand Sneland . 
 after he one Gardarus , be move thereunto by the report which Naddocus give out concern island , go to seek the say hand ; who , when he have find Gardasholme . it , call it after his own name gardars-holme , that be to say , gardar lie . there be more also desirous to visit this new land . for after the two former , a certain island . three Noruagian , call Flok , go into island , and name it of the ice , wherewith he see it environ . 
 of ancient habitation , etc i gather not this opinion out of these word of Saxo ( as some man do ) that island have be inhabit from the beginning , or ( to speak in one word ) that the people of island be autochthones , that be , earth-bred , or breed out of their own soil like unto tree and herb ; since it be evident , that this island scarce begin to be inhabit no long ago than about 718 year since . 
 this be Thyle , etc grammarian wrangle about this name , and as yet the controversy be not decide . which notwithstanding , 1 think may easy grow to composition , if man will understand that this hand be first inhabit about the year of our lord 874. unless some man will say that Thule king of Aegypt ( who , as it be think , give this name thereunto ) pass so far unto a hand , which be at that time until , and destitute of inhabitant . again , if any man will deny this , he may for all i , that it may seem to be but a dream , while they be distract into so many contrary opinion . one affirm that it be island : another , that it be a certain hand , where tree bear fruit twice in a year : the three , that it be one of the Orcades , or the last hand of the Scotish dominion , as Johannes Myritius and other , call it by the name of Thylensey , which 
 102 
 Virgil also seem to have mean by his ultima Thyle . if beyond the britans ( by which name the english man and Scot only at this day be call ) he imagine none other nation to inhabit . which be evident out of that verse of Virgil in his first eclogue : 
 and britans whole from all the world divide . 
 the four write , that it be one of the faar-iland : the five , that it be Telemark in Norway : the sixth , that it be Schrichfinnia . 
 which continual cleave to the north part of the hand . that clause that ice continual cleave etc or as Munster affirm a little after , that it cleave for the space of eight whole month , be neither of they both true , when as for the most part the ice be thaw . in the month of April or may , and be drive towards the west : neither do it return before Januarie or aiways to the February , nay often time it come late . what west . if a man shall reckon up many year , wherein ice ( than no ice at all sharp scourge of this our nation ) have not at all jere in bene see about island ? which be find to be true lsland-this present year 1592. hereupon it be manifest how true Frisius have write that navigation to this hand lie open only for four month in a year , and no long , by reason of the ice and cold , whereby the passage be shut up , when as english ship every year , sometime in march , sometime in April , and some of they in may ; the german and Dane , in may and June , do usual return unto we , and some of they depart not again from hence till August . but the last navigation year , be 1591 , there lay a certain ship of Germany lade with copper within the haven or vopnafiord in the till the midst coast of island about fourteen day in the month of of November . November , which time be expire , she fortunate set sail . wherefore , see that ice , neither continual , nor yet eight month cleave unto island , Munster and Frisius be much deceive . 
 [ the four 
 103 
 island 144 
 germane mile in compass . 
 the four section . 
 the hand be so great that it contain many people . item Zieglerus say : the situation of the hand be extend between the south and the north almost 200 league in length . 
 so great , etc one Wilstenius schoolmaster of Oldenburg , in the year 1591 , send unto my uncle in west-island , a short treatise which he have gather out of the fragment of sundry writer , concern island . where we find thus write : island be twice as great as Sicily , etc but Sicily , accord to Munster , have 150 germane mile in compass . as for the circuit of our hand , although it be not exact know unto we , yet the ancient , constant , and receive opinion of the inhabitant account it 144 league ; namely by the 12 promontory of island , which be common know , be distant one from another 12 league or thereabouts , which two number be multiply , produce the whole sum . 
 many people . etc one Gysserus about the year of our lord 1090 , be bishop of Schalholten in island , cause all the husbandman , or countryman of the hand , who , in regard of their possession be bind to pay tribute to the king , to be number ( omit the poor sort with woman , and the mean sort of the communality ) and he find in the east part of island 700 , in the south part 1000 , in the west part 1100 , in the north part 1200 , to the number of 4000 inhabitant pay tribute . now if any man will try , he shall find that more than half the hand be at that time unpeople . 
 104 
 the hand , most part thereof , be mountainous and unacustomated - m^ster-tilled . but that part which be plain do great ziHerus abound with fodder , which be so rank , that they be * fain to drive their cattle from the pasture , lest they surfeit or be choke . 
 that danger of surfeit or choke be never hear tell of , in our father , grandfather , greatgrandfather or any of our predecessor day , be they never so ancient . 
 the six section . 
 there be in this hand mountain lift up to the sky , ^^ria ' who top be white with perpetuali snow , their ' root boil with everlasting fire . the first be towards the west , call Hecla : the other the mountain of the cross : and the three Helga . item : • Zieglerus . the rock or promontory of Hecla boil with continual fire . item : Saxo. there be in this hand also a mountain , which resemble the starry firmament , with perpetuali flashing of fire , con-tinueth always burn , by uncessant belch out of flame . 
 MUnster and Frisius be about to report the wonder of island do present stumble , as it be , upon the threshold , to the great inconvenience of they both . for that which they here affirm of mount Hecla , although it have some show of truth : notwithstanding concern the other two mountain , that they shall burn with perpetuali fire , it be a manifest error . for there be no such mountain to be find in island , nor yet any thing else ( so far forth as we can imagine ) which may minister occasion of so great a error unto writer . howbeit there be see ( yet very late ) in the year 1581 out of a certain mountain of south 
 105 
 island lie near the sea , and cover over with continual snow and frost , a marvelous eruption of smoke and fire , cast up abundance of stone and ash . but this mountain be far from the other three , which the say author do mention . howbeit , suppose that these thing be true which they report of fiery mountains : be it possible therefore that they shall seem strange , or monstrous , whenas they proceed from natural cause ? what ? do they any whit prevail to establish that opinion concern the hell of island , which follow next after in Munster , Ziegler , and Frisius ? for my part , i think it no way tolerable , that man shall abuse these , and the like miracle of nature , to avouch absurdity , or , that they shall with a kind of impiety wonder at they , as at matter impossible . as though in these kind of inflammation , there do not concur cause of sufficient force for the same purpose . there be in the root of these mountain a matter most apt to be set on fire , come so near as it do to the nature of brimstone and pitch . there be air also , which insinuate it self by passage , and hole , into the very bowel of the earth , do puff up the nourishment of so huge a fire , together with saltpetre , by which puff ( as it be with certain bellows ) a threenaturall most ardent flame be kindle . for , all these thus con-cause of fine cur } fire have those three thing , which necessary moun in s . mahe it burn , that be to say , matter , motion , and force of make passage : matter which be fatty and moist , and therefore nourish last flame : motion which the air do perform , be admit into the cave of the earth : force of make passage , and that the invincible might of fire it self ( which can not be without inspiration of air , and can not but break forth with a incredible strength ) do bring to pass : and so ( even as in undermine trench , and engine or great warlike ordinance , huge iron bullet be cast forth with monstrous roar , and crack , by the force of kindle brimstone , and saltpeter , whereof gun - 
 106 
 powder be compound ) chingle and great stone be scorch in that fiery gulf , as it be in a furnace , together with abundance of sand and ash , be vomit up and discharge , and that for the most part not without a earthquake : which , if it come from the depth of the earth , ( be call by Posidonius , Succussio ) it must either be a open or a quake . open cause the earth in some place to gape , and fall a sunder . by quake the earth be heave up and swell , and sometime ( as Pliny say ) cast out huge lib - 2o - capheap : such a earthquake be the same which i even 20-now mention , which in the year 1581 do so sore trouble the south shore of island . and this kind of earthquake be most clearke describe by Pontanus in these verse : 
 the stir breath run on with steal step , urge now up , and now enforce down : 
 for freedom eke try all , it skip , it leap , to rid it self from uncouth dungeon . then quake the earth as it will burst anon , the earth yquake , and wall city quiver , strong quarry crack , and stone from hill do shiver . 
 i think good to add these thing , not that i suppose any man to be ignorant thereof : but least other man shall think that we be ignorant , and therefore that we will run after their fable , which they do from hence establish . but yet there be somewhat more in these three feign mountain of island , which cause the say writer not a little to wonder , namely whereas they say that their foundation be always burn , and yet for all that , their top be never destitute of snow . howbeit , it beseem not the authority and learning of such great clerk to marveile at this , who can not but well know the flame of mount Aetna , which ( accord to Pliny ) be full of snow all winter , notwithstanding ( as the same man witness ) it do always burn . 
 107 
 wherefore , if we will give credit unto they , even this mountain also , since it be cover with snow , and yet burn , must be a prison of unclean soul : which thing they have not doubt to ascribe unto Hecla , in regard of the freeze top , and the fiery bottom . and it be no marveile that fire lurk so deep in the root of a mountain , and never break forth except it be very seidome , shall not be able continual to melt the snow cover the top of the say mountain . Cardanus . for in Caira ( or Capira ) also , the high top of the mountain be say continual to be white with snow : and those in Veragua likewise , which be five mile high , and never without snow , be distant notwithstanding but only 10 degree from the equinoctial . we have hear that either of the foresay province stand near unto Paria . what , if in Teneriffa ( which be one of the canary or fortunate hand ) the pike so call , arise into the air , accord to Munster , eight or nine germane mile in height , and continual flame like Aetna : yet ( as Benzo a italian , and historiographer of the west Indies witness ) be it not able to melt the girdle of snow embrace the midst thereof . which thing , what reason have we more to admire in the mountain of Hecla ? and thus much brief concern fiery mountain . 
 now that also be to be amend , whereas they write that these mountain be lift up even unto the sky . for they have no extraordinary height beyond the other mountain of island , but especial that three mountain , call by Munster Helga , and by we Helgafel , that be the holy mount , stand just by a monastery of the same name , be cover with snow , upon no part thereof in summer time , neither deserve it the name of a high mountain , but rather of a humble hillock , never yet ( as i say in the begin of this section ) so much as once suspect of burn . neither yet ought perpetuali snow to be ascribe to Hecla only , or to a few other ; for island have very many such snowy 108 
 mountain , all which the cosmographer ( who have so extol and admire these three ) shall not easy find out , and reckon up in a whole year . and that also be not to be omit , that mount Hecla stand not towards the west , as Munster and Ziegler have note , but between the south and the east : neither be it a headland , but rather a midland hill . 
 continue always burn etc whosoever they be that have ascribe unto Hecla perpetuali belch out of flame , they be far beside the mark : insomuch that as often as it have be inflame , our countryman have record it in their yearly chronicle for a rare the chronicle accident : namely in the year of Christ 1104 , 1157 , °fls^and-1222 , 1300 , 1341 , 1362 , and 1389 : for from that year we never hear of the burn of this mountain until the year 1558 , which be the last break forth of fire in that mountain . in the mean time i say not that be impossible , but that the bottom of the hill may inward breed and nourish flame , which at certain season ( as have be heretofore observe ) have burst out , and perhaps may do the like hereafter . 
 the seven section . 
 the flame of mount Hecla will not burn tow ( which Frisius . 
 be most apt for the wieke of a candle ) neither be it Munsterus . quench with water : and by the same force that bullet be discharge out of warlike engine with we , from thence be great stone cast forth into the air , by reason of the mixture of cold , and fire , and brimstone . this place be think of some to be the prison of unclean soul . item : Zieglerus . 
 this place be the prison of unclean soul . 
 will not burn tow . where these writer shall find such matter , it be not easy to conjecture . 
 for our people be altogether ignorant of they , neither have they ever be hear of here among we , if they have not bring they to light . for there be no man 109 
 speculum regale write in the norvagian tongue . 
 whence the fablesofIsland grow . 
 with we so rash and fond curious , that dare for his life , the hill be on fire , try any such conclusion , or ( to our knowledge ) that ever dare : which notwithstanding Munster affirm , say : they that be desirous to contemplate the nature of so huge a fire , and for the same purpose approach unto the mountain , be by some gulf swallow up alive , etc which thing ( as i say ) be altogether unknown unto our nation . yet there be a book extant , write in the ancient language of the noruagians , wherein you may find some miracle of earth , water , fire , and air , etc confuse write , few of they true , and the most part vain and false . whereupon it easy appear that it be write long since by some that be imagine to be great wise man in the time of popery . they call it a royal look glass : howbeit , in regard of the fond fable , wherewith ( but for the most part under the show of religion and piety , whereby it be more difficult to find out the cousinage ) it do all over swarm , it deserve not the name of a look glass royal , but rather of a popular , and old wife look glass . in this glass there be find certain figment of the burn of Hecla , not much unlike these which we now entreat of , nor any whit more ground upon experience , and for that cause to be reject . 
 but that i may not seem somewhat foolhardy , for accuse this royal look glass of falsehood ( not to mention any of those thing which it report as less credible ) lo here a few thing ( friendly reader ) which i suppose deserve no credit at all . 
 1 of a certain isle in Ireland , have a church and a parish in it , the inhabitant whereof decease be not bury in the earth , but like live man , do continual , against some bank or wall in the churchyard , stand bolt-upright : neither be they subject to any corruption or downfall : insomuch that any of the posterity may there seek for , and behold their ancestor . 
 2 of another isle of Ireland , where man be not mortali . 
 iio 
 3 of all the earth and tree of Ireland , be of force to resist all poison , and to kill serpent , and other venomous thing , in any country whatsoever , by the only virtue and presence thereof , yea even without touch . 
 4 of a three isle of Ireland , that the one half thereof become a habitation of devil , but that the say devil have no jurisdiction over the other half , by reason of a church there build , although , as the whole isle be without inhabitant , so this part be continual destitute of a pastor , and of divine service : and that it be so by nature . 
 5 of a four isle of Ireland float up and down in a huge lake , the grass whereof be a most present remedy for all kind of disease , and that the hand , at certain season , especial on Sunday , come to the bank of the lake , so that any man may then easy enter into it , as it be into a ship : which notwithstanding ( say he ) destiny will not suffer any more than one to enter at a time . Furthermore , he report that this hand every seven year grow fast to the bank , so that you can discern it from firm land : but that into the place thereof there succeed another , altogether like the former , in nature , quantity , and virtue : which , from what place it come , no man can tell : and that all this happen with a kind of thunder . 
 6 of the hunter of Norway who be so expert to tame wood ( for so he speak very improper , whereas unto wood neither life nor tame can be ascribe ) that wooden patten of eight elnes long be bind to the sole of their foot do carry they with so great celerity even upon high mountain , that they can be outrun , either by the swiftness of hound and dear , or yet by the fly of bird . and that they will kill nine roe or more at one course and with one stroke of a dart . 
 these and such like , concern Ireland , Norway , m 
 island , Gronland , of the miracle of water , and air , this master of fragment have gather together into his look glass : whereby , although he have make his own follower wonder , and the common people to be astonish , yet have he minister unto we nothing but occasion of laughter . 
 but let we hear Frisius . the flame of mount Hecla ( say he ) will not burn tow ( which be most apt matter for the wieke of a candle ) neither be it quench with water . but i say that this strange opinion may be confirm by many reason borrow out of your school of philosophy . for the natural philosopher do teach , that it be common to all forcible flame to be quench with dry thing , and nourish with moist : whereupon even blacksmithe , by sprinkle on of water , use to quicken and strengthen their fire . for ( say they ) when fire be more vehement , it be stir up by cold , and nourish by moisture , both which quality do concur in water . item , water be wont to kindle scorch fire : because the moisture it self , which arise , do prove more fatty and gross , neither be it consume by the smoke enclose it , but the fire it self feed upon the whole substance thereof , whereby be make pure , and gather round together , it become then more vehement by reason of cold . and therefore also wildfire can be quench with water . item , there be place abound with brimstone and pitch , which burn of their own accord , the flame whereof can be quench with water . the grand philosopher also have affirm , that fire be nourish by water . Arist. 3. de anim . and Pliny , in the second book of his natural historic cap . no . and Strabo in his 7. book . in Nympheum there proceed a flame out of a rock , which be kindle with water . the same author say : the ash continual flourish , cover a burn fountain . and moreover that there be sudden fire at some time , even upon water , as namely that the lake of Thrasumenus in the field of 
 IT2 
 perugi , be all on fire , as the same Strabo witness . and in the year 1226 , and 1236 , not far from the promontory of island call Reykians , a flame of fire break forth out of the sea . yea even upon man body sudden fire have glitter : as namely , there spring a flame from the head of Servius Tullius lie a sleep : and also Lucius Martius in Spain after the death of the Scipions , make a oration to his soldier , and exhort they to revenge , be all in a flame , as Valerius Antias do report . Pliny in like sort make mention of a flame in a certain mountain , which , as it be kindle with water , so be it quench with earth or hay : also of another field which burn not the leaf of shady tree that grow direct over it . Theise thing be thus , it be strange that man shall account that a wonder in Hecla only ( for i will grant it to be , for disputation sake , when indeed there be no such matter so far forth as ever i can learn of any man ) which be common to many other part or place in the world , both hilly and plain , as well as to this . 
 and by the same force that bullet , etc Munster Frisius . say the like also . this mountain when it rage , it sound like dreadful thunder , cast forth huge stone , disgorge brimstone , and with the cinder that be blow abroad , it cover so much ground round about it , that no man can inhabit within 20. mile thereof , etc howbeit , they ought to have compare it with Aetna , or with other fiery mountain , whereof i will present make mention , see there be to be find in they , not only a like accident , but in a manner the very same . unless perhaps this be the difference , that flame break seldome out of Hecla , then out of other mountain of the same kind . for it have now rest these 34. year full out , the last fiery breach be make in the year 1558. as we have before note . and there can no such wonder be affirm of our Hecla , but the same or great be to be ascribe unto other burn mountain , as it shall by and by appear . 
 iv 113 h 
 but that brimstone shall be send forth it be a mere fable , and never know unto our nation , by any experiment . 
 this place be the prison of unclean soul . here i be constrain to use a preface , and to crave pardon of the reader , because , whereas in the beginning 1 propound unto my self to treat of the land , and of the inhabitant distinct by themselves , i must of necessity confuse handle certain matter in this first part , which do proper belong unto the second . this be come to pass through the fault of these writer , who have confound this part of the inhabitant religion concern the opinion of hell , or of the infernali prison , with the situation and miracle of the island . wherefore that we may come to this matter , who can but wonder , that wise man shall be grow to this point , not only to listen after , but even to follow and embrace the do thing of the rude people ? for the common sort of stranger , and the offscouring of mariner ( here i do except they of better judgement aswell mariner as other ) hear of this rare miracle of nature , by a inbred and natural blockishness be carry to this imagination of the prison of soul : and that because they see no wood nor any such fuel lay upon this fire as they have in their own chimney at home . and by this persuasion of the gross multitude , the report grow strong , especial ( as they be too much accustom to ban and curse ) while one will wish to another the fiery torment of this mountain . as though elementary , materiali , and visible fire can consume man soul be spirituali , bodiless , and invisible substance . and to be short , who can but wonder , why they shall not feign the same prison of damn soul , aswell in mount Aetna , be no less famous for fire and inflammation then this ? but you will say , that pope Gregory feign it so to be . therefore it be purgatory . i be content it shall be so : then there be the same truth of this prison that there 
 114 
 be of purgatory . but before i proceed any further i think it not amiss to tell a merry tale , which be the originali and ground of this hellish opinion : namely that a ship of certain stranger depart from island , under full sail , a most swift pace , go direct on her course , meet with another ship sail against wind and weather , and the force of the tempest as swift as themselves , who hail they of whence they be , answer be give by their governor , de bishop van Bremen : be the second time ask whether they be bind ? he answer , Thom Heckelfeld tho , Thom Heckelfeld tho . i be afeard lest the reader at the 
 sight of these thing shall call for a basin : for it be such a abominable lie , that it will make a man cast his gorge to hear it . away with it therefore to fenny frog , for we esteem no more of it , then of their croak coax coax . nay , it be so palpable that it be not worthy to be smile at , much less to be refute . but i will not trifle any long with the fond papist : 
 let we rather come unto our own writer . 
 and first of all i can here omit a say of that most worthy man doctor Caspar Peucer . there be in island ( quoth he ) mount Hecla , be of as dreadful a depth as any vast gulf , or as hell it self , which resound with lamentable , and miserable yelling , that the noise of the crier may be hear for the space of a great league round about . great swarm of ugly black raven and vulture lie hoover about this place which be think of the inhabitant to nestle there . the common people of that country be very persuade , that there be a descent down into hell by this gulf : and therefore when any battle be fight else where , in whatsoever part of the whole world , or any bloody slaughter be commit , they have learn by long experience , what horrible tumult and outcry , what monstrous skritche be hear round about this mountain . who dare be so bold ( most learned sir ) to bring such a incredible report to your ear ? 
 neither have island any vulture , but that second kind of eagle , which Pliny note by their white tail , and call they Pygarsi : neither be there any with we , that can bear witness of the foresay spectacle : nor yet be it likely that raven and eagle will nestle in that place , when as they shall rather be drive from thence by fire and smoke , be thing most contrary to their nature . and yet notwithstanding for proof of this matter , as also of a strange tumult hear within the hollow of the mountain , they allege the experience of the inhabitant , which indeed testify all thing to the contrary . but whereabout shall that hole or window of the mountain be , by the which we may hear outcry , noise and tumult do among they , who inhabit the most contrary , distant , and remote place of the earth from we ? concern which thing i will ask the author of this fable many question , if i may but come to the knowledge of he : in the mean time i can wish that from henceforth he will learn to tell troth , and not presume with so impudent a face to inform excellent Peucer , or other , of such unknown and incredible matter . 
 but to return to Munster , who endeavour to search out the cause of the great and strange fire of that famous hill Aetna , be it not monstrous that the very same thing which he there make natural , he shall here imagine to be preternatural , yea infernal ? but why do i speak of Aetna ? let we rather consider what Munster in another place think of the burn of Hecla . 
 munsterus it be without doubt ( say he ) that some mountain cosmographit anc [ fieid burn in old time throughout the whole ' world ’• and in this our age do burn . as for example : 
 ’ ' mount Hecla in island at certain season cast abroad 
 great stone , spit out brimstone , and disperse ash , for such a distance round about , that the land can be inhabit within 20. mile thereof . but where mountain do continual burn we understand that 116 
 there be no stop of the passage , whereby they pour forth abundance of fire sometime flame , and sometime smoke as it be a stream flood . but if between time the fire increase , all secret passage be shut up , the inner part of the mountain be notwithstanding inflame . the fire in the upper part , for want of matter , somewhat abate for the time . but when a more vehement spirit ( the same , or other passage be set open again ) do with great violence break prison , it cast forth ash , sand , brimstone , pumistone , lump resemble iron , great stone , and much other matter , not without the damage of the whole region adjoin . thus far Munster . where consider ( good reader ) how he cut his throat with his own sword , consider ( i say ) that in this place there be the very same opinion of the burn of Hecla , and the burn of Aetna , which notwithstanding in his 4. book be very diverse , for there he be fain to run to infernali cause . a certain fiery mountain of west India have far more friendly cen-surers , and historiographer then our Hecla , who make not a infernali gulf thereof . the history of which mountain ( because it be short and sweet ) i will set down , be write by Hieronimus Benzo a italian , in his history of the new world , lib . 2. Theise be the word . about 35. mile distant from Leon there be a mountain which at a great hole belch out such mighty ball of flame , that in the night they shine far and near , above 100 mile . some be of opinion that within it be melt gold minister continual matter and nourishment for the fire . hereupon a certain Dominican Frier , determine to make trial of the matter , cause a brass kettle , and a iron chain to be make : afterward ascend to the top of the hill with 4. other Spaniard , he let down the chain and the kettle 140. elne into the furnace : there , by extreme heat of the fire , the kettle , and part of the chain melt . the monk in a rage run back to Leon , and chide the smith , because he have make the chain far more slender than himself have come - 
 117 
 mand . the smith hammer out another of more substance and strength then the former . the monk return to the mountain , and let down the chain and the cauldron : but with the like success that he have before . neither do the caldron only vanish 8c melt away : but also , upon the sudden there come out of the depth a flame of fire , which have almost consume the friar , 8c his companion . than they all return so astonish , that they have small list afterward to prosecute that attempt , 8cc . what great difference be there between these two censure ? in a fiery hill of west India they search for gold : but in mount Hecla of island they seek for hell . howbeit they will perhaps reject this as a thing too new , 8c altogether unknown to ancient writer . why therefore have not writer imagine the same prison of soul to be in chimaera a hill in Lycia ( which , by report , flame continual day and night ) that be in mount Hecla of island ? why have they not imagine the same to be in the mountain of Ephesus , which be touch with a burn torch , be report to conceive so much fire , that the very stone 8c sand lie in the water be cause to burn , 8c from the which ( a staff be burn upon they , 8c trail after a man on the ground ) there proceed whole river of fire , as Pliny testify ? why not in cophantrus a mountain of Bactria , always burn in the night ? why not in the isle of Hiera , flame in the midst of the sea ? why not in Aeolia in old time likewise burn for certain day in the midst of the sea ? why not in the field of Babylon burn in the day season ? why not in the field of Aethiopia glitter always like star in the night ? why not in the hill of Lipara open with a wide and bottomless gulf ( as Aristotle bear record ) whereunto it be dangerous to approach in the night : from whence the sound of cymbal and the noise of rattle , with unwonted and uncouth laughter be hear ? why not in the field of Naples , near unto Puteoli ? why not in the pike of Teneriffa before mention , like 
 118 
 Aetna continual burn and cast up stone into the air , as Munster himself witness ? why not in that aethiopian hill , which Pliny affirm to burn more than all the former ? and to conclude , why not in the mountain of Vesuvius , which ( to the great damage of all the country adjoin , and to the utter destruction of Caius Plinius pry into you cause of so strange a fire ) vomit out flame as high as the cloud , fill the air with great abundance of pumistone , and ash , and with palpable darkness intercept the light of the sun from all the region thereabout ? i will speak , and yet speak no more than the truth : because in deed they foresee , that man will yield no credit to those thing as be too well know , though they shall have feign they to have be the flame of hell : but they think the burn of Hecla ( the rumor whereof come more slow to their ear ) to be fit for the establish of this fond fable . but get you pack , your fraud be find out : leave off for shame hereafter to persuade any simple man , y‘ there be a hell in mount Hecla . for nature have teach both we and other ( maugre your opinion ) to acknowledge her operation in these firework , not the fury of hell . but now let we examine a few more such fable of you common people , which have so unhappy mislead our historiographer and cosmographers . 
 119 
 [ the eight 
 the eight section . 
 near unto the mountain ( the 3. forename Hecla 8cc . ) there be three vast hole , the depth whereof , especial at mount Hecla , can be discern by any man , be he never so sharp sight : but there appear to the beholder thereof certain man at that instant plunge in , and as yet draw their breath , who answer their friend ( exhort they with deep sigh to return home ) that they must depart to mount Hecla : and with that , they sudden vanish away . 
 to confirm the former lie , of a earthly and visible hell ( albeit i will easy grant that Frisius in write these thing do not intend to reproach any , but only to blaze abroad new and incredible matter ) certain idle companion know neither hell nor heaven have invent this fable , no less reproachful than false , and more vain 8c detestable than sicilian scoff . which fellow these writer ( be otherwise man of excellent part , and to who learning be much indebt ) have follow with a over hasty judgement . 
 but it be to be wish , that none will write history with so great a desire of set forth novelty 8c strange thing , that they fear not , in that regard to broach any fabulous 8c old-wive toy , 8c so to defile pure gold with filthy mire . but i pray you , how may those drown man be swim in the infernal lake , 8c yet for all that , parl with their acquaintance 8c friend ? what ? will you conjure , 8c raise up unto we from death to life old Orpheus confer with his wife Eurydice ( draw back again down to the stygian flood ) 8c in these part of the world , as it be by the bank of snowy Tanais , 8c Hebrus descant upon his harp ? but in very deed although other will not acknowledge the falsehood , 8c vanity of these trifle , yet Cardane be a diligent considerer of all thing in his 18. book de subtilitate , do acknowledge 8c find they 
 120 
 out . who word be these . there be Hecla a mountain in island , which burn like unto / Aetna at certain season , and hereupon the common people have conceive a opinion this long time , that soul be there purge : some , lest they shall seem liar , heap up more vanity to this fable , that it may appear to be probable , and agreeable to reason . but what be those vanity ? namely , they feign certain ghost answer they , that they be go to mount Hecla : as the same Cardane say . and further he add . neither in island only , but every where ( albeit seidome ) such thing come to pass . and then he tell this story follow of a man-killing spirit . there be ( say he ) solemnize this last year the funerali of a common citizen , in the gate near unto the great church , by that marketplace , which in regard of the abundance of herb , in our tongue have the name of the herbmarket . there meet with i one of my acquaintance : i ( accord to the custom of physician ) present ask of what disease the man die ? he give i answer that this man use to come home from his labour 3. hour within night : one night among the rest he espy a hobgoblin pursue he : which to avoid , he run away with all speed : but be catch by the spirit , he be throw down upon the ground . he will fain have make a shout , and be not able . at length ( when the spirit and he have struggle together upon the ground a good while ) he be find by certain passenger , and carry home half dead . and when he be come to himself again , be ask what be the matter , he up and tell this strange relation . hereupon ( be utter daunt , and discourage , when neither by his friend , nor by physician , nor by priest , he can be persuade , that these thing be but his own conceit , and that there be no such matter ) 8. day after he die . i hear also afterward of other which be his neighbour , that no man can more constant affirm himself to be wound of his enemy , than this man do , that he 
 121 
 be cast upon the ground by a ghost . and when some demand what he do , after he be tumble on the earth ? the dead man ( quoth he ) lay his hand to my throat , go about to strangle i : neither be there any remedy , but by defend my self with my own hand . when other doubt lest he may suffer these thing of a live man , they ask he how he can discern a dead man from a live ? to this , he render a very probable reason , say that he seem in handle to be like cottum , and that he have no weight , but hold he down by main force . and present after he add . in like manner as in island , so in the desert sand of . / Egypt , Ethiopia , and India , where the sun be hot , the very same apparition , the same spright be wont to delude wayfare man . thus much Cardane . yet from hence ( i trow ) no man will conclude as our writer of island do , that in the place of . / Egypt , . / Ethiopia , and India , there be a prison of damn soul . 
 i think good to write these thing out of Cardane , that i may bring even the testimony of stranger on our side , against such monstrous fable . this place of Cardane impli these two thing , namely y* apparition of spright be not proper to island alone ( which thing all man know , if they do not malicious feign themselves to be ignorant ) and second that that conference of the dead with the live in you gulf of Hecla be not ground upon any certainty , but only upon fable coin by some idle person , be more vain than any bubble , which the brutish common sort have use , to confirm their opinion of the torment of soul . and be there any man so fantastical , that will|be induce to believe these gulf , mention by writer , to be any where extant , although they be never so full of dead man miracle ? yea doubtless . for from hence also they say , y* reproach be just use against our nation : namely , y* there be nothing in all the world more base , and worthless then it , which contain hell within the bound thereof . This very be the good that we have get 
 122 
 by those historiographer , who have be so greedy to publish novelty . but this opinion , breed by the sottishness of the common people have hitherto ( as i hope ) be sufficient overthrow as a thing foolish and vain , and as be devise for the upbraid of our nation . wherefore , proceed ( friendly reader ) and be far instruct in this philosophy of infernali secret . 
 the nine section . 
 but round about the hand , for the space of 7. or 8. Frisius and month in a year there float ice , make a munster-miserable kind of moan , and not unlike to man voice , by reason of the clash together . the inhabitant be of opinion that in mount Hecla and in the ice , there be place wherein the soul of their countryman be torment . 
 no doubt , a worthy augmentation of the history , concern the hell of island , shut up within the bottom of one mountain , and that no great one : yea , at some time ( by fit and season ) change place : namely , when it be weary of lurk at home by the fire side within you mountain , it delight to be range abroad , and to venture to sea , but without a ship , and to gather it self round into morsel of ice . Come forth , and give ear all the y‘ wonder at this secret . Lo , i will afford these historiographer another addition of history very notable . let they write therefore , that you islander have not only hell within their jurisdiction , but also y* they enter into it willing and witting , and come forth again untouched you very same day . how can that be ? why : it be a ancient custom of the island take of that they which inhabit near the sea shore do usual s ™ 1 ” on the go betimes in a morning to catch seal , even upon the ' very same ice which the historiographer make to be hell , and in the evening return home safe and sound . set down also ( if you please ) that the prison of the damn be keep in store by the islander in coffer and vessel , as we shall anon hear out of Frisius . 
 123 
 ice fioat not 7. or 8. month about island . 
 but you have need wise to foresee , lest you islander beguile all your country of the commendation of courage and constancy : namely , as they ( for so it please your writer to report ) who both can and will endure the torment of hell , and who be able to break through and escape they , without any far hurt : which thing be necessary to be collect out of that , that have be before mention . and i be able to reckon up a great many of our countryman , who in you very act of hunt , wander somewhat far from the shore ( the ice be disperse by western wind ) and for the space of many league rest upon the ice , be chase with the violence of the tempest , and some whole day and night be toss up and down in the wave of the rage sea , and so ( for it follow by good consequence out of this problem of the historiographer ) have have experi - ■ ence of the torment , and pain of this hell of ice . who at the last , the weather be change , and the wind blow at the north , be transport again to the shore , in this their ship of ice , have return home in safety : some of which number be alive at this day . wherefore let such as be desirous of news snatch up this , and ( if they please ) let they frame a whole volume hereof , and add it to their history . neither do these vain fantasy deserve otherwise to be handle and confute , then with such like merriment and sporting . but to lay aside all jest , let we return to the matter from whence we be digress . first of all therefore it be evident enough out of the second section , ill ice float not about this hand , neither 8. nor 7. month in a year : then , that this ice ( although at some time by shuffle together it make monstrous sounding and crackling , and again at some time with the beat of the water , it send forth a hoarse kind of murmur ) do any thing at all resound or lament , like unto man voice , we may in no case confess . but whereas they say that , both in the isle , and in mount Hecla we appoint certain place , wherein the soul of our countryman 
 124 
 be torment , we utter stand to the denial of that : and we thank God and our lord Jesus Christ from the bottom of our heart ( who have deliver we from death and hell , and open unto we the gate of the kingdom of heaven ) because he have instruct we moor true , concern the place , whether the soul of our decease countryman depart , than these historiographer do tell we . we know and maintain that the soul of the godly be transport immediate out of their bodily prison , not into the papist purgatory , nor into the elysian field , but into Abraham bosom , into the hand of God , and into the heavenly paradise . we know and maintain concern the soul of the wicked , that they wander not into the fire and ash of mountain , or into visible ice , but immediate be carry away into utter darkness , where be weep and gnash of tooth , where there be cold also , and fire not common , but far beyond our knowledge and curious disputation . where not only body , but soul also , y‘ be spirituali substance be torment . and we do also hold , y* the islander be no whit near unto this extreme and dark prison , in regard of the situation of place , than the german , Dane , Frenchman , italian , or any other nation whatsoever . neither be it any thing to the purpose , at all to dispute of the place or situation of this dungeon . it be sufficient for we , that ( by the grace and assistance of our lord Jesus Christ , with who precious blood we be redeem ) we shall never see that utter darkness , nor feel the rest of the torment that be there . now let we here shut up the disputation concern the hell of island . 
 [ the ten 
 125 
 the ten section . 
 if any man shall take a great quantity of this ice , and shall keep it never so wary enclose in a coffer or vessel , it will at that time when the ice thaw about the hand , utter vanish away , so that not the least part thereof , no nor a drop of water be to be find . 
 oure , this be of necessity to be add : namely , Oy‘ this ice , which accord to historiographer re-presenteth man voice , and be the place of the damn , do not as all other thing in this wide world , consist of you matter of some element . for whereas it seem to be a body , when indeed it be no body : ( which may direct be gather out of Frisius absurd opinion ) whereas also it pierce through hard and solid body , no otherwise then spirit and ghost : therefore it remain , see it be not of a elementary nature , y‘ it must have either a spirituali , or a celestial , or a infernal matter . but y‘ it shall be infernali , we can not be persuade , because we have hear that infernali cold be far more unsufferable than this ice , which use to be put into a box with man hand , and be not of force any whit to hurt even naked flesh , by touch thereof . nor yet will we grant it to be spirituali : for we have learn in natural philosophy , that spiritual substance can neither be see nor feel , and can have any thing take from they : all which thing do notwithstanding most manifest agree to this ice of the historiographer , howsoever accord to they it be supernatural . beside also , it be most true , that the very same ice be melt with the heat of the sun , and resolve into water , upon the upper part thereof , stand fisherman in as good stead to quench their thirst , as any land-river will do , which thing can no way be ascribe to a spirituali substance . it be not therefore spirituali , nor yet infernali . now none will so bold to affirm , that it have celestial matter , lest some man perhaps may hereupon imagine , y‘ this ice have bring hell ( which the historiographer 126 
 annex unto it ) down from heaven together with it self : or that the same thing shall be common unto heaven , be of one and the same matter with ice , and so that the prison of the damn may be think to have change place with the heavenly paradise , and all by the oversight of these historiographer . wherefore see the matter of this historical ice be neither elementary ( as we have so often prove by this place of Frisius ) neither spirituali , nor infernali , both which we have conclude evident , in short , yet sound and substantiali reason : nor yet celestial matter , which , religion for-biddeth a man once to imagine : it be altogether manifest , you accord to the say historiographer , there be no such thing at all , which notwithstanding they blaze abroad with such astonish admiration , and which we think to be a ordinary matter common see and feel . therefore it be , and it be not : which proposition when it shall fall out true , in the same respect , in the same part , and at the same time , then will we give credit to these freeze miracle . now therefore the reader may easy judge , that we need none other help to refute these thing , but only to show how they disagree one with another . but it be no marvel that he , which have once incline himself to the fabulous report of the common people , shall oftentimes fall into error . there be a like strange thing invent by another concern the sympathy or conjoin of this ice : namely , that it follow the departure of that huge lump , whereof it be a part , so narrow , and so swift , that a man by no diligence can observe it , by reason of the unchangeable necessity of follow . but we have oftentimes see such a solitary lump of ice remain ( after the other part thereof be drive away ) and lie upon the shore for many week together , without any post or engine at all to stay it . therefore it be plain that these miracle of ice be ground upon a more slippery foundation than ice it self . 
 127 
 Frisius . not far from these mountain ( the three forename ) decline to the sea shore , there be four fountain of a most contrary nature between themselves . the first , by reason of his continual ! heat convert into a stone any body cast into it , the former shape only still remain . the second be extreme cold . the three be sweet than honey , and most pleasant to quench thirst . the four be altogether deadly , pestilent , and full of rank poison . 
 even this description of fountain do sufficient declare how impure that fountain be , out of which the geographer draw all these miraculous story . for he seem to affirm , that the three foresay mountain do almost touch one another : for he ascribe four fountain indifferent unto they all . otherwise , if he have not make they stand near together , he will have place next unto some one of these , two of the foresay fountain . but neither doe these mountain touch ( be distant so many league a sunder ) neither be there any such four fountain near unto they , which , he that will not believe , let he go try . but to confute these thing , the very contrariety of writer be sufficient . for another concern two fountain gainsayth Frisius in these word . there do burst out of the same hill Hecla two fountain , the one whereof , by reason of the cold stream , the other with intolerable heat exceed all the force of element . Theise be Frisius his two first fountain , save that here be omit the miracle of harden body , be by he attribute to one of the say fountain . but they can at one time break forth , both out of the mountain it self , and near unto the mountain . 
 but here i will willing demand , by what reason any of the peripatetic can affirm , that there be some thing in nature cold than the element of water , or hot than the element of fire . from whence ( i pray 128 
 you , learned writer ) proceed this coldness ? from whence come this heat ? have we not learn out of your school that water be a element most cold and somewhat moist : and in such sort most cold , that for the make of secondary quality , it must of necessity be remit , and be simple , that it can be apply to the use of mankind ? i do here deliver these oracle of the natural philosopher , not know whether they be true or false . m. John Fernelius , lib . 
 2. Phys. cap . 4. may stand for one witness among all the rest , and in stead of they all . so excessive ( say he ) be these four first quality in the four element , that as nothing be hot than pure fire , and nothing light : so nothing be dry than earth , and nothing heavy : and as for pure water , there be no quality of any medicine whatsoever exceed the coldness thereof , nor the moisture of air . Moreover , the say quality be so extreme and surpass in they , that they can be any whit increase , but remit they may be . i will not hear heap up the reason or argument of the natural philosopher . Theise writer have need be wary of one thing , lest while they too much magnify the miracle of the fountain , they exempt they out of the number of thing create , aswell as they do the ice of the islander . we will prosecute in order the property of these fountain set down by the foresay writer . 
 the first by reason of his continual heat . there be many very many bath or hot fountain in island , but few ™ 
 \ 11 i*i 1*1 1 1 island . 
 vehement hot , which we think ought not to make any man wonder , when as i have learn out of author , that Germany every where abound with such hot bath , especial near the foot of the Alps . the hot bath of Baden , gebarsvil , Calben in the duchy of Wittenberg and many other be very famous : all which Fuchsius do mention in his book de arte medendi . 
 and not only Germany , but also France , and beyond all the rest Italy that mother of all commodity , say Cardan . and Aristotle report , that about Epyrus 
 iv 129 1 
 these hot water do much abound , whereupon the place be call Pyriplegethon . and i say , these thing shall therefore be you less admire , because the searcher of nature have as well find out cause of the heat in water , as of the fire in mountain : namely , that water run within the earth through certain vein of brimstone and Allom , and from thence take not only heat , but taste also , and other strange quality . Aristotle in his book de mundo have teach this . the earth ( say he ) contain within it fountain not only of water , but also of spirit and fire : some of they flow like river , do cast forth red hot iron : from whence also do flow , sometime lukewarm water , sometime scald hot , and sometime temperate . and Seneca . Empedocles think that bath be make hot by fire , which the earth secret contain in many place , especial if the say fire be under that ground where the water pass . and Pontanus write very learned concern the baian bath . 
 no marvel though from bank of baian shore 
 hot bath , or vein of scald liquour flow : for Vulcan forge incense evermore 
 do teach we plain , that heart of earth below and bowel burn , and fire enrage glow . 
 from hence the flit flood send smoky stream , and bath do boil with secret burn gleam . 
 i think good in this place to touch that which Saxo Grammaticus the most famous historiographer of the Dane report . that certain fountain of island do sometime increase and flow up to the brink : sometime again they fall so low that you can scarce discern they to be fountain . which kind of fountain , albeit they be very seidome find with we , yet i will make mention of some like unto they , produce by nature in other country , lest any man shall think it somewhat strange . Pliny make a great recital of these . there be one ( say he ) in the isle of Tenedos , which at the solstitium of summer do always flow from the 
 130 
 three hour of the night , till the sixth . in the field of Pitinas beyond the apennine mountain , there be a river which in the midst of summer always increase , and in winter be dry up . he make mention also of a very large fountain , which every hour do increase and fall . neither be it to be omit , that some river run under the ground , and after that fall again into a open chanel : as Lycus in Asia , Erasinus in Argolica , Tigris in Mesopotamia , unto which Cardan add Tanais in Moscovia : and those thing which be throw into Aesculapius fountain at Athens , be cast up again in Phaletico . and Seneca write that there be certain river which be let down into some cave under ground , be withdraw out of sight , seem for the time to be utter perish and take away , and that after some distance the very same river return , enjoy their former name and their course . and again Pliny report that there be a river receive under ground in the field of Atinas that issue out twenty mile from that place . all which example and the like , shall teach we that the fountain of island be not to be make great wonder than the rest . 
 do forthwith convert into a stone any body cast into it . by these two property , namely warmth or most vehement heat , and a virtue of harden body do Frisius describe his first fountain . and i have hear report ( though i never have experience thereof my self ) that there be such a fountain in island not far from the bishop seat of Schalholt , in a village call Haukadal . Seneca report of the like , say : that there be a certain fountain which convert wood into stone , harden the bowel of those man which drink thereof . And add further , that such fountain be to be find in certain place of Italy : which thing Ovid in the 15. book of his metamor . ascribe unto the river of the Cicones . 
 water drink out of ciconian flood 
 131 
 river of island in summer season lukewarm . 
 ought else therewith besprinckt , as earth or wood become marble straight : a thing most strange . 
 and Cardane . Georgius Agricola affirm , that in the territory of Elbogan , about the town which be name of falcon , that the whole body of pine tree be convert into stone , and which be more wonderful , that they contain , within certain rift , the stone call Pyrites , or the flint . and Domitius Brusonius re-porteth , that in the river of Silar ( run by the foot of that mountain which stand in the field of the ci tie in old time call ursence , but now Contursia ) leave and bough of tree change into stone , and that , not upon other man credit , but upon his own experience , be bear and bring up in that country : which thing Pliny also avouch , say , that the say stone do show the number of their year , by the number of their bark , or stony husk . So ( if we may give credit to author ) drop of the Goth fountain be disperse abroad , become stone . and in Hungary , the water of Cepusius be pour into pitcher , be convert to stone . and Pliny report , that wood be cast into the river of the Cicones , and into the Veline lake in the field of Pice , be enclose in a bark of stone grow over it . 
 the second be extreme cold . as for the second fountain , here be none to any man knowledge so extreme cold : in deed there be very many that be indifferent code , insomuch that ( our common river in the summer time be lukewarm ) we take delight to fetch water from those cool spring . it may be that there be some far cold in other country : for Cardane make mention of a river ( stream from the top of a hill in the field of Corinth ) cold than snow : and within a mile of Culma , the river call Insana seem to be very hot be most extreme cool , etc 
 the three be sweet than honey . neither be this altogether true . for there be not any fountain with we , which may in the least respect be compare with the sweetness of honey . and therefore saxon write more 132 
 1592. true , say , that certain fountain ( for there be very many ) yield taste as good as beer : and also in the same place there be fountain and river not only of diverse taste , but of diverse colour . 
 and albeit natural philosopher teach , that water natural of it self have neither taste nor smell , yet it be likely ( as we have touch before , which other call per accidens ) that oftentimes it represent the quality of that earth wherein it be engender , and through the vein whereof it have passage and issue : and from hence proceed the diverse and sundry smell , colour and savour of all water . of such water do Seneca make mention , whereof some provoke hunger , other make man drunken , some hurt the memory , and some help it , and some resemble the very quality and taste of wine , as that fountain which Pliny speak of in the he of i ” Andros , within the temple of Bacchus , which in the mtrab-auscult-nones of January use to flow over with wine . and Aristotle report , that in the field of Carthage there be a fountain which yield oil , and certain drop smell like cedar . also Orcus a river of Thessaly flow into Peneus , swim aloft like oil . Cardane report , that there be in Saxony , near unto the town of bruns-wic , a fountain mix with oil : and another in Suevia near unto the abbey call Tergensch . also in the valley of the mountain Jurassus . he suppose the cause of this thing to be very fatty pitch , which can but contain oil in it . the same author say : it be report that in Cardia near to the place of Daschylus , in the white field , there be water sweet than milk . 
 another also near unto the bridge which we pass over go to the town of Valdeburg . Propertius likewise in the three book of his elegy mention certain water represent the savour of wine in these word . 
 amid the isle of Naxus lo , with fragrant smell and fine 
 a freshet run ; the naxian go fill cup , carouse , there’s wine . 
 133 
 this Naxus be one of the hand call Cyclades lie in the tegaean sea . Cardane give a reason hereof , namely , because Hydromel or water-honey , in long continuance will become wine . Aristotle name a fountain in Sicilia , which the inhabitant use in stead of vinegar . the same author make the cause of savour in water to be heat , because the earth be hot change and give savour unto the water . 
 now concern the colour of water so say Cardane . there be the same reason ( say he ) of the colour of water , that there be of the savour thereof , for both have their originali from the earth . for there be white water within two mile of Glauca a town in Misena : red water in Radera a river of Misena not far from Radeburg . : and in old time near unto Joppa in Judea : green water in the mountain of Carpathus by Neusola : sky-coloured or blue water between the mountain of Feltrius and Tarvisius : and it be report that there be water of that colour in Thermopylis : coalblack water in Alera a river of Saxony , at that place where it dischargeth it self into the Weser . the cause of these colour be the colour of the soil . also Aristotle say , that about the promontory of Japigia , there be a fountain which stream blood : add moreover , that mariner be drive far from that place of the sea , by reason of the extreme stench thereof . Furthermore , they say that in Idumaea there be a fountain which change colour four time in a year : for sometime it be green , sometime white , sometime bloody , and sometime muddy colour . 
 concern the smell of water , thus write Cardane . there be the like reason of difference in smell . but for the most part the steam of water be unpleasant , because the earth do seidome time smell well . the water of the river Anigris in Aelis stink , to the destruction , not only of fish , but also of man . about Meton in Messania , out of a certain pond there have be draw most sweet smell , and odoriferous water . 
 j34 
 i do recite all these example to the end that no man shall make a great wonder at the colour , smell , and savour of water that be in island , then at those which be in other country . 
 the four be altogether deadly . Isidore affirm , that there be a certain fountain who water be drink , extinguish life . and Pliny say , that about Nonaris in Arcadia , the river of Styx ( near the mountain of Cillene , say Cardane : it will be contain in nothing but a horsehoof : and it be report that Alexander the great be poison therewithal ) not differ from other water , neither in smell nor colour , be drink , be present death . in Berosus a hill of the same the people call Tauri , there be three fountain , every author say . one of they deadly without remedy , and yet without grief . and ( which be the strange thing of all the rest ) Seneca make mention of a pool , into which whosoever look , do present die . but , as for this four fountain of Frisius , which Saxo do likewise mention , we islander , as always heretofore , so even at this day do testify , that it be utter unknown unto we : and therefore in this regard , we render unto God in - Island free mortali thank , because he have vouchsafe to preserve our nation from such fountain , from serpent and venomous worm , and from all other pestiferous and con - beast . tagious creature . 
 furthermore about the foresay mountain there be such abundance of brimstone . the three mountain call by Munster and Frisius , fiery mountain , do all of they stand a huge distance from our mine . wherefore , when as near unto these hill they have find out a place for four fountain , which they do so mighty extol for wonder , they must needs have some brimstone mine also , stand a like distance from the say fountain . And assure , neither about mount Hecla , as Munster will have it , nor by Frisius his fountain ( the report whereof how true it be , have be hitherto declare ) be Brimston dig up at this 
 135 
 mine only in the north part of island . 
 abundance offish about island diminish . 
 day : nor i think ever be within the remembrance of our father . neither be it true that Munster re-porteth concern the abundance of brimstone : namely , that it be almost the only merchandise and tribute of the hand . for whereas the hand be divide into four part , the four part only towards the north ( nay , but even the half thereof ) do use it for merchandise , and there be not one crumb of brimstone pay for tribute of the hand . 
 the twelve section . 
 there be so great store of fish in this hand , that they be lay forth on pile to be sell in the open air , as high as the top of house . 
 in the open air . in deed we have see other country merchant do so , until they have unlade their ship of outlandish ware , and fill they again with fish and with other of our country merchandise . but whether our man have do the like at any time , it be not manifest . certain , that plentiful and ancient abundance of fish be now decay , and the islander now begin to be pinch with the want of these and other good thing , the lord lay the just scourge of our impiety upon we , which i pray God we may due acknowledge . 
 the thirteenth section . 
 they have most swift horse , which will run without cease a continual course for the space of 30. league . 
 a certain cosmographer in his map of island re-porteth concern the horse of one parish , that they will run 20. league at once in a continue race . but we account both to be impossible . for Munster write that those beast which excel all other in swiftness and strength of body , call two Rangiferi , can run above 30. league in 24. hour . 
 136 
 there be see sometime near unto island huge whale Munster . like unto mountain , which overturn ship , unless they be terrify away with the sound of trumpet , or beguile with round and empty vessel , which they delight to toss up and down . it sometime fall out that mariner think these whale to be hand , and cast out anchor upon their back , be often in danger of drown . they be call in their tongue Trollwal Tuffelwalen , that be to say , the devilish whale . 
 like unto mountain . Loe here once again ( gentle reader ) Munster falsify echo , and ( as the proverb say ) his blind dream . such a false and senseless overreaching do exceed disgrace a history , and that by so much the more , by how much the less necessary it be . for to what purpose shall a historiographer make leasing , if history be a report of plain truth ? why shall he use such strange surmounting ? what be it that he will persuade , or whither will he ravish the reader , if he propound unto himself nothing but the simple declaration of thing ? 
 poet and painter have leave of old , to feign , to blaze , in all thing to be bold . but not historiographer . 
 the back of whale which they think to be hand . this fable , like all the rest , be breed of a old , ridiculous and vain tale , the credit and truth whereof be not worth a straw . and it be this that follow , namely , that the bishop of Breme ( call by the ancient Norway Brandan , and by Kranzius , if i be not deceive , alebran-dus ) in old time send certain legate with a Coven of friar to preach and publish in the north the popish faith , which be then think to be Christian : and when they have spend a long journey in sail towards the north , they come unto a hand , and there cast 
 certain letter send by bran-dan bishop of Breme , to preach Christian faith in the north . 
 137 
 their anchor they go a shore , and kindle fierce ( for it be very likely that the mariner be not a little vex with the nip cold which they feel at sea ) and so provide victual for the rest of their journey . but when their fire grow very hot , this hand sink , and sudden vanish away , and the mariner escape drown very narrow with the boat that be present . this be the foundation of the matter , but how incredible it be , i appeal to the reader . but what ail these mariner , or what mean they to do , who in a tempestuous sea , see a rock before their eye , or ( as Munster say ) a little hand , will not rather with all diligence have avoid it for fear of run a shore and shipwreck , than to rest in such a dangerous harbour ? but in what ground shall the anchor be fasten ? for mariner for the most part be destitute of such long cable , whereby they may let down a anchor to the bottom of the main sea , therefore upon the back of whale , say Munster . but then they have need first to bear a hole for the flouke to take hold in . o silly mariner , that in dig can discern whale flesh from lump of earth , nor know the slippery skin of a whale from the upper part of the ground : without doubt they be worthy to have Munster for a pilot very in this place ( as likewise before treat of the land-miracle of island ) he gather fruit as they say , out of Tantalus his garden , and follow hard after those thing which will never and no where be find , while he endeavour to proule here and there for miracle , peruse sea and land to stuff up his history : where notwithstanding he can hunt out ought but feign thing . 
 but they be call in their language Trollwal . go not far than your skill , Munster , for i take it you can skill of our tongue : and therefore it may be a shame for a learned man to teach other that which he know not himself : for such a attempt be subject to manifold error , as we will show by this your example . 
 138 
 for while you take in hand to school other , and to teach they by what name a whale-fish be to be call in our tongue , leave out through ignorance the letter h , which almost alone make up the signification of the word , you deliver that which be not true : for val in our language signify not a whale , but choose or choice of the verb eg well , that be to say , i choose , or i make choice , from whence val be derive , etc but a whale be call hualur with we , and therefore you ought to have write trollhualur . neither do troll signify the devil , as you interpret it , but certain giant that live in mountain . you see therefore ( and no marvel ) how you err in the whole word . it be no great injury to our language be in one word only : because ( doubtless ) you know not more than one . 
 other also do offend in the same fault , for it be not to be allow that a certain man be about to publish a map of island receive from islander themselves , have rather mar the fashion of all , or in very deed of the most name of cape , bay , mountain , spring , river , hammock , valley , hill and town ( because that be ignorant of our language , he be not able to read those thing aright , which he receive from our countryman ) he have rather ( i say ) deprave and corrupt they all , then learn of the islander themselves , which at that time , namely in the year 1585. live in the university of Hafnia , or copen Hagen , how every thing ought to be read and write . and we esteem he for this his wilful mar of our native name and word , ( whereupon it come to pass that we read the same , can acknowledge very few to be our own ) that he be no slight offender against our tongue , otherwise retain the pure and the ancient property . 
 but now we have after some sort examine most of the miracle of island , which our writer have mention . notwithstanding before we enter into any 139 
 far matter , we think it good in this section to touch that which the last forename man ( in this map of island , that he cause to be put forth in you foresay year under his own name ) have give out concern two other fountain beside the former : whereof the one shall die white wool black , and the other black wool white . which thing where he receive it , or who be the whence he have it , we can by no mean imagine : for islanduh | t js not to founj ; in our own writer , nor in you 
 wnie' - writer of other country . but whence soever it be , it be but a tale , and have not one jot of truth in it . and although it be incredible that black wool may be die of a white colour , see it be affirm by Pliny , that black wool ( of all other ) will receive no colour : notwithstanding there be some such thing report by Theophrastus : namely , that there be a river in Macedonia which make black sheep white . speculum also , that Norway pamphlet call the royal lookingregale . glass } which i mention before , do attribute these fountain to Ireland , which be also call Hybernia , and not to island . which peradventure deceive the reader , read in a strange language s instead of R. 
 that likewise deserve no better credit which another author write : that there be a certain great stone in island which run up and down the crag and cliff of mountain by no outward force , but by the own proper and natural motion . he that will believe this , what will he not believe ? for it be such a rare devise that the epicure themselves ( who yet seem to Lucian to have feign many incredible thing ) i be sure never invent the like : unless perhaps the say author do imagine , that a man ( who be call of the islander by the proper name of Stein ) shall compass about , and climb up certain rock : which although it be ridiculous to put into a story of wonder , namely , that a man shall move or walk , yet be it so to be suppose to save the credit of the author , that we may not more severe 140 
 1592-condemne that fable , which be so senseless of it self and not worthy to be read . 
 they be guilty of the same crime also who have find out raven , pie , hare and vulture , all white in island : for it be well know that vulture come vulture , very seidome , together with the ice of the sea , unto beam and we , as bear also ( but they seldome than vulture ) ‘ j^drift and a certain kind of crow call by the islander ice into island . Isakrakur . but as for white pie , hare , and raven , island never have any . 
 and these in a manner be the thing which , in regard of our daily business , we be able at this present to afford , as touch the former part of our treatise , which be pen by i for this purpose ( as in the beginning i do protest ) that the error of author concern a unknown land , and the affect vanity also of some man may be disclose , for i be not desirous to diminish any man good name : but because i consecrate these my labour to truth and to my country , i can not choose but show , that those thing which hitherto have be report by many concern our hand deserve very little credit : and so to address my self unto the matter follow concern the inhabitant . 
 here end the first part of the commentary . 
 of island the second part , concern the inhabitant . 
 have hitherto finish the miracle of island with certain other particular belong to the first part , the which while writer do wonder at , and diverse extol as it be the fountain of Agamemnon , yea , as thing beside and against all nature , they have be very careless both of truth it self , and of their own credit . now the course of the present speech do admonish i to make haste unto the other part of the treatise concern the inhabitant : wherein what 
 141 
 i shall first say , or where i shall begin , i be altogether ignorant . for there be such monstrous , and so many mock , reproach , skoffes , and taunt of certain man against we poor islander dwell in the utmost part of the world ( and among these also , some thing of they who take upon they to profess most simple truth , namely historiographer ) insomuch , that to reckon up the particular be nothing else but to tell the drop of the icarian sea . but as i say in the beginning , we will not deal alike severe with all . for although Krantzius , Munsterus , Frisius and other have write many thing too bold of our nation : yet have otherwise deserve well of learning by their monument , they shall|be still in you same reputation w‘ we that they be worthy of . howbeit in the mean time , although a man will free they from the mark of slanderer , yet be it not small matter that they shall broach certain senseless , impossible and ridiculous thing , such as those be which we have hitherto lay down : as also that they shall record in history profane and horrible untruth , some of which kind shall now immediate be discuss . as for other , whatsoever they be , who upbraid the nation of islander with daily reproach , they be to have that answer in a readiness which such man deserve . in the number of who , that scoffer be to be account , who by a company of rhyme publish in the germane tongue , to the disgrace of our country , have bring his name into everlasting ignominy . 
 wherefore as our present business require , while we be in hand with the write of author concern this matter , although we meet with some thing contain little reproach , notwithstanding we will examine most of they , note the error as hitherto we have do : in the mean time also when they shall allege any truth , we will in no case dissemble it . and after this manner , first we will hear Munster , Krantzius and Frisius , and other also , if there be any more , what they 142 
 have to say , reject that Parot and his dutch rhyme infect with fell slander , as he be worthy , unto the last place . First therefore the say author write concern the faith or religion of the islander : and second , of their manner , custom , and course of life in manner follow . 
 the first section . 
 Adalbert metropolitan of Hamburg in the year of Krantzius in Christ 1070. saw the islander convert unto Christianity : albeit , before the receive of Christian faith , they live accord to the law of nature , and do not much differ from our law : therefore at their humble request , he appoint a certain holy man name islief to be their first bishop . 
 KRantzius in these word , and Munster other where , do seem to attribute unto the islander the prerogative of christian faith : and they shall deal both beseem themselves and the truth , if they do not in other place deprive we of the same . for ( to speak of Krantzius anon ) that which Munster before report concern our faith or opinion about the place and situation of hell , be very far from christian piety : namely to be desirous to pry into those secret which God have keep close unto himself alone , and which his pleasure be , shall exceed our capacity : for there be not any thing find in the holy scripture of this matter , where the place and situation of hell , or of eternal fire prepare for the devil and his angel , and so for all damn soul , be bound or compass about . the holy bible ( i say ) assign no local ! or bodily situation beneath the earth , or upon the earth , or in any other place of this world , to that prison of the damn : but it affirm that this earth shall perish , and that a new earth , and new heaven shall be create for the habitation of just and holy man , revel . 2. 2. Pet. 3. and Easie 65. wherefore a christian man willing give over to search into such hide secret : and he account it lawful 
 143 
 to receive or deliver unto other , opinion ( ground upon no plain and manifest place of scripture ) for certainty and truth . Deut. 4. and 12. Easie 8. Matth. 27. 2. Tim. 3. 
 further also that commendation wherewith Munster and Krantzius do grace the islander , be mere contrary to christian religion : namely , that they make all one reckon of their whelp and of their child . but more of this matter anon in the 7. section . so therefore Munster disagree with himself , whereas those who he affirm to be Christians , afterward he make to be master-builder of hell . also Krantzius and Munster both together , when as those who they affirm to be engraft by faith into Christ , they exempt from all sense of piety and honesty , in that they write that their son be not dear unto they then their whelp . 
 but to return to the matter : in very deed we have no great thing to say concern our religion , what , or of what sort it be when gentilism be first put to flight . no more ( i think ) have other northern nation near unto we to say concern the beginning of their faith . for ( alas ) we must needs confess and bewail with deep sigh , that until that day which shine unto we like the begin of immortality , and bring unto we the pure doctrine of the gospel , our countryman , as likewise other church of the north , be overspread with more than cimmerian darkness . but we may just and religious think thus much , that among we and our neighbour of Norway ( for i will not range out of my bound , nor affirm any thing of unknown people ) after heathenish idolatry be root out , Christian faith and religion do flourish far more sincere and simple , as be less infect with the poison of popery at that time , then afterward , when as the pestiferous leaven of the see of Rome be augment , and the contagious mischief grow ripe , the poison thereof be disperse through you whole world : for , as it shall afterward appear , island embrace Christ many year before the 
 144 
 new idolatry of the papist begin to prevail , and do sound forth nothing but faith in God the father , the son and the holy ghost , like unto those two most renown king of Norway , who as they have one common name , so have they one common care and pro - fession to advance the gospel of Christ . i mean Olaus the first the son of thryggo , who be bear in the year of c1 , ian ktnS Christ 968. attain to the kingdom of Norway in the orwa > 27. year of his age , and be the first , as we have hear , that offer Christ unto the norwegian , over who he reign five year : and another of that name call Olaus Sanctus the son of Harald , who in the year of Christ 1013. or there about , govern with more severity , and for the space of 17. year do bold deliver the doctrine of Christ . in the year of Christ 1030. being unjust slay by wicked murderer , he shed his blood for you name of Christ in a town of Norway call sticfla stodum . 
 our country also have , among many other , one man Nialus the of excellent piety who name be Nialus , who about the first know year of Christ 1000 live in the village of Berthorshvol frofeuourof situate in the parish of island call Landehum : who in also for his experience in humane affair , for his great wisdom and sage counsel be account famous . for whereas in his time island be turmoil with many fierce mutiny , the inhabitant be in subjection to no superior magistrate , he intermeddle not in any quarrel , save that by his discreet virtue and diligence , he set through and bring to composition a great number : he never do nor suffer violence , but only upon the last day of his life . so careful avoid he all sedition and strife : and give good assistance to other , who be desirous also to avoid and escape they : neither do any man ever put in practise his counsel , but it turn to his especial good : nor ever any do swerve therefrom , but with the danger of his life and possession . the word or rather the oracle that come from he be so certain , 
 that it be wonderful from whence any man shall have iv 145 king 
 a sum oj the islander religion . 
 so great and so sure forecast and counsel of thing to come , as be find to be in he . whereupon his discreet and provident wisdom join with counsel ! become a proverb among we nial byta raden : that be to say , the counsel of Nialus : or , the thing be do , or succeed by Nialus his counsel : when any business be achieve prudent , and with admirable discretion . this man , when , for a slaughter commit by his son without his knowledge , he be in his own house beset with a ioo . man , who have conspire his death , and when his enemy begin on all side to set his house on fire , see his end approach , at length he break into these word . doubtless these thing happen by fate , that be , by the will of God . howbeit , i put my hope and confidence in Christ , that we ( mean his wife , and himself ) although this our frail body shall undergo the corruption of death , in the fire of our enemy , yet , that it shall|be deliver from eternal flame . and so in the midst of these voice , and in the fury of the flame , he with his wife and the manslayer his son , in the year of Christ 1010. end his life . a voice undoubted full well beseem the son of God , argue the notable comfort of his soul amid the very pang of death . 
 i therefore add those thing to show by what reason i be move to think , that in the very beginning of Christianity receive among we , man mind be not so beguile and overwhelm in the darkness of error , as of late , a little before these our time , they have be . 
 but after the lord God by Luther , and Luthers fellow-labourer in the vineyard of the lord , and by his godly successor , do make the doctrine of salvation more manifest , and shake off the heavy sloth , and thick mist of our mind by the finger of his right hand , that be by his holy spirit ( Matth. 12. v. 28. ) do pluck the ear of our heart , and open our eye , that we may behold his save health : we all , and every of we do believe and confess that God be a spirit ( John 4. v. 
 146 
 24. ) eternal ( Easie 40. v. 28. ) infinite ( Jere. 23. v. 24. Psal. 139. v. 7. 8. 9 ) most good ( Matth. 19 v. 17. ) almighty ( Gen. 17. 1. revel . 1. 8. ) one in be , and nature : one in providence : one in the make and govern of all thing ( Deut. 6. 5. Ephe. 4. 5. ) but distinguish by the person of the godhead and their property , the father , the son , and the holy ghost ( Matth. 28. 19 and 3. 17. ) God the father the first person of the godhead creator of heaven and earth , and all other thing ( Gen. 1. v. 1. and in those that follow ) the upholder and governor of all ( Psa. 115. 3. Heb. 1. 3. ) father of our lord Jesus Christ ( Psal. 2 , 7. and verse follow ) and our father through he ( Rom. 8. 15. ) keeper of our soul and body ( luck 12. 12. ) and that Jesus Christ the second person of the godhead be the son of God the father ( John 1. 18. etc ) only beget ( John 1. 29. Heb. 1. 2. ) equal to his father ( baptize Chro. 17. 13. Joh. 1. i . ) true God ( John 1. 2. etc ) foreappoint before the creation of all thing ( 1. Pet. 1. 
 20 , revel . 13. 8. etc ) and present after man fall promise to be the Messiah ( Gene. 3. 15. etc ) publish eftsoon unto the holy patriarch , as unto Abraham ( Gen. 12. 3. etc ) unto Isaac ( Gen. 26. 4. ) unto Jacob ( Gene. 28. 14. ) and confirm by promise ( Gen. 49. 
 9 Esa. 11. 1 , 10. ) prefigure by you sacrifice of Moses ( Lev. 1. 2. etc ) and by other type , as namely by the offer of Isaac ( Gen. 22. ) by the lift up of the brazen serpent ( Num. 21 ) by Jonas ( Jonas 2. etc ) proclaim by the testimony of the prophet ( Esa. 7. 14. ) and at length in the fullness of time true exhibit : true man ( John 1. 14. etc Gal. 4. ) that he die for our sin , and be raise again for our justification ( Rom. 
 4. 25. etc ) ascend into heaven ( act 1. 9 etc ) and make intercession for we at the right hand of his father without cease ( 1. John 2. 1. etc ) by his holy spirit ( which be the third person of the godhead , coequal , and consubstantial to the father and the son , act 
 5. 4. ) gather the church to himself by the word , 147 
 and sacrament ( Matth. 16. 18. Rom. 10. 14. etc ) and sanctify it to eternal life , act 9 31. etc and that one day at the end of the world he will come from heaven ( act 1. 11. ) to judge the quick and the dead ( 1. thessal . 4. 15. ) that he will render unto the wicked accord to their work , and that he will judge they to eternal pain ( Matth. 13. 42. and 25. 4. ) but that he will reward they with eternal life , who believe in his name ( Matth. 25. 34. ) This Jesus Christ ( i say ) we acknowledge to be our redeemer ( Matth. 1. 21. ) our head ( 1. Corinth . 12. 27. ) and our lord ( Ephe. 4. 5. ) and that we in our holy baptism do give , and have give our name unto he ( act 2. 38. ) and that we be engraft into he by baptism ( 1. Corin. 12. 13. ) and this we do plain , ingenuous , free , and willing confess , and witness : and as for all other who invent any other name in heaven give unto man by which they may be save , we do earnest detest , curse , and condemn they ( act 4. 12. ) we hold his most holy word to be the only rule of our salvation : and that alone ( all man devise be cast away and contemn ) we propound unto our self as a infallible rule , and level of our faith ( Galat. 1. 8. Esai 29. 13. Ezech. 20. ) which we contain under the name of the old and new testament ( Hebr. 8. ) deliver by the prophet and apostle ( Ephe. 2. 20. ) by the singular and infinite goodness of God , preserve ever unto this day and to be preserve hereafter always in the church ( Matth. 28. last verse . 
 Psal. 71. 18. 1. Cor. 11. 26. ) 
 therefore we render thanks unto our most gracious and almighty God from our soul , and from our whole heart , because that even unto we be separate a huge distance from the rest of the body of his church , and inhabit the far part of the world , he will that this light grant for the revelation of the gentile , and prepare before the face of all people , and in old time favourable show to holy Simeon ( for in Christ be all the treasure of wisdom hide ) which now do 148 
 enlighten and cherish with the save beam thereof our whole nation , that he will ( i say ) this light shall come unto we . This in brief ( run over the very sum ) be our faith , and our religion , which by the direction of the holy spirit , and of his minister in the vineyard of Christ , we have draw and that out of the fountain of Israel . 
 in the year of our lord 1070. saw the islander convert unto Christ , etc 
 it be doubtful unto we whether in these word Kranzius will have say , that you islander be first convert unto Christ in the year of our lord 1070 : or whether he do not deny that they be indeed before convert , but say that it be know first unto Adalbert that year . but whithersoever of these he affirm : notwithstanding the yearly record , and most ancient chronicle of our nation testify the contrary do make his credit to be suspect in this place , unto which record and chronicle , whether you have rather give assent concern our own proper and domestical affair , do within the bound of our island , or to Krantzius or any other be ignorant in the story of our country , i appeal , ' ( friendly reader ) unto your own discretion . for my part i be enforce by many reason to agree rather unto our own writer . for our countryman affirm those thing only that be know , and in a manner domestical : he write matter foreign and unknown : they have compile their history without the difiam , disgrace or reprehend of any other nation , only that they may assign unto their own act and exploit the true time or age thereof : he have intermeddle in his historic certain thing contrary to the truth , and that to the upbraid of our nation be most unknown unto he , as it shall immediate appear : they describe the name , year , order , succession of all the bishop of island : he mention only one , and that far otherwise then the truth . Furthermore , 
 149 
 the most ancient chronicle of island . 
 that i may make good the credit of our Coun treyman , i will impart with stranger a few thing which i find in our most ancient record of the conversion of island unto Christ , and of the succession of bishop in our church . which although they be of little moment , and not altogether worthy to be write , yet must they of necessity be set down for the defence of the truth of our affair against Krantzius and other : thus therefore stand the certainty thereof . 
 island first in the year of Christ 874. island ( be indeed 
 inhabit . discover before that time , as be above mention ) be then first of all inhabit by certain noruagian . their chieftain be one Ingulphus from who name the east cape of island be call ingulff hoffdi . Theise planter be reckon up by name in our record more than to the number of 400. together with those of their blood and kindred , and great family beside : neither only be their number describe , but it be also plain set down , what coast , what shore , and what inland place each of they do occupy and inhabit , and what name the first inhabitant do give unto strait , bay , harborough , neckland , creek , cape , rock , crag , mountain , hill , valley , hammock , spring , flood , river . and to be short , what name they give unto their grange or house , whereof many at this day be retain and use . therefore the Norway with their company people all the habitable part of island now occupy by they for the space of 60. year or thereabouts : but they remain ethnic almost a 100 year , except a very few which be baptise in Norwaie . but scarce a 100 year from their first entrance be pass , present Christian religion begin to be consider 
 Fridericus upon , namely about the year of our lord 974. which Saxo the first thing above 20. year together , be diverse attempt preacher of the of many not without notable rebellion : among the rest be mention two outlandish bishop , who 
 anno domini with other diligent labour in convert the hand 981. to Christian faith : the former be one Fridericus a 
 150 
 saxon bear , who in the year 981. come into island , and behave himself courageous in the office of preach , and prevail so much , that in the year 984. Churches be use in island . 
 but the other outlandish bishop or preacher who they call Thangbrandt come first into island in the year 997. 
 and then after 26. year consult about religion , - anno domini at length in the year 1000 it be decree in a general I000‘ assembly of all the inhabitant by their whole consent , that the worship of heathenish idol be abandon , they shall embrace Christian religion . 
 again , in the year 1050. it be decree in a solemn assembly of the inhabitant , that temporali or politic law ( the constitution whereof be bring out of Norwaie be communicate unto the islander by one ulfliot in the year 926. ) shall every where give place to the canon or divine law . 
 in the year 1056. one Isleif go beyond the sea out of island to be consecrate bishop of island . 
 he come home consecrate into island , and enter into the bishopric of Schalholt in the year 1057. he die 1080. in the year of his age 74. the 4. of the kalend of July . 
 these thing perhaps will seem trifle , short and base , nor sufficient worthy to be mention , together with many other matter which follow : but neither do we compile the roman history , neither yet shall these thing be so trifle , but that they may be of sufficient force to convince the error of Krantzius and other , accord to our purpose . and undoubted as touch the truth of our history , it be evident that saxon Grammaticus attribute very much unto they : who word in his preface of Denmark be these : neither be the notable tes-diligence of the Thylenses ( for so he call islander ) fimmuofSaxo to be smother in silence : who when as by reason * e 
 of the native barrenness of their soil , want nourishment of riot , they do exercise the duty of continual 
 151 
 sobriety , and use to bestow all the time of their life in the knowledge of other man exploit , they supply their want by their wit . for they esteem it a pleasure to know , and commit unto memory the famous act of other nation , reckon it no less praiseworthy to discourse of other man virtue , than to practise their own . who treasury replenish with the monument of historical matter , i more curious search into , have compile no small part of this present work by follow of their relation : neither despise i to have those man for my judge , who i know to be skilful in so great knowledge of antiquity . thus far Saxo. 
 wherefore i think it not amiss to proceed in the recital of the bishop of island , that the order and descent of they all , be so far forth as be possible , diligent put together out of our yearly record , may make good that which we have allege against Krantzius concern Isleif the first bishop of island . 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 
 1056. I. Isleif . consecrate beyond the i Jonas son of Augmundus . 
 1057. sea . return and enter Isleif his disciple . consecrate beyond the 1106. 
 1080. the bishop sea of Schalholt . die in the year of his sea in the year of his age 64. his surname be Sanctus , unto who 
 age 74. the 4. of the kalend of July . ii Gysserus . memory the 3. of march be by the inhabitant in old time dedicate . die the 11. of the ii2i . 
 1082. consecrate beyond the kalend of May . 
 1083. sea . return into island with ii 
 1118. his bishopric . die Ketillus or Catullus . 
 the 5. of the Kal. of consecrate . 1122. 
 IS2 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of Helen . in the year of Christ . 
 three . Iii . 
 in the Thorlacus son of run - Biorno . 
 year of ulphus . be consecrate come 
 his age consecrate then same into island . 1147 - 
 3z - year , wherein his predecessor Gysserus de - die . 1162. 
 1133 - cease , but yet 30. day beforehisdeath . die . four . Brandus . [ i - 574-1 
 four . Magnus . consecrate . consecrate . 1163. 
 on the morrow after the 
 feast of all saint , in his v. 
 parish town of hiitar - Gudmundus surname 
 dal , the house be Bonus . 
 strike with lightning , elect and consecrate . I203 . 
 he , and 70. man with he be consume die . 1237. 
 with fire . vi . 
 1152. 1176. enter the see . die . Vii . 
 vi . Henricus . 
 Thorlacus . enter the see . 1247. 
 choose two year before die . 1260. 
 the death of his predecessor . 
 1178. consecrate . Viii . 
 1193 - die . Brandus a abbot . 1262. 
 go beyond the sea . 1263. 
 seven . enter the bishopric . 1264. 
 1195. consecrate . 
 magnus . enter his see . 1267. 
 1216. consecrate . [ ix . die . [ x. 1313 - 
 153 
 A.D. 1592. 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 
 1239. 1268. 1269. 1298. 1304. 1305. 1309. 1310. 1320. 1321. 1322. i323-1338 . 1339 - i34-i - 134313+8 . ix . Siguardus . enter his see . die . x. Arnerus . enter his see . die . xi . Arnerus son of Helgo . consecrate . enter the see . sail into Norwaie , to crave timber of the king of Norway , wherewith the church of Schalholt may be reedify , which the same year be touch with lightning , be burn down . return home . die . Xii . Jonas Haldorus . elect . consecrate the first of August . enter his see . die . Xiii . Jonas son of Indrid a norvagian bear . enter his see . die . XIIIL Jonas son of Siguardus . enter his see . die on s. magnus even . 15 x. Audunnus . enter his see . die . xi . Laurentius . elect and consecrate . die in the ides of April . Xii . Egillus . enter his see . die . Xiii . ormus . enter his see . die upon the feast of all saint . XIIIL Jonas son of Ericus , surname Skalle . be to enter his sea of holen come into island . This Jonas be before time consecrate bishop of Gronland , obtain licence of the bishop of room to enter the see of holen , which be at that time vacant . whereupon come and not bring with he the confirmation of this dignity and function , receive from the pope , he begin to be suspect among the 4 13141322. i324-1331 - 1332. 1341. 13431355 - ■ 358 - a bishop of Gronland . 1356. 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 
 1349 - 1356. xv . Gyrthus . consecrate at Aslo in Norway by Salomon bishop of Aslo . go beyond the sea he be drown . Xvi . Thorarinnus . priest of the diocese of holen . wherefore he be send back by they into Norway , that the matter may be set through by the judgement of the king . the king therefore favour his part , he obtain the bishopric of holen . 
 1362. 1364. 1366. 1381. 1385 - 1388. enter his see . die . xvii . Oddgeirus . enter his see . die upon the assumption of the bless virgin , in the port of Bergen in Norway , fall down from a pack of ware into the bottom of the ship . he be bury at Bergen in the church of our saviour . Xviii . Michael a Dane . enter his see . resign , and sail into Denmark . Xix . William a Dane . he die . xv . Peter . consecrate they same year wherein his predecessor depart out of this present life . enter the see of holen . die , Xvi . Jonas Wilhelmus english , either bear or surname . enter the see . xvii . Godschalcus . Died. Xviii . Olaus son of Rogwaldus nephew to the forename Godschalcus by the sister side , both of they be Norway . * 39e 1392. a english man bishop of island . 1+32 - < 457 - 1458. 
 1394 - enter the bishopric . die . [ twenty . he be establish . he die . [ Xix . 1497. 
 155 
 year of the bishop of Schalholt . 
 the bishop of holen . 
 in the year of Christ . 
 1420. 
 1432. 
 1445. 
 1472. 
 1489. 
 1494. 
 twenty . 
 Arnerus surname Milldur , that be to say , liberali . he be at one time lord precedent of all island , bishop of Schalholt , and vicebishop of holen . he die . 
 xxl 
 Jonas Gerickson Sueden either surname or bear , be make bishop over the church of Schalholt : and afterward for certain bold attempt be take by one Thorvaldus de Modruvollum ( as it be report ) and a great stone be bind to his neck , he be cast alive into the river of Schalholt , ( which take name of the bridge ) and be there strangle . 
 Xxii . 
 Goswinus bishop of Schalholt . 
 xxiii . 
 sueno call you wise , bishop of Schalholt . 
 xxiiii . 
 magnus son of eiol-phus , bishop , etc 
 twenty-five . 
 enter they see . than ( live at one time with Godschalchus bishop of r < 
 nineteeen . 
 the nephew of Olaus decease , by the brother side : also he be a norvagian be elect the same year wherein his uncle decease . 
 he enter the see . and for the space of 20. whole year be report , cruel to have entreat many of the subject . in the year 1520. when he be in the midst of his cup , and banquet dish , and hear that Jonas Sigismundus be depart out of this life ( who with his wife and child , he have for many year most cruel oppress ) he present fall into a sudden disease , and so not long after change that violence for miserable death , which in his whole life he have use against his distress subject . 
 twenty . 
 Jonas Araesonius . enter the see . 
 this , man be the last and most earnest maintain of popish superstition . who stout 
 1500. 
 1525. 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 
 1519. 1522. 1540 1541. 1544. holen , who seem worthy to be surname cruel ) he have the same commendation for mercy and justice , that Godschalchus have . he die : or thereabouts . xxvi . Augmundus . choose in the year wherein Stephen decease . enter the see . while he be bishop , the icing lieutenant with some of his follower be invite to Schalholt , in the time of the banquet , be slay by certain conspirator : because he have in all place wicked waste the inhabitant and their good . but Augmundus as the author of that murder ( although he purge himself with a other ) be transport into Denmark , there end his life . xxvii . Gysserus . elect , Augmundus yet live . enter the see . he be the abolish of popish tradition about priest marriage : his own marriage be solemnize at Schalholt . [ Xxviii . withstand Gysserus and Martinus bishop of Schalholt , be command by the most religious king christian the 3. under pain of banishment to come with all speed into Denmark . but neglect the king commandment , heetooke Martine bishop of Schalholt , and commit he to ward . at length he himself also be take by a man of great name ( who before that time , it be say , he have provoke ) and be bring to Schalholt , be , together with his two son , by the authority of the king lieutenant behead . in revenge whereof not long after , then . say lieutenant with some of his company , be villanous slay by certain roister , which be once servant to the party behead . xxl Olaus Hialterus . depart his country . enter the see . [ this 1551. 1552. 1553 - 
 J57 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 
 > 5+7 - Xxviii . Martinus . bishop , etc and the this man ( be as yet in the life time of his predecessor fellow - 
 year follow . Xxix . Gislaus Jonas . this man present , in the time of bishop Augmund begin in his youth to be inflame with you love of true piety , and of the pure labourer with he ) be the first that kindle the love of sincere doctrine at holen in the heart of many : and then be bishop do open teach and defend the say doctrine . he die . 1568. 
 1556. doctrine of the gospel , and be pastor of the church of selardal , diligent to advance the same , by which mean he do so procure unto himself the hatred of papist , as be constrain to give place unto their craft and cruelty , he depart over to Hamburg , from whence come to copen Hagen in Denmark , and painefiil proceed in his former study of divinity , he live in the familiarity , and favour of many , but special of D. D. Peter Palladius : who be at that time bishop there . afterwards re - Xxii . Gudbrandus thorlacius . the ornament , not only of his age , but of posterity also : who beside that , by the direction of the holy spirit , he have most notable bring the work begin , and leave unto he by his predecessor Olaus to that perfection which it have please God to vouchsafe : ( namely his labour and diligence in maintaining the truth of the gospel , and in abolish of popish superstition ) even in this his country he 
 1587 - turn into his country , Martine give place unto he of his own accord . this man die also , have be the first that have establish a print house . for which cause his country ( beside , for many 
 > 5 8 
 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 
 1588. 1589. for the space of 31. year or there about , profess the gospel of Jesus Christ : neither do he help and further the church of God by the sound of his voice only , but by all other mean to the utmost of his ability , by teach , preach , write , by his wealth and his counsel . Xxx . Otto Enerus , a grave , godly , and learned man . be choose he depart his country . he be consecrate , return , and enter the sea , endeavour himself in the labour of his function . other book translate into our mother tongue ) shall eternal bind unto he , that the sacred bible also , by his mean , be fair print in the language of island . he ( i say ) be at this present , bishop , when he be about to take his charge : depart his country . return and enter the see of holen . 1570. 1571. 
 in these time therefore light be restore unto our soul from heaven , and the gate of the kingdom of heaven be open unto we by the sincere preach of Christian doctrine . for in either of the bishop seat there be a free school found by the liberality and piety of that most renown king of Denmark christian the three : and afterward the son follow the godly step of his most christian father , the say free school by lord Friderick the second , our most religious king , be call up to his heavenly country in the year 1588 , have be increase and further : which at this day also do prosper and flourish by the 
 159 
 favour and authority of the most gracious king and our prince , Christian the four , wherein the youth of our island be instruct in the rudiment of liberali art , and sacred divinity , be train up to knowledge and true godliness , that from hence minister of church may proceed . 
 we be come at length in the register of the bishop of island down to this present day , wherein the forename excellent man Gudbrandus thorlacius , and Otto Enerus , the one at holen , and the other at Schalholt be bishop of our cathedral church : both of which man , that it will please God long to preserve unto his church in health and life , for the glory of his most holy name , we all do earnest and with fervent prayer beseech he . 
 the second section . 
 they inhabit for the most part in cave , or hollow place within the side of mountain . and again , they have many house and church build with the bone of fish , and whale . again . many of they also to avoid the extremity of cold , do keep themselves close in their cave , even as the people of Africa do to avoid the heat of the sun . also Munster say : many in island at this day build their house with the rib and bone of whale . 
 here the second member take his beginning concern the course of life , and the manner of the inhabitant . and first of all what building or house they do use : namely accord to Munster , Krantzius , Frisius etc hole and cave of mountain . but although in gorgeous building , and such other worldly bravery there be very little help to the attain of a life true happy : notwithstanding , we can not in this place conceal the truth : and we plain affirm that cosmographer and historiographer also do err in this point . for such habitation as they write to be common 160 
 unto the whole nation , be but in very few place , and be either sheep-cot for shepherd , or cottage and receptacle for fisherman at that time of the year only when they go a fish , and the other stand in need to watch their flock . but for their house themselves , and the very dwell place of man , the islander have have they build from ancient time stately and sumptuous enough , accord to the condition of the country , with timber , stone , and turf , until such time as traffic and exchange of ware begin to cease traffic with between they and the noruagians , who be wont to 
 , , .... i r , Norway 
 supply they with timber , and for that cause now our ceaset^ house begin to decay : whenas neither we have wood convenient for building , not yet there be now a day , drift « and not as there be in old time , tree cast upon our shore by so Plentift11 the benefit of the sea , which may in any sort relieve we : timespast . neither do outlandish merchant succour our necessity : whereupon many of our mean country village be much decay from their ancient integrity , some whereof be fall to the ground , and other bee very ruinous . notwithstanding there be many farm and village which i can easy reckon up , the building whereof do resemble that ancient excellency , the house be very large , both in breadth and length , and for the most part in height also . as for example : farm or grange which contain chamber in they , more than fifty cubit in length , ten in breadth , and twenty in height . and so other room , as a parlour , a stove , a buttery , etc answer in proportion unto the former . i can here name many of our country building both large and wide , neither ill-favoured in show , nor base in regard of their workmanship and costly firmness or strength , with certain church also , or religious house build of timber only , accord to ancient and artificiali seemeli-nesse and beauty : as the cathedral church of holen have a body the five pillar whereof on both side be four elne high , and about five elnes thick , as also beam and weather-bourdes , and the rest of the roof 
 iv 161 l 
 proportional answer to this low building . our most gracious king lord Frederick , who memory be most sacred unto we , in the year 1588. do most liberal bestow timber for the re-edify of this body be cast down in the year 1584. by a horrible tempest . but the church it self do manifest exceed the body thereof in all quantity : also the inner part of the church , which be common call the quire be somewhat less , both then the middle part of the church , and also then the body . 
 the church of Schalholt be far great as i have hear in old time , than this our cathedral , which have now be twice burn , be bring to a lesser scantling . likewise there be some other church of our hand , although not match , yet resemble the ancient magnificence of these . for here the matter seem not to require that i shall run into a long description of these thing . for as we do not great extol our house and building , so be we nothing ashamed of they : because be content with our poverty , we render unto Christ immortali praise who despise not to be receive of we under a base roof , and contemn not our temple and house , ( which Munster , Krantzius and Frisius do not true affirm to be build of fish and whale bone ) more than the marble vault , the paint wall , the square pavement , and such like ornament of church and house in other country . 
 the three section . 
 Krantzius . they and their cattle use all one house , all one food or Munsterus . victual , all one state ( here Krantzius have it lodging . ) 
 also . they live only by feed of cattle , and sometime by take of fish . 
 these be the thing together with those that follow , which Krantzius have champ , and put into Munster mouth , so that Munster shall not need so much as once to chew they , which may appear by compare they both together . for Munster , as he 162 
 swallow these reproach , take they out of Krantzius his preface upon Norway , so he cast up the very same morsel undigested and raw against our nation , in his four book of cosmography cap . 8. those thing which have be hitherto , although they have sufficient grieve we , yet will we let they seem more tolerable : but this most malicious devise , and those which follow we can easy brook . it be our part therefore in this place also to avouch the truth , and to turn the lease upon the author own head . 
 house , etc first , that which they say concern the same common house ( as also live , and state ) with our cattle , we plain affirm to be false and erroneous , not only the truth it self be our witness , if any man will make trial , but also the experience of many stranger , that have live some year among we , and have more mind to speak the truth then to revile our nation : who have see our house and habitation with their own eye , and know that in every particular farm or grange there be many several room : namely , in those that be most simple and base , seven or eight : in other which be great , sometime ten , and sometime twenty . in the great sometime forty , and sometime fifty . which for the most part be sever , both by roof and wall , do serve for the daily and household affair of one owner or master , seidome of two or three , but almost never of more : whereupon the reader may easy judge , how true it be that the islander and their cattle have all one house to lie in , when every husbandman in this variety of room have several oxe-stalle , sheep-cote , stable , lambs-cot separate indifferent space one from another , which the servant go unto so oft as need require , and from thence return back to the dwell house . 
 but whereas one note in his map of island , concern the province of skagefiord , that under the same roof , man , dog , swine and sheep live all together , it be partly false , and partly no marvel : for sheep , as 163 
 it have be say , and special for swine ( when as that province have no swine at all ) it be utter false : for dog it be no marvel , when as not king court be ever , or at this day be destitute of they , as it be well know to all man . but as touch dog afterward in the seven section . 
 victual , etc whither beast meat may fit be term by the name of victus , a man may just doubt : when Doletus interpret a piece of Tully , say : as for victus ( say he ) we will so expound it with the civilian , namely that we comprehend under the word of victus all thing necessary for the life of man , as meat , drink , attire of the body , etc and Ulpianus de verborum signification define victus in the very same word . but in this place the say author call beast meat by the name of victus . 
 but let we see what truth and plain deal be to be find in these man . we have no labour cattle beside horse and ox : these have grass and hay ( except where hay be want ) for their fodder , and water to drink . now , the very same writer confess , that the islander live by fish , butter , flesh both beef , and mutton , and corn also , though it be scarce , and bring out of other country . therefore they have not the same food with brute beast , which notwithstanding the say writer affirm in these word : they and their cattle use all one victual or food . what Munster meaning be in this clause , he himself a little before have plain teach . 
 island ( say he ) contain many people live only with the food of cattle , and sometime by take of fish . but what else be the food of cattle , but the meat of cattle , say Doletus ? unless perhaps Munster call the food of cattle , cattle themselves slay for the food of man : who , as i think , the use of the latin tongue do gainsay , which have teach we that as man do eat , so beast do feed , and have term the victual of man , and the food or fodder of cattle . 
 164 
 but may i think that Munster and Krantzius be so mad as to imagine that the islander live upon grass and hay ? to this pass of misery be Nabuchodonozor bring undergo the yoke of God vengeance : Daniel 4. vers . 30. we will easy grant that beast , and cattle will not perhaps refuse many thing , which man not only of our country but of you also eat , if the say beast be destitute of their usual food : as horse be feed with corn and barley loaf : they will drink milk also ( like unto calf and lamb ) and ale , if it be proffer they , and that greedy . and dog in like manner will devour any dainty dish whatsoever . may any man therefore say that man use the same common victual with dog and horse ? 
 now , whatsoever thing have happen in the time of grievous famine ought not to be record in historic for the general custom of any country . as it be not lawful for we to write concern other nation , that the people of this or that country , do usual live by eat of dog , mouse , cat , although perhaps in the time of famine or siege or dearth of corn , they have often be constrain so to do . 
 but that the same drink be some time common to many man with beast , we will not great gainsay : namely most pure water , that natural drink create by God for all live creature : which also in some respect physician do commend , yea , neither the patriarch themselves , nor our saviour Christ despise it . 
 as touch apparel ( for we comprehend apparel also under the name of victus ) it be no wise common to we with beast . for nature have clad they with hair and bristle ( as i dare say Munster and Krantzius can be ignorant ) man , be otherwise naked , stand in need of clothes to cover their body . but i have not think it may therefore have proper be say , that sheep and we have all one apparel . man of other country also wear cloth of sheep wool , although it i65 
 be more fine wrought . but no more concern the attire of the body . for it be a mere folly to seek for praise , and ambitious reputation by that , which argue the infirmity of our nature . 
 state , etc now , it remain that we shall speak of that state , which we be say to have common with beast : but of what kind or manner it shall be , or our writer will have it to be , i can easy discern . state ( say Doletus ) be either of the body , or of cause , or of order and condition . doubtless , that there be another state of our body then of beast ( for beside our two foot , we have hand also , and go with our body , and countenance lift upright ) and that we be of another order and condition from they , we be very persuade . as for these good fellow , if they know any such matter by themselves or other , let they disclose it . we do altogether scorn these , be so vain thing , and breed so great contempt against the majesty of God our creator , neither do we vouchsafe they any large discourse . 
 but because it be our duty not so high to regard either the love of our country , or of any other thing whatsoever , but that we may be ready at all time , and in all place , to give truth the pre-eminence : i will say in a word what that be which perhaps may minister occasion to this infamous reproach of writer . 
 there be near unto Schalholt , upon the south shore of island , three small parish stand between two most swift river Thiorsaa and Olfwis Aa , be in a manner destitute both of wood and turf , which be the accustom fuel of the country . and although most of the inhabitant of these parish , and some of their neighbour , as they do in time of year provide all thing necessary for household , so especial those thing which belong to fire and bath : notwithstanding there be certain among they of the base sort of people , who , because they want those thing at home , and be not able to provide they from other place , be con-166 
 1592-strained to use straw for the dress of their meat . 
 but when the sharp rigor of snowy winter come on , these poor people betake they to their ox stall , and there set up shed , and do their necessary business in the day time , when they be not able to make fire , they borrow heat from their ox , as it have be report to i by other : and so they only , be very few in number , do not willing enjoy , but be constrain to use the same common house with their ox . but for their livelihood and state it be far otherwise with they then with their ox , of which thing i have entreat before . this be the lot , and poverty of certain man in those petty parish , the condition whereof be therefore make a common byeword of the people among we , though somewhat injurious . where i will willing demand with what honesty man can impute that unto the whole nation , which be hard and scant true of these few poor man ? i be weary to stay any long in this matter : only , because i have to do with divine , let that of Salomon suffice , proverb 17. verse 5. he that mock the poor , reproach he that make he . 
 and in very deed , because this our nation be now , and heretofore have be poor and needy , and as it be a beggar amongst many rich man , it have sustain so many taunt and scoff of stranger . but let they take heed who they upbraid . very if there be nothing else common unto we with they , yet we both consist of the same element , and have all one father and god . 
 167 
 [ the four 
 the four section . 
 they lead their life in holy simplicity , not seek any more than nature do afford . a happy nation , who poverty no man do envy . but the english and danish merchant suffer not the nation to be at rest , who frequent that country to transport fish , have convey thither our vice , together with their manifold ware . for now , they have learn to brew their water with corn , and begin to despise , and loathe the drink of fair water . now they covet gold and silver like unto our man . 
 simplicity , etc i be exceed glad , that the commendation of holy simplicity be give unto we . but it grieve we that there be find so great a decay of justice , and good law , and so great want of government among we , which be the cause of many thousand heinous offence : which all honest and godly man do continual bewail . this inconvenience do not happen through the negligence of the high magistrate , that be , of our most gracious king , but rather by our own fault : who do not present these thing unto his majesty , which be disorderly commit without his knowledge , and which be want in the inferior magistrate . 
 merchant . Moreover , merchant , not only of England and Denmark , but especial of Germany , as at this time , so heretofore frequent our country , not to transport fish , but fish , teach not islander the art of brew corn with water . for the noruagians themselves , the first , to our knowledge , that inhabit this hand , from who you islander be lineal descend , bring with they out of Norway that art , as also gold and silver coin , so that in old time there be no less use of silver and gold with we , than there be at this day . 
 168 
 and it be certain that before the often navigation come of old of Dane , german , and english man unto we , our land £r0^inS be much more fertile than now it be ( feel the inn - tn 5 ' 
 convenience of the age and decay world , both from heaven and earth ) and bring forth , in certain choice place , corn in abundance . 
 the five section . 
 the king of Denmark and Norway send every year a lieutenant into the country . 
 in the year of our lord eight hundred forty and six Harald Harfagre ( which be to say , golden hair or fair clock ) be bear . who afterward in the year eight hundred fifty and eight , be choose king of Norway , when he be grow to age , and full strength , change the form of the norvagian government . for whereas before it be divide into petty province ( which they call Fylki , and the petty king that the occasion govern they , Fylkis konga ) he reduce it by force of arm unto a monarchic . but when some inhabitant of the country , be mighty , and descend of people of Norgood parentage , can not well brook this hard deal , way . they choose rather to be banish their country , than not to shake off the yoke of tyranny . whereupon , they in the year above name eight hundred seventie and four , transport colony into island be before discover by some man and find out , but unpeople as yet : and so be the first founder of our nation , they call themselves islander , which name their posterity retain unto this day . and therefore the islander live a long time , namely , three hundred eighty and six year , more or less , acknowledge no submission to any other nation . and although Hayuinus Haquinus that crown king of Norway , who reign conatus . long of any norvagian king , namely , above sixty six year , do oftentimes attempt by ambassador to make the islander become tributary unto he , notwithstanding at all time they constant withstand he , till at 
 169 
 length about the year of our lord 1260. they perform homage unto he . and afterward continue always in their promise loyalty , be subject to the king of Norway . but now at this day , since the empire of the noruagians be translate by Margaret queen of Denmark , Suedeland , and Norway unto the Dane , they do honour as their sovereign lord and king the most gracious king of Denmark . 
 the sixth section . 
 all thing be common among they except their wife . 
 here Krantzius in the first place begin with such a gibe . there be many notable thing in their manner , etc Moreover , your wit be too hasty in affirm thing unknown , do here also diminish your credit . the experience as well of all thing as of person and time prove your over greedy desire of novelty , of fame and vainglory , and argue your great negligence in maintain the truth . o worthy writer . 
 but whether the aforesaid thing be true or no , we call the law of our country to witness , which the islander from the beginning have use all one with the Norway : of the king and his subject : of the seat of justice , and of lawcase which come to be decide there : of inheritance : of adoption , marriage , theft , extortion , lend , bargain , and the rest : all which , to what purpose shall they be enjoin unto they with who all thing be common ? we call to witness so many broil and contention in our court , and place of judgement in island concern good moveable , and immoveable : we call to witness our king now of Denmark , aforetime of Norway , who by so many bill of supplication out of island in old time , and of late have be often interrupt , for the set through of controversy concern possession . we call Krantzius himself to witness against himself , 170 
 who word in the first section be these . before the receive of Christian faith the islander live accord to the law of nature do not much differ from our law , etc if by the law of nature , then doubtless by that law of justice , which give to every man his own : if by the law of justice , then certain distinction of property and possession must needs have take place in our nation : and although this very law be often transgress , and that heinous even in the church : notwithstanding both the church , and also heathen man do acknowledge it to be most just and 
 the seven section . 
 they make all one reckon of their whelp , and of their child : except that of the poor sort you shall easy obtain their son than their shall|be . 
 although in the begin of this treatise i think that Munster and other man of great name in those thing which they have leave write concern island , be not to be charge with slander , yet whether that favour may here be show by any man whatsoever ( be he never so favourable , and never so sincere ) i do not sufficient conceive . for what shall move such great man , follow the despiteful lie , and fable of mariner , to defame and stain our nation with so horrible and so shameful a reproach ? Surely nothing else but a careless licentiousness to deride and contemn a poor and unknown nation , and such other like vice . 
 but , be it know to all man that this untruth do not so much hurt to the islander , as to the author themselves . for in heap up this , and a great number of other into their history , they cause their credit in other place also to be suspect : and hereby they gain thus much ( as Aristotle say ) that when they speak truth no man will believe they without suspicion . 
 171 
 but attend a while ( reader ) and consider with i the gravity and wisdom of these great clerk : that we may not let pass such a notable commendation of island . Krantzius and Munster have hitherto teach , that the islander be Christians . also : that before the receive of Christian faith they live accord to the law of nature . also : that the islander live after a law not much differ from the law of the germane . also , that they live in holy simplicity . 
 attend i say ( good reader ) and consider , what mark of Christianity , of the law of nature , of the germane law , of holy simplicity , these author require , and what mark they show and describe in the islander . there be one of the say mark before : namely , that the islander do place hell or the prison of the damn , within the gulf and bottom of mount Hecla : concern which , read the first section of this part , and the seven section of the former . the second mark be , that with the Anabaptists they take away distinction of property and possession : in the section next go before . the three and most excellent be this : those singular and natural affection , that love and tender care , and that fatherly and godly mind of the islander towards their child , namely that they make the same account of they , or less than they do of their dog . what ? will Munster and Krantzius after this fashion picture out unto we the law of Christ , the law of nature , the law of the germane , and holy simplicity ? o rare and excellent picture , though not altogether match the skill of Apelles : oh sharp and wonderful invention , if authentical : oh knowledge more than humane , though not at all divine . 
 but we islander ( albeit the far of all nation and inhabit a freeze clime ) require far other note of Christianity . for we have the commandment of God , that every man shall love his neighbour as himself . now there be none ( i suppose ) that do not love or esteem more of himself then of his dog . and if 172 
 there aught to be so great favour , so great estimation , so great love unto our neighbour , then how great affection do we owe unto our child ? the most near and inseparable love of who , beside that nature have most friendly settle in our mind , the love of God also command we to have speciali regard in train they up ( Exod. 12. 24. Ephes. 6. 4. ) namely , that there may be in holy marriage certain seminary of God church , and exercise of all piety and honesty : accord to the excellent say of the poet . 
 god will have each family , a little church to be . 
 also 
 of humane life or man society , a school or college be holy matrimony . 
 that it may be manifest , that among Christians their son be more to be account of and regard , than their dog : and if any do not otherwise esteem of they , that they be not Christians . 
 but this natural affection toward our most dear offspring be plain see in the heathen themselves : that whosoever you total deprive of this , you deny they also to be man . the mother of Carthage testify this to be true , when as in the three punic war the most choice and gallant young man in all the city be send as pledge into Sicilia , who they follow unto the ship with most miserable weep and lamentation , and some of they be with grief separate from their dear son , when they see the sail hoist , and the ship depart out of the haven , for very anguish cast themselves headlong into the water : as Sabellicus witness . Egaeus do testify this , who when he see the ship of his son Theseus , return out of Crete with black sail , think that his son have perish , end his life in the next water : Sabell . lib . 3. cap . 4. Gordianus the elder , proconsul of Africa , do testify this , who likewise , upon rumour of the death of his son , 
 173 
 hang himself . campoful . lib . 5. cap . 7. also Jocasta the daughter of Creon , Auctolia daughter of Simon , Anius king of the tuscan , Orodes king of the parthian , and a infinite number of other . concern who read Plutarch stat . lib . 2. and other author etc to these may be add that sentence , love descend , etc so that you see , it be no less proper to a man entire to love his child , then for a bird to fly : that if our writer at any time have confess the islander to be man ( much less to be Christians , ) they must , will they will they , ascribe unto they this love and affection towards their child : if not , they do not only take from they the title and dignity of man , but also they debase they under every brute beast , which even by the instinct of nature be bind with exceed great love , and tender affection towards their young one . 
 i will not add against this shameless untruth most notable example of our own countryman : i will omit our law of manstealing , more ancient than the islander themselves , be receive from the noruagians , and be extant in our book of law under the title Manhelge cap . 5. whosoever sell a freeman ( any man much more a son ) unto stranger etc 
 now if any man be drive to that hard fortune , that he must needs commit his own son into the hand of some inhabitant or stranger , be urge thereunto by famine , or any other extreme necessity , that he may not be constrain to see he hungerstarve for want of sustenance , but keep his dog still for his own eat , this man be not to be say , that he esteem equal or more base of his son then of his dog : whether islander or any other countryman do the same . 
 the germane or the danish mariner may perhaps find among we certain beggar lade with child ( for we have here a great number of they ) who in jest manner for they be much give to trifle talk , may say : give i this , or sell i that : and when the stranger 174 
 shall ask , what will you give i for it ? the beggar may answer : i have ten or fourteen child , i will give you some one or more of they , etc for this rabble of beggar use thus fond to prate with stranger . now if there be any well dispose man , who pity the need and folly of these beggar , release they off one son , and do for God sake by some mean provide for he in another country : do the beggar therefore ( who together with his son be ready to die for hunger and poverty , yield and com-mitteth his son into the hand of a merciful man ) make less account of his son then of his dog ? such work of love and mercy have be perform by many , aswell islander themselves as stranger : one of which number be that honourable man Accilius Julius , be send by the most gracious king of Denmark into island in the year of our lord 1552 , who , as i have hear , take , and carry with he into Denmark fifteen poor boy : where afterward it be report unto i , that by his good mean every one of they be bind to a several trade , prove good and thrifty man . 
 what if some man be drive to that pass , that he do not only sell his son , but not find a chapman , his own self kill and eat he ? example of this kind be common , namely of the unwilling and force cruelty of parent towards their child , not be prick on through hate , or want of natural affection , but be compel thereunto by urgent necessity . shall any man hereupon ground a generail reproach against a whole nation ? we read that in the siege of Samaria , two mother slay their son , and eat they sodden : 4. king . chapter 6. we read in the siege of Jerusalem , how lamentable the voice of that distress mother be , be about to kill her tender child : my sweet babe , say she ( for i will report Eusebius own word , concern this matter , though very common , that the affection of a mother may appear ) bear to misery and mishap , for who shall i convenient reserve thou 
 175 
 in this tumult of famine , of war , and sedition ? if we be subdue to the government of the roman , we shall wear out our unhappy day under the yoke of slavery . but i think famine will prevent captivity . beside , there be a rout of seditious rebel much more intolerable than either of the former misery . Come on therefore , my son , be thou meat unto thy mother , a fury to these rebel , and a byeword in the common life of man , which one thing only be want to make up the calamity of the Jew . Theise say be end , she kill her son , roast and eat one half , and reserve the other , etc Eusebius lib . 3. cap . 6. now , what man will not believe that this unhappy mother will full glad have pass over this her son into the possession of some master or chapman , if she can have happen upon any such , with who she think he may have be preserve ? that famine be well know which oppress Calagurium , a city of Spain , when in old time Cneius Pompeius lay siege thereunto ( Valerius lib . 7. cap . 7. ) the citizen whereof convert their wife and child into meat for the satisfy of their extreme hunger , who doubtless they will with all their heart have sell for other victual . that famine also be well know which in the year of our lord 851 ( Vincent , lib . 25. cap . 26. ) afflict Germany , insomuch that the father be glad to devour his own son . it be well know after the death of the emperor Henry the seven , in a famine continue three whole year , how the parent will devour their child , and the child their parent , and that especial in Polonia and Bohemia . and that we may not only allege ancient example : it be report that there be such a grievous dearth of corn in the year 1586 , and 1587 , throughout Hungary , that some be compel for want of food be fain to sell their child unto the most bloody and barbarous enemy of Christians , and so to enthral they to the perpetuali yoke of turkish slavery : and some be say to have take their child , who they can no long 
 176 
 1592. sustain , and with cruel mercy to have cast they into Danubius , and drown they . but shall these story and the like make any man so mad as to affirm that this or that nation accustome to kill their child for their own food , and to sell they willing unto the turk , or to drown and strangle they willing in the water ? i can think it . so neither ( because beggar in island be enforce through extreme and bite necessity , do willing part with their son ) be this custom general to be impute unto the whole nation , and that by way of disgrace , by any man , except it be such a one who have take his leave of all modesty , plain deal , humanity , and truth . 
 but i can wish that the love of dog in islander may be more spare reprehend by those people , who matron , and special their noble woman , take so great delight in dog , that they carry they in their bosom through the open street : i will not say in church : which fashion Caesar blame in certain stranger , who he see at Rome carry about young ape and whelp in their arm , ask they this question : whether woman in their country bring forth child or no ? signify hereby , that they do great offend , who bestow upon beast these natural affection , wherewith they shall be invite to the love of mankind , and special of their own offspring : which strange pleasure never overtake , nor possess the nation of the islander . wherefore now ( Munster and Krantzius ) you must find we out other mark of Christianity , of the law of nature , of the german law , and of holy simplicity . 
 iv 
 177 
 [ the eight 
 the eight section . 
 they honour their bishop as their king : unto who command all the whole people have respect . whatsoever he prescribe out of the law , the scripture , or the custom of other nation , they do full holy observe . 
 there be indeed at the beginning , about the time of the reformation of religion , great reverence have unto the bishop ; but never so great , that our politic law at the bishop command shall give place to outlandish law and custom . neither in the time of Albertus Krantzius , much less of Munster ( of which two the first decease in the year of our lord 1517 , and the second 1552 ) the bishop of island have the authority of king , when as many of the country which be of the rich sort , will not doubt to rebel ! against they ; which thing be too well know in our country . yet in the mean time , the bishop be terrible with their authority of excommunication , reduce some under their subjection , and other at that time they cruel persecute . 
 moreover , albeit at that time the bishop be have in great , yea , in exceed great reverence , yet now adays , the darkness of popery be dispel , the devil assault man after another sort , and even here among we , he be not slack to arm their mind with contempt , and perverse stubbornness against God , and his holy ministry . 
 the nine section . 
 they live there for the most part upon fish , because of their great want of corn , which be bring in from the port town of other country : who carry home fish from thence with great gain . also Munster say , they do there use stockfish in stead of bread , which grow not in that country . 
 consider ( friendly reader ) how Munster be delight to harp upon one string , that when he can write nothing of a unknown nation which may carry any 178 
 .... I59X show with it , he be fain either to bring in falsehood , or often to repeat the same thing , and so to become tedious unto his reader : for he say a little before , that the islander live upon fish . his word above recite be these : island contain many people live only with the food of cattle , and sometime by take of fish . and that i may omit the rest in which some trifle may be note : whereas he say that bread grow not in island : it be most true : which i think be common therewith to Germany also , because bread grow not there neither , except it be in Munster field where natural vinegar also do marvelous increase . but these toy , by the liberty of rhetoric forsooth , shall be out of danger . howbeit , unto these reproach , which stranger do gather from the meat and drink of the islander , we will hereafter brief answer , Sect. 
 u - 
 the ten section . 
 the inhabitant do celebrate the act of their ancestor , Munsterus . and of their time , with song , and they grave they kranizius-in rock and promontory , that they may not decay with posterity , but only by the defect of nature . 
 there be diverse find among they that be minstrel , Frisius . and can play upon the lute , who with their delectable music do ensnare and take both fowl and fish . 
 we deny not but that some worthy act of our then islander forefather be reserve in the song and poem 
 of our countryman , as also in prose : but that the same act oftheir thing have be engrave by we , or by our ancestor , ancestor . in rock or promontory , we may in no case acknowledge that praise to be due unto we , nor yet the other of minstrel , and take of bird and fish . for we hold it to be the part of a honest and ingenuous mind , as to refute false crime , so not to challenge undeserving praise unto himself , nor to accept it be offer . 
 179 
 but now , let this be the end of our controversy with the author aforesaid , be otherwise man of excellent learning , and of great renown , who notwithstanding so inconsiderate have intermeddle these thing in their write . and now the better part of my labour be finish . 
 but yet there remain that viperous germane brood the mother whereof will have it come to light , as it be at a second birth , without name , that it may so much the more free wound the fame of the islander with venomous sting . 
 moreover , although i be not afraid to encounter with this beast , yet will i have all man to know with what mind i undertake this enterprise , namely , not that i mean to contend with his pestiferous rancour , by reproach , and rail speech ( for as it be in the common proverb : 
 i know , that if i strive with dung most vile , how ere it be , my self i shall defile ) 
 but that i may satisfy all honest and well affect man , even stranger themselves , who shall hereafter read or heare^ or have heretofore hear that germane pasquill , lest they also shall think that we worthy sustain so monstrous a disgrace : and also that i may from henceforth , if it be possible , restrain other ( who use those venomous germane rhyme to the upbrade of our nation , and from hence borrow their scoff , and reproachful taunt to the debase of we Iselanders ) from that liberty of backbiting . 
 therefore , that i may not be tedious to the reader with long circumstance , i will come to the rehearse of those thing which that rail germane have heap up in his lewd pasquill : who also i can bring in , repeat his friendly verse of the islander , within the compass of this my book , but that i do foresee that 180 
 the say slanderous libel be stuff with so many and diverse reproach , may breed offence to all honest man , and deter they from read it , with the filthiness thereof . 
 i will therefore repeat the principali matter ( omit those thing which he have common with other , or , that heretofore have be examine ) but far more modest than he , lest ( as i say ) i cause good and learned man ear to tingle at his lewd and unseemly rhyme : they that be desirous to see or hear he , let they inquire at the stationer . it be no part of our meaning ( i say ) to defile these paper with his stink slander , or with the filthy sink of his reproach . 
 first therefore , this our goodly germane history - the first grapher object that there be many pastors in island , objec , ion or which preach not to their people once in two year , as p ' it be read in the former edition of this pasquill , which notwithstanding the latter edition do refute : say that the say pastors use to preach but five time in a whole year : which two , how well they agree together , let the reader be judge , see it be manifest that the author himself , present after the first edition , have scarce see island . so oftentimes one lie betray another , accord to that say : truth agree unto truth ; but falsehood agree neither to truth nor to falsehood . 
 but sith it be our part not to dissemble the truth in any place , we will not deny that holy sermon , about the time wherein this sycophant live in island , namely in the year 1554 , be seldome in use than they be at this day , namely , the darkness of popery be scarce at that time dispel . which also be to be understand concern the psalm of David mumble by the common people in latin , as he cast we in the tooth : for the papist ground all the hope of their salvation in the mass , do little regard the sermon , or doctrine . but after we be free from that mist , it have be ( god be thank ) far otherwise with we : although we can 
 181 
 altogether excuse the dulness , sloth , and preposterous care of certain of our pastors . which , whether it agree to any of their countryman or no , let other nation judge . 
 the twelve section . 
 the second second , the trifler shameful report , that adultery teproch . and whoredom be not only public , and common vice among islander : but that they be not account by they for vice . 
 although indeed these most filthy abomination , even in our common wealth , be not altogether unusual : notwithstanding , since all man know that they be far more common in other nation , where be great multitude of people , he do undeserved , and malicious note the islander rather with this reproach , then other people and nation , who be more infamous with this crime then our countryman . 
 and albeit i wish with all my heart that vice and enormity be much less wink at in our country , than we see they be , yet notwithstanding this juggler , by reason of his natural inclination to backbiting , have add this in his last reproach : namely , that these vice by the iselander be not account for vice . for , in what common wealth dare the impudent companion affirm this to be true ? what ? in that common wealth which have swear to observe the law contain in our statute book under the title of Manhelge chapter 28 , whereby it be enact , that whosoever commit adultery with another man wife the second time , his good be { i . 586. ] confiscate , he shall be punish with death ? or in that common wealth , which not long since have inflict the penalty of 80 daller upon a servant commit adultery with his master wife ? or in that common wealth which have decree , that if he do not pay , nor lay in surety at the day appoint , he shall|be banish the country ? or in that common wealth the politic law whereof doe straight command that whosoever be accord to 182 
 law find in adultery with another man wife , by her husband , if he escape , he shall undergo the punishment of manslaughter ? or in that common wealth , the politic law whereof do also enjoin a man that be take in carnail copulation with the mother , daughter , or sister , by the son , father , or brother , to redeem his life with the one half of that which he ought to have pay , if he have shed the innocent blood of the say party ? or in that common wealth the politic law whereof have note and condemn adultery under the name of a most heinous offence ? and do straight command that he which be take the three time in that beastly act shall|be punish with death ? 
 you see therefore ( friendly reader ) what a injurious notary we have , affirm that adultery and whoredom in island deserve not the name of sin and wickedness : for although some officer let slip this or that vice unpunished , yet ought not the whole nation , nor the law , nor all good and godly man , in that regard , to be accuse or evil speak of . 
 the thirteenth section . 
 the three reproach be , whereby he do brand the islander the three with the mark of deceit and treachery towards the repnch-germans . 
 doubtless the author of this libel be some vagabond huckster or pedlar , and have go particular into many corner of island to utter his trumpery ware , which he also testify of himself in his worthy rhyme , that he have travail through the great part of island , whereupon when he have play the cozen mate with other ( for often time deceit and lie be join together , and he have sufficient prove himself to be a liar , by this trial of his wit ) peradventure himself be beguile by they who he before time have defraud . 
 from hence proceed this slander against our whole nation : dissemble in the mean time with what honesty certain germane , make yearly voyage into 
 183 
 island , deal with our man . but see by this complaint i have not determine to reproach other , but to lay open the undeserving reproach of other against our nation , i do here of purpose surcease . 
 the fourteen section . 
 4 > 5 > 6 , four , he say that in banquet none of the guest ^7 reproach . use tQ rjse from the taye . but that the good wife of the house reach to every one a chamber-pot , so oft as need require . Moreover , he note much unmanerlinesse of eat and drink at banquet . 
 five , he object custom of lie in bed , and of dine : namely that ten person , more or less , man and woman lie altogether in the same bed , and that they eat their meat lie in bed : and that in the mean time they do nothing but play at dice or at table . 
 six , he report that they wash their hand and their face in piss . 
 seven , he despiteful abase our solemnizing of marriage , spousal , birthday , and our custom at burial . 
 these , and a number of such like reproach have this impure slanderer spew forth against a innocent nation , yea and that nation which have deserve right well of he and his countryman . which be of the same kind with these , in so much that we altogether disdain to make answer unto they . for , that we may grant ( which notwithstanding we will in no case yield unto ) that this worthy germane notary observe some such matter among base companion , and the very offscouring of the common people , with who he be much more conversant than with good and honest person ( for he have live , as his rhyme testify , somewhat long upon the coast of island , whither a confuse rout of the mean common people , in fish time do yearly resort , who be nought aswell through their own lewdness , as by 184 
 1592. the wicked behaviour of outlandish mariner , often time do lead a bid and dishonest life ) notwithstanding we be in this place more manifest wrong through the knavery of this one varlet , and desperate sycophant by his defame of the whole nation ( as other also usual do ) than that it shall need any refutation at all . of which thing stranger themselves , who be not a little conversant in our island , may be most sufficient witness . 
 i can also gather together many such filthy , unmannerly , and bawdy fashion note by other even in his own country . but i detest this dogged eloquence , neither take i any pleasure to be witty in the disgrace of other : and yet i will not show my self such a milksop as to be daunt with light word . only , let all honest and good man consider , what disposition it argue , for one to object against a whole nation certain misdemeanour commit by some one or other particular man . if any man shall travel throughout all the city and town of Germany or any other nation , and heap together the offence , and most lewd manner , the robbery , manslaughter , murder , whoredom , adultery , incest , riot , extortion , and other profane , and filthy act , shall affirm they to be common to all german , or otherwise to any other whole nation , and shall exaggerate all these thing with notorious lie , be he to be account one that spend his time in a good argument ? but what marvel be it , though a varlet , and , that i may give he his true title , a filthy hog , that rimer ( i say ) have bewray his nature and disposition in such like reproach ? for it be well know that swine , when they enter into most pleasant garden , do not pluck lily , or rose , or any other most beautiful and sweet flower ; but thrust their snout into the ground , do tumble and toss up and down whatsoever dirt and dung they can find , until they have root up most unclean thing , namely such as be best agreeable to their nature , wherewith they greedy 
 185 
 glut themselves : even so this hoggish rhymer light pass over the best and most commendable thing of our common wealth , but as for the worst , and those which have be commit by none , or by very few , namely , such thing as best fit his humour and disposition ( that he may indeed show himself to be the same which we have term he ) those thing ( i say ) have he scrape up together : whereupon hereafter by my consent , for his manner and disposition let he enjoy the name of a swine . 
 the fifteen section . 
 the nine xt 7 " ee will here rehearse the nine reproach , which reproach . wonderful that slanderous hog have draw from the manner of live , and special from the meat and drink of the islander , and that not in one or a few word , but in a large invective : namely , that they eat old and unsavoury meat , and that , without the use of bread . also , that they eat diverse kind of fish which be unknown to stranger : and that they mingle water and whey together for drink . all which this venomous pasquill , with eloquent rail and witty slander have set out at the full . 
 and albeit we do scarce vouchsafe to stand long about answer of he , yet in regard of other , who at this day partly wonder at the matter , and partly object it to our nation , we think good to add some few thing in this place . 
 first therefore we will divide this our nation into two part : into beggar , and those that sustain both themselves , and , among other , beggar also . as touch all kind of meat wherewith beggar and other poor man satisfy their hunger , it be no easy matter to rehearse and examine they : neither , because extreme necessity have at some time compel they to eat this or that , therefore be it meet to prescribe certain kind and number of meat to the rest of the nation . for we have also a law amone the canon 186 
 1592. apostolical , which forbid to eat thing strangle : in the observe of which canon , antiquity have seem to be very devout . 
 moreover , we will make a distinction of time also , that it may seem no strange accident in the time of famine , though many thing be , and have be use by a great number of man to satisfy their hunger , which at other time be scarce meat for dog . as very late in the year 1590 we hear concern the citizen of Paris , be environ with the most strait siege of Henry the four , king of Navarre , suffer ( as Petrus Lindebergius speak ) the famine of Saguntum : insomuch that they do not only eat their horse , but also take the flesh of dead man , and beat their bone to powder in a mortar , they mingle therewith a handful or two of meal , esteem it dainty . and it be well know also of other nation , who in the like urgent necessity have live by eat of mouse , cat and dog . in like manner sometime be we islander constrain to do , not be besiege by our enemy ( although hitherto we have abstain from man flesh , yea , and to our knowledge , from dog , mouse , and cat ) for whereas we provide thing necessary for food out of the land and sea , and no sustenance , or very little , be bring unto we by stranger : so often as God withhold his gift of land and sea , then must follow and ensue a dreadful scarcity of victual , whereupon the inhabitant be sometime vex with grievous famine . and therefore it be likely that they among we which use to live from hand to mouth , and have not some provision of former year remain , have be drive to great extremity , so often as need have enforce they thereunto . but whether this thing ought worthy to minister occasion to a public and perpetuali reproach against the islander , more than other nation , i refer it to the judgement of indifferent and honest mind . 
 moreover , whereas diverse use to object concern 187 
 the islander mean of preserve their meat without salt . 
 the proper and accustom fare of our country , especial of flesh , fish , butter be long time keep without salt : also concern white-meat , want of corn , drink of water , and such like : in most place of island ( for there be many of our countryman also , who , after the manner of the Dane and german so far forth as aught in a mean to suffice chaste and temperate mind , although we have not any great variety of sauce , be destitute of apothecary shop , be of ability to furnish their table , and to live moderate ) we confess it to be even so : namely that the foresay kind of victual be use in most place without the season of salt . and i will further add , that the very same meat , which certain stranger abhor so much as to name , yet stranger themselves , when they be among we do use to eat they with delight . for albeit for the most part we have no corn , nor meal , nor yet salt the provocation of gluttony , for the season of our victual , be common to we all : yet notwithstanding almighty god of his goodness have teach our man also the way , how they shall handle , and keep in store those thing which belong to the sustentation of life , to the end it may appear , that God in nourish and sustain of we islander , be not tie to bread and salt . 
 but whereas stranger boast that all their victual be more pleasant and wholesome : yet we deny that to be a sufficient reason , why they shall upbraid we in regard of we : neither do we think God to be a debtor unto our dainty mouth : but rather we give he thank with our whole heart , that he vouchsafe without this delicate and nice fare , which be esteem to be so pleasant and wholesome , to grant even unto the man of our country many year , and a good age as also constant health , and flourish strength of body ; all which we account to be sign of wholesome and convenient nourishment , and of a perfect constitution . beside , our wit be not altogether so gross and barren , 188 
 as the philosopher seem to assign unto this our air , and these nourishment , which perhaps many of our countryman can much rather verify in deed then in word , if ( as the poet say ) envious poverty do not hold we down . 
 but here the judgement of the common people , as often in other matter , do too plain deceive ( i except all good and well experience man ) some of they which will seem to be wise : namely , that whatsoever their use do not admit , or that they have not see , nor have trial of beforetime , they present condemn . as for example , he that never see the sea will not be persuade that there be a mediterrane sea : so do they measure all thing by their own experience and conceit , as though there be nothing good and profitable , but that only wherewith they maintain their life . but we be not grow to that pitch of folly , that because we have hear of certain people of Aethiopia , which be feed with locust , be therefore call by Diodorus , Acridophagi , and of a certain nation of India also , who Clitarchus and megastenes have name Mandri , as Agatarchides witness , or of other that live upon frog or sea-crab , or round shrimp , which thing be at this day common know , that ( i say ) we shall therefore presume to make they a laugh stock to the common people , because we be not accustom to such sustenance . 
 the sixteenth section . 
 tenth , that uncivil ! beast cast our man in the the ten reteeth with their good hospitality . they do not frocfl - 
 ( say he ) carry about money with they in their purse , neither be it any shame to be entertain in a strange place , and to have meat and drink bestow of free cost . for if they have any thing which they may impart with other , they will very glad . Moreover , he make mention of certain church or holy chapel ( as of a base thing ) which many of the islander have 189 
 build in their own house : and that first of all in the morning , they have recourse thither , to make their prayer , neither do they suffer any man before they have do their devotion , to interrupt they . Theise be the thing which he have set down as some notable disgrace unto the islander . and no marvel : 
 for filthy swine detest all cleanly one , and hog unclean regard not precious stone . 
 which i fear , lest it may be too true affirm of this slanderer , as it be manifest out of these two last objection . 
 howbeit , since he himself be a most sufficient witness of his own virtue , we will refer the reader , who be desirous to know more of he unto his book of rhyme against island , which we have now examine in our former section : at who rail and filthy speech we have be ashamed on his behalf : insomuch that those thing which he with satirical , satirical ? nay satanical bite and revile of our nation , have not blush to write , be irksome for we to repeat : so great and abominable be his insolency , and his reproach so heinous . good God! whosoever shall view this cartlode of slander ( for we have mention the least part thereof , because i be loath to lose my labour , or , as the wise man say , to answer a fool accord to his foolishness , whereas in his rhyme there be not one word without a reproach ) will he not judge the author of this pasquill to have be a most lewd man , yea the very dross of mankind , without piety , without humanity ? 
 but here i have just occasion to doubt whether the author of these revile have be the more injurious to islander , or the Printer thereof Joachimus Leo ( and whatsoever else they be who in their edition dare neither profess their own name , nor the name of their city ) which leo have now twice , if not often , publish the say pamphlet at Hamburg . do you suffer this to go unpunished , oh you counsel and commons of ham-190 
 burg ? what ? have you determine to gratify island in this sort , which these many year , by reason of your abundant traffic with we , and your transport home of all our commodity , of our beef and mutton , and commo-of a incredible deal of butter and fish , have be esofl^and-unto your ci tie in stead of a storehouse ? in time past ancient also , certain city of England and of holland have t^iue of reap the commodity or this isle : moreover , there island have be ancient traffic of Denmark , Breme , and Lubeck with the islander . but they never gain by any of their chapman such commendation , and such thank , as be contain in this libel : it have in your , in your city ( i . say ) be breed , bring forth , iterate , if not the third time publish : which have arm other people , unto who the name of island be otherwise scarce know , to the disdain and contempt of this our nation : and this injury offer by a citizen of you , have island sustain these 30. year and more , and do as yet sustain . but many such accident often come to pass without the knowledge of the magistrate , neither do we doubt but that good man be grieve at such infamous libel , and do take diligent heed that they be not publish : for such edition be contrary to the law of nature : do not that to another which thou will not have do unto thy self : and to 
 the law imperial of infamous libel : wherein be law against enjoin a most grievous penalty unto those , who invent , write , utter , or cause such libel to be buy or sell , or do not present upon the find thereof tear they in piece . 
 but now time bid we to sound a retreat : and to return home unto thou island ( our most dear mother ) who neither poverty , nor cold , nor any other such inconvenience shall make irksome unto we , so long as thou cease not to give hearty and willing entertainment unto Christ : where , first we do earnest exhort thou to the serious and ardent affection , and love of God , and of the heavenly knowledge reveal unto we in Christ : 
 191 
 that thou will prefer this before all thing , be inflame with desire of doctrine , and of the word : that thou will not light esteem , contemn or hate the holy ministry and minister , but reverence , cherish , and love they . account those that practise the contrary as wicked and profane : and manage all thy affair both private and public , accord to the prescript rule of piety and honesty , that unto this , thy state and order ecclesiastical and politic may in all thing be conform : and so in either kind of life rely thy self upon that level and line of equity and justice , and avoid other , who upon stubborness and impiety swerve therefrom . that thou will also inflict just punishment upon offender : all which we doubt not but the magistrate will have respect unto . but especial that thou admit none to be magistrate , but man of approve fidelity and honesty , and such as may adjoin unto these virtue other hereto belong , by which mean inconvenience may fit be prevent . for if this matter be well handle , namely that they which be the best of all good man be choose to bear public authority , wicked and unfit man be altogether reject ; the condition of the subject shall|be most prosperous : the life and manner of all man shall prove by so much the more commendable : godliness also and honesty shall become the more glorious . but on the contrary , if pastor of church be not answerable to their function , either in life or doctrine ; if all man without respect or difference be admit to the government of the common wealth , who aspire thereunto by their own rashness , ambition , or avarice , and desire of honour , yea though they be suspect or convict of crime and dishonesty , or be pro tectour or unjust favourer of such person as be suspect and convict ; then what will be thy state , oh island ? what will be thy outward show or condition ? doubtless most miserable . neither shall thou by any other mean more sudden approach to thy ruin and destruction , 
 192 
 i592-then if thou commit thy self to the government of such man , who to the uttermost of their power , although they be of thy own brood , daily seek thy overthrow for their own private advantage and secret malice . wherefore ( to be short ) let these be to advertise my dear country , how behovefiill it be that the matter aforesaid be put in practice . 
 but while i be speak these thing unto thou ( my country ) oh that my deep and doleful sigh , which lie hide in the former speech , may pierce the ear of our king most excellent majesty , before who , on thy behalf i do bewail the public misery , which in this respect especial do arise , because we be so far distant from the seat and royal presence of our king , that many therefore take more liberty , and promise more securi tie of offend unto themselves . but we will commit all these matter to the most just judge of heaven and earth who behold all thing in equity . 
 now it remain ( my belove country ) that thou will take in good part these my labour employ in thy service , and accept they with that favourable and courteous mind which i have expect . and although they be not of such worth as i can wish , yet sith a willing mind be worth all , i will not therefore give over because i mistrust my self as one insufficient to contend for thy innocence , for thy reputation , and thy honour , my dear country . but rather whatsoever it be ( if it be aught ) and how mickle-soev which for my slender ability i be able to afford in thy defence , i think good not to suppress it : for i esteem not those man worthy of commendation , who despair 
 to overgrow the limb of Lyco stout , neglect to cure their body of the gout . 
 and in very deed , it do not whit repent i of my labour , if this little treatise shall tend neither to thou nor to my own disgrace . but if it shall any 
 iv 193 n 
 thing avail to thy honour or defence , i will think my travail right well bestow . yea , if by this my slender attempt i may but only excite other of thy child , and my native countryman , be far my superior both in learning and industry to take thy cause in hand , either now or hereafter , what reason be there why any man shall say that it be not worth my labour ? now , if they address themselves to write , howsoever my fame shall|be obscure , yet will i comfort my self with their excellency , who be like to impair my credit : for albeit a man ought to have speciali regard of his name and fame , yet be he to have more of his country , who dignity be safe and sound , we also must needs esteem our self to be in safety . 
 write at holen hialtedale in island , the year of our lord 1592. the 17. of the kalend of May . 
 . 