the miraculous victory achieve by the english fleet , under the discreet and happy conduct of the right honourable , right prudent , and valiant lord , the lord Charles Howard , L. high admiral of England , etc upon the spanish huge armada send in the year 1588. for the invasion of England , together with the woeful and miserable success of the say armada afterward , upon the coast of Norway , of the scottish western isle , of Ireland , of Spain , of France , and of England , etc record in latin by Emanuel van Meteran in the 15. book of his history of the low country . 
 ave in part declare the strange and wonderful event of the year eighty eight , which have be so long time foretell by ancient prophecy ; we will now make relation of the most notable and great enterprise of all other which be in the foresay year achieve , in order 
 as it be do . which exploit ( although in very deed it be not perform in any part of the low country ) be intend for their ruin and destruction . and it 
 be the expedition which the spanish king , have a long time determine the same in his mind , and have consult thereabouts with the pope , set forth and undertook against England and the low country . to the end that he may subdue the realm of England , and reduce it unto his catholic religion , and by that 
 197 
 the preparation of the spanish king to subdue England and the low country . 
 mean may be sufficient revenge for the disgrace , contempt and dishonour , which he ( have 34. year before enforce they to the pope obedience ) have endure of the english nation , and for diverse other injury which have take deep impression in his thought . and also for that he deem this to be the most ready and direct course , whereby he may recover his heredetarie possession of the low country , have restrain the inhabitant from sail upon the coast of England . which very , upon most weighty argument and evident reason , be think will undoubt have come to pass , consider the great abundance and store of all thing necessary wherewith those man be furnish , which have the manage of that action commit unto they . but now let we describe the matter more particular . 
 the spanish king have with small fruit and commodity , for above twenty year together , wage war against the netherlander , after deliberation with his counsellor thereabouts , think it most convenient to assault they once again by sea , which have be attempt sundry time heretofore , but not with force sufficient . unto the which expedition it stand he now in hand to join great puissance , as have the english people his profess enemy ; who island be so situate , that it may either great help or hinder all such as sail into those part . for which cause he think good first of all to invade England , be persuade by his secretary Escovedo , and by diverse other well experience Spaniards and Dutchman , and by many english fugitive , that the conquest of that hand be less difficult than the conquest of holland and Zealand . Moreover the Spaniard be of opinion , that it will be far more behooveful for their king to conquer England and the low country all at once , then to be constrain continual to maintain a warlike navy to defend his east and west Indie fleet , from the english drake , and from such like valiant enemy . 
 198 
 and for the same purpose the king catholique have give commandment long before in Italy and Spain , that a great quantity of timber shall be fell for the build of ship ; and have beside make great preparation of thing and furniture requisite for such a expedition ; as namely in sound of brazen ordinance , in store up of corn and victual , in train of man to use warlike weapon , in leavy and muster of soldier : insomuch that about the begin of the year 1588. he have finish such a mighty navy , and bring it into Lisbon haven , as never the like have before that time sail upon the ocean sea . 
 a very large and particular description of this navy be put in print and publish by the Spaniard ; wherein be set down the number , name , and burden of the ship , the number of mariner and soldier throughout the whole fleet ; likewise the quantity of their ordinance , of their armour , of bullet , of match , of gun-poulder , of victual , and of all their naval furniture be in the say description particularize . unto all these be add the name of the governor , captain , nobleman and gentleman voluntary , of who there be so great a multitude , that scarce be there any family of account , or any one principali man throughout all Spain , that have not a brother , son or kinsman in that fleet : who all of they be in good hope to purchase unto themselves in that navy ( as they term it ) invincible , endless glory and renown , and to possess themselves of great signory and riches in England , and in the low country . but because the say description be translate and publish out of spanish into diverse other language , we will here only make a abridgement or brief rehearsal thereof . 
 Portugal furnish and set forth under the conduct of the duke of Medina Sidonia general of the fleet , ten galleon , two zabra , 1300. mariner , 3300. soldier , 300. great piece , with all requisite furniture . 
 199 
 the number and quality of the ship in the spanish tleete , with the soldier , mariner , and piece of ordinance . 
 Biscay , under the conduct of John Martin de recall admiral of the whole fleet , set forth ten galleon , 4. patache , 700. mariner , 2000 soldier , 250. great piece , etc 
 Guipusco , under the conduct of Michael de Oquendo , ten galleon , 4. patache , 700. mariner , 2000 soldier , 310. great piece . 
 Italy with the Levant island , under Martine the verten-dona , 10. galleon , 800. mariner , 2000 soldier , 310. great piece , etc 
 Castille , under Diego flores de Valdez , 14. galleon , two patache , 1700. mariner , 2400. soldier , and 380. great piece , etc 
 Andaluzia , under the conduct of Petro de Valdez , 10. galleon , one patache , 800. mariner , 2400. soldier , 280. great piece , etc 
 item , under the conduct of John Lopez de Medina , 23. great flemish hulk , with 700. mariner , 3200. soldier , and 400. great piece . 
 item , under Hugo de Moncada , four Galliasses contain 1200. galleyslave , 460. mariner , 870. soldier , 200. great piece , etc 
 item , under Diego de Mandrana , four galley of Portugal ! , with 888. galleyslave , 360. mariner , 20. great piece , and other requisite furniture . 
 item , under Anthony de Mendoza , 22. patache and zabra , with 574. mariner , 488. soldier , and 193. great piece . 
 beside the ship aforemention there be 20. caravel row with oar , be appoint to perform necessary service unto the great ship : insomuch that all the ship appertain to this navy amount unto the sum of 150. each one be sufficient provide of furniture and victual . 
 the number of mariner in the say fleet be above 8000. of slave 2088. of soldier 20000 ( beside nobleman and gentleman voluntary ) of great cast piece 2650. the foresay ship be of a huge and incredible 200 
 1588. capacity and receipt . for the whole fleet be large enough to contain the burden of 60. thousand ton . 
 the galleon be 64. in number , be of a huge description bigness , and very stately build , be of marvelous °f^galeons . force also , and so high , that they resemble great castle , most fit to defend themselves and to withstand any assault , but in give any other ship the encounter far inferior unto the english and dutch ship , which can with great dexterity wield and turn themselves at all assay . the upperworke of the say galleon be of thickness and strength sufficient to bear off musketshot . the low work and the timber thereof be out of measure strong , be frame of plank and rib four or five foot in thickness , insomuch that no bullet can pierce they , but such as be discharge hard at hand : which afterward prove true , for a great number of bullet be find to stick fast within the massy substance of those thick plank . great and well pitch cable be twine about the mast of their ship , to strengthen they against the battery of shot . 
 the Galliasses be of such bigness , that they con - description tain within they chamber , chapel , turret , pulpit , °^the Gallt~ and other commodity of great house . the Galliasses ’ be row with great oar , there be in each one of they 300. slave for the same purpose , and be able to do great service with the force of their ordinance . all these together with the residue aforenamed be furnish and beautify with trumpet , streamer , banner , warlike ensign , and other such like ornament . 
 their piece of brazen ordinance be 1600 and of the great iron a 1000 
 the bullet thereto belong be 120. thousand . 
 item of gun-poulder 5600. quintal . of match 1200. quintal . 
 of musket and kaleiver 7000 of halebert and partisan 10000 201 
 bullet , gun-poulder , and other furniture . 
 their provision of victual and other thing necessary . 
 a spanish terza consist-eth of 3200. soldier . 
 moreover they have great store of canon , doublecanon , culvering and field-piece for land service . 
 likewise they be provide of all instrument necessary on land to convey and transport their furniture from place to place ; as namely of cart , wheel , wagon , etc also they have spade , mattock and basket to set pioner on work . they have in like sort great store of mule and horse , and whatsoever else be requisite for a land-army . they be so well store of biscuit , that for the space of half a year , they may allow each person in the whole fleet half a quintali every month ; whereof the whole sum amount unto a hundred thousand quintal . 
 likewise of wine they have 147. thousand pipe , sufficient also for half a year expedition . of bacon 6500. quintal . of cheese three thousand quintal . beside fish , rise , bean , pease , oil , vinegar , etc 
 moreover they have 12000. pipe of freshwater , and all other necessary provision , as namely candle , lantern , lamp , sail , hemp , ox-hides and lead to stop hole that shall be make with the battery of gunshot . to be short , they bring all thing expedient either for a fleet by sea , or for a army by land . 
 this navy ( as Diego Pimentelli afterward confess ) be esteem by the king himself to contain 32000. person , and to cost he every day 30. thousand ducat . 
 there be in the say navy five terzae of Spaniards , ( which terzae the Frenchman call regiment ) under the command of five governor term by the Spaniard , master of the field , and among the rest there be many old and expert soldier choose out of the garrison of Sicily , Naples , and Ter^era . their captain or colonel be Diego Pimentelli , don Francisco de Toledo , don Alonso de Lu^on , don Nicolas de Isla , don Augustin de Mexia ; who have each of they 32. company under their conduct . beside the which company there be many band 
 202 
 1588. also of castilian and Portugal , every one of which have their peculiar governor , captain , officer , colour and weapon . 
 it be not lawful for any man , under grievous penalty , to carry any woman or harlot in the fleet : for which cause the woman hire certain ship , wherein they sail after the navy : some of the which be drive by tempest arrive upon the coast of France . 
 the generail of this mighty navy , be don Alonso Perez de Guzman duke of Medina Sidonia , lord of S. Lucar , and knight of the golden fleece : by reason that the mark of santa Cruz appoint for the same dignity , decease before the time . 
 John Martin de recall be admiral of the fleet . 
 Francis Bovadilla be chief martial : who all of [ i . 594. j they have their officer fit and requisite for the guide and manage of such a multitude . likewise Martin Alorcon be appoint vicar general of the inquisition , be accompany with more than a hundred monk , to wit , Jesuit , Capuchin , and friar mendicant . beside who also there be physician , chirurgeon , apothecary , and whatsoever else pertain unto the hospitali . 
 over and beside the forename governor and officer be man of chief note , there be 124. very noble and worthy gentleman , which go voluntary of their own cost and charge , to the end they may see fashion , learn experience , and attain unto glory . among who be the prince of Ascoli , Alonzo de Leiva , the mark de Pennafiel , the mark de Ganes , the mark de Barlango , count de Paredes , count de Yelvas , and diverse other marquess and earl of the honourable family of Mendoza , of Toledo , of pachieco , of Cordova , of Guzman , of Manricques , and a great theprepara-number of other . .................... 
 while the Spaniard be furnish this their navy , aid tJe the duke of Parma , at the direction of king Philip , make Spaniards . 
 203 
 great preparation in the low country , to give aid and assistance unto the Spaniard ; build ship for the same purpose , and send for pilot and shipwrights out of Italy . 
 in Flanders he cause certain deep channel to be make , and among the rest the channel of Yper common call yper-lee , employ some thousand of workman about that service : to the end that by the say chanel he may transport ship from Antwerp and ghendt to Bruges , where he have assemble above a hundred small ship call hoy be well store with victual , which hoy he be determine to have bring into the sea by the way of Sluys , or else to have convey they by the say yper-lee be now of great depth , into any port of Flanders whatsoever . 
 in the river of Waten he cause 70. ship with flat bottom to be build , every one of which shall serve to carry 30. horse , have each of they bridge likewise for the horse to come on board , or to go forth on land . of the same fashion he have provide 200. other vessel at Neiuport , but not so great . and at dunkerk he procure 28. ship of war , such as be there to be have , and cause a sufficient number of mariner to be levy at Hamburgh , Breme , Emden , and at other place . he put in the ballast of the say ship , great store of beam of thick plank , be hollow and beset with iron pike beneath , but on each side full of clasp and hook , to join they together . 
 he have likewise at grevel provide 20. thousand of cask , which in a short space may be compact and join together with nail and cord , and reduce into the form of a bridge . to be short , whatsoever thing be requisite for the make of bridge , and for the bar and stop up of haven mouth with stake , post , and other mean , he command to be make ready . Moreover not far from Neiuport haven , he have cause a great pile of wooden faggot to be lay , and other furniture to be bring for the rear up 
 204 
 of a mount . the most part of his ship contain two oven a piece to bake bread in , with a great number of saddle , bridle , and such other like apparel for horse . they have horse likewise , which after their land shall serve to convey , and draw engine , field-piece , and other warlike provision . 
 near unto Neiuport he have assemble a army , over the which he have ordain Camillo de monte to be campmaster . this army consist of 30. band or ensign of italian , of ten band of wallon , eight of Scot , and eight of Burgundians , all which together amount unto 56. band , every band contain a hundred person . near unto Dixmud there be muster 80. band of dutch man , sixty of Spaniard , six of high german , and seven band of english fugitive , under the conduct of sir William Stanley a english knight . 
 in the suburb of cortreight there be 4000 horseman together with their horse in a readiness : and at waten 900. horse , with the troop of the mark deal gwasto captain generail of the horseman . 
 unto this famous expedition and presuppose victory , many potentate , prince , and honourable personage hie themselves : out of Spain the prince of Melito call the duke of Pastrana and take to be the son of one ruygome de Silva , but in very deed account among the number of king fillip base son . also the mark of Burgrave , one of the son of Archiduke Ferdinand and Philippa Welsera . Vespasian Gonsaga of the family of Mantua , be for chivalry a man of great renown , and heretofore viceroy in Spain . item John Medici base son unto the duke of Florence . and Amadas of Savoy , the duke of Savoy his base son , with many other of inferior degree . the pope fur - 
 likewise pope Sixtus quintus for the set forth of thermce to the the foresay expedition , as they use to do against Turk and infidel , publish a Cruzado , with most ample indulgence which be print in great number . Theise country . 
 205 
 a treaty of peace , to the end that England and the unite province may be secure of invasion . 
 vain bull the english and Dutchmen deride , say that the devil at all passage lay in ambush like a thief , no whit regard such letter of safe conduct . some there be which affirm that the pope have bestow the realm of England with the title of defensor fidei , upon the king of Spain , give he charge to invade it upon this condition , that he shall enjoy the conquer realm , as a vassal and tributary , in that regard , unto the sea of Rome . to this purpose the say pope proffer a million of gold , the one half thereof to be pay in ready money , and the other half when the realm of England or any famous port thereof be subdue . and for the great furtherance of the whole business , he dispatch one D. Allen a english man ( who he have make Cardinali for the same end and purpose ) into the low country , unto who he commit the administration of all matter ecclesiastical throughout England . This Allen be enrage against his own native country , cause the pope bull to be translate into english , mean upon the arrival of the spanish fleet , to have it so publish in England . by which bull the excommunication of the two former pope be confirm , and the queen most sacred majesty be by they most unjusdy deprive of all princely title and dignity , her subject be enjoin to perform obedience unto the duke of Parma , and unto the pope legate . 
 but that all matter may be perform with great secrecy , and that the whole expedition may seem rather to be intend against the low country , then against England , and that the english people may be persuade that all be but bare word and threaten , and that nought will come to effect , there be a solemn meeting appoint at borborch in Flanders for a treaty of peace between her majesty and the spanish king . ...... 
 against which treaty the unite province make open protestation , use all mean possible to hinder it , 206 
 allege that it be more requisite to consult how the enemy now press upon they may be repel from off their frontier . howbeit some there be in England that great urge and prosecute this league , say , that it will be very commodious unto the state of the realm , as well in regard of traffic and navigation , as for the avoid of great expense to maintain the war , affirm also , that at the same time peace may easy and upon reasonable condition be obtain of the Spaniard . other think by this mean to divert some other way , or to keep back the navy now come upon they , and so to escape the danger of that tempest . howsoever it be , the duke of Parma by these wile enchant and dazzle the eye of many english and dutch man that be desirous of peace : whereupon it come to pass , that England and the unite province prepare in deed some defence to withstand that dreadful expedition and huge armada , but nothing in comparison of the great danger which be to be fear , albeit the constant report of the whole expedition have continue rife among they for a long time before . howbeit they give ear unto the relation of certain that say , that this navy be provide to conduct and waft over the indian fleet : which seem the more probable because the Spaniard be deem not to be man of so small discretion as to adventure those huge and monstrous ship upon the shallow and dangerous chanel of England . 
 at length when as the french king about the end her majesty of May signify unto her majesty in plain term that warlike prepare shall stand upon her guard , because he be now , atlon sea‘ most certain inform , that there be so dangerous a invasion imminent upon her realm , that he fear much lest all her land and sea-force will be sufficient to withstand it , etc then begin the queen majesty more careful to gather her force together , and to furnish she own ship of war , and the principali ship of her subject with soldier , weapon , and other necessary provision . the great and strong ship of the 
 207 
 the preparation of the unite province . 
 whole navy she send unto Plymouth under the conduct of the right honourable lord Charles Howard , lord high admiral of England , etc under who the renown knight sir Francis Drake be appoint vice-admiral . the number of these ship be about a hundred . the lesser ship be 30. or 40. in number , and under the conduct of the lord Henry Seimer be command to lie between Dover and Caleis . 
 on land likewise throughout the whole realm , soldier be muster and train in all place , and be commit unto the most resolute and faithful captain . and whereas it be common give out that the Spaniard have once unite himself unto the duke of Parma , mean to invade by the river of Thames , there be at Tilburie in Essex over-against Gravesend , a mighty army encamp , and on both side of the river fortification be erect , accord to the prescription of Frederike Genebelli a italian enginier . likewise there be certain ship bring to make a bridge , though it be very late first . unto the say army come in proper person the queen most royal majesty , represent Tomyris that Scythian warlike princess , or rather divine Pallas her self . also there be other such army levy in England . 
 the principali catholic recusant ( lest they shall stir up any tumult in the time of the spanish invasion ) be send to remain at certain convenient place , as namely in the isle of Ely and at Wisbich . and some of they be send unto other place , to wit , unto sundry bishop and nobleman , where they be keep from endanger the state of the common wealth , and of her sacred majesty , who of her most gracious clemency give express commandment , that they shall be entreat with all humanity and friendship . 
 the province of holland and Zealand , etc give credit unto their intelligence out of Spain , make preparation to defend themselves : but because the spanish ship be describe unto they to be so huge , 208 
 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this downwodedfrom http : / / www . cambridge.org / corelgnivfrsityaf nj£ew£t > e 5^30^ ^w^v , subject to the camhifeffdtfltrmfafuuse^ hnpsvww-varbdgeog / oe . ems . 
 1588. they rely partly upon the shallow and dangerous sea all along their coast . wherefore they stand most in doubt of the duke of Parma his small and flat-bottomed ship . howbeit they have all their ship of war to the number of 90. and above , in a readiness for all assay : the great part whereof be of a small burden , as be more meet to sail upon their river and shallow sea : and with these ship they besiege all the haven in Flanders , begin at the mouth of Scheid , or from the town of Lillo , and hold on to grevel and almost unto Caleis , and fortify all their seatown with strong garrison . 
 against the spanish fleet arrival , they have provide 25. or 30. good ship , commit the government of they unto admiral lonck , who they command to join himself unto the lord Henry Seymer , lie between Dover and Cales . and when as the foresay ship , ( whereof the great part besiege the haven of Dunkirk ) be drive by tempest into Zealand , Justin of Nassau the admiral of Zealand supply that squadron with 35. ship be of no great burden , but excellent furnish with gun , mariner and soldier in great abundance , and especial with 1200. brave musketeer , have be accustom unto sea-fight , and be choose out of all their company for the same purpose : and so the say Justin of Nassau keep such diligent ward in that station that the duke of Parma can not issue forth with his navy into the sea out of any part of Flanders . 
 in the mean while the spanish armada set sail out the spanish of the haven of Lisbon upon the 19 of may , An. Dom. fieete set sail 1588. under the conduct of the duke of Medina Sidonia , direct their course for the bay of Corunna , i ali^s the groin of Gallicia , where they take in soldier and warlike provision , this port be in Spain the near unto England . as they be sail along , there arise such a mighty tempest , that the whole fleet be disperse , so that when the duke be re - 
 iv 209 oh 
 turn unto his company , he can not escry above 80. ship in all , whereunto the residue by iide and little join themselves , except eight which have their mast blow overboard . one of the four galley of portin-gal escape very hardly , retire her self into the haven . the other three be upon the coast of baion in France , by the assistance and courage of one David Gwin a english captive ( who the french and turkish slave aid in the same enterprise ) utter disable and vanquish : one of the three be first overcome , which conquer the two other , with the slaughter of their governor and soldier , and among the rest of don Diego de Mandrana with sundry other : and so those slave arrive in France with the three galley , set themselves at liberty . 
 they set sail from you groin upon the 11. of July . 
 the Spaniard come within ken of England . 
 captain fleming . 
 the navy have refresh themselves at the groin , and receive daily commandment from the king to hasten their journey , hoist up sail the 11. day of July , and so hold on their course till the 19 of the same month , they come then unto the mouth of the narrow sea or english chanel . from whence ( strike their sail in the mean season ) they dispatch certain of their small ship unto the duke of Parma . at the same time the spanish fleet be escry by a english pinnace , captain whereof be m. Thomas Fleming , after they have be advertise of the Spaniard expedition by their scout and espial , which have range along the coast of Spain , be late return home into Plymouth for a new supply of victual and other necessary , who consider the foresay tempest , be of opinion that the navy be of late disperse and toss up and down the main ocean , be by no mean able to perform their intend voyage . 
 moreover , the lord Charles Howard lord high admiral of England have receive letter from the court , signify unto he that her majesty be advertise that the spanish fleet will not come forth , nor be to be any long expect for , and therefore , that upon she 
 210 
 majesty commandment he must send back four of her tall and strong ship unto Chattam . 
 the lord high admiral of England be thus on 2% L. ad-the sudden , namely upon the 19 of July about four mtrahsfmrt of the clock in the afternoon , inform by the pinnace of captain fleme aforesaid , of the Spaniard July . approach , with all speed and diligence possible he warp his ship , and cause his mariner and soldier ( the great part of who be absent for the cause aforesaid ) tocome on board , and that with great trouble and difficulty , insomuch that the lord admiral himself be fain to lie without in the road with six ship only all that night , after the which many other come forth of the haven . the very next day be the 20. of July the 20. of about high noon , be the spanish fleet escry by the english , which with a southwest wind come sail along , and pass by Plymouth : in which regard ( accord to the judgement of many skilful navigator ) they great overshoot themselves , whereas it have be more commodious for they to have stay themselves there , consider that the Englishman be as yet unprovide , great rely upon their own force , and know not the estate of the spanish navy . Moreover , this be the most convenient port of all other , where they may with great security have be advertise of the english force , and how the commons of the land stand affect , and may have stir up some mutiny , so that hither they shall have bend all their puissance , and from hence the duke of Parma may more easy have convey his ship . 
 but this they be prohibit to do by the king and his counsel , and be express command to unite themselves unto the soldier and ship of the say duke of Parma , and so to bring their purpose to effect . which be think to be the most easy and direct course , for that they imagine that the english and dutch man will be utter daunt and dismay thereat , and will each man of they retire unto his 
 211 
 own province and porte for the defence thereof , and transport the army of the duke under the protection of their huge navy , they may invade England . 
 it be report that the chief commander in the navy , and those which be more skilful in navigation , to wit , John Martin de recall , Diego flores de Valdez , and diverse other find fault that they be bind unto so strict direction and instruction , because that in such a case many particular accident ought to concur and to be respect at one and the same instant , that be to say , the opportunity of the wind , weather , time , tide , and ebb , wherein they may sail from Flanders to England . oftentimes also the darkness and light , the situation of place , the depth and should be to be consider : all which especial depend upon the conveniency of the wind , and be by so much the more dangerous . 
 but it seem that they be enjoin by their commission to anchor near unto , or about Caleis , whither the duke of Parma with his ship and all his warlike provision be to resort , and while the english and spanish great ship be in the midst of their conflict , to pass by , and to land his soldier upon the down . 
 the spanish captive report that they be determine first to have enter the river of Thames , and thereupon to have pass with small ship up to London , suppose that they may easy win that rich and flourish city be but mean fortify and inhabit with citizen not accustom to the war , who dare not withstand their first encounter , hope moreover to find many rebel against her majesty and popish catholics , or some favourer of the scottish queen ( which be not long before most just behead ) who may be instrument of sedition . 
 thus often advertise the duke of Parma of their approach , the 20. of July they pass by Plymouth , which the english ship pursue and get the wind 212 
 the first action in the english channel against the armada 2 first July 1588 
 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv of this book , by click on it resource available it . 
 1588. of they , give they the chase and the encounter , and so both fleet frank exchange their bullet . 
 the day follow which be the 21. of July , the then-of english ship approach within musquet shoot of the spanish : at what time the lord Charles Howard most hot and valiant discharge his ordinance upon the spanish viceadmiral . the Spaniard then well perceive the nimbleness of the english ship in discharge upon the enemy on all side , gather themselves close into the form of a half moon , and slacken their sail , lest they shall outgo any of their company . and while they be proceed on in this manner , one of their great Galliasses be so furious batter with shot , that the whole navy be fain to come up round together for the safeguard thereof : whereby it come to pass that the principali galleon of Seville ( wherein don Pedro de Valdez , Vasques de Silva , Alonzo de Sayas , and other noble man be embark ) fall foul of another ship , have her foremast break , and by that mean be not able to keep way with the spanish fleet , neither will the say fleet stay to succour it , but leave the distress Galeon behind . the lord admiral of England when he see this ship of Valdez , and think she have be void of mariner and soldier , take with he as many ship as he can , pass by it , that he may not loose sight of the spanish fleet that night . for sir Francis Drake ( who be notwithstanding appoint to bear out his lantern that night ) be give of chase unto five great hulk which have separate themselves from the spanish fleet : but find they to be Easterling , he dismiss they . the lord admiral all that night follow the spanish lantern in stead of the english , find himself in the morning to be in the midst of his enemy fleet , but when he perceive it , he clean convey himself out of that great danger . 
 the day follow , which be the two and twenty of Tk of July , sir Francis Drake espy Valdez his ship , where - 
 213 
 unto he send forth his pinnace , and be advertise that Valdez himself be there , and 45° - person with he , he send he word that he shall yield himself . 
 Valdez for his honour sake cause certain condition to be propound unto drake : who answer Valdez that he be not now at laisure to make any long parley , but if he will yield himself , he shall find he friendly and tractable : howbeit if he have resolve to die in fight , he shall prove drake to be no dastard . 
 do Pedro de upon which answer Valdez and his company under-^hls^mpstanding that they be fall into the hand of fortunate company take . Drake , be move with the renown and celebri tie of his name , with one consent yield themselves , and find he very favourable unto they . then Valdez with 40. or 50. nobleman and gentleman pertain unto he , come on board sir Francis drake ship . the residue of his company be carry unto Plymouth , where they be detain a year and a half for their ransom . 
 Valdez come unto drake and humble kiss his hand protest unto he , that he and his have resolve to die in battle , have they not by good fortune fall into his power , who they know to be right courteous and gentle , and who they have hear by general report to be most favourable unto his vanquish foe : insomuch that he say it be to be doubt whether his enemy have more cause to admire and love he for his great , valiant , and prosperous exploit , or to dread he for his singular felicity and wisdom , which ever attend upon he in the war , and by the which he have attain unto so great honour . with that drake embrace he and give he very honourable entertainment , feed he at his own table , and lodge he in his cabin . 
 here Valdez begin to recount unto drake the force of all the spanish fleet , and how four mighty galley be separate by tempest from they : and also how they be determine first to have put into Plymouth haven , not expect to be repel thence by the 214 
 english ship which they think can by no mean withstand their impregnable force , persuade themselves that by mean of their huge fleet , they be become lord and commander of the main ocean . for which cause they marvel much how the english man in their small ship dare approach within musket shoot of the Spaniard mighty wooden castle , gather the wind of they with many other such like attempt . 
 immediate after , Valdez and his company , be a man of principal authority in the spanish fleet , and be descend of one and the same family with that Valdez , which in the year 1574. besiege leiden in holland , be send captive into England . there be in the say ship 55. thousand ducat in ready money of the spanish king gold , which the soldier merry share among themselves . 
 the same day be set on fire one of their great ship , be admiral of the squadron of Guipusco , and be the ship of Michael de Oquendo viceadmiral of the whole fleet , which contain great store of gunnepowder and other warlike provision . the upper part only of this ship be burn , and all the person therein contain ( except a very few ) be consume with fire . and thereupon it be take by the english , and bring into England with a number of miserable burn and scorch Spaniards . howbeit the gunpowder ( to the great admiration of all man ) remain whole and unconsume . 
 in the mean season the lord admiral of England in his ship call the arke-royall , all that night pursue the Spaniard so near , that in the morning he be almost leave alone in the enemy fleet , and it be four of the clock at afternoon before the residue of the english fleet can overtake he . 
 at the same time Hugo de Moncada governor of the four Galliasses , make humble suit unto the duke of Medina that he may be licence to encounter the admiral of England : which liberty the duke think 
 215 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 a great Biscaine ship take by the english . 
 not good to permit unto he , because he be loath to exceed the limit of his commission and charge . 
 the 23. of upon Tuesday which be the three and twenty of July , the navy be come over against Portland , the wind begin to turn northerly , insomuch that the Spaniard have a fortunate and fit gale to invade the english . but the Englishman have lesser and nimble ship , recover again the vantage of the wind from the Spaniard , whereat the Spaniard seem to be more incense to fight then before . but when the english fleet have continual and without intermission from morning to night , beat and batter they with all their shot both great and small : the Spaniard unite themselves , gather their whole fleet close together into a roundel , so that it be apparent that they mean not as yet to invade other , but only to defend themselves and to make haste unto the place prescribe unto they , which be near unto dunkerk , that they may join force with the duke of Parma , who be determine to have proceed secret with his small ship under the shadow and protection of the great one , and so have intend circumspect to perform the whole expedition . 
 this be the most furious and bloody skirmish of all , in which the lord admiral of England continue fight amid his enemy fleet , and see one of his captain afar off , he speak unto he in these word : oh George what do thou ? will thou now frustrate my hope and opinion conceive of thou ? will thou forsake i now ? with which word he be inflame , approach forthwith , encounter the enemy , and do the part of a most valiant captain . his name be George Fenner , a man that have be conversant in many sea-fight . 
 great in this conflict there be a certain great Venetian we ™ * ™ 1 ship ship with other small ship surprise and take by the ship take by english .... 
 the english . the english navy in the mean while increase , whereunto out of all haven of the realm resort ship and 216 
 1588. man : for they all with one accord come flock thither as unto a set field , where immortali fame and glory be to be attain , and faithful service to be perform unto their prince and country . 
 in which number there be many great and honourable personage , as namely , the earl of Oxford , of Northumberland , of Cumberland , etc with many knight and gentleman : to wit , sir Thomas Cecill , sir Robert Cecill , sir Walter Raleigh , sir William Hatton , sir Horatio Palavicini , sir Henry brook , sir Robert Carew , sir Charles blunt , master Ambrose Willoughbie , master Henry Nowell , master Thomas Gerard , master Henry Dudley , master Edward Darcie , master Arthur gorge , master Thomas Woodhouse , master William Harvie , etc and so it come to pass that the number of the english ship amount unto a hundred : which when they be come before Dover , be increase to a hundred and thirty , be notwithstanding of no proportionable bigness to encounter with the Spaniard , except two or three and twenty of the queen es great ship , which only , by reason of their presence , breed a opinion in the Spaniard mind concern the power of the english fleet : the mariner and soldier whereof be esteem to be twelve thousand . 
 the four and twenty of July when as the sea be the 24 , of calm , and no wind stir , the fight be only between the four great galleas and the english ship , which be row with oar , have great vantage of the say english ship , which notwithstanding for all that will not be force to yield , but discharge their chain-shot to cut asunder their cable and cordage of the galleas , with many other such stratagem . they be now constrain to send their man on land for a new supplier of gunpowder , whereof they be in great skarcitie , by reason they have so frank spend the great part in the former conflict . 
 the same day , a counsel be assemble , it be decree that the english fleet shall be divide into 
 217 
 four squadron : the principali whereof be commit unto the lord admiral : the second , to sir Francis drake : the three , to captain Hawkins : the four , to captain Frobisher . 
 the Spaniard in their sail observe very diligent and good order , sail three and four , and sometime more ship in a rank , and follow close up one after another , and the strong and great ship protect the lesser . 
 the 25. of the five and twenty of July when the Spaniard be come over-against the isle of wight , the lord admiral of England be accompany with his best ship , ( namely the lion , captain whereof be the lord Thomas Howard : the Elizabeth Jonas under the commandment of sir Robert southwel son in law unto the lord admiral : the bear under the lord Sheffield nephew unto the lord admiral : the victory under captain Barker : and the Galeon Leicester under the forename captain George Fenner ) with great valour and dreadful thunder of shot , encounter the spanish admiral be in the very midst of all his fleet. which when the Spaniard perceive , be assist with his strong ship , he come forth and enter a terrible combat with the english : for they bestow each on other the broad side , and mutual discharge all their ordinance , be within one hundred , or a hundred and twenty yard one of another . 
 at length the Spaniard hoist up their sail , and again gather themselves up close into the form of a roundel . in the mean while captain Frobisher have engage himself into a most dangerous conflict . whereupon the lord admiral come to succour he , find that he have valiant and discreet behave himself , and that he have wise and in good time give over the fight , because that after so great a 
 the 26. of battery he have sustain no damage . 
 July . for which cause the day follow , be the six and 218 
 1588. twenty of July , the lord admiral reward he with the order of knighthood , together with the lord Thomas Howard , the lord Sheffield , m. John Hawkins and other . 
 the same day the lord admiral receive intelligence from Newhaven in France , by certain of his pinnace , that all thing be quiet in France , and that there be no preparation of send aid unto the Spaniard , which be great fear from the guisian faction , and from the leaguer : but there be a false rumour spread all about , that the Spaniard have conquer England . 
 the seven and twenty of July , the Spaniard about the z^ . of the sunsetting be come over-against Dover , and . ride at anchor within the sight of Caleis , intend to ancr / before * hold on for dunkerk , expect there to join with Caleis . the duke of Parma his force , without which they be able to do little or nothing . 
 likewise the english fleet follow up hard upon they , anchor just by they within culverin-shot . and here the lord Henry Seymer unite himself unto the lord admiral with his fleet of 30. ship which ride before the mouth of Thames . 
 as the spanish navy therefore lie at anchor , the duke of Medina send certain messenger unto the duke of Parma , with who upon that occasion many nobleman and gentleman go to refresh themselves on land : and among the rest the prince of Ascoli , be account the king base son , and a very proper and towardly young gentleman , to his great good , go on shore , who be by so much the more fortunate , in that he have not opportunity to return on board the same ship , out of which he be depart , because that in return home it be cast away upon the irish coast , with all the person contain therein . 
 the duke of Parma be advertise of the spanish fleet arrival upon the coast of England , make all the haste he can to be present himself in this expedition for the performance of his charge : vain persuade 
 219 
 the 30. oj July . 
 himself that now by the mean of Cardinali Allen , he shall be crown king of England , and for that cause he have resign the government of the low country unto count Mansfeld the elder . and have make his vow unto saint marry of hall in Henault ( who he go to visit for his blind devotion sake ) he return towards Bruges the 28. of July . 
 the next day travel to dunkerk he hear the thunder ordinance of either fleet : and the same evening be come to Dixmud , he be give to understand the hard success of the spanish fleet . 
 upon Tuesday which be the thirty of July , about high noon , he come to dunkerk , when as all the spanish fleet be now pass by : neither dare any of his ship in the mean space come forth to assist the say spanish fleet for fear of five and thirty warlike ship of holland and Zealand , which there keep watch and ward under the conduct of the admiral Justin of Nassau . 
 the foresay five and thirty ship be furnish with most cunning mariner and old expert soldier , among the which be twelve hundred musketeer , who the state have choose out of all their garrison , and who they know to have be heretofore experience in sea-fight . 
 this navy be give especial in charge not to suffer any ship to come out of the haven , nor to permit any zabra , patache or other small vessel of the spanish fleet ( which be more likely to aid the Dunkerkers ) to enter thereinto , for the great ship be not to be fear by reason of the shallow sea in that place . howbeit the prince of Parma his force be as yet unready , be not come on board his ship , only the english fugitive be seven hundred in number under the conduct of sir William Stanley , come in fit time to have be embark , because they hope to give the first assault against England . the residue show themselves unwilling and loath to 
 220 
 1588. depart , because they see but a few mariner , who be by constraint draw into this expedition , and also because they have very bare provision of bread , drink , and other necessary victual . 
 moreover , the ship of holland and Zealand stand continual in their sight , threaten shot and powder , and many inconvenience unto they : for fear of which ship , the mariner and seaman secret withdraw themselves both day and night , lest that the duke of Parma his soldier shall compel they by main force to go on board , and to break through the Hollander fleet , which all of they judge to be impossible by reason of the straightness of the haven . 
 but it seem that the duke of Parma and than the Spaniard Spaniards ground upon a vain and presumptuous vain °Ptnion expectation , that all the ship of England and of the c°heirozvnfleet low country will at the first sight of the spanish and Dunkerk navy have betake themselves to flight , yield they sea room , and endeavour only to defend themselves , their haven , and sea coast from invasion . wherefore their intent and purpose be , that the duke of Parma in his small and flat-bottomed ship , shall as it be under the shadow and wing of the spanish fleet , convey over all his troop , armour , and warlike provision , and with their force so unite , shall invade England ; or while the english fleet be busy in fight against the spanish , shall enter upon any part of the coast , which he think to be most convenient . which invasion ( as the captive afterward confess ) the duke of Parma think first to have attempt by the river of Thames ; upon the bank whereof have at his first arrival land twenty or thirty thousand of he principali soldier , he suppose that he may easy have win the city of London ; both because his small ship shall have follow and assist his land-force , and also for that the city itself be but mean fortify and easy to overcome , by reason of the citizen delicacy and discontinuance from 
 221 
 the war , who with continual ! and constant labour may be vanquish , if they yield not at the first assault . they be in good hope also to have meet with some rebel against her majesty , and such as be discontent with the present state , as papist , and other . likewise they look for aid from the favourer of the scottish queen , who be not long before put to death ; all which they think will have stir up sedition and faction . 
 whenas therefore the spanish fleet ride at anchor before Caleis , to the end they may consult with the duke of Parma what be best to be do according to the king commandment , and the present estate of their affair , and have now ( as we will afterward declare ) purpose upon the second of August be Friday , with one power and consent to have put their intend business in practice ; the lord admiral of England be admonish by her majesty letter from the court , think it most expedient either to drive the spanish fleet from that place , or at leastwise to give they the encounter : and for that cause ( accord to her majesty prescription ) he take forthwith eight of his worst and base ship which come next to hand , and disburden they of all thing which seem to be of any value , fill they with gunpowder , pitch , brimstone , and with other combustible and fiery matter ; and charge all their ordinance with powder , bullet , and stone , he send the say ship upon the 28 of July be Sunday , about two of the clock after midnight , with the wind and tide against the spanish fleet : which when they have proceed a good space , be forsake of the pilot , and set on fire , be direct carry upon the king of Spain navy : which fire in the dead of the night put the Spaniard into such a perplexity and horror ( for they fear lest they be like unto those terrible ship , which Frederic Jenebelli three year before , at the siege of Antwerp , have furnish with gunpowder , stone , and dreadful engine , for the dissolution of the duke of 
 222 
 Parma his bridge , build upon the river of Scheid ) that cut their cable whereon their anchor be fasten , and hoist up their sail , they betake themselves very confuse unto the main sea . 
 in this sudden confusion , the principali and great the galliass of the four galliass fall foul of another ship , lose her rudder : for which cause when she can not be the guide any long , she be by the force of the tide showld before cast into a certain showld upon the shore of Caleis , c alei . where she be immediate assault by diverse english pinass , hoy , and drumbier . 
 and as they lie batter of she with their ordinance , and dare not board she , the lord admiral send thither his long boat with a hundred choice soldier under the command of captain Amias Preston . upon who m. Amias approach their fellow be more embolden , do offer ? restm to board the galliass : against who the governor iimrtigth fa thereof and captain of all the four galliass , Hugo galliass . de Moncada , stout oppose himself , fight by so much the more valiant , in that he hope present to be succour by the duke of Parma . in the mean season , Moncada , after he have endure the conflict a good while , be hit on the head with a bullet , fall down stark dead , and a great number of Spaniards also be slay in his company . the great part of the residue leap overboard into the sea , to save themselves by swim , be most of they drown . howbeit there escape among other don Anthonio de Manriques , a principali officer in the spanish fleet ( call by they their Veador general ) together with a few Spaniards beside : which Anthonio be the first man that carry certain news of the success of the fleet into Spain . 
 this huge and monstrous galliass , wherein be contain three hundred slave to lug at the oar , and four hundred soldier , be in the space of three hour rifle in the same place ; and there be find among diverse other commodity 50000 ducat of the spanish king treasure . at length when the slave be release out of 
 223 
 the great fight before greveling the 29. of July . 
 their fetter , the english man will have set the say ship on fire , which Monsieur Gourdon the governor of Caleis , for fear of the damage which may thereupon ensue to the town and haven , will not permit they to do , but drive they from thence with his great ordinance . 
 upon the 29 of July in the morning , the spanish fleet after the foresay tumult , have arrange themselves again into order , be , within sight of grevel , most brave and furious encounter by the english ; where they once again get the wind of the Spaniard : who suffer themselves to be deprive of the commodity of the place in Caleis ride , and of the advantage of the wind near unto dunkerk , rather than they will change their array or separate their force now conjoin and unite together , stand only upon their defence . 
 and albeit there be many excellent and warlike ship in the english fleet , yet scarce be there 22 or 23 among they all which match 90 of the spanish ship in bigness , or can convenient assault they . wherefore the english ship use their prerogative of nimble stirrage , whereby they can turn and wield themselves with the wind which way they list , come often time very near upon the Spaniard , and charge they so sore , that now and then they be but a pike length asunder : and so continual give they one broad side after another , they discharge all their shot both great and small upon they , spend one whole day from morning till night in that violent kind of conflict , until such time as powder and bullet fail they . in regard of which want they think it convenient not to pursue the Spaniard any long , because they have many great vantage of the english , namely for the extraordinary bigness of their ship , and also for that they be so near conjoin , and keep together in so good array , that they can by no mean be fight withal one to one . the english think therefore , that they have right well acquit themselves , in chase the Spaniard 
 224 
 the final battle off gravelines 20th July 1588 
 1588. first from Caleis , and then from dunkerk , and by that mean to have hinder they from join with the duke of Parma his force , and get the wind of they , to have drive they from their own coast . 
 the Spaniard that day sustain great loss and damage have many of their ship shoot through and thorough , and they discharge likewise great store of ordinance against the english ; who indeed sustain some hindrance , but not comparable to the Spaniard loss : for they lose not any one ship or person of account . for very diligent inquisition be make , the english man all that time wherein the spanish navy sail upon their sea , be not find to have want above one hundred of their people : albeit sir Francis drake ship be pierce with shot above forty time , and his very cabben be twice shoot through , and about the conclusion of the fight , the bed of a certain gentleman lie weary thereupon , be take quite from under he with the force of a bullet . likewise , as the earl of Northumberland and sir Charles blunt be at dinner upon a time , the bullet of a demi-culverin break through the midst of their cabin , touch their foot , and strike down two of the stander by , with many such accident befall the english ship , which it be tedious to rehearse . whereupon it be most apparent , that God miraculous preserve the english nation . for the lord admiral write unto her majesty that in all humane reason , and accord to the judgement of all man ( every circumstance be due consider ) the english man be not of any such force , whereby they may , without a miracle , dare once to approach within sight of the spanish fleet : insomuch that they free ascribe all the honour of their victory unto God , who have confound the enemy , and have bring his counsel to none effect . 
 the same day the spanish ship be so batter with three Spanish english shoot , that that very night and the day follow , hip sink two or three of they sink right down : and among 1n t } ie fight . 
 iv 225 p 
 two galleon take and cart into Beland . 
 the rest a certain great ship of Biscay , which captain cross assault , which perish even in the time of the conflict , so that very few therein escape drown ; who report that the governor of the same ship slay one another upon the occasion follow : one of they which will have yield the ship be sudden slay ; the brother of the slay party in revenge of his death slay the murderer , and in the mean while the ship sink . 
 the same night two Portugal galleon of the burden of seven or eight hundred ton a piece , to wit the saint Philip and the saint Matthew , be forsake of the spanish fleet , for they be so tear with shot , that the water enter into they on all side . in the galeon of saint Philip be Francis the Toledo , brother unto the count de Orgas , be colonel over two and thirty band : beside other gentleman ; who see their mast break with shot , they shape their course , as well as they can , for the coast of Flanders : whither when they can not attain , the principali man in the ship commit themselves to their skiff , arrive at the next town , which be Ostend ; and the ship it self be leave behind with the residue of their company , be take by the ulishinger . 
 in the other galeon , call the saint Matthew , be embark don Diego Pimentelli another campmaster and colonel of 32 band , be brother unto the mark of tamnare , with many other gentleman and captain . their ship be not very great , but exceed strong , for of a great number of bullet which have batter she , there be scarce 20 wherewith she be pierce or hurt : her upper work be of force sufficient to bear off a musket shoot : this ship be shoot through and pierce in the fight before grevel ; insomuch that the leakage of the water can not be stop : whereupon the duke of Medina send his great skiff unto the governor thereof , that he may save himself and the principal person that be in his ship : which he , upon a halt 
 226 
 courage , refuse to do : wherefore the duke charge he to sail next unto himself : which the night follow he can not perform , by reason of the great abundance of water which enter his ship on all side ; for the avoid whereof , and to save his ship from sink , he cause 50 man continual to labour at the pump , though it be to small purpose . And see himself thus forsake and separate from his admiral , he endeavour what he can to attain unto the coast of Flanders : where , be espy by 4 or 5 man of war , which have their station assign they upon the same coast , he be admonish to yield himself unto they . which he refuse to do , be strong assault by they altogether , and his ship be pierce with many bullet , be bring into far worse case than before , and 40 of his soldier be slay . by which extremity he be enforce at length to yield himself unto Peter banderduess and other captain , which bring he and his ship into Zealand ; and that other ship also last before mention : which both of they , immediate after the great and better part of their good be unlade , sink right down . 
 for the memory of this exploit , the foresay captain Banderduess cause the banner of one of these ship to be set up in the great church of leiden in holland , which be of so great a length , that be fasten to the very roof , it reach down to the ground . 
 about the same time another small ship be by a small ship necessity drive upon the coast of Flanders , about away Blankenberg , be cast away upon the sand , the people and therein be save . thus almighty God will have the Spaniard huge ship to be present , not only to the view of the english , but also of the zelander ; that at the sight of they they may acknowledge of what small ability they have be to resist such impregnable force , have not God endue they with courage , providence , and fortitude , yea , and fight for they in many place with his own arm . 
 227 
 the dishonour - than 29 of July the spanish fleet be encounter 
 able flight of English ( as be aforesaid ) and lie close together 
 under their fight sail , with a southwest wind sail prudent advice past dunkerk , the english ship still follow the chase . of the lord ad - of who the day follow when the Spaniard have get mirall . sea roomej they cut their main sail ; whereby they sufficient declare that they mean no long to fight but to fly . for which cause the lord admiral of England dispatch the lord Henry Seymer with his squadron of small ship unto the coast of Flanders , where , with the help of the dutch ship , he may stop the prince of Parma his passage , if perhaps he shall attempt to issue forth with his army . and he himself in the mean space pursue the spanish fleet until the second of August , because he think they have set sail for Scotland . and albeit he follow they very near , yet do he not assault they any more , for want of powder and bullet . but upon the four of August , the wind arise , when as the Spaniard have spread all their sail , betake themselves whole to flight , and leave Scotland on the left hand , trend towards Norway , ( whereby they sufficient declare that their whole intent be to save themselves by flight , attempt for that purpose , with their batter and craze ship , the most dangerous navigation of the northern sea ) the english see that they be now proceed unto the latitude of 57 degree , and be unwilling to participate that danger whereinto the Spaniard plunge themselves , and because they want thing necessary , and especial powder and shot , 
 the english return back for England ; leave behind they r^urne h01 ™ certain pinass only , which they enjoin to follow suit of the Spaniard aloof , and to observe their course . and 
 Spaniard the so it come to pass that the four of August , with great 4 of August , danger and industry , the english arrive at Harwich : for they have be toss up and down with a mighty tempest for the space of two or three day together , which it be likely do great hurt unto the spanish fleet , be ( as i say before ) so maim and batter . the 228 
 english now go on shore , provide themselves forthwith of victual , gunpowder , and other thing expedient , that they may be ready at all assay to entertain the spanish fleet , if it chance any more to return . but be afterward more certain inform of the Spaniard course , they think it best to leave they unto those boisterous and uncouth northern sea , and not there to hunt after they . 
 the Spaniard see now that they want four or five thousand of their people and have diverse maim and sick person , and likewise have lose io or 12 of their principali ship , they consult among themselves , what they be best to do , be now escape out of the hand of the english , because their victual fail they in like sort , and they begin also to want cable , cordage , anchor , mast , sail , and other naval furniture , and utter despair of the duke of Parma his assistance ( who very hope and undoubted expect the return of the spanish fleet , be continual occupy about his great preparation , command abundance of anchor to be make , and other necessary furniture for a navy to be provide ) they think it good at length , so soon as the wind shall serve they , to fetch a compass about Scotland and Ireland , and so to return for Spain . 
 for they well understand , that commandment be give throughout all Scotland , that they shall not have any succour or assistance there . neither yet can they in Norway supply their want . wherefore , have take certain Scotisfi and other fisherboat , they bring the man on board their own ship , to the end they may be their guide and pilot . fear also lest their fresh water shall fail they , they cast all their horse and mule overboard : and so touch no where upon the coast of Scotland , but be carry with a fresh gale between the Orcades and faar-isle , they proceed far north , even unto 61 degree of latitude , be distant from any land at the least 40 league . here the 
 229 
 the Spaniard consult to sail round about Scotland and Ireland , and so to return home . 
 duke of Medina generail of the fleet command all his follower to shape their course for Biscay : and he himself with twenty or five and twenty of his ship which be best provide of fresh water and other necessary , hold on his course over the main ocean , return safe home . the residue of his ship be about forty in number , and commit unto his viceadmiral , fall near with the coast of Ireland , intend their course for cape Clare , because they hope there to get fresh water , and to refresh themselves on land . but after they be drive with many contrary wind , the ship - at length , upon the second of September , they be ■ m-acke of the cast y a tempest arise from the southwest upon diverse upon^he^rish part °f Ireland , where many of their ship perish . coast . and among other , the ship of Michael de Oquendo , which be one of the great Galliasses : and two great ship of Venice also , namely , la Ratta and Belanzara , with other 36 or 38 ship more , which perish in sundry tempest , together with most of the person contain in they . 
 likewise some of the spanish ship be the second time carry with a strong west wind into the channel of England , whereof some be take by the english upon their coast , and other by the man of rochel upon the coast of France . 
 moreover , there arrive at Newhaven in Normandy , be by tempest enforce so to do , one of the four great Galliasses , where they find the ship with the spanish woman which follow the fleet at their set forth . two ship also be cast away upon the coast of Norway , one of they be of a great burden ; howbeit all the person in the say great ship be of ship save : insomuch that of 134 ship , which set sail out ° { et'th ” re p°rtugahj there return home 53 only small and 
 turn how it great : namely the four galliass but one , and but but 53. one of the four galley . of the 91 great galleon and hulk there be miss 58 , and 33 return : of the patache and zabrae 17 be miss , and 18 return 
 230 
 home . in brief , there be miss 81 ship , in which number be galliass , galley , galleon , and other vessel both great and small . and among the 53 ship remain , those also be reckon which return home before they come into the english channel . two galleon of those which be return , be by misfortune burn as they ride in the haven ; and such like mishap do many other undergo . of 30000 person which go in this expedition , there perish ( accord to the number and proportion of the ship ) the great and better part ; and many of they which come home , by reason of the toil and it inconvenience which they sustain in this voyage , die not long after their arrival . the duke of Medina immediate upon his return be depose from his authority , command to his private house , and forbid to repair unto the court ; where he can hardly satisfy or yield a reason unto his malicious enemy and backbiter . many honourable personage and man of great renown decease soon after their return ; as namely John Martin de recall , with diverse other . a great part also of the spanish nobility and gentry employ in this expedition perish either by fight , disease , or drown , before their arrival ; and among the rest Thomas perenot of granduell a Dutchman , be earl of Cantebroi , and son unto Cardinali granduell his brother . 
 upon the coast of Zealand don Diego de Pimen tell , brother unto the mark de Tamnares , and kinsman unto the earl of Beneventum and Calva , and colonel over 32 band with many other in the same ship be take and detain as prisoner in Zealand . 
 into England ( as we say before ) don Pedro de Valdez , a man of singular experience , and great honour in his country , be lead captive , be accompany with don Vasquez de Silva , don Alonzo de Sayas , and other . 
 likewise upon the Scotish western isle of Lewis , and Ila , and about cape Cantyre upon the main land , 231 
 there be cast away certain spanish ship , out of which be save diverse captain and gentleman , and almost four hundred soldier , who for the most part , after their shipwreck , be bring unto Edinburgh in Scotland , and be miserable needy and naked , be there clothe at the liberality of the king and the merchant , and afterward be secret ship for Spain ; but the Scotish fleet wherein they pass touch at Yarmouth on the coast of Norfolk , be there stay for a time until the counsel pleasure be know ; who in regard of their manifold misery , though they be enemy , wink at their passage . 
 upon the irish coast many of their nobleman and gentleman be drown ; and diverse slay by the barbarous and wild irish . howbeit there be bring prisoner out of Ireland , don Alonzo de Lu^on , colonel of two and thirty band , common call a terza of Naples ; together with Rodorigo de Lasso , and two other of the family of Cordova , who be commit unto the custody of sir Horatio Palavicini , that Monsieur de Teligny the son of monsieur de la notie ( who be take in fight near Antwerp , be detain prisoner in the castle of Turney ) may be ransome for they by way of exchange . to conclude , there be no famous nor worthy family in all Spain , which in this expedition lose not a son , a brother , or a kinse - 
 man . 
 new coin stamp fir the memory of the Spaniard overthrow . 
 for the perpetuali memory of this matter , the zelander cause new coin of silver and brass to be stamp : which on the one side contain the arm of Zealand , with this inscription : glory to God only : and on the other side , the picture of certain great ship , with these word : the spanish fleet : and in the circumference about the ship : it come , go , and was . anno 1588. that be to say , the spanish fleet come , go , and be vanquish this year ; for which , glory be give to God only . 
 232 
 compass and breech-loading gun from the spanish GALLEON ‘ FLORENCIA ’ find in Tobermory bay June I903 
 likewise they coin another kind of money ; upon the one side whereof be represent a ship flee , and a ship sink : on the other side four man make prayer and give thank unto God upon their knee ; with this sentence : man purpose ; God dispose . 1588. also , for the last memory of the same matter , they have stamp in holland diverse such like coin , accord to the custom of the ancient roman . 
 while this wonder and puissant navy be sail the people of along the english coast , and all man do now plain tnglandandof see and hear that which before they will not be per - v-tnceh swade of , all people throughout England prostrate fast , and give themselves with humble prayer and supplication unto thank unto God : but especial the outlandish church ( who have god-great cause to fear , and against who by name , the Spaniard have threaten most grievous torment ) enjoined to their people continual fast and supplication , that they may turn away God wrath and fury now imminent upon they for their sin : know right well , that prayer be the only refuge against all enemy , calamity , and necessity , and that it be the only solace and relief for mankind , be visit with affliction and misery . likewise such solemn day of supplication be observe throughout the unite province . 
 also a while after the spanish fleet be depart , there be in England , by the commandment of her majesty , and in the unite province , by the direction of the state , a solemn festival day public appoint , wherein all person be enjoin to resort unto the church , and there to render thank and praise unto God : and the preacher be command to exhort the people thereunto . the foresay solemnity be observe upon the 29 of November ; which day be whole spend in fast , prayer , and give of thank . 
 likewise , the queen majesty herself , imitate the ancient roman , ride into London in triumph , in regard of her own and her subject glorious deliverance . for be attend upon very solemn by all the principali 
 233 
 estate and officer of her realm , she be carry through she say city of London in a triumphant chariot , and in robe of triumph , from her palace unto the cathedral church of saint Paul , out of the which the ensign and colour of the vanquish Spaniards hang display . and all the citizen of London in their livery stand on either side the street , by their several company , with their ensign and banner : and the street be hang on both side with blue cloth , which , together with the foresay banner , yield a very stately and gallant prospect . her majesty be enter into the church , together with her clergy and noble give thank unto God , and cause a public sermon to be preach before she at Paul cross ; wherein none other argument be handle , but that praise , honour , and glory may be render unto God , and that god name may be extol by thanksgiving . and with her own princely voice she most christianly exhort the people to do the same : whereupon the people with a loud acclamation wish she a most long and happy life , to the confusion of her foe . 
 thus the magnificent , huge , and mighty fleet of the Spaniard ( which themselves term in all place invincible ) such as sail not upon the ocean sea many hundred year before , in the year 1588 vanish into smoke ; to the great confusion and discouragement of the author thereof . in regard of which her majesty happy success all her neighbour and friend congratulate with she , and many verse be pen to the honour of her majesty by learned man , whereof some which come to our hand we will here annex . 
 ’34 
 ad serenissimam ELIZABETHAM anglic reginam . 
 THEODOR . BEZA . 
 traverat innumeris Hispanus navibus aequor , Regnis juncturus sceptra Britanna suis . 
 tanti huius , rogitas , quae motus causa ? superbos 
 impulit ambitio , vexit avaritia . 
 quam bene te ambitio mersit vanissima ventus ? 
 et tumidos tumidae vos superasti aquae ! 
 quam bene totius raptores orbis avaros , hausit inexhausti justa vorago maris encage at tu , cvi venti , cvi totum militat aequor , regina , d mundi totius una , decus , sic regnare deo pergo , ambition remota , Prodiga sic opibus pergo juvare pios , 
 ut te Angli longum , longiim Anglis ipsa fruaris , quam dilecta bonis , tam metuenda malis . 
 the same in english . 
 the spanish fleet do float in narrow sea , and bend her ship against the english shore , with so great rage as nothing can appease , and with such strength as never see before : and all to join the kingdom of that land unto the kingdom that he have in hand . 
 now if you ask what set this king on fire , to practise war when he of peace do treat , it be his pride , and never quench desire , to spoil that island wealth , by peace make great : his pride which far above the heaven do swell , and his desire as unsuffic’d as hell . 
 but well have wind his proud blast overblow , and swell wave allay his swell heart , well have the sea with greedy gulf unknow , devour the devourer to his smart : 
 and make his ship a prey unto the sand , that mean to pray upon another land . 
 235 
 and now , oh queen , above all other bless , for who both wind and wave be press to fight , so rule your own , so succour friend oppress , ( as far from pride , as ready to do right ) 
 that England you , you England long enjoy , no less your friend delight , than foe annoy . 
 . 