a second testimony of the foresay Sighelmus his voyage unto saint Thomas of India etc out of William of Malmesbury his second book de gestis pontificum anglorum , cap . de episcopis schireburnensibus , salisburiensibus , wil-tunensibus . 
 the same in english . 
 sighelmus be for the performance of the king alm send beyond the sea , and travail unto saint Thomas of India , very prosperous ( which a man will wonder at in this age ) pass through the say country of India , and return home bring with he diverse strange and precious stone , such as that climate afford . many of which stone be as yet extant in the monument of the church . 
 the life and travail of John Erigena . 
 literis graecis , chaldaicis , and arabicis insudavit : 
 [ il i . 
 omnia 
 280 
 the same in english . 
 JOhn Erigene a Britain , descend of honourable parent , and bear in the town of S. David in Wales , see the Englishman to be oppress with the war and rapine of the cruel Dane , and all the land in a hurly burly , he in the mean time undertook a long journey , even as far as Athens , and there spend many year in the study of the greek , Chaidie , and arabian tongue : he there frequent all the place and school of the philosopher , and the oracle also of the sun , which Aesculapius have build unto himself . and have find at length that which he have with long travel search , he return again into Italy , and France , where for his singular learning , he be much favour of the two king Charles and Lewes , and in his be there , he translate into latin the book of Dionysius Areopagita concern the heavenly hierarchic , which be send from Constantinople in the year 858. after this he come back again into his own country , and be schoolmaster unto Alphred then king of England , and his son : and upon his request , at his time of leisure , he translate Aristotle moral , of the secret of secret , or of the right government of prince , out of greek into these three tongue , chaidie , arabian , and latin , 281 
 a . d 
 858. 
 which he do very exquisite . at the last , be in the Abbie of Malmsburie , whither he go for his recreation , and there accord to his manner dispute , and read to the student , some of they mislike and hate he , rise against he , and slay he in the year of Christ , 884. 
 . 