a fleet of Englishman , Dane , and Fleming , arrive at Joppa in the holy land , the seven year of Baldwine the second king of Jerusalem . write in the begin of the ten book of the chronicle of Jerusalem , in the 8. year of Henry the first of England . 
 Cap. 1. 
 t the same time also in the seven year of the reign of Baldwine the catholic king of Jerusalem , a very great warlike fleet of the catholic nation of England , to the number of about seven thousand , have with they more man of war of the kingdom of Denmark , 
 of Flanders and of Antwerp , arrive with ship which they call buss , at the haven of the city of Japhet , determine there to make their abode , until they have obtain the king licence and safeconduct , may safe worship at Jerusalem . of which navy the chief and best speak repair to the king , speak to he in this manner . Christ preserve the king life , and prosper his kingdom from day to day ; we , be man and soldier of christian profession , have , through the help of God , sail hither through mighty and large sea , from the far country of England , Flanders , and Denmark , to worship at Jerusalem , and to visit the sepulchre of our lord . and therefore we be assemble to entreat your clemency touch the matter , that by your favour and safe conduct we may peaceable go up to Jerusalem , and worship there , and so return . 
 301 
 [ ii i . 14. ] 
 [ Chap. 2. 
 the king favourable hear their whole petition , grant unto they a strong band of man to conduct they , which bring they safe from all assault and ambush of the gentile by the know way unto Jerusalem and all other place of devotion . after that these pilgrim , and new christian stranger be bring thither , they offer unto our lord their vow in the temple of the holy sepulchre , return with great joy , and without all let unto Joppa ; where find the king , they vow that they will assist he in all thing , which shall seem good unto he : who , great commend the man , and command they to be well entertain with hospitality , answer that he can not on the sudden answer to this point , until that after he have call his noble together , he have consult with my lord the patriarch what be most meet and convenient to be do , and not to trouble in vain so willing a army . and therefore after a few day , call unto he my lord the patriarch , Hugh of Tabaria , Gunfride the keeper and lieutenant of the tower of David , and the other chief man of war , he determine to have a meeting in the city of rames , to consult with they what be best to be do . 
 Chap. 3. 
 who , be assemble at the day appoint , and propose their diverse opinion and judgement , at length it seem best unto the whole company to besiege the city Sagitta , which be also call Sidon , if peradventure , through god help , and by the strength of this new army , by land and sea it may be overcome . whereupon all they which be there present , and require that this city shall be besiege , because it be one of those city of the gentile which continual rebel , be commend , and admonish of the king every one to go home , and to furnish them-302 
 self with thing necessary , and armour for this expedition . every one of they depart home ; likewise huge of Tabaria depart , be a chief man of war against the invasion of the enemy , which can never be weary day nor night in the county of the pagan , in pursue they with war and warlike stratagem all the day of his life . immediate after this consultation the king send ambassador to all the multitude of the english man , require they not to remove their camp nor fleet from the city of Japhet , but quiet to attend the king further commandment . the same ambassador also declare unto the whole army , that the king and all his nobility have determine to besiege and assault the city Sagitta by sea and by land , and that their help and force will there be needful ; and that for this purpose , the king and the patriarch be come down unto the city of acre , and that they be in building of engine , and warlike instrument , to invade the wall and inhabitant thereof : and that in the mean season they be to remain at Japhet , until the king further commandment be know . whereupon they all agree that it shall so be do according to the king commandment ; and answer that they will attend his direction in the haven of Japhet , and will in all point be obedient unto he unto the death . 
 Chap. 4. 
 the king come down to acre with the patriarch , and all his family , building , and make there by the space of forty day engine , and many kind of warlike instrument : and appoint all thing to be make perfect ready , which seem to be most convenient for the assault of the city . assoon as this purpose and intent of the king be come unto the ear of the inhabitant of Sagitta , and that a invincible power of man of war be arrive at Japhet to help the king , they be great astonish , fear that 
 303 
 by this mean , they shall be consume and subdue by the king by dint of sword , as other city , to wit , Caesaria , Assur , acre , Cayphas , and Tabaria be vanquish and subdue . and therefore lay their head together , they promise to the king by secret mediator , a mighty mass of money of a coin call byzantine : and that further they will yearly pay a great tribute , upon condition that cease to besiege and invade their city , he will spare their life . whereupon these business be handle from day to day between the king and the citizen , and they solicit the king for the ransome both of their city and of their life , proffer he from time to time more great gift . and the king for his part , be careful and [ ii i . 15. ] perplex for the payment of the wage which he ought unto his soldier , hearken whole unto this offer of money . howbeit because he fear the christian , lest they shall lay it to his charge as a fault , he dare not as yet meddle with the same . 
 Chap. 5. 
 in the mean space Hugh of Tabaria be send for , accompany with the troop of two hundred horseman and four hundred footman , invade the country of the gross carl call suet , very rich in gold and silver most abundant in cattle fronter upon the country of the damascene , where he take a prey of inestimable riches and cattle , which may have suffice he for the besiege of Sagitta , whereof he mean to impart liberal to the king , and his company . this prey be gather out of sundry place thereabouts , and be lead away as far as the city of belinas , which they call Caesaria Philippi , the Turk which dwell at Damascus , together with the Saracen inhabitant of the country perceive this , flock on all part together by troop , pursue Hugh company to rescue the prey , and pass forth as far as the mountain , over which Hugh footman do drive the prey . 
 3°4 
 there begin a great skirmish of both part , the one side make resistance to keep the prey , the other endeavour with all their might to recover it , until at length the Turk and Saracens prevail , the prey be rescue and bring back again : which Hugh and his troop of horseman , sudden understand , which be on the side of the mountain , incontinent rid back upon the spur , among the straight and craggy rock , skirmish with the enemy , and succour their footman , but as it chance they fight unfortunate . for Hugh , be unarm , and immediate rush into the midst of all danger , and after his wont manner invade and wound the infidel , be behind with a arrow shoot through the back which pierce through his liver and breast , he give up the ghost in the hand of his own people . hereupon the troop of the Gentiles be return with the recover prey , and be divide through the secret and hard passage of the craggy hill , the soldier bring the dead body of Hugh , which they have put in a litter , into the city of Nazareth , which be by the mount Thaber , where with great mourning and lamentation , so worthy a prince , and valiant champion be honourable and catholic inter . the brother of the say Hugh name Gerrard , the same time lie sick of a grievous disease . which hear of the death of his brother , his sickness of his body increase more vehement through grief , he also decease within eight day after , and be bury by his brother , after christian manner . 
 Chap. 6. 
 after the lamentable burial of these so famous prince , the king , take occasion of the death of these principali man of his army , agree , make none privy thereto , to receive the money which be offer he for his differ off the siege of the city of Sagitta , yet dissemble to make peace with the sara-w 305 u 
 A.D. 
 1107. 
 cens , but that he mean to go through with the work , that he have begin . whereupon send a message unto Japhet , he advise the english soldier to come down to acre with their fleet , and to confer and consult with he touch the besiege and assault of the city of Sagitta , which rise immediate upon the king commandment , and forthwith hoist up the sail of their ship aloft with pendant and stremer of purple , and diverse other glorious colour , with their flag of scarlet colour and silk , come thither , and cast their ancres , ride hard by the city . the king the next day call unto he such as be privy and acquaint with his deal , open his grief unto the chief captain of the english man and Dane , touch the slaughter of Hugh , and the death of his brother , and what great confidence he repose in they concern these war : and that now therefore they be depart and dead , he must of necessity differre the besiege of Sagitta , and for this time dismiss the army assemble . this resolution of the king be spread among the people , the army be dissolve , and the Englishman , Dane and Fleming , with sail and oar go aboard their fleet , salute the king , and return home unto their native country . 
 . 