a letter write from Manuel the emperor of Constantinople , unto Henry the second king of England , anno Dom. 1177. wherein mention be make that certain of king Henry noble man and subject be present with the say emperor in a battle of he against the sultan of Iconium . record by Roger Hoveden , in annalium parte posteriore , in regno hen . 2. folio 316 , and 317. 
 312 
 313 
 314 
 the same in english . 
 in the year 1177 , Manuel the emperor of Constantinople have fight a field with the sultan of Iconium , and vanquish he , write unto Henry the second king of England in manner follow . 
 Manuel Comnenus in Christ the everliving God a faithful emperor , descend of the lineage of Porphyry , crown by God grace , high , puissant , mighty , always most sovereign , and governor of the roman ; unto Henry the most famous king of England , his most dear friend , greeting and all good success . whereas our imperiali highness think it expedient to advertise you our well-beloved friend of all our affair : we think it not amiss to signify unto your royal majesty certain exploit at this present achieve by we . from the beginning therefore of our inauguration 
 315 
 our imperiali highness have maintain most deadly feod and hostility against God enemy the persian , see they so to triumph over Christians , to exalt themselves against the name of God , and to usurp over christian kingdom . for which cause our imperiali highness have in some sort encounter they heretofore , and do as it please God to give we grace . and we suppose that your majesty be not ignorant , what our imperiali highness have often perform for their ruin and subversion . for even now , be urge thereunto , we have determine to lead a mighty army against they , and to wage war against all Persia . and albeit our force be not so great as we can wish they be , yet have we accord to the time , and the present state of thing , strong invade they . wherefore our majesty imperiali have gather our army together : but because we have in our army sundry cart lade with armour , engine , and other instrument for the assault of city , to a exceed weight we can not make any great speed in our journey . Moreover , while our imperiali highness be yet march in our own dominion , before any barbarous enemy have fight against we : our people be visit with the most grievous disease of the flux , which be disperse in our troop destroy and slay great number , more than the sword of the enemy will have do . which mischief so prevail , do wonderful abate our force . but after we have invade the turkish frontier , we have at the first very often and hot skirmish , and the turk come swarm to fight against our imperiali troop . howbeit by god assistance those miscreant be altogether scatter and put to flight by our soldier . but as we approach unto that straight passage which be call by the persian cibrilcimam , so many band of persian footman and horseman ( most whereof come from the innermost part of Persia , to succour their ally ) encounter our army , as be almost superior unto we in number . wherefore the army of our 
 316 
 imperiali highness , by reason of the straightness and difficulty of the way , be stretch ten mile in length ; and the first not be able to help the last , nor yet contrariwise the last to rescue the first , it come to pass that they be very far distant asunder . and in very deed the foremost troop be much separate from the guard of our imperiali person , who forget their fellow behind , will not stay any whit for they . because therefore the turkish band know full well by their former conflict that it be bootless for they to assail the forefront of our battle , and perceive the narownesse of the place to be a great advantage , they determine to set upon our rearward , and do so . wherefore our passage be very straight , and the infidel assail we upon the right hand and upon the left , and on all side , and discharge their weapon as thick as hailstone against we , slay diverse of our man and horse . hereupon , the slaughter of our people still increase our majesty imperiali deem it requisite to stay behind , and to succour our band in the rearward , and so expect they we sustain the fierce encounter of many thousand persian . what exploit our Imperiali person achieve in the same skirmish , i hold it needless at this time to recount : your majesty may perhaps understand more of this matter by they which be there present . howbeit our imperiali highness be in the midst of this conflict , and endure the fight with so great danger , all our hindermost troop , both greek , Latines , and other nation , retire themselves close together , and not be able to suffer the violence of their enemy weapon , press on so hard , and be carry with such main force , that hasten to ascend the next hill for their better safeguard , they urge on they which go before , whether they will or no . whereupon , much dust be raise , which stop our eye and utter deprive we of sight , and our man and horse press so sore one upon the neck of another , plunge they - 
 317 
 self on the sudden into such a steep and dangerous valley , that tread one upon another , they quell to death not only a multitude of the common soldier , but diverse most honourable personage , and some of our near kinsman . for who can restrain the irresistible throng of so huge a multitude ? howbeit our imperiali highness be environ with such swarm of infidel , and give and receive wound ( insomuch that the miscreant be great dismay at our constancy ) we give not over , but by god assistance win the field . neither do we permit the enemy to ascend unto that place , from whence we skirmish with he . neither yet spur we on our horse any fast for all their assault . but marshal all our troop together , and deliver they out of danger , we dispose they about our imperial person ; and so we overtake the foremost , and march in good order with our whole army . now the sultan perceive that notwithstanding the great damage which we have sustain , our imperial highness provide to give he a fresh encounter , humble submit himself unto we , and use submiss speech , make suit to have peace at our hand , and promise to fulfil the pleasure of our majesty Imperiali , to do we service against all comer , to release all our subject which be captive in his realm , and to rest whole at our command . here therefore we remain two day with great authority ; and consider that we iconitmin cou^ attempt nought against the city of Iconium , have tend have ost our warlike engine both for defence and for bene besiege , battery , for that the ox which draw they be slay with the enemy weapon , fall as thick as hailstone : and also for because all our beast in a manner be most grievous disease ; our majesty imperial accept of the sultan petition , league , and oath be make and take under our ensign , and grant our peace unto he . then return we into our own dominion , be great grieve for the loss of our dear kinsman , and yield unto God most humble 318 
 1190. thank , who of his goodness have even now give we the victory . we be right glad likewise that some of your certaim noble majesty prince and noble accompany we in this mtnofthektng action , who be able to report unto you all thing which fa 
 have happen . and albeit we be exceed grieve emperor in for the loss of our people ; yet think it our expedient his battle to signify unto you the success of our affair , as unto gfl^tthe&ol-our well-beloved friend , and one who be very near ally anoflcmwm-unto our highness imperial , by reason of the consanguinity of our child . farewell . give in the month of November , and upon the ten indiction . 
 . 