the worthy voyage of Richard the first , king of England into Asia , for the recovery of Jerusalem out of the hand of the Saracen , draw out of the book of act and monument of the church of England , write by m. John fox . 
 king Richard the first of that name , for his great valour surname ceur de lion , the son of Henry the second , after the death of his father 
 remember the rebellion that he have undutiful raise against he , seek for absolution of his trespass , and in part of satisfaction for the same , agree with Philip the [ ii i . 21. ] French king to take his voyage with he for the recovery of Christ patrimony , which they call the holy land , whereupon the say king Richard immediate after his coronation , to prepare himself the better towards his journey , use diverse mean to take up sum of money , and exact a ten of the whole realm , the Christians to make threescore and ten thousand pound , and the Jew which then dwell in the realm threescore thousand . 
 have thus get sufficient money for the exploit , he send certain earl and baron to fillip the french king in the time of his parliament at saint Denis , to put he in mind of his promise make for the recovery of 
 319 
 u the oath of fidelity betwixt king Richard , and the french king . 
 the discipline and order of the king . 
 Christ holy patrimony out of the Saracen hand : to who he send word again in the month of December , that he have bind himself by solemn oath , depose upon the evangelist , that he the year next follow , about the time of easter , have certain prefix to address himself towards that journey , require he likewise not to fail , but to be ready at the term above limit , appoint also the place where both the king shall meet together . 
 in the year therefore 1190. king Richard have commit the government of this realm in his absence to the bishop of Ely then chancellor of England , advance forward his journey , and come to Turon to meet with Philip the french king , and after that go to Vizeliac , where the french king and he join together , for the more continuance of their journey , assure themselves by solemn oath , swear fidelity one to the other : the form of who oath be this . 
 that either of they shall defend and maintain the honour of the other , and bear true fidelity unto he , of life , member and worldly honour , and that neither of they shall fail one the other in their affair : but the french king shall aid the king of England in defend his land and dominion , as he will himself defend his own city of Paris if it be besiege : and that Richard king of England likewise shall aid the french king in defend his land and dominion , no otherwise then he will defend his own city of roan if it be besiege , etc 
 concern the law and ordinance appoint by king Richard for his navy , the form thereof be this . 
 1. that who so kill any person on shipboard , shall be tie with he that be slay , and throw into the sea . 
 2. and if he kill he on the land , he shall in like manner be tie with the party slay , and be bury with he in the earth . 
 320 
 3. he that shall convict by lawful witness to draw out his knife or weapon to the intent to strike any man , or that have strike any to the draw of blood , shall loose his hand . 
 4. also he that strike any person with his hand without effusion of blood , shall be plunge three time in the sea . 
 5. item , who so speak any opprobrious or contumelious word in revile or curse one another , for so oftentimes as he have revile , shall pay so many ounce of silver . 
 6. item , a thief or felon that have steal be lawful convict , shall have his head shear , and boil pitch pour upon his head , and feather or down straw upon the same , whereby he may be know , and so at the first land place they shall come to , there to be cast up . 
 these thing thus order , king Richard send his navy by the spanish sea , and by the strait of Gibraltar , between Spain and Africa , to meet he at Marsilia , he himself go as be say to Vizeliac to the french king . which two king from thence go to lion , where the bridge over the flood Rhodanus with press of people break , and many both man and woman be drown : by occasion whereof the two king for the combrance of their train , be constrain to dissever themselves for time of their journey , appoint both to meet together in Sicily : and so fillip the french king take his way to Genua , and king Richard to Marsilia , where he remain 8. day , appoint there his navy to meet he . from thence cross over to Genua where the french king be , he pass forward by the coast of Italy , and enter into Tiber not far from room . 
 king Richard stay in Marsilia 8. day for his navy which come not , he there hire 20. galley , and ten great bark to ship over his man , and so come to Naples , and so partly by horse and wagon , and partly by iv 321 ten 
 the sea , pass to Falernum , come to Calabria , where after that he have hear that his ship be arrive at Messana in Sicily , he make the more speed , and so the 23. of September enter Messana with such a noise of trumpet and shaum , with such a rout and show , that it be to the great wonderment and terror both of the Frenchman , and of all other that do hear and behold the sight . 
 [ ii i . 22. ] to the say town of Messana the french king be come before the 16. of the same month of September , and have take up the palace of Tancredus king of Sicily for his lodging : to who king Richard after his arrival ! eftsoon resort , and when the two king have commune together , immediate the french king take ship and enter the sea , think to sail towards the land of Jerusalem : but after he be out of the haven , the wind rise contrary against he , return he back again to Messana . then king Richard ( who lodging be prepare in the suburb without the city ) after he have resort again and talk with the french king , and also have send to Tancredus king of Sicily , for deliverance of Joan his sister ( who have be sometime queen of Sicily ) and have obtain she to be send unto he , the last day of September pass over the strait deal fare , and there get a strong hold call de la baguare , or le bamare , and there place his sister with a sufficient garrison , he return again to Messana . 
 the 2. of October king Richard win another strong hold , call monasterium griffonum , situate in you midst of the strait deal fare , between Messana and Calabria , from whence you monk be expulse , he repose there all his store and provision of victual , which come from England or other place . 
 the citizen of Messana see that the king of England have win the castle and island de le baguare , and also the monastery of the griffon , and doubt least the king will extend his power further to invade their city , and get if he can the whole isle of Sicily , 
 322 
 begin to stir against the king army , and to shut the Englishman out of the gate , and keep their wall against they . the Englishman see that , make to the gate , and by force will have break they open , insomuch that the king ride among they with his staff , and break diverse of their head , can not assuage their fierceness , such be the rage of the Englishman against the citizen of Messana . the king see the fury of his people to be such that he can not stay they , take boat , and go to the palace of king Tancred , to talk of the matter with the french king , in which mean time the matter be so take up by the wise handle of the ancient of the city , that both part lay down their armour , go home in peace . 
 the four day of the say month of October , come to king Richard the archbishop of Messana with two other archbishop also with the french king , and sundry other earl , baron , and bishop , to entreat of peace , who as they be together consult , and have almost conclude upon the peace , the citizen of Messana issue out of the town , some go up upon the mountain , some with open force invade the mansion or lodging of Hugh Brune a english captain . the noise whereof come to the ear of the king , he sudden break off talk with the french king and the rest , depart from they , and come to his man , command they forthwith to arm themselves . who then with certain of his soldier make up to the top of the mountain ( which seem to pass their power to climb ) there put the citizen to flight , chase they down the mountain , unto the very gate of the city , who also certain of the king servant pursue into the city , of who five valiant soldier and twenty of the king servant be slay , the french king look upon , and not once will to rescue they , contrary to his oath , and league before make with the king of England : for the french king with his man 
 323 
 A.D. 
 ii90 . 
 be there present , ride in the midst of they safe , and without any harm too and fro , and may well have ease the king party , more than he , if it have so like he .. 
 this be know to the english host how their fellow be slay , and the Frenchman permit in the city , and that they be exclude and the gate bar against they , be also stop from buy of victuali , and other thing , they upon great indignation gather themselves in arm , brace open the gate , and scale the wall , and so win the city , set up their flag with the english arm upon the wall : which when the french king do see , he be mighty offend , require the king of England that the arm of France may also be set up , and join with his : but king Richard to that will in no case agree , notwithstanding to satisfy his mind , he be content to take down his arm , and to commit the custody of the city to the hospitalary and templary of Jerusalem , till the time that Tancred king of Sicily and he shall agree together upon condition . 
 these thing be do the five and sixth day of October , it follow then upon the eight day of the same , that peace be conclude among the king . in which peace , first king Richard , and fillip the french king renew again their oath and league before make , concern their mutual aid and society , during the time of that peregrination . 
 second , peace also be conclude between king Richard and Tancred king of Sicily aforesaid , with condition , that the daughter of tancrede in case king Richard shall die without issue , shall be marry to Arthur duke of Britain the king nephew and next heir to his crown , whereof a formali chart be draw , and letter send thereof to pope Clement be date the nine of November . 
 from this time until February the next year these two king keep still at Messana , either for lack of 
 324 
 wind and weather , or for the repair of their ship . and in the aforesaid February , in the year 1191. king Richard send over his galley to Naples , there to meet his mother Elinore , and Berengaria the daughter of zanctius king of Navarre , who he be purpose to marry , who by that time be come to Brundisium , under the conduct of Philip earl of Flanders , and so proceed unto Naples , they find the king ship wherein they sail to Messana . 
 in this mean space , king Richard show himself exceed bounteous and liberali to all man : to the french king first he give diverse ship , upon other likewise he bestow rich reward , and of kiss treasure and good he distribute large to his soldier and servant about he , of who it be report , that he distribute more in one month , than any of his predecessor do in a whole year : by reason whereof he purchase great love and favour , which not only redound to the advancement of his fame , but also to his singular use and profit , as the sequel afterward prove . 
 the first day of march follow , he leave the city of Messana , where the french king be , and go to Cathneia , a city where Tancredus king of Sicily then lie , where he be honorable receive , and there remain with king Tancredus three day and three night . on the four day when he shall depart , the aforesaid Tancredus offer he many rich present in gold and silver , and precious silk , whereof king Richard will receive nothing , but one little ring for a token of his good will : for the which king Richard give again unto he a rich sword . at length when king Richard shall take his leave , king Tancred will not let he so depart , but needs will give he 4. great ship , and 15. galley , and furthermore he himself will needs accompany he the space of two day journey , to a place call Tavernium . 
 then the next morning when they shall take their leave , Tancredus declare unto he the message , which 
 325 
 the french king a little before have send unto he by the duke of Burgundy , the content whereof be these : that the king of England be a false traitor , and will never keep the peace that be between they : and if the say Tancredus will war against he , or secret by night will invade he , he with all his power will assist he , to the destruction of he and all his army . to who Richard the king protest again , that he be no traitor , nor never have be : and as touch the peace begin betwixt they , the same shall never be break through he : neither can he believe that the french king be his good lord , and his swear compartner in that voyage , will utter any such word by he . which when Tancredus hear , he bring forth the letter of the french king , send to he by the duke of Burgundy , affirm moreover , that if the duke of Burgundy will deny the bring of the say letter , he be ready to try it with he by any of his duke . king Richard receive the letter , and muse not a little upon the same , return again to Messana . the same day that king Richard depart , the french king come to Tavernium to speak with Tancred , and there abide with he that night , and on the morrow return to Messana again . 
 from that time king Richard move in stomach against king Philip , never show any gentle countenance of peace and amity , as he before be wont : whereat the french king great marvel , and inquire earnest what shall be the cause thereof , word be send he again by Philip earl of Flanders from king Richard , what word he have send to the king of Sicily , and for testimony thereof the letter be show , which he write by the duke of Burgundy to the king of Sicily : which when the french king understand , first he hold his peace as guilty in his conscience , not know well what to answer . at length turn his tale to another matter , he begin to quarrel with king Richard , pretend as though he seek cause to 326 
 i 191. break with he , and to malign he : and therefore he forge ( say he ) these lie upon he , and all because he by that mean will avoid to marry with Alise his sister , accord as he have promise . add moreover that if he will so do , and will not marry the say Alise his sister accord to his oath , he will be a enemy to he , and to his , while he live . 
 to this king Richard say again , that he can by no mean marry that woman , forsomuch as his father have carnail copulation with she , and also have by she a son : for proof whereof he have there present to bring forth diverse and sundry witness to the king face , to testify with he . 
 in conclusion , through counsel and persuasion of diverse about the french king , agreement at last be make , so that king Philip do acquit king Richard from this bond of marry his sister , and king Richard again shall be bind to pay to he every year for the space of five year , two thousand mark , with certain other condition beside , not great materiali for this place . and thus peace be between they conclude the 28 day of the say month of march , the [ ii i . 24. ] French king launch out of the haven of Messana , the 22 day after in the easter week , come with his army to the siege of Achon . 
 after the departure of the french king from Messana , king Richard with his army yet remain behind , arrive queen Alinor the king mother , bring with her Berengaria the king of navar daughter , to be espouse to king Richard : which be do , king Richard in April follow , about the 20 day of the say month , depart from the haven of Messana with 150 great ship , and 53 great galley well man and the navy of appoint , and take his journey towards Achon : who Kin&Ruhard‘ be upon the sea on good Friday about the nine hour , rise a mighty south wind with a tempest , which dissever and scatter all his navy , some to one place , and some to another . the king with a few ship be 
 327 
 drive to the he of Creta , and there before the haven of Rhodes cast anchor . the ship that carry the king sister , queen of Sicily , and Berengaria the king of navar daughter , with two ship be drive to the he of Cyprus . 
 the king make great moan for the ship of his sister , and Berengaria his wife that shall be , not know where they be become , after the tempest be overblow , send forth his galley diligent to seek the rest of his navy disperse , but especial the ship wherein his sister be , and the maiden who he shall marry , who at length be find safe and merry at the port of Lymszem in the lie of Cyprus , notwithstanding the two other ship , which be in their company before in the same haven , be drown with diverse of the king servant and man of worship , among who be m. Roger , call Malus Catulus , the king vicechan-cellour , who be find with the king seal hang about his neck . 
 the king of Cyprus be then Isakius ( call also the emperor of the griffon ) who take and imprison all english man , which by shipwreck be cast upon his land , also inveigle into his hand the good and prize of they which be find drown about his coast , neither will suffer the ship wherein the two lady be to enter within the port . 
 the tiding of this be bring to king Richard , he in great wrath gather his galley and ship together , boord the land of Cyprus , where he first in gentle wise signify ! to king Isakius , how he with his english man , come as stranger to the supportation of the holy land , be by distress of weather drive upon his bound , and therefore with all humble petition beseech he in god behalf , and for reverence of the holy cross , to let go such prisoner of he as he have in captivity , and to restore again the good of they that be drown , which he detain in his hand , to be employ for the behoof of their soul . and this the king once , 328 
 twice , and thrice desire of the emperor : but he proud answer again , send the king word , that he neither will let the captive go , nor render the good of they which be drown . 
 when king Richard hear this , how light the emperor Isakius make of he so humble and honest petition , and how that nothing can be get without violent force , eftsoon give commandment throughout all his host to put themselves in armour and follow he , to revenge the injury receive of that proud and cruel king of Cyprus , will they to put their trust in God , and not to misdoubt but that the lord will stand with they , and give they the victory . the emperor in the mean time with his people stand ward the sea coast , where the english man shall arrive , with sword , bill , and lance , and such other weapon as they have , set board , stool , and chest before they as a wall : few of they be harness , and for the most part all unexpert and unskilful in the feat of war . 
 then king Richard with his soldier issue out of their ship , first set his bowman before , who with their shot make a way for other to follow . the Englishman thus win the land upon they , so fierce press upon the gryffon , that after long fight and many blow , at last the emperor be put to flight , who king Richard valiant pursue , and slay many , and diverse he take alive , and have go near also to take the emperor , have not the night come on and part the battle . and thus king Richard with much spoil , and great victory , return to the port town of Lymszem , which the townsman have leave for fear , find there great abundance of corn , wine , oil and victual . 
 the day after the victory get , Joanna the king sister , and Berengaria the maiden , enter the porte and Towne of Lymszem , with 50. great ship , and 14. galliot : so that all the whole navy there meet together , be 254. tall ship , and above threescore galliot . then Isakius the emperor , see no way for 
 329 
 he to escape by sea , the same night pitch his tent five mile off from the english army , swear that the three day after , he will sure give battle to king Richard : but he prevent he before , sudden the same morning before the day of battle shall be , set upon the tent of the griffon early in the morning , they be unaware and a sleep , and make of they a great slaughter , insomuch that the emperor be fain to run away naked , leave his tent and pavilion to [ ii i . 25. ] the Englishman , full of horse and rich treasure , also with the imperial standard , the low part whereof with a costly streamer be cover , and wrought all with gold . 
 king Richard return with victory and triumph to his sister and Berengaria , short after in the month of May next follow , and the 12. day of the say month , marry the say Berengaria daughter of zanctius , king of Navarre , in the isle of Cyprus at Lymszem . 
 the king of Cyprus see himself overmatch , be drive at length to yield himself with condition to give king Richard 20000 mark in gold for amends of such spoil as he have get of they that be drown , also to restore all the captive again to the king : and furthermore , he in his own person to attend upon the king to the land of Jerusalem , in god service and he , with 400. horseman , and 500 footman : in pledge whereof he will give to his hand his castle , and his only daughter , and will hold his kingdom of he . 
 this do , and the emperor swear fidelity to king Richard before Guido king of Jerusalem , and the prince of Antioche ( who be come thither to king Richard a little before ) peace be take , and Isakius commit to the ward of certain keeper . notwithstanding short after he break from his keeper , be again at defiance with the king : whereupon king Richard besetting the hand of Cyprus round about with ship and galley , do in such sort prevail , that the 
 330 
 1191. subject of the land be constrain to yield themselves to the king , and at last the daughter of the emperor , and the emperor himself , who king Richard cause to be keep in fetter of gold and silver , and to be send to the city of Tripoli . 
 these thing thus do , and all set in order touch the lord the possession of the he of Cyprus , the keep whereof Chamberlaine he commit to radulphe son of Godfrey lord , 
 Chamberlaine , be then the first day or June upon the of 
 five of the say month , king Richard depart from the Cyprus . he of Cyprus , with his ship and galley towards the siege of Achon , and on the next morrow come to Tyrus , where by procurement of the french king he be restrain by the citizen to enter . the next day after , which be the first day of June , cross the sea , he meet with a great carrack fraught with soldier and man of war to the number of a thousand and five hundred , which pretend to be Frenchmen , and set forth their flag with the french arm , be indeed Saracen , a great ship of secret send with wild fire and certain barrel of un - Saracen take know serpent to the defence of the town of Achon , b%rbin& wb which king Richard at length perceive , eftsoon set ’ upon they and so vanquish they , of who the most be drown and some take alive : which be once know in the city of Achon , as it be a great discomfort to they , so it be a great help to the christian for win the city . 
 the next day after which be the seven of June , king Richard king Richard come to Achon , which at that time have arrive at be long besiege by the Christians . after who achm-comming it be not long , but the pagan within the city , see their wall to be undermine and tower overthrow , be drive by composition to escape with life and limb , to surrender the city to the two king . 
 another great help to the christian in win the city , be this . in the say city of Achon there be a secret Christian among the Saracen , who in time of the siege thereof use at sundry time to cast over the wall 
 331 
 the form of peace conclude between the king and the prince of Achon . 
 [ ii i . 26. ] 
 into the camp of the christian , certain bill write in hebrew , greek , and latin , wherein he disclose to the christian from time to time , the do and counsel of the enemy , advertise they how and what way they shall work , and what to beware , and always his letter begin thus . in nomine patris , 8c Filii , 8c spiritus sancti amen . by reason whereof the Christians be much advantage in their proceed : but this be a great heaviness unto they , that neither he will utter his name , nor when the city be get do they ever understand who he be . 
 to make of a long siege a short narration . upon the twelve day of July the year aforesaid , the prince and captain of the pagan , upon agreement resort to the tent of the templary to commune with the two king touch peace , and give up of their city : the form of which peace be thus . 
 1 that the king shall have the city of Achon free and full deliver unto they , with all which be therein . 
 2 that 500 captive of the Christians shall be restore to they , which be in Achon . 
 3 that the holy cross shall be to they render , and a thousand christian captive with two hundred horseman , whosoever they themselves will choose out of all they which be in the power of the Saladine . 
 4 that they will give unto the king two hundred thousand bysant , so that they themselves shall remain as pledge in the king hand , for the performance hereof , that if in forty day , the aforesaid covenant be not accomplish , they shall abide the king mercy touch life and limb . 
 these covenant be agree upon , the king send their soldier and servant into the city , to take a hundred of the rich 8c best of the city , to close they up in tower under strong keep , 8c the residue they commit to be keep in house and in street , minister unto they accord to their necessity : to 
 332 
 who notwithstanding this they premit , that so many of they as will be baptize and receive the faith of Christ , shall be free to go whither they will : whereupon many there be of the pagan , which for fear of death pretend to be baptize , but afterward so soon as they can , revolt again to the sala-dine : for the which it be afterward command by the king , that none of they shall be baptize against their will . 
 the thirteenth day of the say month of July , king fillip of France , and king Richard , after they have obtain the possession of Achon , divide between they all thing therein contain as well the people as gold and silver , with all other furniture whatsoever be remain in the city : who in divide the spoil , be so good carver to themselves that the knight and baron have but title to their share , whereupon they begin to show themselves somewhat discontent , which be know of the king , they send they answer that their will shall be satisfy . 
 the twenty day of July , king Richard speak with the french king , desire he that they two with their army , will bind themselves by oath to remain there still in the land of Jerusalem the space of 3. year , for the win and recover again of those country : but he say he will swear no such oath , and so the next day after king Richard with his wife and sister enter into the city of Achon , and there place himself in the king palace : the french king remain in the house of the templary , where he continue till the end of that month . 
 about the begin of the month of August , Philip the french king after that he and king Richard have make agreement between Guido and con-radus the mark , about the kingdom of Jerusalem , go from Achon to Tyrus , notwithstanding king Richard and all the prince of the christian army with great intreaty desire he to tarry , show what a 
 333 
 shame it be for he to come so far , and now to leave undo that for which he come , and on the 3. day of August depart from Tyrus , leave the half part of the city of Achon , in the hand of the aforesaid Conradus Marques . 
 the french after his departure the pagan refuse to keep their king shame - covenant make , who neither will restore the holy fmreturne cross nor the money , nor their captive , send word i ' to king Richard , that if he behead the pledge leave with he at Achon , they will chop off the head of such captive of the christian , as be in their hand . 
 short after this the Saladine send great gift to king Richard , request the time limit for behead of the captive to be prorogue , but the king refuse to take his gift , and to grant his request , whereupon the Saladine cause all the christian captive within his possession forthwith to be behead , which be the 28. of August : which albeit king Richard understand , yet will not he prevent the time before limit for the execution of his prisoner , be then the captive 20. day of August : upon which day he cause they of the Saracen prisoner of the Saracen open in the sight of ^Richard th6 saladines army to loose their head : the number 
 ' of who come to two thousand and five hundred , 
 save only that certain of the principal of they he reserve for purpose and consideration , especial to make exchange for the holy cross , and certain other of the christian captive . 
 after this king Richard purpose to besiege the city of joppe , where by the way between Achon and Joppe , near to a town call Assur , Saladine with a great multitude of his Saracen come fierce against the king rearward , but through God merciful grace in the same battle , the king warrior acquit themselves so well , that the Saladine be put to flight , who the tone against Christians pursue the space of 3. mile , and he lose the Saladine . that same day many of his noble and captain , in 334 
 such sort ( as it be think ) that the Saladine be not put to such confusion 40. year before , and but one Christian captain call James Avernus in that conflict be overthrow . 
 from thence king Richard proceed further go to joppe , and then to Ascalon , where he find first the city of joppe forsake of the Saracen , who dare not abide the king come : Ascalon the Saladine throw down to the ground , and likewise forsake the whole land of Syria , through all which land the king have free passage without resistance : neither dare the saracen prince encounter after that with king Richard . king Richard of all which his atchevance the say king Richard send ™ f ™ esslmof his letter of certificate as well into England , as also y ’ to the abbot of Clara valle in France , well hope y‘ he god willing shall be able to make his repair again to they by easter next . 
 many other famous act be do in this voyage by these two king , and more shall have be , have not they fall into discord dissever themselves , by reason whereof Philip the french king return home again within short space : who be return again eftsoon invade the country of Normandy , exciting also John the brother of king Richard , to take on he the kingdom of England in his brother absence : who then make league upon the same with the french [ ii i . 27. ] king , and do homage unto he , which be about the four year of king Richard . who then be in 1193. Syria , and hear thereof , make peace with the Turk for three year : and not long after , king Richard the king Richard next spring follow return also , who in his return retumethfrom drive by distress of weather about the part of Palartina . Histria , in a town call Synaca , be there take by lympold , duke of the same country , and so sell to the emperor for sixty thousand mark : who for no small joy thereof , write to fillip the french king , these letter here follow . 
 [ the letter 
 335 
 the letter of the emperor to fillip the french king , concern the take of king Richard . 
 henricus dei gratia romanorum imperator , and semper Augustus , Dilecto and speciali amico suo , Philippo illustri francorum regi salutem , and sincerae dilectionis affectum . quoniam Imperatoria celsitudo non dubitat regalem magnificentiam tuam laetiorem effici , de universis quibus omnipotentia creatoris nostri nos ipsos , and Romanum Imperium honoraverit and exaltaverit , nobilitati tuus tenore praesentium declarare duximus , quod inimicus Imperii nostri , and turbator Regni tui rex angliae , quum esset in transeundo mare ad part suas reversurus , accidit ut ventus rupta navi sva , in qua ipse erat , induceret eum in part histriae ad locum qui est inter Aquileiam , and Venetias . ubi rex , dei permissidne passus naufragium cum paucis evasit . 
 quidam itaque fidelis noster comes , maynardus de grooxce , and populus regionis illius , audito quod in terra erat , and considerato diligentius , qualem nominatus rex in terra promissionis proditionem and traditionem , and perditionis svae cumulum exercuerat , insecuti sunt , intendentes eum captivare . ipso autem rege in fugam converso , ceperunt de n'est octo milite : postmodum processit rex ad Burgum in archiepiscopatu salsebur-gensi , qui voco Frisorum , ubi Fridericus de betesow , rege cum tribus tantum versus austriam properante , noctu sex milite de suis coepit : dilectus autem consanguineus noster Lympoldus Dux Austria , observata strata saepe , dictum regem juxta denam in villa viciniori in domo despecta captivavit . 
 cum itaque in nostra nunc habeatur potestate , and ipse semper tua molestavit , and turbationis operam praestiterit , ea quae praemisimus , nobilitati tuus insinuare curavimus : sciente ea dilectioni tuus bene placita existere , animo tuo uberrimam importare laetitiam . Datum apud ritheoun-tum 5. Kalendas Janua . 
 king Richard be thus traitorous take , and sell 336 
 to the emperor by the duke of Austridge for 60000. mark , be there keep in custody a year and 3. month . 
 in some story it be affirm , that king Richard return out of Asia , come to Italy with prosperous wind , where he desire of the pope to be absolve of a other make against his will and can not obtain it : and so set out from thence towards England , pass by the country of Conradus the Marques , who death ( he be slay a little before ) be false impute by the french king to the king of England , there traitorous be take ( as be aforesay ) by Limpoldus duke of Austridge . 
 albeit in another story i find the matter more credible set forth : which say thus . that king Richard slay the brother of this Limpoldus , play with he at chess in the french king court : and Limpoldus take his vantage , be more cruel against he and deliver he ( as be say ) to the emperor . in who custody he be detain during the time above mention , a year and 3 month . during which time of the king endurance , the french king in the mean season stir war in Normandy : and Earle John the king brother , make stir and invade England , but the baron and bishop of the land mighty withstand he . 
 at length it be so agree and conclude with the emperor , that king Richard shall be release for a hundred and four thousand pound : of which money part shall remain to the duke of Austridge , the rest shall be the emperor . the sum of which money be here gather and make in England of chalice , cross , shrine , candlestick and other church plate , also with public contribution of friar , abbot , and other subject of the realm : whereof part be present pay , and for the residue remain , hostage and pledge be take , which be about the five year of his reign : and then it be obtain of the pope , that priest may celebrate with chalice of latten and tin . 
 at what time this aforesaid money be pay , and iv 337 five 
 A.D. 
 1193 - 
 the just judgement of God upon the duke of Austria . 
 [ ii i . 28. ] 
 Civitas joppe . 
 the hostage give for the ransom of the king , i have a old history which say , that the aforesaid duke of Austridge be short after plague by God , with 5. sundry plague . 
 first , with the burn of his chief town . 
 2. with drown of ten thousand of his man in a flood happen no man can tell how . 
 3. by turn all the ear of his corn field into worm . 
 4. by take away almost all the noble of his land by death . 
 5. by break his own leg fall from his horse , which leg he be compel to cut off with his own hand , and afterward die of the same : who then at his death be report to forgive king Richard 50000. mark , and send home the hostage that be with he . and further a certain book entitle Eulogium declare , that the say Limpoldus duke of ostrich fall in displeasure with the bishop of room , and die excommunicate the next year after , anno 1196. 
 but thus , as you have hear , Richard the king be ransom and deliver from the covetous captivity of the emperor , and return home make a end of his voyage for Asia , which be both honourable to himself and to all christian state , but to the Saracen the enemy of Christianity , terrible and dishonourable . 
 this history of king Richard voyage to Jerusalem be very excellent and large write in latin by Guilielmus Neobrigensis , and Roger Hoveden . 
 Epitaphium richardi primi regis anglorum apud fontem Ebraldi . 
 scribitur hoc auro , rex auree , laus tua tota aurea , materiae convenient nota . 
 laus tua prima fuit Siculi , Cyprus altera , dromo tertia , Caruanna quarta , suprema * jope . 
 Retrusi Siculi , Cyprus pessundata , dromo mersus , Caruanna capta , retenta jope . 
 . 