a preparation of a voyage of king Henry the four to the holy land against the infidel in the year 1413 , be the last year of his reign : wherein he be prevent by death : write by Walsingham , Fabian , Polydore Virgile , and Holenshed . 
 n this fourteen and last year of king Henry reign a council be hold in the white friar in London , at the which among other thing , order be take for order take ship and galley to be build and make ready , and all other thing necessary to be provide for a voyage , which he 
 mean to make into the holy land , there to recover the city of Jerusalem from the infidel : for it grieve he to consider the great malice of christian prince , that be bend upon a mischievous purpose to destroy one another , to the peril of their own soul , rather than to make war against the enemy of the christian faith , as in conscience , it seem to he , they be bind . we find , say Fabian in his chronicle , that he be take with his last sickness , while he be make his prayer at saint Edward shrine , there as it be , to take his leave , and so to proceed forth on his journey . he be so sudden and grievous take , that such as be about he fear lest he will have die present : wherefore to relieve he , if it be possible , they bear 
 455 
 he into a chamber that be next at hand , belong to the abbot of Westminster , where they lay he on a pallet before the fire , and use all remedy to revive he . at length he recover his speech , and perceive himself in a strange place which he know not , he will to know if the chamber have any particular name , whereunto answer be make , that it be call Jerusalem . then say the king , laudes be give to the father of heaven : for now i know that i shall die here in this chamber , accord to the prophesy of i declare , that i shall depart this life in Jerusalem . 
 of this intend voyage Polydore Virgile write in manner follow : 
 often haze henricus rex memor nihil homini debere esse antiquus , quam ad officium justitiae , quae ad hominum utilitatem pertinet , omne suum studium 
 confer , protinus omisso civili bello , quo pudebat videre christianos omni tempore turpiter occupari , de republica Anglica bene gubernanda , de bello in host commune [ ii i . 72. ] sumendo , de hierosolymis tandem aliquando recipiendis plura destinabat , classemque jam parabat , cum ei talia agenti atque meditanti casus mortem attulit : subito enim morbo tentatus , nulla medicina sublevari potuit . Mortuus est apud westmonasterium , annum agens quadragesimum sextum , qui fuit annus salutis humanae I4I3 - 
 the same in english . 
 afterward , king Henry call to mind , that nothing ought to be more high esteem by any man , than to do the utmost of his endeavour for the performance of justice , which tend to the good and benefit of mankind ; altogether abandon civil war ( wherewith he be ashamed to see , how Christians at all time be dishonourable busy ) enter into a more deep consideration of well govern his realm of 456 
 1413-England , of wage war against the common enemy , and of recover , in process of time , the city of Jerusalem , yea , and be provide a navy for the same purpose , whenas in the very midst of this his heroical action and enterprise , he be surprise with death : for fall into a sudden disease , he can not be cure by any kind of physic . he decease at Westminster in the 46 year of his age , which be in the year of our lord , 1413. 
 . 