a letter of the king of England Henry the eight , to John king of Portugal , for a Portugal ship with the good of John Gresham and Wil. Locke with other , unlade in Portugal from Chio. 
 63 
 A.D. 
 1531 - 
 the same in english . 
 to the high and mighty prince , John by the grace of God , king of Portugal , and of Algarve on this side and beyond the sea in Africa , lord of Ghinea , and of the conquest , navigation , and traffic of . / Ethiopia , Arabia , Persia , India , etc our most dear and well-beloved brother . 
 Henry by the grace of God , king of England and of France , defender of the faith , and lord of Ireland : to John by the same grace , king of Portugal and Algarve , on this side and beyond the sea in Africa , and lord of Ghinea , and of the conquest , navigation , and traffic of Aethiopia , Arabia , Persia , India , etc our most dear and well-beloved brother , send greeting . so much you more willing and ready we undertake the recommend of all just cause unto your highness , because by the daily testimony of our subject which traffic in your kingdom and dominion , we be inform , that accord to the duty of a most worthy prince , so careful and exact you minister justice unto every man , that all man 
 five 65 e 
 most will repair unto your highness , with full trust to obtain the same . whereas therefore our well-beloved and trusty subject John Gresham merchant of London , of late in humble manner have signify unto we , that one William Heith his factor and agent , certain month ago have hire in Candie a certain Portugal ship call Santo Antonio , ( the patron whereof be Diego Perez ) and covenant with the patron of the say ship , that he shall first sail to the isle of Sio , to take in merchandise of sundry sort , and then eftsoon return to Candie , to be freight with other good , all which he be to bring into our kingdom of England , to the value of 12000 ducat , as by their bill of covenant and agreement more plain appear : it so fall out , that you aforesaid Diego your highness subject have receive the say good , very treacherous and much contrary to his covenant , to the exceed great loss of our subject , put in by the way into a haven of Portugal , and alter his purpose of come into England , he remain still in that haven , and likewise detain our subject good . which injury ( see it be do in your highness kingdom ) we hope your highness will see reform accord to equity and right , the rather at our request , which always have have a speciali care of the cause and good of your highness , and of your subject whensoever they come into our kingdom , whereof we make proof the last year . wherefore we instant request your highness , y‘ you will so receive John Ratcliff the bearer of these present letter , 8c the new appoint agent of John Gresham , which come into your dominion about this business , be thus commend unto you in this business , and recover and free bring home of the say good , and in remit of the custom , unless they be sell there ( the like whereof we do towards your subject ) see by the fraud and deceit of the patron of the ship , the ware be bring thither , and final in dispatch you whole matter , accord to justice , and so further the same by direct 66 
 your highness letter to your officer who it may concern , that we may perceive , that our subject right and liberty have especial be maintain upon this our commendation . which we will take in most thankful part , and your highness shall find we in the like or a great matter most ready to gratify you , who we wish most hearty well to fare . from our court at Waltham the 15. of October 1531. 
 . 