a brief relation of the siege and take of the city of Rhodes , by sultan Soliman the great Turk , translate out of french into english at the motion of the reverend lord Thomas dockwray , great prior of the order of Jerusalem in England , in the year , 1524. 
 ill faithful to write and reduce in verity historiali , the great siege , cruel oppugnation , and piteous take of the noble and renown city of Rhodes , the key of Christendom , the hope of many poor christian man , withhold in turkic to save and keep they in their faith : 
 the rest and yearly solace of noble pilgrim of the holy sepulchre of Jesus Christ and other holy place : the refuge and refresh of all christian people : have course of merchandise in the party of Levant , i promise to all estate that shall see this present book , that i have leave nothing for fear of any person , nor prefer it for favour . and first i shall show the occasion that move this cruel bloodshedder , enemy of our holy christian faith , sultan Soliman , now be great Turk , to come with a great host by sea and by land , to besiege and assail the space of six month , night and day , the noble and mighty city of Rhodes , the year of the incarnation of our lord Jesus Christ , 
 1522. 
 [ the occasion 
 the occasion why the great Turk come to besiege the city of Rhodes . 
 the first and principali cause be that he do consider and see by experience , that there be none other town nor place in Levant that war against he nor keep he in doubt , but this poor rock of Rhodes . And hear the continual complaint of his subject aswell of Syria , as of turquoise , for the domage and prize daily do of their body and good by christian man of war receive into Rhodes : and also of the ship and galley of the religion , he take conclusion in himself , that if he may put the say town in his power and subjection , that than he shall be peaceable lord of all the party of Levant , and that his subject shall complain no more to he . 
 the second , that he may follow the do of his noble predecessor , and show himself very heir of the mighty and victorious lord sultan Selim his father , will to put in execution the enterprise by he leave the year one thousand five hundred twenty and one . the which Selim the great Turk put in all readiness his army to the number of three hundred sail purpose for to send they against Rhodes , if mortality have not happen in his host , and he afterward by the will of our lord be surprise and take with death : wherefore he be in the latter end of his day , ( as some Turk and false christian man that be at this siege show i ) do charge by his testament , or cause to charge his son now be great Turk , that after his death he shall make his two first enterprise , the one against Bellegrado in Hungary , and the other against Rhodes , [ ii i . 73. ] for to get he honour , and to set his country and subject in rest and surety . the which fatherly motion easy enter into he and be imprint in the heart and young will of the say Solyman , his son , the which soon after the death of his father put in effect the first enterprise , and raise a huge host both by 
 water and by land , and go himself in person against Bellegrado , a right strong place in Hungary . and after take of that he have besiege it the space of two month or thereabouts , for fault of ordinance and victual , it be yield to he by composition the eight day of September , in the year of our lord , one thousand five hundred twenty and one . the say Solyman have this victory , be swell and raise in pride and vainglory , turn his heart against Rhodes . nevertheless , he not ignorant of the strength of it , and consider the quality of the people that be within it , of who he shall be well receive as his predecessor have be aforetime , doubt much , and know not how to furnish his enterprise . for his captain and bassa turn he from it as much as they may by many reason , they know the force of it , save only Mustofa bassa his brother in law , the which counsel and put he in mind to go thither . final , he purpose entire to have it by treason or by force . and also for the same cause and purpose , his father in his day have send a 
 Jewe physician into Rhodes as a spy , to have the better foreign physi-knowledge of it : the say Solyman be inform that t1 ™ 5 be^ome he be there yet , wherefore he send he word that he n shall abide there still for the same cause . And give in charge to one of the chief man in Sio , to send unto the say Jewe all thing needful to maintain he . and the same Jewe write to he of Sio , under privy word , all that be do in Rhodes to give knowledge thereof to the great Turk : and the better to hide his treason , the say Jewe make himself to be baptise . 
 and to be the more name to be expert in physic , he do some fair cure to such as be disease , whereby he begin to be well trust , and come in favour with many substantiali folk of the town . among all other thing whereof he advertise the great Turk , one be of a wall that be take down for to be new build at the bulwark of Auvergne , certify he that if he come hasty with his host , he may easy and at 
 unaware surprise the town in such estate as it be at that time . many other advertisement and warn he show the Turk , which shall be declare hereafter . but beside his advertisement , the say great Turk stir and provoke by a false traitor , a Portugal knight of we , that time Chanceller of the say holy religion , a man of great authority , dignity , and understanding , and one of the principali lord of the counsel of the same , name sir Andrew de merall , by little and little be move and kindle to the say enterprise of treason , whereof be no marvel , for it be a great hope and comfort to have such a person for he , that know all the estate and rule of the religion and of the town . and for to declare the occasion of the curse and unhappy will of the say traitor that have be occasion of so great loss and damage , and shall be more at the length , if the divine power set not to his hand . 
 and here it be manifest to be understand of all man , that after the death of the noble and right prudent lord , Fabrice of Cacetto , great master of Rhodes , the say sir Andrew inflame with ambition and covetousness to be great master , and see himself deceive of his hope , by the election make the two and twenty day of January , of the right reverend and illustrate lord , Philip de Villiers lisleadam , before he : from that time he take so great envy and desperation , enmity and evil will , not only against the say lord , but against all the holy religion , that he set all his study and purpose , to betray and sell his religion and the city of Rhodes to the curse misbeliever , forget the great honour and goodness that he have have of the religion , and hope to receive , with many other particular pleasure that the say lord master have do to he . but the devil , unkindness , and wickedness have so blind the eye of his thought , that he in no wise can refrain he , but at every purpose that be speak afore he , he be short and may not dissemble . and one day among other he say before many knight , that he will that his 
 soul be at the devil , and that Rhodes and the religion be lose . and many other foolish and dishonest purpose and word he utter , whereat none take heed , nor thought that he have the courage to do that thing that he have do . howbeit , obstinate as Judas , he put in execution his curse will : for soon after that the tiding of the election be send westward to the say noble lord , the say the merall do send a Turk prisoner of he to Constantinople , under shadow to fetch his ransom . by who he advertise the great Turk and his counsel , of the manner and degree of Rhodes , and in what state and condition the town be in of all manner of thing at that time , and what may happen of it , provoke and stir he to come with a great host to besiege the town . and after the come of the say reverend lord great master , he give other advise to the great Turk , show he that he can never have better time to come , see that the great master be [ ii i . 74. ] new come , and part of the wall take down , and that all Rhodes be in trouble by occasion of some italian knight , rebel against the lord great master : of the which rebellion he be causer , the better to bring his curse mind to pass : and also give the say great Turk knowledge that all christian prince be busy , war each upon other , and that he shall not doubt but if the rebellion last among they , the town shall be his without fail , as it be see by experience . and for lack of succour of every part , and especial of such as may easy have help we be our neighbour , with their galley and man of war , wherefore it be now in the hand of the enemy of the christian faith . the which monition and reason of the false traitor be understand and ponder by the great Turk and his counsel , it be consider of they not to loose so good occasion and time . wherefore he make most extreme diligence to rig and apparel many ship and vessel of diverse sort , as galliass , galley , pallandre , fuste , and brigantine , to the number of 350. sail and more . 
 when the prisoner that the say the merall do send into turquoise have do his commission , he return into Rhodes , whereof every man have marvel . and many folk deem evil of his come again , as of a thing unaccustomed , but none dare say any thing , see the say the merall of so great authority and dignity , and he cherish the say prisoner more than he be wont to do . therefore belike he have well do his message , and have bring good tiding to the damnable and . shameful mind of the say traitor de merall . 
 how the great Turk cause the passage to be keep , that none shall bear tiding of his host to Rhodes . 
 the great Turk intend with great diligence to make ready his host both by sea and by land , the better to come to his purpose , and to take the town unwary as he be advertise , think to keep his do as secret as he may , and command that none of his subject shall go to Rhodes for any manner of thing . and likewise he take all the bark and brigantine out of the haven and port in those coast , because they shall give no knowledge of his army . and also he make the passage by land to be keep , that none shall pass . howbeit , so great apparel of a army can not be long keep close : for the spy which the lord great master have send into turquoise , bring tiding to the castle of saint Peter , and to Rhodes , of all that be say and do in turquoise . nevertheless , the say lord give no great credence to all that be bring and tell , because that many year before , the predecessors of the great Turk have make great army : and always it be say that they go to Rhodes , the which come to none effect . and it be hold for a mock and a byeword in many place , that the Turk will go to besiege Rhodes . and for this reason doubt be have of this last army , and some thought that it shall have go into Cyprus or to Cataro , a land of the lordship of 6 
 Venice . howbeit the great master not willing to be take unwary , but the mean while as careful and diligent for the wealth of his town , and his people , understand these tiding of the Turk army , do all his diligence to repair and strengthen the town . among all other thing to build up , and raise the bulwark of Auvergne , and to cleanse and make deep than ditch . and the more to cause the workman to haste they in their business , the say lord oversawe they twice or thrice every day . 
 how the lord great master counsel with the lord for provision for the town . 
 than the say reverend lord think to furnish and store the town with more victual for the sustenance thereof , and for the same many time he speak with the lord that have the handle and rule of the treasury , and of the expense thereof in his absence , and since his coming : that be to wit , with the great commander Gabriel de pommerolle , lieutenant of the say lord : the turcoply sir John Bourgh of the english nation : and the Chanceller sir Andrew de meral , of who be speak afore , and of his untruth against his religion . the which three lord say , that he shall take no thought for it , for the town be well store with victual for a great while , and that there be wheat enough till new come in : notwithstanding it be good to have more , or the siege be lay afore the town , and therefore it be behooveful to send for wheat and other necessary into the west for succour of the town , and at that time to purvey for every thing . 
 sir Joh. Bourgh the english turcoply . 
 of the provision for victual and ordinance [ two . two . 75. ] of war . 
 as touch the store and ordinance of war , the say lord affirm that there be enough for a year and more , whereof the contrary be find , for it fail a month or the city be yield . it be of truth that 
 there be great store , and to have last long than it do . but it be needful to spend large at the first come of the enemy to keep they from come near , and from bring earth to the ditch side as they do . and moreover you be to consider the great number of they , and their power that be spread round about the town , give we so many assault and skirmish in so many place as they do , and by the space of six whole month day and night assail we , that much ordinance and store be waste to withstand they in all point . and if it fail , it be no marvel . howbeit the noble lord great master provide speedy for it , and send brigantine to Lango , to the castle of saint Peter , and to the castle of his isle Feraclous and Lyndo , for to bring powder and saltpeter to strength the town , but it suffice not . 
 and for to speak of the purveiance of victual , it be advise by the lord great master and his three lord , that it be time to send some ship for wheat to place thereabouts , before the Turks host be come thither . and for this purpose be appoint a ship name the gal-lienge , who captain hight Brambois , otherwise call wolf , of the almain nation , a expert man of the sea , the which make so good diligence , that within a month he perform his voyage , and bring good store of wheat from Naples and Romania , which do we great comfort . 
 how a brigantine be send to Candie for wine , and of diverse ship that come to help the town . 
 after this , a motion be make to make provision of wine for the town , for the man of Candie dare not sail for to bring wine to Rhodes as they be wont to do for fear of the Turk host : and also they of the town will send no ship into Candie , fear to be take and enclose with the say host by the way . howbeit some merchant of the town , be willing 
 to have adventure themselves in a good ship of the religion , name the mary , for to have lade she with wine in Candie . but they can not agree with the three lord of the treasure , and their let be but for a little thing : and all the cause come of the say traitor de merall , feign the wealth of the treasure ; for he intend another thing , and break this good and profitable enterprise and will of the say merchant , see that it be hurtful to the Turk , who part the say traitor hold in his devilish heart : that notwithstanding , the reverend lord great master , that in all thing from the beginning to the end , have always show his good will , and with all diligence and right that may be requisite to a sovereign captain and head of war , find other expedience , and send a brigantine into Candie , in the which he send a brother sergeant name Anthony of Bosus , a well spright man and wise , that by his wisdom wrought so well , that within a small time he bring fifteen vessel call gripes , lade with wine , and with they man of war the which come under shadow of those wine , because the governor of Candie dare let none of their man go to the succour of Rhodes for fear of the Turk . and beside those fifteen gripes come a good ship who capitaine and owner be a rich young gentleman venetian , messire John Antonio de Bonaldi , which of his good will come with his ship lade with 700. butt of wine to succour the town with his person and folk , who good and lowable will i leave to the consideration of the reader of this present book . for he be purpose to have have his wine to Constantinople , or he be inform of the business of Rhodes , and be in the porte du castle in Candie , will not bear his victual to the enemy of the faith , but come out and return his way towards Rhodes , forget all particular profit and advantage . he be arrive at Rhodes , dispatch and sell his wine , which be a great increase and comfort for the town . and when he have so do , he present his person , his ship , and 
 his folk , to the reverend great master , the which retain he , and set he in wage of the religion . and during the siege , the say capitaine behave he worthy in his person , and put himself in such place as worthy man ought to be , spend his good large without demand any payment or recompense for his do , of the religion . 
 how the corn be shear down half ripe and bring into the town for fear of the Turk host . 
 during these thing , the reverend lord great master careful and busy to have every thing necessary , as man and other strength , send vessel call brigantine , for to cause the wafter of the sea to come into Rhodes for the keep and fortify of the town , the [ ii i . 76. ] which at the first send come and present their person and ship to the service of the religion . 
 harvest in after that the say lord cause to sheer down the Apnl and jsje^ anj cause ; it to be bring into the 
 ’ town , which be do in April : and then in may in some place , he make to sheer the wheat half ripe , howbeit the most part be leave in the field , because the Turk host be come out of the strait of Constantinople . And doubt that any number of ship shall come before to take the people of the say isle unaware , the say lord make they to leave shear of wheat , and cause the people of the further part of the isle to come into the town . 
 while that the great master provide for all thing after the course of time and tiding that he have , there arrive a carrack of Genoa lade with spicery from Alexandria , the which pass before the port of Rhodes the eight day of April , and rid at anchor at the Fosse , 7. or 8. mile from the town , for to know and hear tiding of the turkish host . then the lord willing to furnish he with people as most behooveful for the town , send a knight of Provence name sir anastase 
 de sancta Camilla , commander de la Tronquiere to the captain of the carrack , pray he to come into the haven with his ship for the defence of the town , proffering he what he will , assure he his ship . the captain excuse he , say , that the merchandise be not his own , but belong to diverse merchant to who he must yield account . howbeit at the last after many word and promise to he make , he come into the haven , the which captain be name messire Domingo de fournati , and he in his person behave he valiant in the time of the say siege . 
 how the great master cause generail muster to be make , and send a vessel to the Turk navy , of who he receive a letter . 
 after the month of April the lord master see that the Turk host draw near , and that he have the most part of the wafter within the town , he cause general muster of man of arm to be make . And begin at the knight , the which upon holy rood day in may make their muster before the commissioner ordain by the say lord in place depute to each of they call Aulberge . the which Commissioners make report to the lord that they have find the knight in good order of harness and other thing necessary for war , and their array fair and proper , with cross on they . when the muster of the knight be do , the lord master think to make the muster of they of the town , and stranger together : but his wisdom perceive that harm shall come thereby , rather than good , doubt that the number of people shall not be so great as he will , or need to have , whereof the great Turk may have knowledge by goer and comer into Rhodes , and therefore he cause they of the town to make their muster several by band and company , and the stranger also by themselves , to the end that the number shall not be know , notwithstanding that there be good quantity of good man and well willing 
 to defend themselves . and the more to hearten and give they courage and good will , some knight of the cross , deck their man with colour and devise , and take with they man of the town and stranger , and with great noise of trumpet and timbrel , they make many muster , as envy each other which shall keep best array and order , and have the fair company . it be a great pleasure to see they all so well agree , and so well willing . 
 the number of the man of the town amount and be esteem , three or four thousand , beside man of the village , that may be 1500. or 2000 
 the eight day of the same month , the Turk hear of those tiding , make a fire for a token in a place call le Fisco , in the main land right against Rhodes . and certain day afore they have make another , that be to weet , when the ship of a knight name Menetow go thither , and have with he the clarke of the galley name Jaques truchman , the which under shadow to speak with he , be withhold of the Turk . for the great Turk have command to take he or some other man of the Rhodes to have perfect knowledge in what estate the town be then in every thing . and they of the town ween that the second fire be for to deliver Jaques , the reverend lord great master send one of his galliass , who patron be call messire Boniface of Provence , to know the cause thereof . and when he arrive at the say place of le Fisco , he demand of the Turk wherefore they have make the token of fire . and they say that it be because their lord have send a letter to the great master , but as yet it be not come , and desire he to tarry till it be bring . the patron as wary and wise in the business of the sea , think in himself that the Turk make such prolong to some evil intent , or to surprise his vessel be alone , wherefore he bid they give he the letter speedy , or else he will go his way , and neither tarry for letter nor other thing : and tell they of the evil and dishonest 
 1522. ’ deed that they have do the day afore , to withhold the [ ii i . 77. ] clarke under their word and safeconduct : and therewith he turn his galliass to have go away . the Turk see that , give he the letter , the which he take , and when he be arrive at Rhodes , he present it to the lord great master , which assemble the lord of his counsel , and make it to be read : the tenor whereof be such as follow . 
 the copy of the letter that the great Turk send to the lord great master , and to the people of the Rhodes . 
 sultan Solyman bassa by the grace of God , right mighty emperor of Constantinople , and of himself hold both the land of Persia , Arabia , Syria , Mecha , and Jerusalem ; of Asia , Europe , TEgypt , and of all the sea , lord and possessor : to the reverend father lord Philip , great master of Rhodes , to his counsellor , and to all the other citizen great and small , greeting . send convenient and worthy salutation to your reverence , we give you to weet , that we have receive your letter send unto our imperiali majesty by George your servant , the tenor whereof we do well understand ; and for this occasion we send unto you this our present commandment , to the end that we will that you know sure how by our sentence we will have that isle of Rhodes for many damage and evil deed which we have , and hear from day to day of the say place do to we and our subject , and you with your good will shall hold it of we and do we obeisance , and give the city to my imperiali majesty . and we swear by God that make heaven and earth , and by 26000. of our prophet , and by the 4. Misafi that fall from the sky , and by our first prophet Mahomet , that if you do we homage , and yield you with good will upon these oath , all you that will abide in the say place , great and small , shall not need to fear peril nor damage of my imperiali majesty , neither you , your good , nor your man : and who so will go to any other 13 
 place with his good and household , may so do , and who so will dwell and inhabit in any other place under my imperiali majesty , may remain where they like best , without fear of any person . and if there be any of the principal and worthy man among you that be so dispose , we shall give he wage and provision great than he have have . and if any of you will abide in the say isle , you may so do after your ancient usage and custom , and much better . and therefore if that you will accept these our oath and entreating , send unto we a man with your letter to my imperiali majesty , or else know you that we will come upon you with all provision of war , and thereof shall come as it please God . and this we do , to the end that you may know , and that you may not say , but we have give you warning . and if you do not thus with your good will , we shall vault and undermine your foundation in such manner , that they shall|be tear upside down , and shall make you slave , and cause you to die , by the grace of God , as we have do many , and hereof have you no doubt . write in our court at Constantinople the first day of the month of June . 
 how the Turk come to land in the isle of Lango , and be drive to their ship again by the prior of S. Giles . 
 when the lord great master and his counsel have hear the tenor of the letter , they will give none answer to the great Turk , but that he shall be receive with good stroke of artillery . so that to a foolish demand behoove none answer . and it be very like that he will have nothing . for six day after , that be the 14. day of the say month of June , the brigantine that go towards Sio to know of the say army , come again and say , that of a truth the say army be come , and that nigh to Lango a isle of the religion , a 100 mile from Rhodes , they have see and tell 30. sail that be most part galley and 14 
 fuste : the which vessel set man on land in you isle of Lango . then the prior of saint Giles , messire pre John de bidoux commander of the say place , tarry not long from horseback with his knight and people of the isle , and he meet so well with the Turk , that he drive they to their ship , and slay a certain number of they : and of the side of pre John some be hurt , and his horse be slay . when the enemy be enter into their galley , they go to a place call castle judeo on the main land , between the say isle of Lango and the castle of saint Peter . 
 how part of the navy and army of the great Turk come before the city of Rhodes . 
 the 18. day of the say month of June , these 30-gally go from the say place , and pass by the cape of Crion , enter the gulf of epime beside Rhodes , and be discover from the shade of the hill of salaco , a castle in the isle of Rhodes . on the morrow they come out of the gulf by plain day , and sail along by the coast , they enter into a haven on main land call Malfata , where they abide three day . than [ ii i . 78. ] they go from thence , and return to the gulf of epime , where they abide two day and two night . 
 the 24 day of the same month they issue out of epime , and traverse the channel , they come to the isle of Rhodes in a place before a castle call fave , and they go to land , and burn a great field of corn the same day , which be the feast of saint John Baptist our patron . the guard of a castle name Absito in the isle of Rhodes discover and spy the great host , and in great haste bring word to the lord master , and say that the say host , that be in so great number of sail that they . may not be number , be enter into the gulf of epime . the 30 sail that lie in the isle arise in the night , and go to the say host in the gulf . 
 the 26 day of June the say great host arise and go out of epime a hour after the sun rise , and 15 
 traverse the channel , they come to a place call the Fosse , eight mile from the town . and the 30 first sail turn back towards the cape of saint Martin and other place to watch for ship of christian man , if any pass by to Rhodes . the great host abide still till noon or one of the clock , and then arise , not all , but about 80 or 100 ship , as galley , galliass , and fust : and pass one after another before the town and haven of Rhodes three mile oftj and come to shore in a place nigh to land , call Perambolin , six mile from the town . in the which place the say host abide from that time to the end of that unhappy siege . 
 the number and it name of the vessel that come to besiege Rhodes . 
 the number of the ship be these : 30 galliass , 103 galley , aswell bastard as subtle mahonnet , 15 taffour , 20 fust , 64 great ship , six or seven galleon , and 30 gallere , beside the navy that wait for christian man , if any come to succour we . Theise be the vessel that come at the - first to lay the siege . and sith that the say host come out of Perambolin , there come from Syria 20 other sail , aswell galley as fust . and many other ship come sith , and join with the say army in the time of the say siege . and it be say that there be 400 sail and more . 
 the same day that part of the host come to the say place , the reverend lord great master ordain a great brigandine to send into the west , to certify our holy father the pope , and the christian prince how the Turks army be afore Rhodes . and in the say vessel he send two knight , one of french man name sir Claude dansoyville call Villiers , and sir Loys de Sidonia a Spaniard : and they go to the pope and to the emperor . 
 after the come of the Turks navy into the say place , it be 14 or 15 day or they set any ordinance on land , great or small , or any quantity of man come 16 
 on shore , whereof we marvel . and it be tell we by some that come out of the camp , and also by the spy that the lord great master have send abroad array as Turks , that they abide the commandment of their great lord , until the host by land be come into the camp . howbeit there come some number for to view the town , but they go privy , for the ordinance of the town shoot without cease . 
 all this while the galley and galliass go and come to land , bring vitaile and people . at the which ship pass nigh the town , be shoot many stroke with bombard , which make some slaughter of our enemy : and when the most part of they be pass , they begin to set ordinance on the land with great diligence . then the lord great master depart from his palace , and lodge he nigh a church call the victory , because that place be most to be doubt : and also that at the other siege the great business and assault be there . 
 how the lord great master make his petition before the image of saint John , and offer he the key of the town . 
 the day before be make many predication and sermon , and the last be in the church of saint John Baptist . when the sermon be do , a pontificali mass be celebrate with all solemnity , and all the relic take down , and the lord great master and all his knight with great devotion and reverence hear it . and when the mass be end , the lord great master make a piteous oration or prayer before saint John Baptist his protector : and above all other word , which be too long to tell , he beseech he meek that it will please he to take the key of that miserable city . the which key he present and lay upon the altar before the image , beseech saint John to take the keep and protection thereof , and of all the religion , as by his grace he have give to he unworthy , the govern unto that day : and by his holy grace to defend they 
 five 17 b 
 from the great power of the enemy that have besiege they . 
 how the woman slave will have set fire in the town . 
 the eight day of July it be know that the turkish woman be slave and servant in many house of the town , have appoint to set fire in their master house at the first assault that shall be make , to the end that the man shall leave their postern and defense to go and save their house and good . and it be find that a woman of Marchopota be a slave , be first mover thereof , the which be take and put to execution . 
 the same day some of our man go out for to skirmish with the Turk , and many of they be slay with shot of our artillery , and of our man but one . 
 how the Turk lay their artillery about the town , and of the manner and quantity of their piece and gunshot . 
 the 18. day of July , for the beginning and first day they set up a mantellet , under the which they put three or four mean piece , as sacres , wherewith they shoot against the postern of England and Provence . but the mantellet be soon break and cast down , and their piece destroy with the shot of the wall , and they that shoot they be most part slay . as this first mantellet be break , by the great and innumerable people that they have they set all their ordinance on land , and carry it to the place where it shall be bend , or nigh thereby . 
 and the 29. day of the same month , they set up two other mantellet . one beside a church of sane Cosme and Damian , and another towards the west . and from these mantellet they shoot great piece , as culver-ings , double gun , and great bombard against the wall of England and Spain , to the which mantellet the ordinance of the town give many great stroke , and 18 
 often break they . and the more to grieve the town and to fear we , they set up many other mantellet in diverse place , almost round about the town , and they be reckon four score : the which number be well lessen by the great quantity of stroke of artillery shoot out of the town from many place . 
 the artillery of the Turk be such as folio w . 
 first there be six great gun , cannon perrier of brass , that shoot a stone of three foot and a half : also there be 15. piece of iron that shoot stone of five or six span about . also there be 14. great bombard that shoot stone of eleven span about . also there be twelve basilisk , whereof they shoot but with 8. that be to weet , four shot against the postern of England and Spain , and two against the gate of Italy : the other two shoot sometime against saint Nicholas tower . also there be 15. double gun cast bullet as basilisk . the mean shot , as sacres and pasvolan , be in great number . the handgunshot be innumerable and incredible . also there be twelve potgunne of brass that shoot upward , whereof eight be set behind the church of saint Cosme and Damian , and two at saint John de la Fontaine towards the port of Italy , and the other two afore the gate of Auvergne , the which be shoot night and day : and there be three sort of they , whereof the great be of six or seven span about . and the say stone be cast into the town to make murder of people , which be a thing very inhumane and fearful , which manner of shoot be little use among christian man . howbeit by evident miracle , thank be God , the say piece do not great harm , and slay not past 24. or 25. person , and the most part woman and child , and they begin to shoot with the say piece from the 19 day of the same month , unto the end of August , and it be account that they shoot 2000 time , more or less . 
 then the enemy be warn by the Jewe that write letter to they of all that be do and say in the town , that the say potgunne do not harm : wherefore they be angry , for they think that they have slay the three part of our people : and they be counsel by he to leave that shoot , for it be but time lose , and powder waste , and then they shoot no more with they . it be of a truth that they shoot with the say potgunne 12. or 15. time with bullet of brass or copper , full of wild fire , and when they be in the air , they flame forth , and in fall on the ground , they break , and the fire come out and do some harm . but at the last we know the malice thereof , and the people be wary from come near to they , and therefore they do hurt no more folk . 
 how the captain Gabriel Martiningo come to the succour of Rhodes , and all the slave be in danger to be slay . 
 the 24. day of the same month a brigantine arrive that be send afore into Candie , wherein come a worthy captain name Gabriel Martiningo with two [ ii i . 80. ] other captain . and there go to receive he messieur prou John prior of saint Giles , and the prior of Navarre . then after his honourable receive as to he well appertain , they bring he before the lord great master , that love receive he , and he be glad see and welcome of the people , as a man that be name very wise and ingenious in feat of war . then come a Spaniard renegado from the host , that give we warning of all that be do in the field , and of the approach by the trench that our enemy make . 
 and in likewise there arise a great noise in the town , that the slave turk that wrought for we in the ditche have slay their keeper , and will have flee , which be not so . nevertheless , the rumour be great , and they ring alarm : wherefore the say slave come to prison , as it be ordain in all the alarm , be meet of 20 
 the people , which in great anger put they to death : so that there be slay a hundred and more than same day . and if the lord great master have not command that none shall hurt they , they have be all slay , and there be fifteen hundred of they : which slave do great service in time of the siege : for they labour daily to make our defence , and to cast earth out of the ditch , and in all work they be necessary at our need . 
 how the great Turk arrive in person before Rhodes . 
 the 25 day of the say month many of our man go out for to skirmish in the field and make great murder of Turks , and in likewise do our artillery . and it be to be note that the 28 day of the same month the great Turk in person passed le Fisco a haven in the main land with a galley and a fust , and arrive about noon , where his army lie , the which day may be call unhappy for Rhodes . for his come , his presence and continual abide in the field be and have be cause of the victory that he have have . when the galley that he come in be arrive , all the other ship of the host hang banner aloft in their top and on their sail yard . 
 soon after that the Turk be arrive , he go to land , and mount on his horse , and ride to his pavilion which be in a high place call Megalandra , four or five mile from the town out of the danger of the gun shoot . and on the morrow , as it be report to we , he come to a church nigh the town call saint Steven , for to view the town and fortress , whereas they have set up mantellet for to lay their ordinance . 
 the last day of July , one of our brigandine go out with a good company of man array as Turk , and some of they can speak turkish , and go by night to land through the Turk host , and demand 21 
 if there be any that will pass over into turquoise , that they shall haste they to come . the Turk ween that they have be of turquoise , there enter a 12. person , the which be carry to Rhodes , by who we know what they do in the camp . 
 the first day of August the captain Gabriel martin-ingo be make knight of the order of the religion by the lord great master , and be make the first ancient of the italian nation , of the first baliage or priory that shall be vacant . and in the mean season the religion shall give he twelve hundred ducat for pension every year , and the same day he be receive to the council in the room of a bailiff . 
 the five day of the say month our master gunner be slay with a gun , which be great loss for we at that time . 
 the 15. day of the say month be know and take for a traitor , messire John Baptista , the physician aforesaid , which confess his evil and devilish do , and have his head strike of . 
 of the marvelous mount that the turk make afore the town , and how the captain be order in the trench . 
 after the come of the great Turk , the enemy begin to shoot with ordinance of another sort than they do before , and special with harquebuss and handgun , and also to make their trench and approach . and also they do more diligence than afore , to bring you earth nigh the town with spade and pickax . and it be to weet , that they move the earth from half a mile off , and there be shoot out of the town innumerable stroke with ordinance against the say earth , and innumerable quantity of people hide behind the say earth , be slay . nevertheless they never leave work till they have bring it to the brim of the ditch : and when it be there , they raise it high and high in strengthen it behind . and in conclusion the say earth be high 
 1522. then the wall of the town by 10. or 12. foot , and it seem a hill . and it be against the gate of Auvergne and Spain , and beat our man that be at the gate and bulwark , in such wise , that none dare be see till certain defence and repair be make of plank and board to cover our people and keep they from the shot . 
 and at the gate of Italy be make such another heap , and in none other part . 
 when the trench be thus make to the ditch , the enemy make hole in the wall of the ditch outward : [ ii i . 81. ] wherethorow they shoot infinite with handgunne at our man aswell on the wall as on the bulwark , and slay many of they . then the basha and captain enter into the trench , each to his place after their order and dignity : that be to wit , Mustafa bassa as chief captain enter the trench direct to the bulwark of England with his people and captain under he . Pery Bassha go to the trench against the gate of Italy with his folk and captain under he . acmek Bassha be in the trench of Auvergne and Spain with the aga of the janizaire and the Beglarby of Romany with he . the Beglarby of Anatolia be in the trench of Provence . Allibey be with his company against the garden of saint Anthony on the north side , and diverse other captain with he , and set his ordinance against the wall of the gate of almain , which be but weak , and set up seven mantellet by the mill towards the west : and by the space of eight or nine day they beat upon the same wall ; which put we in great fear , if they have continue . howbeit the noble lord great master forthwith cause repair to be make within , and plank 8c table to be set to fortify the say weak wall : and abide there from the morning till night , to cause it to be the more haste . the artillery of the gate of almain , and the massif of the gate of the camp and of the palace beat so sore and so often upon the say mantellet that it weary the enemy to make and repair they so often : and they take up the piece , and bear they away . and also they can not well beat the say 
 wall because the brim of the ditch without be almost as high as the wall that they beat . but or they bear the artillery away , they beat the steeple of saint Johns church so , that the most part be break and cast down . the foresaid mantellet be appoint to beat saint Nicholas tower , and by the space of ten or twelve day they shoot sore against it : but they have so sharp and vigorous answer , that there be not one mantellet that abide whole a hour . the captain of the say tower and his folk do such diligence and business in shoot off their piece , that the enemy dare set up no more mantellet by day , nor shoot no more but only by night , while the moon do shine , which be a thing worthy of memory , of marvel , and of praise . at the last when they have beat against the say tower a certain time , see that it further nothing , they take their ordinance from thence , and bear it where they think best . 
 during the shot in the say place , the other captain be not idle nor in a sleep , but without cease night and day they beat the wall of England and Spain , and set fourteen mantellet against it , shoot great bombard , whereof some of the stone be five or six span about , and some other of nine or ten : and within a month and less they cast down the wall almost even smooth with the Barbican . and when the say wall be so beat , they set to beat the bulwark of Spain for to raise the defence : and in their trench they set three great bombard , which shoot stone of eleven span in compass , and with the say piece they beat the say bulwark and wall in such wise , that they make great brack , and the stone and earth that fall , serve the enemy for ladder , so that they may come upon the plain ground . in like sort they raise the defence from the height of the bulwark at the postern of Provence , and set three great piece on the brim of the ditch , which shoot stone of eleven span against the wall , and within a while they make a breach as at the postern of Spain . the artillery of the town do shoot 
 without cease against the mantellet , and break many of they , but they make other as it be say in the night . for they have all thing that belong to they , and need . and out of the postern of England be shoot a gun that break down one of the say mantellet , and hit upon one of the piece , and slay four or five man , and bear away both the leg of the master of the ordinance , which die soon after : whereof the great Turk be very ill content , and say that he have rather have lose one of his basha or captain then the say master . also it be to know that there be three or four mantellet address against the plain ground of Italy , and by continual beat of shot that they make , there be also a breach , and by the earth and stone that be fall , they may come up to it . 
 of the politic repair and defence that the ingenious captain Gabriel Martiningo , make within the town against the breach in the wall . 
 the captain Gabriel Martiningo , prompt , diligent , and expert to give remedy to the needful place , forthwith cause to make the traverse upon the wall whereas the breach be , with good repair , and gun small and great which be set in the say traverse , the which shoot not only at the breach but to the trench , and make great murder of enemy aswell at the assault that they make as otherwhiles . and beside the traverse , the say captain plant small artillery , as harquebuss , and handgunne upon certain house within the town , that stand open against the breach , with good repair : [ ii i . 8 2. i and from that place great slaughter of Turks be make at the assault . also it be of truth that beside the say mantellet that shoot against the wall of England and Spain with great bombard , be two mantellet in a high place towards the way to the garden of maupas , in the which be certain double gun , as basilisk with 
 hollow stone and wild fire in they , which shoot against the wall into the town at all adventure for to make murder of people : howbeit , thank be God , they do no great harm but to the house . 
 after these great and terrible beat , and that the enemy have way to mount upon the town wall , and come to hand with we by traverse of their trench to the fall earth within the breach more sure , and without hurt of our gunshot , shoot through hole that they make in the wall of the ditch without , they cast up much stone and earth , because it shall cover they from the shot of the bulwark of Auvergne . and also they shoot fervent against the bulwark of Spain , for to raise the defence , of the which at the last they raise the most part , reserve only a few gunner below in the i of the say bulwark , which little or nothing damage they . and this be touch the gunshot , whereof i say not the three part , because it be a thing incredible to they that have not see it . for some day they shoot with those great bombard that be on the brim of the ditch , and from the mantellet bend against the wall of England and Spain 20 or 30 time and more . and i believe very that since the creation of the world such artillery , and so great quantity be never bend and lay before any town as have be against Rhodes at this siege . wherefore it be no marvel if the wall be and have be beat down , and if there be breach and cliff in many place . 
 of the mine that the turk make : and how they overthrow part of the bulwark of England . 
 a nd because as it be say before , that the great hope that the enemy have to get the town of Rhodes , be by mine , therefore now after that i have speak of the gunshot and beat , i shall show of the mine that the turk make , the which be in so great quantity , and in so many place , that i believe the 26 
 1522. three part of the town be mine : and it be find by account make , that there be about 60 mine , howbeit , thank be God , many of they come not to effect , by occasion of the countermine that they within make , and also trench that the right prudent lord the great master cause to be make deep within the ditch , unto two or three foot of water . the which trench and certain pit that he have cause in the say ditch to be wrought , or the host arrive , serve right well since : for night and day there be man in they to watch and hearken when the enemy mine , for to meet they , and cut their way , as be do many time . 
 and for to speak of the mine that have effect , and damage we , it be to wit , that the four day of September , about four hour after noon , the enemy put fire in two mine , one be between the postern of Spain and Auvergne , which do not hurt but to the Barbican . the other be at the bulwark of England , which be so fell and strong , that it cause most part of the town to shake , and cast down a great part of the say bulwark at the spring of the day : and by the earth and stone that fall into the ditch , the enemy come upon the bulwark with their banner , and fight sore and mighty with our man , not with hand , but with shot of handgunne . the lord great master that be come 15 day or more with his succour to the say bulwark , go with his company to help they that fight . after that they have fight the space of two or three hour , the enemy repel and drive back by our man from the say bulwark , and beat with ordinance on every side , withdraw they with their loss , shame , and damage . and this be the first a thousand victory that our lord give we , and there abide of our enemy a thousand and moor . English 
 when this assault be do , they make another at the bulwark . breach in the wall of Spain , and mount upon it , but the ordinance of the traverse of the wall and of the house make so fair a riddance , that they be very 27 
 will to withdraw themselves : for at the retreat , and also at their come the say ordinance of the bulwark do they great damage , albeit that they have make some repair of earth . of our man die that day 25 or thereabouts , aswell knight as other . and the same day in the morning depart out of this world Gabriel de pomerolles lieutenant to the lord master , which on a certain day before fall from the wall as he go to see the trench in the ditch , and hurt his breast , and for fault of good attendance he fall into a fever , whereof he die . 
 how the Turks assail the bulwark of England , and how they be drive away . 
 the nine day of the say month , at seven in the morning the enemy put fire in two mine ; one at the postern of Provence , which have none effect : the other be at the bulwark of England , which fell another piece nigh to that that be cast down [ ii i . 83. ] afore . and the say mine be as fierce as the other , or more , for it seem that all the bulwark go down , and almost all they that be in it run away . and when the standard of the religion come into the say bulwark , the enemy be at the breach ready to have enter : but when they see the say standard , as people lose and overcome , they go down again . then the artillery of the bulwark of quosquino , and of other place , find they well enough , and slay many of they . howbeit , their captain make they to return with great stroke of sword and other weapon , and to remount upon the earth fall from the say bulwark , and pight seven banner nigh to our repair . than our man fight with morispike and fix spear against they the space of three whole hour , till at the last they be well beat with great ordinance and small on every side , withdraw themselves . and of their banner our man gate one , for it be not possible to get any more : for assoon as any of our man go up on our 
 1522. repair , he be slay with small gun of the trench , 
 and hole make in the wall of our ditch . and there two thousand be slay of our enemy that day at the assault 2000 of mean man , and three person of estate , which lie al^ar^U dead along in the ditch , with fair and rich harness . 
 and it be report to we from the camp , they be three saniacbei , that be to say , great seneshalle or stuard . and of Christian man of our part abode about thirty person . and this be the second victory give to we by the grace divine . 
 how sir John Bourgh Turcoplier of England be slay at a assault of the english bulwark . 
 the 17 day of the same month , about midday , the enemy come again to give another assault to the say bulwark , at the same place aforesaid , without set of fire in mine , and bring five banner with they , nigh to the repair . then be there strong fight on both part , and there be get two of their banner , of the which sir Christopher Valdenare , that time castelaine of Rhodes , gate one : the other be in the hand of sir John Bourgh Turcoplier of England , chief captain of the succour of the say postern of England , a valiant man and hardy : and in hold of it he be slay with the stroke of a handgunne , which be great damage . the say banner be recover by one of our man . and after long fight on both side , the enemy see that they get nothing but stripe , return into their trench . at the say fray the lord prior of saint Giles pre John be hurt through the neck with a handgun , and be in great danger of death , but he escape and be make whole . the same day , and the same hour of the say assault , the enemy mount to the breach in the wall of Spain , and come to the repair to the hand of our man , and fight a great while : but the great quantity of artillery that be shoot so busy and so sharp from our traverse on each side , 29 
 and out of the bulwark of Auvergne and Spain , skirmish they so well , that there abide as many at that assault as at the other of England , well near to the number of 5000. and they withdraw themselves with their great loss and confusion , which be the three time that they be chase and overcome : thank be our lord , which give we the force and power so to do , for they be by estimation a hundred against one . 
 also the 22 day of the same month of September they fire a i between Italy and Provence , which do no harm . 
 of the terrible mine at the postern of Auvergne . 
 a nd the 23 day of the same month they fire two mine , one at the postern of Spain , and the other by the bulwark of Auvergne , the which mine by Auvergne be so terrible , that it make all the town to shake , and make the wall to open from above to beneath unto the plain ground : howbeit , it fall not , for the mine have vent or breath in two place , by one of the countermine , and by a rock under the Barbican , the which do cleave , and by that cleave the fury and might of the mine have issue . and if the say two vent have not be , the wall have be turn upside down . and for truth , as it be report to we out of the camp , the enemy have great hope in the say mine , think that the wall shall have be overthrow , and then they may have enter into the town at their pleasure : but when they see the contrary , they be very ill please . and the captain determine to give assault at four place at once , to make we the more ado , and to have a entrance into the town by one of the four . and the say day and night they cease not to shoot artillery : and there come in hope of the mine threescore thousand man and more into the trench . 
 how the bulwark of Spain be lose , and [ ii i . 84. ] woonne again . 
 the 24 day of the same month , a little before day , they give assault at the breach of Spain , to the bulwark of England , to the postern of Provence , and at the plain ground of Italy , all at one hour and one time . the first that mount to the breach of Spain , be the aga of the janissary , a valiant man , and of great courage with his company , and bear three score or three score and ten banner and sign , and pight they in the earth of the breach , and then fight with our man , and mount on our repair , make other manner of fray and more rigorous than the other that be pass , and the say skirmish last about six hour . and forthwith , as the assault be give , a great sort of Turks enter into the bulwark of Spain , and set up eight or nine sign or banner upon it , and drive our man out , i can not tell how , unware or otherwise . and they be lord of it three hour and more . howbeit there be of our man beneath in the i of the say bulwark , the which bulwark so lose , give we evil hope . but incontinent the lord great master be at the defence of the postern of England , have knowledge of the say loss , and that there be great fight and resistance on both side at the breach of Spain , march thither with the banner of the crucifix , leave the charge of the say bulwark in the hand of the bailiff de la Moree messieur merry Combant . and the lord mount on the wall of Spain , whereas then begin a great skirmish , and every man lay his hand to work , as well to put the enemy out of the breach , as to recover the bulwark that be lose . and the say lord send a company of man into the bulwark by the gate of the mine , or by the Barbican , the which enter at the say gate , and go up , where they find but few Turk . for the artillery of the postern of England , right against the bulwark of Spain , have so well meet and 
 scatter they , that within a while our man have slay all they that be leave . and thus the say bulwark be get and recover again , and with all diligence be make new repair and strength to the say place . and in like sort , the enemy be put from the breach , and few of they escape , and all their banner and sign be leave with we . Surely it may be say , that after the grace of God ( the traverse of Spain and Auvergne , and the small artillery set on the house right against the say breach , as it be say , with the come and presence of the lord great master ) have give we this day victory . 
 as touch the murder of the people , do by the artillery of the bulwark of England and Spain , the quantity be such that a man can not perceive nor see any ground of the ditch . and the stench of the mastiff carrion be so grievous , that we may not suffer it seven or eight day after . and at the last , they that may save themselves do so , and withdraw themselves to the trench : and the reverend lord great master abide victorious of the say place , and in like sort of the other three assault , the which be but little less than that of Spain , for they fight long . but in conclusion , the enemy beat on all side , and in so many sort , with artillery be put back , and vanquish , that there die that day at all the four place fifteen or sixteen thousand . and the slaughter be so great at the plain Italy , of the curse enemy , that the sea be make red with their blood . and on our side also die to the number of a hundred man or more . and of man of dignity in the town , have charge , die sir Francis de Frenolz commander of Romania , which sir Francis be chief captain of the great ship of Rhodes , and he be slay at the plain of Italy , wound with two stroke of harquebuss : it be great damage of his death , for he be a worthy man , perfect , and full of virtue . there die also messieur nastasy de sancta Camilla aforenamed , have two hundred man under he of the lord great master succour . there die also diverse other worthy 
 man that day , and many be maim . among all other that lose any member , messieur John de le touse call pradines , be at the say bulwark , with a stroke of artillery have his arm smite away , in great danger to have lose his life ; howbeit by the help of God he die not . in like sort the same day be hurt sir William s*r Will-Weston abovesaid , captain of the postern of England , and have one of his finger strike away with a harque - gi^ pos . bush : which knight behave himself right worthy at tear hurt . all the assault . of the Turk part , of great man , be two principali captain slay under the aga of the janissary , and another captain that be come out of surey to the camp certain day before , with six hundred Mameluke , and two or three thousand moor . 
 and of they that be hurt of great man the Beglarby of Anatolia have a stroke with a arrow as he be in the trench of Provence . and many other be wound , who name be not rehearse here , because of shortness . 
 how the great Turk for anger that he can [ ii i - 85. ] not get the town , will have put his chief captain to death , and how they make 11 mine under the bulwark of England . 
 during this assault , the great Turk be by his pavilion in a place that he have cause to be make , and see all the business , and how his people be so sharp put back , and the victory lose on his side , and be very sore displease , and half in despair : and he send for Mustafa bassa with who he be angry , and chide he bitter , say that he have cause he to come thither , and have make he to believe that he shall take the town in fifteen day , or a month at the further ; and he have be there already three month with his army , and yet they have do nothing . and after these word he be purpose to put he to death in the camp : but the other bassa show he that he ought not to do justice in the land of his enemy , for it will comfort they five 33 c 
 and give they courage . whereby he do moderate his anger , and leave he for that time , and think to send he to Cairo , lest the people there will rebel , by occasion of the captain of Cairo which die a few day before . howbeit he depart not so sudden , and or he go he think to assay if he may do some thing for to please the Turk , aswell for his honour as for to save his person , and be marvellous diligent to make mine at the bulwark of England for to overthrow it . and by account be make 11 mine aswell to the say bulwark as elsewhere , beside they speak of before , and that they have fire . but the most part of the say mine come to no proof though they put fire in they , and many be meet with countermine , and break by our man by the good diligence and solicitude of sir Gabriel du-chef steward of the house of the lord great master , which have the charge of the say countermine at the same bulwark . in the which business he behave himself well and worthy , and spare not his good to cause the people to work and travel , but spend thereof large . 
 how the turk be mind to have go their way , and of the traitor within the town , and of many great assault . 
 the Turks see that by mine they be nothing further , nor may not come to their intention , and have but small store of gunpowder , be in deliberation and mind to have raise the siege , and go their way . and in deed some of they bear their carriage towards the ship : and also certain number of people go out of the trench with their standard straight to the ship . and it be write unto we from the camp how the janissary and other of the host will fight no more : and that they be almost all of one opinion for to go away , save some of the captain of the foresay Mustafa Bassha or Acmek Bassha . and in the mean season the false traitor that be in the town write letter to the camp , give they knowledge of all that 34 
 be say and do among we . and also a albanese flee to the enemy camp , and warn they not to go , for the gunshot be nigh waste , and that the most part of the knight and people shall be they short . 
 in like sort then write the abovesaid Chanceller sir Andrew de merall , who treason as then be not know : but when it come to the effect of his treason , i shall show the knowledge that he give to the enemy at diverse time . 
 when the basha and captain of the host understand the say warning , they all purpose for to tarry , and cause those tiding of the town to be know over all the army . And begin again to shoot artillery fast than ever they do , for new shot be come into the camp . then Mustafa Bassha be in despair that he can do nothing by mine , by gunshot , nor by assault , he be ready to depart for to go into surey by the great Turk commandment , before his depart he think once again to assay his adventure , and make three assault three day together . the first be on a Saturday the four day of October a hour before night . the other on Sunday in the morning . and the three on Monday after dinner . and the say three assault be make to the bulwark of England . and it be assail but with stone and bag full of artificiali fire . and at these three assault many of our man be hurt with the say fire , and with the stone that come as thick as rain or hail . but in the end the enemy get nothing but stroke , and return into their trench evil content , and murmur , and swear by their Mahomet that Mustafa Bassha shall not make they to mount any more to the say bulwark . and that it be great folly for they to cause they to be slay at the will and fantasy of one man . Theise word say in greek by some of the enemy be hear of our man as they go down from the bulwark . and because ( as it be say ) that the enemy at the assault that be make , come up by the earth and stone that fall from the breach , 35 
 some of our man advise to dense the barbican , and take the earth out of the ditch , to the end that the enemy shall not easy come upon the wall . and in effect ween that it be well and behooveful to be do , by great diligence night and day by mine they void the barbican , and the most part of the earth that lie in the ditch be bring into the town , the which be hurtful afterward , and be cause that the enemy get the foot of the wall . notwithstanding , they have it but scarce . but this cleanse further the time , and cause they to get it soon than they shall have do if the earth have lie still : but their final intent be to raise the defence of the bulwark , and then pass at their pleasure , and enter into the barbican , as they have do : for the enemy see that the barbican be cleanse , think to get into it by trench , and so they do , howbeit they be certain day let by our handgun shot . the enemy see that they may not come near it , cover their trench with table to save themselves : and then they make a i whereby they may go to the barbican . so by these two mean , afterward they be repair with earth and with a certain wall that they make for to eschew the shot of the bulwark of Auvergne and Spain : and in the mine they find but two gunner , which they slay by force of man . by this manner they be cover on all part and without any danger , pass through and leap into the barbican , and get the foot of the wall ; which be the 17 day of October , a unhappy day for the poor town , and occasion of the ruin thereof , and win of the same . 
 at this point they sleep not , but light and with great delight they begin to pick and hew the wall . And ween to make remedy therefore , and to find mean to drive they from the say barbican with engine of fire and barrel of gunpowder , we slay many of they , but it avail nothing : for the quantity and multitude of people that travel there be so great , 36 
 that they care not for loss of they . and if we have have man enough within the town , there may have be remedy to have raise they from thence : but consider that our force and total hope be in people , we leave to do many thing that may have be do , and that shall have be good then and other time also , for fault of man of war . at the last it be ponder by sir Gabriel Martiningo , that there be no remedy but to hew the wall for to meet they , and beat they with ordinance and with engine of fire to burn and undo they . than our man begin to hew the wall , and make some hole to shoot at the enemy that sleep not , but do as we do , and shoot at we , and indeed they slay and hurt many of our man . then sir Gabriel Martiningo ordain to make repair within the town at the front where they do cut the wall , to the end that after the wall be cut , the enemy shall know with who to meet . the traverse be make on each side with good artillery great and small : and the say traverse and repair be of the length that the enemy have cut the wall , and begin at the massife of Spain make by the reverend lord great master merry d’amboise , and end at the church of saint Salvador . the which traverse and repair the vulgar people call the Mandra , that be to say , the field . 
 the mean time that the repair and traverse be make with all diligence , sir Gabriel Martiningo never cease go to every place to purvey for all thing : and he be on the bulwark of Spain to ordain all thing that be needful , there come a stroke of a handgun from the trench that smite out his eye , and put he in danger of his life , but thank be God , he recover his health within a month and a half . his hurt come ill to pass , for the need that we have of he that time in all thing , and special to the repair of the breach . nevertheless the lord prior of saint Giles ( not ignorant in all such thing ) with other man expert in war , attend to the say repair and traverse , there and elsewhere . 
 the enemy on the other side night and day without rest ( for the great number of labourer that they have hourly and new ready ) hew and undermine the say wall .. 
 and the 20 day of October they put fire in the undermine , ween to have cast down the wall , but they can not : than they will have pull it down with great rope and ancres , but the artillery of the bulwark of Auvergne break their rope , and send they away light . 
 at the last they make a i under the say wall and breach : and the 26 day of the same month they do put fire to the same mine , ween to have overthrow the wall , which it do not , but raise it , and make it to fall almost straight upright , which be more disadvantage to the enemy then profit . than they shoot artillery at it , which in few day beat it down , and they have open and way to come into the town . nevertheless it be not necessary for they as than to enter : for the artillery of our repair beat they in the forepart , and the artillery lie at the two mill at the postern of quosquino , and in that of England , whereas be a basilisk that beat right upon the breach with other piece : and therefore the enemy seek other mean , and begin to raise the earth between our two wall , draw towards the bulwark of England on the one side , and towards Auvergne on the other side , and will have [ ii i . 87. ] cut the wall further than our traverse be for to come in unbeaten of our artillery . then be the repair enlarge and make great with the wall that be cut , of the height of twelve , and 16 foot in breadth : and so the enemy may go no further forward , but shoot great artillery against our repair , for to break and cast they down , and also they make trench for to come right to the breach , and unto the repair : and certain we look day by day , and hour by hour for to have some assault . the reverend lord great master , the which , as it be say , have leave the bulwark of England the day that 38 
 the great assault be make , and since that time he move not from thence while they hew the wall , and where as the breach be , because that they be most dangerous and most unquiet place . and continual the say lord keep he behind the say repair with his knight and man of succour , intentive ready and prepare to live and die , and to receive his enemy as they ought to be receive . and he abide three or four day at the say breach , continue since it be make , unto the end , fight with his enemy every day in great peril of his body : for oftentimes he put himself further in the press then need for the danger of his person , but he do it for to hearten and strengthen the courage of his people , be so well willing to defend and die for the faith . 
 how the enemy assail the postern of Provence and Italy , and how they be drive away . 
 by the will of our lord , the enemy always in fear and dread , will give none assault , but continual shoot against our repair , and make trench for to pass forward into the town : by the which trench they shoot infinite with harquebuss and handgunne , and slay many of our folk , and special of they that wrought and make the repair that be break and erase . and they put we in such extremity , that we have almost no more slave nor other labour people for to repair that which they break night and day , which be a great hindrance for we , and the begin of our perdition . and if we have much to do in that place , there be not less at the gate of Provence , and at the plain of Italy : for daily they be do either with assault or skirmish , and most at the plain of Italy . howbeit by the help of our lord with the good conduct of the captain of succour of the same place , the prior of Navarre , that be prompt and intentive , and can well encourage his man , the enemy have always the worst , and be 39 
 drive from the say plain , and from the breach of Provence . 
 how the treason of sir Andrew de merall be know , and of the marvellous assault that the turk make . 
 upon these term and assault , the treason of the chancellor sir Andrew de merall , of who i speak before , be perceive : for a servant of he , name Blasie , be find shoot a quarrel of a crossbow with a letter , whereof he be accuse to the lord great master , which command to take he and examine he by justice , and he confess the shot of that letter and of other before , at the commandment of his master : and say that he have great acquaintance with the turk basha , and that it be not long since he have write a letter to they , warn they that they shall not go , for gunshot begin to fade , and the man be waste by slay and hurt at the assault in great quantity : and if they abide still and give no more assault , at the last the town shall be they . and diverse other thing the servant say of his master , of the which i have speak part before at the beginning , and of the warning that he give to the great Turk for to come . 
 but to return to the plain of Italy . after many battle and assault do in the say place , by continual shot of seventeen great gun that beat the say plain , the repair and traverse be almost break and lose . and by trench the enemy be come join to the breach , and never cease to grate the earth and scrape the earth to cause the repair and traverse to fall : and at the last the most part fall down , and our man be constrain to leave the say plain , save a cantle that be towards the sea , as it be the three part thereof . certain day afore the enemy come to the foot of the plain , and do cut it , and raze the earth , and at the last they pass through unto the town wall : and anon begin to hew and cut as they do at that of Spain . 
 1522. the lord great master see that , anon cast down a part of the church of our lady de la victoria , and of a other church of saint Panthalion . and within they begin to make the repair and traverse as at the place of Spain , whereto be make extreme diligence , but not such as the lord will , and as be needful , because there be no labourer for to help . after that the enemy have win the most part of the bulwark of England and the plain of Italy , they purpose to make assault to the say [ ii i . 88 ] plain , and to the breach of Spain , and to enter into our repair to win they for to make a end of we . and for ever to affeeble the repair and for to abash we , the 28 day of November all along the day and night they cease not to shoot great artillery , both from the brim of the ditch with those great piece , cast stone of nine and eleven foot about , and from the mantellet without . and as it be reckon , they shoot the same day and night 150 time or more against our repair and traverse of the wall . 
 and in the morning the 29 day of the same month , the vigil of saint Andrew at the spring of the day , the enemy go through the breach with their banner , and enter into the repair with great number of people than they do at the great battle in September , hardy and furious for to fight with we . but at their come in , the artillery of the traverse , and the handgunne , and the gunshot of the mill find they so well and so sharp , that he that come in , be anon dispatch and overthrow , and there abide above 2000 of the turk slay . the other that come after see their fellow so evil welcome , as people that be astonish and lose , they turn again to their trench : at who the artillery of the mill shoot victorious , and haste they to go apace : and by report from the camp there die six thousand or more that day : the which day may be call very happy , and well fortunate for we , thank be God , for there be none that think to escape that day , but to have die all , and lose the town : howbeit , the 
 pleasure of our lord be by evident miracle to have it otherwise , and the enemy be chase and overcome . and it be to be note that the same day the rain be so great and so strong , that it make the earth to sink a great deal that they have cast into the ditch , for to cover they from the shot of Auvergne . and the say earth be so sink , the artillery of the say bulwark ( unware to they ) smite they go and come , and make great murder of the say dog . the say day also the enemy come to the plain of Italy for to assault it ; but when they understand that their fellow have be put back so rude , and with so great slaughter , they be afraid , and so they return again to their trench . 
 how the Turks get the plain ground of Spain . 
 a nd that do , acmek bassa see their business every day go from worse to worse , and that at the assault be but loss of people , without do of any good , and that there be no man that willing will go to it any more , he intend to give no more assault , but to follow his trench , and by they enter covert without loss of a man from the breach to the other end of the town . semblable he intend for to win the plain earth beside Spain : the which to get , he come at pleasure to the foot of the wall , and begin to beat down the plain ground , and to give many skirmish and conflict to our folk that keep it . and there be slay many good man . and at the last , for default of more help and of gunshot , it be leave and give up of our man , and so lose . that do , the enemy come thither as in other place . and this be the three place where they come near to the foot of the wall . and whoso well consider in what estate the poor town be at that time , see their enemy have so great advantage , may well say , and judge , that at length it shall be take , and a lose town . 
 how a genouois come to the gate of the town for to speak for a treaty , and deliverance of the same . 
 a few day after the say journey a christian man that be in the camp , the which by his speech be a 
 Genouois or Siotis , come to the gate of Auvergne , and demand to parley , and after that he be demand what he will have , he say that he have marvel of we why we will not yield our self , see the piteous estate the town be in : and he as a christian man counsel we to yield our self with some agreement : and that if we will look thereto , that some shall be find expedient to do somewhat for our safeguard . and it be very like that he say not such word , nor speak so farforth in the matter , without commission from some of the chief of the camp , or of the great Turk himself . to the which Siotis be answer , that he shall go away with a evil hap , and that it need not to speak of appointment : and that though the enemy have great advantage , there be yet enough wherewith to receive and feast they , if they make any assault . Theise word hear , he go away : and two day after he come again , and demand to speak with a merchant Genouois of the town , name Matthew de Ura , and he be answer that he which he demand , be sick , and may not come , but that he shall deliver the letter , and it shall be give to he . the say Siotis say nay , and that he will give it himself , and speak with he : and say that he have also a letter of the grand signior , for the lord master . upon this he be bid to go his way : and to set he pack , they shoot after he a piece of artillery . the next [ ii i . 89. ] day after Ballantis albanese that be flee through the breach of Spain to the camp , come from the say genouois propose such word , or like as the other have say , say likewise that the grand signior have send a letter to the lord master . to who no word be speak , nor answer make , for the lord great master 
 as wise and prudent consider that a town that will hear entreating be half lose , defend upon the pain of death sith that Siotis have speak these two time , that none shall be so hardy to speak nor answer they of the camp , without his knowledge and commandment : but see they be such ambassador , they report the word of the say Albanese , or ever the say lord have knowledge of the word of the Siotis . the which word spread through the town put many folk in thought , and will have undo that that the Siotis say : the which be no marvel whereas be much people , for with good will and most often they regard soon to save the life of they and their child , than they do to the honour of the residue . howbeit not one dare speak a word open of that business , but all secret : and some come and speak to certain lord of the great cross for to speak to you lord great master . and in effect some lord speak thereof to he , persuade he that it shall be good to think thereon , see that the town go to loss . to who the say lord show many thing for his honour and the religion : and that no such thing ought to be do or think for any thing in the world , but rather he and they to die . the lord hear this answer , go their way , and then return again to the say lord , advise he more to think well on all thing , and to the salvation of his town and of his religion . and they say moreover , that they doubt that the people will rather have a peace then to die themselves , their wife and child . the lord see that such word be as thing enforce , as who shall say , if thou do it not , we shall do it as wise man and prudent , willing to make remedy of needful thing by counsel , call the lord of his council for to have advice in these do , and other . and when they be assemble , the lord propose the word that be to he denounce , and say : with these term and word come two or three merchant and citizen of the town that knock at the door of the council , and present a supplication 
 to the great master , and lord of the council , whereby they require and beseech meek the say reverend lord to have respect to they and their poor household , and to make some appointment with the great Turk , see that the say matter be already forward in purpose , that he will do it ; and that it will please he to consider the piteous and sorrowful estate that the town be in ; and that there be no remedy to save it : and at the least way , if the lord will not make appointment , to give they leave ( of his goodness ) to have their wife and their child out of the road to save they , for they will not have they slay nor make slave to the enemy . and the conclusion be , that if the say lord will not purvey therefore , they will purvey for it themselves . and there be write in the say request the name of eight or ten of the rich of the town . which word of the say supplication be hear , the say lord and his council be abash and ill content as reason will , see that it be but a course game , and think on many thing to make answer to the say citizen , for to content and appease they : and also to see if they shall intend to the appointment , as they require , and after as the Genouoys have report : and the better to make the say answer , and to know more plain in what estate the town be in all thing : that be to wit , first of gunpowder , and then of man of war , and of the battery . also be demand and ask the lord of saint Giles pre John , which have the charge of the gunpowder , and then the captain sir Gabriel Martiningo , for be over their man of war ( as it be say ) as to he that know the truth ; if the town may hold or not , or there be any mean to save it . the say lord of saint Giles arise , say and affirm upon his honour and his conscience that almost all the slave and labourer be dead and hurt , and that scant there be folk enough to remove a piece of artillery from one place to another , and that it be unpossible without folk any more to make or set up the repair they which every day 
 be break and crush by the great , furious , and continual shot of the enemy artillery . as for gunpowder the say lord say , that all that be for store in the town , be spend long ago , and that which be new bring , be not to serve and furnish two assault . and he see the great advantage of the enemy be so far within the town , without power to put or chase they away , for default of man , be of the opinion that the town will be lose , and that there be no mean to save it . the word of the say lord finish , the captain Gabriel Martiningo for his discharge say and declare to the reverend lord and they of the council , that see and consider the great beat of the shot that the town have suffer , and after see the enter which the enemy have so large , and that they be within the town by their trench both endlong and overthwart ; see also that in two other place they be at the foot of the wall , and that the most part of our knight and man of war and other be slay and hurt , and the [ ii i . 90. ] gunpowder waste , and that it be unpossible for they to resist their enemy any more , that without doubt the town be lose if there come no succour for to help and resist the siege . the which opinion and reason of these two worthy man and expert in such feat , understand and ponder by the lord great master and the lord of the council , they be most part advise for to accept and take treaty if it be offer , for the safeguard of the common people , and of the holy relic of the church , as part of the holy cross , the holy throne , the hand of saint John , and part of his head , and diverse other relic . howbeit the lord great master to who the business belong very near , and that take it most heavy , and be more sorrowful than any of the other , as reason require , be always steadfast in his first purpose , rather will to die then to consent to such a thing , and say again to the lord of the council : advise you , and think well on every thing , and of the end that may happen , and he propose to they two point : that be to 
 wit , whether it be better for we to die all , or to save the people and the holy relic . the which two point and doubt be long time dispute , and there be diverse opinion : nevertheless , at the last they say all , that howbeit that it be well and safe do to die for the faith , and most honour for we , notwithstanding see and consider that there be no remedy to resist against our enemy , and mean to save the town ; and on the other part , that the great Turk will not oppress we to forsake our faith , but only will have the town , it be much better then , and tend to great wealth to save all the jewel abovesaid , that shall be defile and lose if they come in the hand of the enemy of the faith . and also to keep so much small people , as woman and child , that they will torment and cut some in piece , other take , and perforce cause they to forsake their faith , with innumerable violence , and shameful sin that shall be commit and do , if the town be put to the sword , as be do at Modon , and late at bellegrado . whereby they do conclude , that it be better , and more agreeable to God , for to take the treaty , if it be proffer , then for to die as people desperate , and without hope . 
 how the great Turk send two of his man to the town , to have it by entreat . and how the lord great master send two knight to he , to know his assurance . 
 upon these consultation and word almighty God that save they which trust in he , and that will not that so many evil and cruelty shall come to the poor city and inhabitant of it , and also that the great Turk may not arise in over great pride and vainglory , put he in mind to seek to have the say town by treaty , which he ought not to have do for his honour , nor by reason , for the town be in a manner his . and in like sort he ought not to have let we go as he do , see that 47 
 we be his mortali enemy ever , and shall be still in the time come , consider the great slaughter of his people that we have make in this siege . howbeit , the eternal goodness have blind he , and have please that these thing shall be thus , for some cause unknown of we . and for conclusion , the great Turk send to have a communication and parley in follow the word of the Genouese aforesaid . then be a sign set upon the church of the abbey without the town , to the which be make answer with another at the mill of quosquino . and forthwith come two turk to speak with they of the town . then the lord great master send the prior of S. Giles pre John , and the captain Gabriel Martiningo to know the cause of their come . and when they come to they , without hold of long speech , the two Turk deliver they a letter for to bear to the lord great master from the great Turk , and then return safe into their tent . when the two lord have receive it , they bear and present it to the reverend lord great master , which cause it to be read . by the which the great Turk demand of the lord great master to yield the town to he , and in so do he be content to let he go and all his knight , and all the other people of what condition soever they be , with all their good and jewel safe without fear of any harm or displeasure of his folk . and also he swear and promise on his faith so to do . the say letter be seal with his signet that he use , that be as it be gild . and he say afterward , that if the lord great master will not accept the say treaty , that none of the city , of what estate soever he be , shall think to escape , but that they all unto the cat shall pass by the edge of the sword , and that they shall send he a answer forthwith , either yea or nay . after the sight of the content of the say letter of so great weight , and the time so short for to give so great a answer , and with demand , the say lord great master and all the lord of the council be in great thought , howbeit they determine to give 
 a answer , see the estate of the town so ill that it can be no worse . hear the report and opinion a day or two before of the two lord ordain to view the defect of the town , say that the town be lose without remedy : consider also that the principal of the town will have appointment . and in likewise , at the [ ii i . 91. ] other counsel all the lord have already will and declare , that it be better to save the town for respect of the poor people , than to put it all whole to the fury of the enemy , whereupon they agree and conclude to take the foresay treaty . after the conclusion take , answer be make ready for a good respect ; that be to weet , to take the Turk at his word , to the end that he shall not repent he of it , nor change his opinion . for every hour his people win and enter further and further into the town . and for to go unto the great Turk be ordain these two knight , sir Passin afore name , and he bear the token of the white cross : and another of the town name Robert the perruse judge ordinary . 
 when these two ambassador have make they ready , they go out at the gate of quosquino , and go to the tent of acmek basham , capitaine general . and because it be late , and that they may not go that day to the great Turk , on the next day in the morning the foresay captain acmek lead and convey our say ambassador to the great Turk pavilion , that they may have the more knowledge plain , and for to hear his will as touch the word which be report to the reverend lord great master , and after , the content of his letter and write . 
 when the say two ambassador be depart out of the town , there do enter two man of authority of the camp ; one be nephew or kinsman of the say acmek , the other be the great Turk truchman , which the lord master cause to be well receive , and they be lodge nigh the say gate of quosquino . and then truce be take for 3. day , and the enemy come to our repair , and speak with our folk and drink one with another . 
 five 49 d 
 how the ambassador of Rhodes speak with the great Turk , and what answer they have . 
 when our ambassador have make reverence to the great Turk , they say that the lord great master of Rhodes have send they to his Imperiali majesty to know what he request , and desire that they may talk together , and how the great master have receive his letter . the great Turk answer they by his truchman , that of demand to speak together , nor writing of letter to the great master he know nothing . howbeit , sith the great master have send to he for to know his will , he bid say to they that the great master shall yield he the town . and in so do he promise by his faith for to let he go with all his knight , and all other that will go with their good , without receive any displeasure of his people of the camp . and if he accept not the say treaty , to certify he that he will never depart from Rhodes till he have take it , and that all his might of turquoise shall die there , rather than he will fail of it , and that there shall neither great nor little escape , but unto the cat they shall be all cut in piece , and say that within 3. day they shall give he a answer , for he will not that his people shall loose time , and that during the say truce they shall make no repair nor defence within the town . 
 when the great Turk have end his word , our ambassador take their leave of he , and return to the town , and there be give to each of they a rich garment of branch velvet , with cloth of gold of the turkish fashion . then acmek basham take sir Passin , and lead he to his pavilion , and entreat he right well , cause he to abide all that day and night : and in eat and drink they have many discourse of thing do at the siege , question each with other . and among all other thing our ambassador demand of acmek , and pray he to tell for truth how many man die of the camp while the siege be lay . the say 5° 
 bassa swear upon his faith and certify , that there be dead of the camp of violent death , that be to say , of gunshot and other way , 64000. man or more , beside they that die of sickness , which be about 40. or continue . see e thousand . Rhodes . 
 how one of the ambassador make answer of his message , and how the commons will not agree to yield the town . 
 return we now to our purpose and to the answer that our ambassador bring to the lord great master . the say Robert Perruse make the answer , and tell what the great Turk have say , certify that he will have a answer quick either yea or nay . the which answer after the demand of the great Turk have be purpose and conclude by the whole counsel , and his offer and treaty accept , howbeit the say ambassador have it not to do so soon nor the first time that they go for good reason , but yet they will not defer it , for fear lest he shall repent he . and [ ii i . 92. ] upon these determination that they will have send the say peruse to bear the answer , come some of the common people of the town to the lord great master , that be with the lord of the counsel , and say that they be advertise of the appointment that he have make with the great Turk , and that he will yield the town with covenant by he take , which they suppose ought not to be do without call of they . and because they be not call to it , they say that they will not agree thereto , and that it be better for they to die , for the great Turk by some way will put they all to death , as be do in Bellegrado in Hungary . 
 how the lord great master send two ambassador for the commons to the great Turk . 
 when the reverend lord great master have hear their word , he say gracious to they , that as touch the acceptation of the great Turks offer , it be 
 needful so to do in the degree that the town be , and the cause wherefore he have do it the counsel have see and discuss , and that it be a thing that may not , nor ought not to be say nor publish in common , for report of it to the enemy by traitor , but be keep still and secret . and moreover , that it be conclude to make a answer short , for to take the great Turk at his word , lest he repent he . for if they have be call , or the answer have be give , it have be overlong business , and in the mean time the Turk may have change his mind , and that that he have do and conclude with the great Turk , the lord of the counsel have well regard and consider in all thing , and for their profit and advantage , as much or more as for that of the religion . and that they will send to the great Turk again other ambassador , the better to know his will , and to be sure of his promise . then the lord great master ordain two other ambassador for to go to the great Turk , which be two Spaniard , the one name sir Raimon market , and the other messire Lopez , at who issue enter sir Passin the first ambassador , and the other two go to the tent of acmek basham , for to lead they to the great Turk . and when they be within the Turk pavilion , and have do he reverence as appertain , our ambassador say that the great master have hear and see his demand to yield the town . and for y‘ it be a thing of great weight , and that he have to do and say with many man of diverse nation , and because the time of answer be so short , he may not do that that he demand so soon . howbeit he will speak with his people , and then he will give he a answer . 
 how the Turk begin the assault , and how the commons agree to yield the town . 
 when the great Turk hear the answer of our ambassador , he say nothing , but command his bassa that they shall begin the battle again to 52 
 the town , the which be do , and then the truce be break , and the shot of the enemy be sharp than it be afore . and on the other side nothing , or very little for fault of powder : for that that there be leave , be keep for some great assault or need . howbeit the say amek bassa keep one of the ambassador , and messire Lopez only enter . the great master see the war begin , and the shot thick than it be afore , and the enemy enter hourly by their trench further into the town , call they that before have say to he , that they will not the town shall be yield , but have rather for to die . and therefore the say lord say that he be content for to die with they , and that they shall dispose they to defend themselves well , or to do their endeavour better than they have do in time past . and to the end that each one of they shall have knowledge of his will ( for as than he speak but to four or five of they that gainsay he ) he make a cry through all the town , that all they that be hold to be at the postern or gate shall give attendance , and not to come away day nor night on pain of death : for afore , the rhodian come but little there . and that the other that be not of the postern , or that be of his succour , shall go to the breach of Spain where the say lord be continual , and not to go away day nor night on ; the abovesaid pain . the say cry make , each one be obedient for a day or twain , howbeit a young rhodian leave his postern and go to his house , which on the next day be hang for break of the lord commandment . notwithstanding that , by little and little the people annoy they , and their heart fail , and leave the postern and breach : in such wise , that the enemy may come in without find great resistance , but of a few that the lord master cause to abide there ( that be to weet ) knight of his succour . and in the night he seek out more people for to keep you watch at the say breach , and pay to they as much as they will . the say lord see himself thus aban - 
 don and leave of his people , he send to ask they again wherefore they do not their endeavour , and why they come not to day , as they say before . which make answer that they see and know well that the town be lose for certain reason that be tell they : by occasion whereof they have gainsay the ordinance of the say lord , and say that they have be wrong inform of diverse thing : and on the other side , that they fear that the Turk will not hold his word . but since they see that there be none other remedy but to abide the adventure and fortune , they say that they put all to the say lord to do what he think good , and that he will see what be best for they . And require the lord to do they so much favour as to let they choose one or two among they for to go to the great Turk with his ambassador for to have surety of he . the which be grant , and two ordinary ambassador be choose for they ; one Nicholas Vergo tie , and the other Piero of saint Cretice , and the foresay Passin shall return with they for to make the say answer . then the great master or they depart ( prolong the time as much as he may ) advise to send a letter to the great Turk , the which his grandfather have write or cause to be write . in the which letter he give his malediction or curse to his child and successor , if they enterprise to besiege Rhodes . the say Robert Perruse bear the say letter , and as he be accustom , he go to acmek bassa for to cause he to have audience , and to present the say letter . and the bassa say he will see the letter : for it be the guise in the great Turk court , that none may speak to he nor give he a letter , but he be advertise first what shall be say , or what shall be write . when the bassa have see the word write in the say letter , he break it and cast it on the ground , and do tread upon it , say many injurious and villainous word to the say judge . And bid he return apace to his great master , and bid he to think on his 
 business , and to make answer to the great lord ( as he have send and command ) or else it shall not be long or he see his dolorous and woeful end . and that same day be take two man of we that bear earth towards the bulwark of England . of who the say acmek cause a officer to cut off their nose , finger and ear , and give they a letter to bear to the lord great master , wherein be great word and threaten . after the say perruse be return , messire Passin be send again to the say bassa , for to know of he if the great Turk will be content with any sum of money for his cost and expense , that he have make for his army . the which answer that such word or offer of silver be not to be say nor present to the great lord on pain of life , and that he set more by honour then by silver . and therefore he bid he return and say to the great master that he shall make answer to the great lord after his demand , to yield or not yield the town . the say Passin make relation of the word of the bassa to the great master : the which for the great sorrow that he have defer always , see himself in such piteous estate . notwithstanding , the say lord put all to the will of our lord , 8c consider that there be no remedy to do otherwise , nor to resist any more his enemy : and be constrain on all side to make the appointment , with great heaviness , inestimable dolour and bewailing , at the last give his voice to yield the town ( with the treatise or offer to he present ) which be the 20. day of December , the year of our lord a thousand five hundred and two and twenty . 
 a answer to such as will make question for the deliverance of the city of Rhodes . 
 a nd if by any it be demand wherefore the say lord great master have yield the town to the great Turk , request it with treaty and covenant , which be a sign that he fear and will no more fight , but 55 
 go his way . to this i answer : notwithstanding that the great Turk be advertise by some traitor , and by other that flee into the camp , that the powder almost fail , and that there be but few man of war within the town , yet he believe not , nor give credence of all that be report to he , but think very that we have enough for a great while , and consider that he must tarry till they be waste and spend , whereto behoove time . And see all his estate enter into strange place , and into the land of his enemy , and have be there already six month , ( and not without great danger of his own person ) think on the other side , that take the town by assault , he shall lose many of his folk ; and yet when he have overcome and win the town , they shall fall each upon other in depart of the booty or pillage , doubt final the hazard of war . for these reason and other that may be allege , the great Turk have much rather to have the town by composition and treaty , then otherwise . and it suffice he to drive his old enemy out of the country of Levant , and set the subject of his [ ii i . 94. ] country in rest and surety . and we of the town that know our weakness , and that we may do no more , it seem better to save so much small people , than we and they to fall into the fury of our enemy , for otherwise can we not have do , but tempt God , and die as in despair . 
 how the city of Rhodes be yield to the great Turk , and of the evil behaviour of certain Turk . 
 but to return to our principali : after that the reverend great master have give his voice to the yield of the town , he send the say Passin again for to bear it to the great Turk . and with he go the two man that be choose of the commons , and they go all three together to the tent of acmek bassa . to who the say Passin first make this piteous answer 56 
 and conclusion to yield the town . notwithstanding , he say the people have ordain two man among they for to go to the great Turk , to speak of their particular do , and to have some surety of their person , wife , and child , to the end that it be not do to they , as to those of Bellegrado . the say acmek lead the three ambassador towards the great Turk . and when they be enter into the pavilion , the say messire Passin make the report of his ambassade to the say lord , and say that the great master yield he the town under the promise make by his Imperiali majesty , with the treaty promise . of the which promise he hold he sure and certain , and that he will do no less : howbeit , the people have require he to give they licence to go to his majesty for to ask some request of he . then the two citizen beseech the great Turk that he will for surety remove his camp from the town , to the end that they shall have no manner of harm to their body nor good , and that they that will go , shall go , and that they that will abide still , may be well entreat . the great Turk answer by his interpreter to messire Passin , that he accept the town , and promise again upon his faith , and on his honour to the lord great master , that he will perform that he have promise , and send to he by the same Passin that he shall not doubt of the contrary : and if he have not ship enough for to carry his people and their good , that he will let they have of he , and that he will deliver the artillery that be wont to be in the ship of you religion . and as touch the request of the people , he say that he will remove the camp , and that they that will abide , may abide , and they shall be well entreat , and shall pay no tribute in five year , and their child shall not be touch , and who so will go within the say space of five year , they shall go in good time . Theise word end , our ambassador take leave of he , and when they be depart , they speak again with the say 
 acmek bassa for to have a letter of the content of the promise of the say lord . and by his commandment the say letter be make , whereby he promise to let go the great master with all his knight , stranger and man of the town that will go with their good , without have displeasure of any of his people of the camp , or by the way . when the letter be make , it be deliver to messire Passin . and as touch withdraw of the camp , the say bassa promise again that he will do it , since the great lord will so : howbeit he remove but from the trench , and some of his people go a little way off . and the say bassa demanded in the Turk behalf , that they shall send to he in hostage four and twenty knight , whereof two shall be of the great cross , and two and twenty citizen . and the say lord shall send only a captain with three or four hundred janissary , for to keep the town when the camp be withdraw . and so it be do ; and beside this he give twelve day respite to the lord great master , to prepare he and depart out of Rhodes . and in conclusion all this do , our ambassador return and make the report to the reverend great master of all that they have do and practise with the great Turk , and the say bassa , and give he the letter for to go sure . then the great master with his counsel ordain the four and twenty person , and other of the town . when they be ready , they go to the camp , where they be well entreat four day . during this time , Ferra bassa pass from the main land to the camp , with four and twenty or five and twenty thousand janissary , which by the commandment of the great Turk be go upon the border of the country of the sophy . for the Turk see the people of the camp discourage and will no more to go to the assault , send to the say bassa to come to Rhodes with his people , which will have withstand we sore , as fresh man . and it be the work of God and a wonderful miracle , that they come after that the 58 
 appointment be make : for if they have come afore , it be to be suppose that the deed have go otherwise , and there have be many stroke give : but i believe that the end shall have be piteous for we , but God will not that the Turk shall have victory upon we as he may have have , see the great advantage that he have in all thing , but he blind he and will not that he shall know his might . and on the other part it may be say and marveil how it be possible always [ ii i . 95. ] to have overcome our enemy in all assault and skirmish , and at the end to loose the town , it be the will of God that so have please for some cause to we unknown . 
 it be to be think , that lack of man and gunshot , and the enemy so far within the town , and ready to enter at other place , with the treason , have cause the town to be lose . two or three day after the come of the say bassa , his janissary and other of the camp enter into the town , which be on Christmas day , within the time give to we , and then the Turk word be break , if it be his will or not , i can tell . nevertheless there be no sword draw , and in that respect promise be keep . but they make pillage , and enter by force into the house of the castle , and take all that they may and will . after that they have ransack the house , they enter into the church , and peel all that they find , and break the image . and there be no crucifix , nor figure of our lady , nor of other saint , that be leave whole . then with great inhumanity they go into the hospitali of poor and sick folk , call the fermorie , and take all the silver vessel that the sick folk be serve with , and raise they out of their bed , and drive they away , some with great stroke and staff , and some be cast down from the gallery . when these hound have do that act , they go to the church of saint John and take down the tomb of the great master , and seek if there be any treasure hide in they , and they force certain woman and maiden . and all they that be christen and have 
 be Turk afore , be they man , woman or child , and child that the say man have make Christians , they lead into turquoise , which thing be of great importance than any of the other . the morrow after Christmas day , the reverend lord great master go to the great Turk pavilion for to visit he , and to be better assure of his promise , the which lord he make to be well and gracious receive . and he signify unto he by his interpreter , that the case so happen to he be a thing usual and common ; as to loose town and lordship , and that he shall not take overmuch think for it : and as for his promise , he bid that he shall not doubt in any thing , and that he shall not fear any displeasure to his person , and that he shall go with his people without fear . with these word the say lord thank he , and take his leave and depart . 
 finis . 
 lenvoy of the translator . 
 go little book , and woeful tragedy , of the rhodian fearful oppugnation , to all estate complain ruthful ■ of thy estate , and sudden transmutation : excuse i if in thy translation ought be amiss in language or in work , i i submit with their supportation , to be correct , that be so small a clerk . 
 . 