the queen commission under her great seal , [ n . i . 157. ] to her servant master William hareborne , to be her majesty ambassador or agent , in the part of turquoise . 1582. 
 221 
 the same in english . 
 ELizabeth , by the clemency of the most good and most great God , the only creator and governor of all thing , queen of England , France , and Ireland , invincible , and most mighty defender of the true faith , against all idolater false profess the name of Christ , to all and singular person , to who sight and view these our present letter may come , greeting . whereas the 222 
 commission to William hareborne o . 1582. 
 most renown , and most invincible prince zuldan Murad can , the most mighty governor of the kingdom of turquoise , and monarch of the east empire , have enter into league and friendship with we , ( which we for our part , as much as lie in we , do purpose solemn , and inviolable to keep in all time to come ) and whereas for the better countenance and authorize of the same , the foresay renown emperor have grant unto our subject free liberty of traffic , in all the part of his sacred empire , with as ample and large a grant of privilege , as be give to other good prince our neighbour and confederate , the grant of which privilege , we take very thankful , and acceptable , be certain , and thorough determine to keep and maintain , with the like goodness and courtesy of mind , desire nothing more , than with a honourable respect to nourish , and deserve the benevolent affection of good prince towards we : know you , that we think well , and have good [ ii i . 158. ] confidence in the singular trustiness , obedience , wisdom , and disposition of our well-beloved servant William hareborne , one of the esquire of our body , towards we , and our service , do by these present , make , ordain and constitute he our true and undoubted orator , messenger , Deputie , and agent . give and grant unto he power and authority , in our name , and for we , to confirm the foresay league of friendship , to take into his hand , and to ratify the grant of the privilege , and to command , and enjoin by the authority of our majesty , all and singular our subject trade and deal in any of the coast and kingdom of that empire , that as long as they remain in traffic with his subject , they be obedient to the prescription and order of the foresay privilege , apply themselves in all thing , and through all thing , to such duty and service as appertain to so great a league and friendship , and the offender against this our league to receive justice , and punishment accord . we further give unto he power and authority over all and singular our subject , deal , and 
 223 
 use traffic in any place or part whatsoever , subject to the government of that empire , to appoint the place of their traffic , in what haven or city it shall please he , and to prohibit they from all other place , and wheresoever their traffic be appoint to be keep , there to make and create consul or governor , to enact law and statute , by the virtue and tenor whereof all our foresay subject , and every one of they , shall both public and private use and behave themselves , to correct and punish the breaker of those law : and last of all , to do and fulfil all and singular thing whatsoever , which shall seem requisite and convenient for the honest and orderly government of our say subject , and of the manner of their traffic in those part . promise assure , and in the word of a prince , that whatsoever shall be do of our say orator and agent , in all , or in any of the premise , not repugnant and contrary to our law , shall be accept , ratify , and confirm by we . in witness whereof , we have cause these our letter to be make patent , and our seal thereunto to be appense . give at our castle of Windsor , the 20. day of November , in the year of Christ 1582. and of our reign the 24. 
 . 