remembrance for master S. to give he the better [ ii i . 161. ] occasion to inform himself of some thing in England , and after of some other thing in turquoise , to the great profit of the common weal of this country . write by the foresaid master Richard Hakluyt , for a principali english factor at Constantinople 1582. 
 ince all man confess ( that be not barbarous breed ) that man be bear as well to seek the common commodity of their country , as their own private benefit , it may seem folly to persuade that point , for each man mean so to do . but wherein man shall seek the 
 common commodity , and what way , and by what mean that be to be bring about , be the point or sum of the matter , since every good man be ready to employ his labour . this be to be do by a infinite sort of mean , as the number of thing be infinite that may be do for common benefit of the realm . and as the chief thing so to be do be diverse , so be they to be do by diverse man , as they be by wit and manner of education more fit , or less fit , for this and for that . and for that of many thing that tend to the common benefit of the state , some tend more , and some less , i find that no one thing , after one other , be great than clothe , and the thing incident to the same . And understand that you be off right good capacity , and become a factor at Constantinople , and in other part in turquoise , i find no man fit of all the english factor there , than you . and therefore i be so bold to put you in mind , and to tell you wherein with some endeavour you may chance to do your country much good , and give a infinite sort of the poor people occasion to pray for you here throughout the realm : this that i mean be in matter of cloth , etc 
 231 
 1 thirst , you can deny but that this realm yield encage ? the most fine wool ! , the most soft , the most strong wool , the most durable in cloth , and most apt of nature of all other to receive die , and that no island or any one kingdom so small do yield so great abundance of the same : and that no wool be less subject to moth , or to fret in press , than this , as the old parliament robe of king , and of many noble peer to be show may plain testify . 
 2 there be no commodity of this realm that may set so many poor subject on work , as this do , that do bring in so much treasure , and so much enrich the merchant , and so much employ the navy of this realm , as this commodity of our wool do . 
 ample and full vent of this noble and rich commodity be it that the common weal of this realm do require . 
 Spain now abound with Wools , and the same be clothe . turquoise have wool , and so have diverse province of Christendom and of heatheness , and cloth be make of the same in diverse place . 
 1 but if England have the most fine , and the most excellent wool of the world in all respect ( as it can be deny , but it have ) 2 if there may be add to the same , excellent artificiali , and true make , and excellent die , 3 then no doubt but that we shall have vent for our clothes , although the rest of the world do abound much more with wool than it do , and although their workmanship and their die be in every degree equal with we of England , unless the labour of our people employ that way , and the material use in die shall be the cause of the contrary by dearth . 
 but if foreign nation turn their wool , inferior to we , into true and more excellent make cloth , and 
 232 
 shall die the same in true , sure , and more excellent and more delectable colour , then shall they sell and make ample vent of their clothes , when the english cloth of better wool shall rest unsold , to the spoil of the merchant , of the clothier , and of the breeder of the wool , and to the turn to bag and wallet of the infinite number of the poor people employ in clothe in several degree of labour here in England . 
 which thing weigh , i be to tell you what thing i wish you in this realm , and after in turquoise , to endeavour from time to time , as your laisure may permit the same . 
 before you go out of the realm , that you learn : 
 i r i ' oh know wool , all kind of clothes make in this a realm , and all other employment of wool , home or foreign , be you same in feel cloak , feel hat , in the red knit cap for Barbary , call bonetto rugio colorado , or whatsoever , etc 
 all the deceit in clothmaking ; as the sort together of wool of several nature , some of nature to shrink , some to hold out , which cause cloth to cockle and lie uneven . 
 the evil sort of thread of good or bad wool , some tootoo hard spin , some tootoo soft spin deliver to be weave . 
 the fault in weave . 
 the fault in walk , row , and Burling , and in rack the clothes above measure upon the teintors : all which fault may be learn of honest man , which fault be to be know to the merchant , to be shun and not to be use . 
 2 then to learn of the dyer to discern all kind of colour ; as which be good and sure , and which will not hold : which be fair , which not ; which colour by the dearth of the substance be dear , and which by reason of the cheapness of the material with which they be die , be cheap colour . 
 233 
 [ ii i . 162. ] 
 3 then to take the name of all the material and substances use in this city or in the realm , in die of cloth or silk . 
 to learn to know they , as which be good , which bad . 
 and what colour they die . 
 and what price they be of . 
 and of they which bee the natural of this realm , and in what part of the realm they be to be have . 
 and of all the foreign material use in die to know the very natural place of they , and the plenty or the scarceness of each of they . 
 these thing superficial learn in the realm before you go , you be the fit in foreign part to serve your country , for by this mean you have a enterie into the thing that i wish you to travel in . 
 what you shall do in turquoise , beside the business of your factorship . 
 1 tporasmuch as it be report that the woollen JT clothes die in turquoise be most excellent die , you shall send home into this realm certain mowster or piece of show to be bring to the dyer hall , there to be show , partly to remove out of their head , the tootoo great opinion they have conceive of their own cunning , and partly to move they for shame to endeavour to learn more knowledge to the honour of their country of England , and to the universali benefit of the realm . 
 2 you shall devise to amend the die of England , by carry hence a apt young man bring up in the art , or by bring one or other from thence of skill , or rather to devise to bring one for silk , and another for wool and for woollen cloth , and if you can work this by ordinary mean , than to work it by some great bassa mean , or if your own credit there be not sufficient by mean of your small abode in those party , to work it by the help of the french ambassador there resident , for which purpose you may insinuate your self into his 
 234 
 acquaintance , and otherwise to leave no mean unsought that tend to this end , wherein you be to do as circumstance may permit . 
 3 then to learn to know all the material and substance that the Turk use in die , be they of herb , simple or compound , be they plant , bark , wood , berry , seed , grain , or minerali matter , or what else soever . but before all other , such thing as yield those famous colour that carry such speciali report of excellence , that our merchant may bring they to this realm by ordinary trade , as a right mean for the better vent of our clothes . 
 4 to know the use of those , and where the natural place of they and of each of they be , i mean the place where each of they grow or be breed . 
 5 and in any wise , if anile that colour blue be a natural commodity of those part , and if it be compound of a herb , to send the same into this realm by seed or by root in barrel of earth , with all the whole order of sow , set , plant , replant , and with the compound of the same , that ' it may become a natural commodity in this realm as woad be , to this end that the high price of foreign woad ( which devour yearly great treasure ) maybe bring down . so shall [ ii i . 163. ] the merchant buy his cloth less dear , and so he shall|be able to occupy with less stock , be able to afford cloth cheap , make more ample vent , and also become a great gainer himself , and all this to the benefit of this realm . 
 6 to do the like with herb and plant , or tree that in die be of any excellent use , as to send the same by seed , berry , root , etc : for by such mean saffron be bring first into this realm , which have set many poor on work , and bring great wealth into this realm . thus may sumack , the plant wherewith the most excellent black be die in Spain , be bring out of Spain , and out of the hand of the same , if it will grow in this more cold climate . for thus be woad bring into this 
 335 
 realm , and come to good perfection , to the great loss of the french our old enemy . and it do marvellous import this realm to make natural in this realm such thing as be special in the die of our clothes . and to speak of such thing as colour blow , they be of great use , and be ground of the most excellent colour , and therefore of all other to be bring into this realm , be it anile or any other materiali of that quality . 
 7 and because yellow and green be colour of small price in this realm , by reason that oide and greenwee wherewith they be die be natural here , and in great plenty , therefore to bring our clothes so die to common sale in turquoise be to the great benefit of the merchant , and other poor subject of this realm , for in sale of such our own natural colour we consume not our treasure in foreign colour , and yet we sell our own trifle dear perhaps . 
 8 the wool be natural , and excellent colour for die become by this mean here also natural , in all the art of clothe then we want but one only speciali thing . for in this so temperate a climate our people may labour the year throughout , whereas in some region of the world they can work for extreme heat , as in some other region they can work for extreme cold a good part of the year . and the people of this realm by the great and bless abundance of victuali be cheap feed , and therefore may afford their labour cheap . and where the clothier in Flanders by the flatness of their river can make walkmille for their clothes , but be force to thicken and dress all their clothes by the foot and by the labour of man , whereby their clothes be raise to a high price , we of England have in all shire store of mill upon fall river . and these river be in temperate zone be not dry up in summer with drought and heat as the river be in Spain and in hot region , nor freeze up in winter as all the river be in all the north region of the world : so as our mill 236 
 remembrance for a factor may go and work at all time , and dress clothes cheap . than we have also for scour our clothes earth and clay , as walker clay , and the clay of Oborne little inferior to soap in scour and in thick . then also have we some reasonable store of alum and Copporas here make for die , and be like to have increase of the same . than we have many good water apt for die , and people to spin and to do the rest of all the labour we want not . so as there want , if colour may be bring in and make natural , but only oil : the want whereof if any man can devise to supply at the full with any thing that may become natural in this realm , he whatsoever he be that can bring it about , may deserve immortali fame in this our common wealth , and such a devise be offer to the parliament and refuse , because they deny to endow he with a certain liberty , some other have obtain the same before , that practise to work that effect by radish seed , which only make a trial of small quantity , and that go no further , to make that oil in plenty : and now he that offer this devise be a merchant , and be dead , and withal the devise be dead with he . 
 it be write by one that write of Africa , that in Egypt in a city call Muhaisira there be many mill employ in make of oil of the seed of a herb call sesamum . Pena and Lobell , physician , write in our time , that this herb be a cod herb full of oily seed , and that there be plenty of this seed bring out of Egypt to diverse city in Italy . if this herb will prosper in this realm , our merchant may easy bring of it , etc 
 9 have herein thus trouble you by raise to your mind the consideration of certain thing , it shall not be impertinent to tell you that it shall not be amiss that you note all the order of the degree of labour use in Turkey , in the art of clothe , and to see if any way they excel in that profession our people of these part , and to bring notice of the same into this realm . 
 io and if you shall find that they make any cloth of 237 
 Suf ply of the want of oil . 
 leo Africanus ; lib . 8. 
 any kind not make in this realm , that be there of great use , than to bring of the same into this realm some mowster , that our people may fall into the trade , and prepare the same for turquoise : for the more kind of cloth we can devise to make , the more ample vent of our commodity we shall have , and the more sale of the labour of our poor subject that else for lack of labour become idle and burdenous to the common weal , and hurtful to many : and in England we be in our clothing trade to frame our self accord to the desire of foreign nation , be it that they desire thick or thin , broad or narrow , long or short , white or black . 11 but with this proviso always , that our cloth pass out with as much labour of our people as may be , wherein great consideration ought to be have : for ( if vent may so admit it ) as it be the great madness in the world for we to vent our wool not clothe , so be it madness to vent our wool in part or in the whole turn into broad cloth , if we may vent the same in kersey : for there be great difference in profit to our people between the clothing of a sack of wool in the one , and the like sack of wool in the other , of which i wish the merchant of England to have as great care as he may for the universali benefit of the poor : and the turn of a sack of wool into bonnet be better than both etc and also not to carry out of the realm any cloth white , but die if it may be , that the subject of this realm may take as much benefit as be possible , and rather to seek the vent of the clothes die with the natural colour of England , than such as be die with foreign colour . 
 12 and if of necessity we must be force to receive certain colour from foreign part , for that this climate will not breed they , i wish that our merchant procure anile and such other thing to be plant in like climate where now it grow , in diverse other place , that this realm may have that bring in for as base price as be possible , and that fall out with one place we may receive the same from another , and not buy the same 238 
 at the second or the three hand etc for if a commodity that be to be have of mere necessity , be in one hand , it be dear purchase . 
 i how many several colour be die be to be learn of our dyer before you depart . 
 2 than how many of those colour England do die of her own natural home material and substance , and how many not . 
 3 then to bring into this realm herb and plant to become natural in our soil , that may die the rest of the colour , that present of our own thing here grow we can not yet die , and this from all foreign place . 
 4 there be a wood call Logwood or Palo Campechio , it be cheap and yield a glorious blue , but our workman can not make it sure . this wood you must take with you , and see whether the silk diers or wool diers in Turkey can do it , with this one you may enrich your self very much , and therefore it be to be endeavour earnest by you . it may bring down the price of woad and of anile . 
 other some thing to be remember . 
 if you can find out at Tripoli in Syria or elsewhere a vent for the cap call in Barbary , bonetto colorado rugio , which be a red scottish cap as it be without brim , you shall do your country much good : for as a sack of wool turn into fine Devonshire kersy do set many more people on work then a sack spin for broad cloth in a gross thread , so a sack of wool turn into those bonnet do set many more poor people on work , than a sack turn into kersey , by reason of the knit . and therefore if you can endeavour that , you work great effect . and no doubt that a marvellous vent may be find out of they into Africa by the way of Alexandria , and by alcayer southeast and southwest thence . 
 2 and by the vent of our knit hose of woollen yarn , worsted yarn , and of linen thread , great benefit to 
 239 
 this may be learn at Alger . 
 our people may arise , and a great value in fine kersey and in those knit ware may be couch in a small room in the ship . and for these thing our people be grow apt , and by endeavour may be draw to great trade . 
 3 saffron the best of the universali world grow in this realm , and forasmuch as it be a thing that require much labour in diverse sort , and set the people on work so plentiful , i wish you to see whether you can find out ample vent for the same , since it be go out of great use in those part . it be a spice that be cordial , and may be use in meat , and that be excellent in die of yellow silk . this commodity of saffron grow fifty mile from Tripoli in Syria , on a high hill call in those part Garian , so as there you may learn at that port of Tripoli the value of the pound , the goodness of it , and the place of the vent . but it be say that from that hill there pass yearly of that commodity fifteen mode lade , and that those region notwithstanding lack sufficiency of that commodity . but if a vent may be find , man will in Essex about Saffronwalden and in Cambridge shire revive the trade for the benefit of the set of the poor on work . so will they do in Hereford shire by wale , where the best of all England be , in which place the soil yield the wild saffron common , which show the natural inclination of the same soil to the bear of the right saffron , if the soil be manure and that way employ . 
 4 there be a wall town not far from Barbary , call hub , towards the south from the famous town Telensin , about six mile : the inhabitant of which town in effect be all dyer . and it be say that thereabouts they have plenty of anile , and that they occupy that , and also that they use there in their die , of the saffron aforesaid . the truth whereof , in the southerly port of the Mediteran sea , be easy learn in your passage to Tripoli , or in return from thence homeward you may understand it . it be report at Saffronwalden that a 
 240 
 pilgrim purpose to do good to his country , steal a head of saffron , and hide the same in his palmer staife , which he have make hollow before of purpose , and so he bring this root into this realm , with venture of his life : for if he have be take , by the law of the country from whence it come , he have die for the fact . if the like love in this our age be in our people that now become great traveller , many knowledge , and many trade , and many herb and plant may be bring into this realm that may do the realm good . and the roman have that care , bring from all coast of the world into Italy all art and science , and all kind of beast and fowl , and all herb , tree , busk and plant that may yield profit or pleasure to their country of Italy . and if this care have not be heretofore in our ancestor , then have our life be savage now , for than we have not have wheat nor rye , pease nor bean , barley nor oat , pear nor apple , vine nor many other profitable and pleasant plant , bull nor cow , sheep nor swine , horse nor mare , cock nor hen , nor a number of other thing that we injpy , without which our life be to be say barbarous : for these thing and a thousand that we use more the first inhabitor of this hand find not here . and in time of memory thing have be bring in that be not here before , as the damask rise by doctor Linaker king Henry the seven and king Henry the eight physician , the Turkey cock and hen about fifty year past , the artichowe in time of king Henry the eight , and of late time be procure out of Italy the musk rise plant , the plum call the Perdigwena , and two kind more by the lord Cromwell after his travel , and the Abricot by a french priest one wolf gardener to king Henry the eight : and now within these four year there have be bring into England from Vienna in Austria diverse kind of flower call Tulipas , and those and other procure thither a little before from Constantinople by a excellent man call m. Carolus Clusius . and it be say that since we trade to Zante five 241 queen 
 that the plant that bear the Coren be also bring into this realm from thence ; and although it bring not fruit to perfection , yet it may serve for pleasure and for some use , like as our vine do , which we can well spare , although the climate so cold will not permit we to have good wine of they . and many other thing have be bring in , that have degenerate by reason of the cold climate , some other thing bring in have by negligence be lose . the archbishop of canterbury Edmund Grindall , after he return out of Germany , bring into this realm the plant of Tamariske from thence , and this plant he have so increase that there be here thousand of they ; and many people have receive great health by this plant : and if of thing bring in such care be have , then can not the first labour be lose . the seed of tobacco have be bring hither out of the west Indies , it grow here , and with the herb many have be ease of the reume , etc each one of a great number of thing be worthy of a journey to be make into Spain , Italy , Barbary , Egypt , Zante , Constantinople , the west Indies , and to diverse other place near and further off then any of these , yet forasmuch as the poor be not able , and for that the rich settle at home in quiet will not , therefore we be to make suit to such as repair to foreign kingdom , for other business , to have some care herein , and to set before their eye the example of these good man , and to endeavour to do for their part the like , as their speciali business may permit the same . thus give you occasion by way of a little remembrance , to have a desire to do your country good , you shall , if you have any inclination to such good , do more good to the poor ready to starve for relief , then ever any subject do in this realm by building of almshouse , and by give of land and good to the relief of the poor . thus may you help to drive idleness the mother of most mischief out 
 242 
 William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. . 1583 - 
 of the realm , and win you perpetuali fame , and the prayer of the poor , which be more worth than all the gold of Peru and of all the west Indies . 
 . 