a brief remembrance of thing to be endeavour at Constantinople , and in other place in turquoise , touch our clothe and our die , and thing that be incident to the same , and touch ample vent of our natural commodity , and of the labour of our poor people withal , and of the generail enrich of this realm : draw by m. Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple , and give to a friend that be send into turquoise 1582. 
 Nile wherewith we colour blow to be bring into this realm by seed or root . 
 2 and the art of compound of the same . 
 3 and also all other herb use in die in like manner to be bring in . 
 4 and all tree , who leaf , seed , or bark , or wood do serve to that use , to be bring into this realm by seed or root . 
 5 all little plant and busk serve to that use to be bring in . 
 6 to learn to know all earth and mineral foreign use in die , and their natural place , for possible the like may here be find upon sight . 
 229 
 7 also with the material use in die , to bring in the excellende of the art of die . 
 8 to procure from Muhaisira a city in . / Egypt to Constantinople , the seed of sesamum the herb , and the same into this realm . common trade be between Alexandria and Constantinople , and therefore you may easy procure the seed . of this seed much oil be make , and many mill set on work about the same in the say Muhaisira , and if this seed may prosper in England , infinite benefit to our clothe trade may rise by the same . this city be situate upon Nilus the river , and thence this be bring to Venice and to diverse other city of Italy , and to Antwerp . 
 9 to note all kind of clothing in turquoise , and all degree of their labour in the same . 
 10 to endeavour rather the vent of kersey , then of other clothes as a thing more beneficial to our people . 
 11 to endeavour the sale of such our clothes as be colour with our own natural colour as much as you can , rather than such as be colour with foreign colour . 
 12 to seek out a vent for our bonetto , a cap make for Barbary , for that the poor people may reap great profit by the trade . 
 13 to endeavour vent of knit stock make of Norwich yarn , and of other yarn , which bring to great trade , may turn our poor people to great benefit , beside the vent of the substance , of our colour , and of our diverse labour . 
 14 to endeavour a vent of our saffron for the benefit of our poor people : for a large vent find , it set many on work . 
 . 