the voyage of master Henry Austell by Venice and thence to Ragusa over land , and so to Constantinople : and from thence by Moldavia , Polonia , Silesia and Germany to Hamburg , etc 
 of June we take ship at 
 he 9 0 
 Harewich and the next day land at the 
 [ ii i . 195. ] 
 Hamburg . 
 Brunswig . 
 halberstat . 
 Ramekins in the isle of Walcheren with very stormy weather , and that night go to middleburch in the same island . 
 the twelve we take ship for holland , and the 13. we land at Schiedam : and the same day go to Delft by boat , and so that night to the Hage . 
 the 17. we take ship at Amsterdam , and the 18. we land at Enckhuysen . 
 the 19 we take ship and by the Zuydersee we pass that day the ulie , and so into the main sea ; and the next day we enter into the river of Hamburg call the Elbe . 
 the 21. we come to anchor in the same river before a town of the bishop of Breme call Staden , where they pay a certain toll , and special for wine , and so that night we land at Hamburg , where we stay three day . 
 the 24. we depart from Hamburg in the company of Edward parish merchant , and that day we bait at Wyntson , and so . over the heath we leave Lunenburg on the left hand , and travail all that night . 
 the 25. we meet with master Sanders upon the heath , and pass by a town of the duke of Lunenborg call Geffherne , and from thence through many water , we lay that night within a english mile of brunswig . 
 the 27. we lay at halberstat , which be a great town subject to the bishop of that town . 
 320 
 the 28. we bait at erinsleiben : and there we enter into the duke of Saxon his country : and the same night we lie at a town call Eisleben , where Eisleben . Martine Luther be bear . 
 the 29. we pass by Mansfield , where there be many copper mine : and so that night go to coppermine . Neuburg upon the river of Sala ; and at that time there be a great fair . 
 the 30. we bait at a proper town call Jena Jena . upon the same river , and the same night we lie at Cone upon that river . 
 the first of July we bait at Salfeld : and the same great wood of day we enter first into the great wood of fir tree , rre tree ' and that night to grevandal ; the second to dinner to neustat . 
 the 3. day to dinner at Bamberg : and before we Bamberg . come to the town we pass the river of main that run towards Arnfurt , and that night to Forchaim . 
 the 4. we come to Nurenberg , and there stay Nurenberg . two day . the 6. to bed to Blayfield . 
 the 7. we pass without Weissenburg to dinner at Monhaim , and that night we pass the river of Danubius at Tonewertd , and so to bed to nurendof . 
 the 8. we come to Augspurg , otherwise call Augspurg . Augusta , upon the river of Lech . 
 the 9 we lay at Landsberg upon the say river , in the duke of bavar country . 
 the 10. to dinner at Svanego , and that night to hamber against the mountain , where the small toy be make . 
 the 11. to dinner to Parcberk , and that night to Sefelt in the archduke of Austria his country . 
 the 12. to dinner at Inspruck , and that night to bed at landeck , where there be a toll , and it be the place where Charles the five and his brother Ferdinand do meet . and there be a table of brass with latin letter in memory thereof . 
 five 321 ten 
 the 13. we pass by stizen , and dine at Prisena , and so that night to clusen . 
 the 14. to dinner at bolsan and to bed at Neumark , and by the way we pass the dangerous place , where so many murder have be commit . 
 the border of the 15. to dinner at Trent : that day we enter lta^ - the border of Italy , that night to Lenigo . 
 the 16. to dinner at Grigno , where the last toll of the emperor be : and so we come by Chursa , which be a strait passage . and the keeper thereof be draw up by a cord into his hold . and that night we go to Capana to bed in the country of the venetian . 
 the 17. to dinner at castle Franco : by the way we stay at Tarviso , and there take coach , and that night come to Mestre to bed . 
 Venice . the 18. in the morning we come to Venice , and there we stay 15. day . in which time the duke of Venice call Nicholas de Ponte die , and we see his burial . the senator be continual shut up together , as the manner be , to choose a new duke , which be not yet choose when we depart from thence . 
 the 2. of August at night we do embark our self upon the frigate of Cattaro , a haven near Ragusa . the 3. we come to a town in Istria call Citta nova . 
 the 4. we come to Parenzo , and so that night to Forcera of the bishop . 
 the 5. we pass by Rovigno : and a little beyond we meet with 3. galies of the venetian : we pass in the sight of Pola ; and the same day pass the gulf that part Istria from Dalmatia . 
 the 6. of August we come to Zara in Dalmatia , a strong town of the venetian : and so that night to Sebenico , which stand in a marvelous goodly haven , with a strong castle at the entry thereof . 
 the 7. we come to Lezina , and go not on shore , but travel all night . 
 the 8. we pass by a very well seat town call Curzola , which stand in a island of that name . 
 322 
 the 9 in the morning betimes we land at Ragusa , Ragusa . and there stay three day , where we find many friendly gentleman . 
 the 11. be provide of a janizary we depart from Ragusa in the company of half a dozen merchant of that town : and within 6. mile we enter into the country of Servia . So travel in barren Servia . and craggy mountain for the space of four day , [ ii i . 196. ] we come by a small town of the Turk call Chiernisa , be the 14. of the month ; and there Chiernisa . we part from the merchant .. 
 the 16. we dine in a Cavarsara in a town call 
 Focea , be then great infect with the plague . or , * Fochia . the 17. we lay by a town call Taslizea . 
 the 20. we come to Novibazar . Hovibazar . 
 the 21. we part from thence , travail still in a country very ill inhabit , and lie in you field . 
 the 22. we pass within sight of Nicaea . or , Nissa . 
 the 23. we pass in sight of another town call circui : and about those place we begin to leave the mountain , and to enter into a very fair and fertile country , but as evil inhabit as the other , or worse . 
 the 27. we come to Sophia , where we stay three Sophia . day , be our janissary home : and by good chance we lie in a merchant house of Ragusa , that come in company with we from Novibazar ; and also we have in company , ever since we come from Focea , a Turk which be a very good fellow , and he keep company with we till we come very near Constantinople . 
 the first of September we come to Philippopoli , Philippopoli . which seem to be a ancient town , and stand upon the river of stanuch . 
 the 4. we come to Andrinopoli , a very great and Andrinopolis . ancient town , which stand in a very large and champion country , and there the great Turks mother do lie , be a place , where the emperor of the Turk be wont to lie very much . 
 the 5. we lay in one of the great Cavarzaras , that 
 323 
 be build by Mahomet Bassha with so many goodly commodity . 
 the 6. we lay in another of they . 
 sisveri . the 8. we come to Siliveri , which by report be the last town that remain Christian . 
 the 9 of September we arrive at the great and Constantin - most stately city of Constantinople , which for the situation and proud seat thereof , for the beautiful and commodious haven , and for the great and sumptuous building of their temple , which they call Moschea , be to be prefer before all the city of Europe . and there the emperor of the Turk then live , who name be Amurat , keep his court and residence , in a marvelous goodly place , with diverse garden and house of pleasure , which be at the least two english mile in compass , and the three part thereof join upon the sea : and on the north-east part of the city on the other side of the water over against the city be the town of Pera , where the most part of the Christians do lie . and there also we do lie . and on the north part of the say town be the arsenal , where the galy be build and do remain : and on the southside be all the ordinance , artillery , and house of munition . note that by the way as we come from Ragusa to Constantinople , we leave on our right hand the country of Albania , and Macedonia , and on the left hand the country of Bosnia , Bulgaria , and the river of Danubius . 
 the 14. of September be the Turk Beyram , that be , one of their chief feast . 
 the 15. we go to the black sea call Pontus Pompey Euxinus , and there upon a rock we see a pillar of 
 ptll - white marble that be set up by Pompeius : and from 
 thence we pass to the other side of the water , upon the shore of Asia and there we dine . 
 the 25. we depart from Constantinople . 
 the 29. we come to a ancient town call cher-chisea , that be to say , fourty church , which in the 324 
 old time be a very great city , now full of scatter building . 
 the 4. of October we come to Prouaz , one day Prouaz . journey distant from Varna upon the black sea Varna . 
 the 9 we come to Saxi upon the river of Danubius . 
 the 10. we pass , the say river which in that place be about a mile over , and then we enter into the country of * Bogdania : they be Christians but subject to the Turk . 
 the 12. we come to Palsin upon the river Prut . Pahmufon 
 the 14. we come to Yas the principali town of Bogdania , where Peter the Vayvoda prince of that country keep his residence , of who we receive great courtesy , and of the gentleman of his court : and he cause we to be safe conduct through his say country , and convey without cost . 
 the 17. we come to Stepanitze . 
 the 19 we come to Zotschen , which be the last town Sotschen . of Bogdania upon the river of Neister , that part the say country from Podolia . 
 the 20. we pass the river of Nyester and come to [ ii i - J97 - ] Camyenetz in the country of Podolia , subject to the Nyester a king of Poland : this be one of the strong town by Qa^enetz nature and situation that can be see . 
 the 21. we come to Skala . skala . 
 the 22. to Slothone , or Sloczow . 
 the 24. to Leopolis which be in Russia alba , and so be Leopolis , or the most part of the country betwixt Camyenetz and it . Leunpurg . and it be a town very well build , well govern , full of traffic and plentiful ! : and there we stay five day . 
 the 30. we bait at Grodecz , and that night at Grodecz . 
 Vilna . Vilna . 
 the 31. we dine at Mostiska , and that night at Rodmena . 
 the first of November in the morning before day we pass without the town of Jaroslaw , where they say be Jaroslaw . one of the great fair in all Poland , and chief of horse , and that night to Rosdnoska . 
 32 
 Cracovia . 
 lead mine . 
 Bendzin . 
 salt dig out of mountain in Poland . 
 bitom . 
 oppelen . 
 schurgasse . 
 Brigk . 
 Breslaw . 
 the second to dinner at lanczut , at night to Retsbou . 
 the third to Sendxizow , at night to Tarnow , and that night we meet with the palatine Laski . 
 the four to Vonuez , and that night to Brytska . 
 the five to Kuhena . 
 the 6. to Cracovia the principali city of all Poland : at which time the king be go to Lituania : for he do make his residence one year in Poland , and the other in Lituania . Cracovia stand on the river of 
 Vistula . 
 the 9 we depart from Cracovia , and that night we come to a village hard by a town call Ilkusch , where the lead mine be . 
 the 10. we pass by a town call slawkow : where there be also lead mine , and bait that day at Bendzin , which be the last town of Poland towards Silesia ; and there be a toll . 
 note that all the country of Poland , Russia alba , podolia , Bogdania , and diverse other country adjoin unto they , do consume no other salt but such as be dig in Sorstyn mountain near to Cracovia which be as hard as any stone ; it be very good , and go further than any other salt . that night we lie at bitom , which be the first town of Silesia . 
 the 12. we pass by a great town call Strelitz , and that night we lie at Oppelen upon the river of Odera . 
 the 13. we pass by schurgasse , and that night we lie without the town of Brigk : for we can not be suffer to come in by reason of the plague which be in those part in diverse town . 
 the 14. we pass by olaw , and that night we come to the city of Breslaw , which be a fair town , great , well build and well seat upon the river of Odera . 
 the 16. we bait at Neumargt . 
 the 17. we pass by Lignizt and by Hayn , and that night to Buntzel . 
 the 18. we pass by Naum burg through Gorlitz 
 326 
 upon the river of Neiss , and that night lie without Reichenbach . 
 the 19 we pass by baudzen and Cannitz , and that night to Rensperg . 
 the 20. we pass by Hayn , by Strelen , where we shall have pass the river of Elbe , but the boat be not there , so that night we lie at a town call Mulberg . 
 the 21. we pass the say river , we go by Belgern , by Torga , by dumitch ; and at night to Bretsch . 
 the 22. we pass the Elbe again at Wittenberg , which be a very strong town , with a good universi tie : and that day we pass by coswig . 
 the 23. we pass through Zerbst in the morning , 
 and that night to Magdeburg , a very strong town , and well govern as we do hear . the most part of the country , after we be come one day journey on this side breslawe to this place , belong to the duke of 
 A.D. 
 1585. 
 Magdeburg . 
 saxon 
 the 24. we pass by a castle of the mark of Brandenburg call wolmerstat , and that night we lie at Garleben . 
 the 25. we lay at Soltwedel . 
 the 26. at Berg. 
 the 27. we bait at Lunenborg , that night we lie at Lunenburg . Winson . 
 the 28. we come to Hamborg , and there stay one Hamburg . week . 
 the 5. of December we depart from Hamborg , and pass the Elbe by boat be much freeze , and from the river go on foot to Boxtchoede , be a long dutch mile off , and there we lie ; and from thence pass over land to Emden . 
 thence have pass through Friseland and holland , [ ii i . 198. ] the 25. be Christmas day in the morning we come to Delft : where we find the right honourable the earl of Leicester with a goodly company of lord , knight , gentleman , and soldier . 
 327 
 the 29. to the Briel , and there stay eight day for passage . 
 the five of January we take ship . 
 the 7. we land at Gravesend , and so that night at London with the help of almighty God . 
 . 