the Turk letter to the king of Tripoli in Barbary , command the restitution of a english ship , call the Jesus , with the man , and good , send from Constantinople , by Mahomet beg , a justice of the great Turk , and a english gentleman , call master Edward Barton . anno 1584. 
 onourable , and worthy bassa Romadan Beglerbeg , most wise and prudent judge of the west Tripoli , we wish the end of all thy enterprise happy , and prosperous . by these our highness letter , we certify thou , that the right honourable , William hareborne , ambassador 
 in our most famous porch , for the most excellent queen majesty of England , in person , and by letter have certify our highness , that a certain ship , with all her furniture , and artillery , worth two thousand ducat , arrive in the port of Tripoli , and discharge of her lade and merchandise , pay our custom accord to order , and again , the merchant jade their ship with oil , which by constraint they be enforce to buy of you , and have answer in like manner the custom for the same , determine to depart : a Frenchman assistant to the merchant , unknown to the Englishman , carry away with he another Frenchman indebt to a certain moor in four hundred ducat , and by force cause the Englishman , and ship to depart : who neither suspect fraud , nor deceit , hoist sail . in the mean time , this man , who debtor the Frenchman have 
 314 
 steal away , go to the bassa with the supplication , by who mean , and force of the castle , the Englishman be constrain to return into the port , where the Frenchman , author of the evil , with the master of the ship a Englishman , innocent of the crime be hang , [ il i . 193. ] and six and twenty Englishman cast into prison , of who through famine , thirst , and stink of the prison , eleven die , and the rest like to die . further , it be signify to our majesty also , that the merchandise and other good , with the ship , be worth 7600. ducat : which thing if they be so , this be our commandment , which be grant and give by our majesty , that the english ship , and all the merchandise , and whatsoever else take away be whole restore , and that the Englishman be let go free , and suffer to return into their country . wherefore when this our commandment shall come unto thou , we straight command , that the foresay business be diligent look unto , and discharge . and if it be so , that a Frenchman , and no Englishman have do this craft , and wickedness unknown to the Englishman , and as author of the wickedness be punish , and that the Englishman commit nothing against the peace and league , or their article : also if they pay custom accord to order , it be against law , custom of country , and their privilege , to hinder or hurt they . neither be it meet , their ship , merchandise , and all their good take , shall be withhold . we will therefore , that the english ship , merchandise , and all other their good , without exception , be restore to the Englishman : also that the man be let go free , and if they will , let none hinder they , to return peaceable into their country : do not commit , that they another time complain of this matter , and how this business be dispatch , certify we at our most famous porch . 
 date in the city of Constantinople , in the 992. year of Mahomet , and in the end of the month of October ; and in the year of Jesus 1584. 
 315 
 . 