the voyage and travel of m. Cassar Frederick , merchant of Venice , into the east India , and beyond the Indies . wherein be contained the custom and rite of those country , the merchandise and commodity , aswell of gold and silver , as spice , drug , pearl , and other jewel : translate out of italian by m. Thomas hickocke . 
 Cassar Frederick to the reader . 
 have ( gentle reader ) for the space of eighteen year continual coast and travel , as it be , all the east Indies , and many other country beyond the Indies , wherein i have have both good and ill success in my travel : and have see and understand 365 
 Caesar Frederick travel eighteen year in the east Indies . 
 many thing worthy the note , and to be know to all the world , the which be never as yet write of any : i think it good ( see the Almighty have give i grace , after so long peril in pass such a long voyage to return into my own country , the noble city of Venice ) i say , i think it good , as brief as i can , to write and set forth this voyage make by i , with the marvellous thing i have see in my travel in the Indies : the mighty prince that govern those country , their religion and faith that they have , the rite and custom which they use , and live by , of the diverse success that happen unto i , and how many of these country be abound with spice , drug , and jewel , give also profitable advertisement to all those that have a desire to make such a voyage . and because that the whole world may more commodious rejoice at this my travel , 1 have cause it to be print in this order : and now i present it unto you ( gentle and love reader ) to who for the variety of thing herein contain , i hope that it shall be with great delight receive . and thus God of his goodness keep you . 
 a voyage to the east Indies , and beyond the Indies , etc 
 “ the author go from Venice to Cyprus and Tripoli . 
 n the year of our lord God 1563 , i Caesar Frederick be in Venice , and very desirous to see the east part of the world , ship my self in a ship call the Gradaige of Venice , with certain merchandise , govern by m. Jacomo Vatica , which be bind to 
 Cyprus with his ship , with who i go : and when we be arrive in Cyprus , i leave that ship , and go in a lesser to Tripoli in Soria , where i stay a while . afterwards i take my journey to Aleppo , and there i acquaint my self with merchant of Armenia , and moor , that 366 
 be merchant , and consort to go with they to ormus , and we depart from Aleppo , and in two day journey and a half , we come to a city call Bir. 
 of the city call Bir. 
 by|our be a small city very scarce of all manner of victual , and near unto the wall of the city run the river of Euphrates . in this city the merchant divide themselves into company , accord to their merchandise that they have , and there either they buy or make a boat to carry they and their good to Babylon down the river Euphrates , with charge of a master and mariner to conduct the boat in the voyage : these boat be in Euphrates . a manner flat bottomed , yet they be very strong : and for all that they be so strong , they will serve but for one voyage . they be make accord to the sholdnesse of the river , because that the river be in many place full of great stone , which great hinder and trouble those that go down the river . Theise boat serve but for one voyage down the river unto a village call feluchia , because it be impossible to bring they up the river back again . at Feluchia the merchant pluck their boat in piece , or else sell they for a small price , for that at by|our they cost the merchant forty or fifty chicken a ' piece , and they sei they at Feluchia for seven or Feluchia a eight chicken a piece , because that when the merchant on return from Babylon back again , if they have mar - ' chandise or good that owe custom , than they make their return in forty day through the wilderness , pass that way with a great deal lesser charge than the other way . and if they have not merchandise that owe custom , than they go by the way of mosul , mosul . where it cost they great charge both the carovan and company . from by|our where the merchant embark [ ii i . 214. ] themselves to Feluchia over against Babylon , if the river have good store of water , they shall make their voyage in fifteen or eighteen day down the river , and if the water be low , and it have not rain , than it be 
 367 
 much trouble , and it will be forty or fifty day journey down , because that when the bark strike on the stone that be in the river , than they must unlade they , which be great trouble , and then lade they again when they have mend they : therefore it be not necessary , neither do the merchant go with one boat alone , but with two or three , that if one boat split and be lose with strike on the sholde , they may have another ready to take in their good , until such time as they have mend the break boat , and if they draw the break boat on land to mend she , it be hard to defend she in the night from the great multitude of arabian that will come down there to rob you : and in the river every night , when you make fast your boat to the banckeside , you must keep good watch against they the arabian arabian which be thief in number like to ant , yet thief be in when they come to rob , they will not kill , but steal ant and run away . harquebuss be very good weapon against they , for that they stand great in fear of the shot . and as you pass the river Euphrates from by|our to Feluchia , there be certain place which you must pass by , where you pay custom certain medines upon a bale , which custom be belong to the son of aborise king of the arabian and of the desert , who have certain city and village on the river Euphrates . 
 feluchia and Babylon . 
 the old Babylon have great trade no* merchant still . 
 feluchia be a village where they that come from by|our do unbark themselves and unlade their good , and it be distant from Babylon a day journey and a half by land : Babylon be no great city , but it be very populous , and of great trade of stranger because it be a great thorowfare for Persia , Turkia , and Arabia : and very often time there go out from thence Carovans into diverse country : and the city be very copious of victual , which come out of Armenia down the river 
 of Tigris , on certain zattare or Raffes make of blow hide or skin call Utrii . this river Tigris do 
 368 
 wash the wall of the city . Theise Raffes be bind fist together , and then they lie board on the aforesaid blow skin , and on the board they lade the commodity , and so come they to Babylon , where they unlade they , and be unlade , they let out the wind out of the skin , and lade they on camel to make another voyage . this city of Babylon be situate in the kingdom of Persia , but now govern by the turk . on the other side of the river towards Arabia , over against the city , there be a fair place or town , and in it a fair Bazarro for merchant , with very many lodging , where the great part of the merchant stranger which come to Babylon do lie with their merchandise . the pass over Tigris from Babylon to this borough be by a long bridge make of boat chain together with a bridge great chain : provide , that when the river wax °fboats-great with the abundance of rain that fall , than they open the bridge in the middle , where the one half of the bridge fall to the wall of Babylon , and the other to the brink of this borough , on the other side of the river : and as long as the bridge be open , they pass the river in small boat with great danger , because of the smallness of the boat , and the overlade of they , that with the fierceness of the stream they be overthrow , or else the stream do carry they away , so that by this mean , many people be lose and drown : this thing by proof i have many time see . 
 of the tower of Babylon . 
 the tower of Nimrod or Babel be situate on that side of Tigris that Arabia be , and in a very great plain distant from Babylon seven or eight mile : which tower be ruinate on every side , and with the fall of it there be make a great mountain : so that it have no form at all , yet there be a great part of it stand , which be compass and almost cover with the aforesaid fall : this tower be build and make of 
 five 369 2 a 
 these brick foursquare brick , which brick be make of earth , be in thickness anj dry in the sun in manner and form follow : stx or seven grst iayetj a lay of brick , than a mat make of foot a half anes5 square as the brick , and in stead or lime , they square . daub it with earth : these mat of cane be at this time so strong , that it be a thing wonder to behold , be of such great antiquity : i have go round about it , and have not find any place where there have be any door or entrance : it may be in my judgement in circuit about a mile , and rather less than moor . 
 this tower in effect be contrary to all other thing which be see afar off , for they seem small , and the more near a man come to they the big they be : but this tower afar off seem a very great thing , and the near you come to it the lesser . my judgement and [ ii i . 215. ] reason of this be , that because the tower be set in a very great plain , and have nothing more about to make any show save the ruin of it which it have make round about , and for this respect descry it a far off , that piece of the tower which yet stand with the mountain that be make of the substance that have fall from it , make a great show than you shall find come near to it . 
 Babylon and Basora . 
 from Babylon i depart for Basora , ship my self in one of the bark that use to go in the river 
 Tigris from Babylon to Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : which bark be make after the manner of fust or galliot with a speron and a cover poop : they have no pump in they because of the great abundance of pitch which they have to pitch they with all : which pitch they have in abundance two day journey from Babylon . Nere unto the river Euphrates , there be a city call Heit , near unto which city there be a great plain full of pitch , very marvellous to behold , and a thing almost incredible , that out of a hole in the earth , which continual throw out pitch into the air with con - 
 370 
 tinuall smoke , this pitch be throw with such force , that be hot it fall like as it be sprinkle over all the plain , in such abundance that the plain be always full of pitch : the moor and the arabian of that place say , that that hole be the mouth of hell : and in truth , it be a thing very notable to be mark : and by this pitch the whole people have great benefit to pitch their bark , which bark they call Daneck and Saffin . when the river of Tigris be well replenish with water , you may pass from Babylon to Basora in eight or nine day , and sometime more and sometime less : we be half so much more which be 14 or 15 day , because the water be low : they may sail day and night , and there be some place in this way where you pay so many medin on a bail : if the water be low , it be 18 day journey . 
 Basora . 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 this hole whereout come this pitch be most true , and the coat pitch run into the valley or hand where the pitch rest , y the water run into the river Euphrates , and it make all the river to be as it be brackish with the smell of pitch and brimstone . 
 BAsora be a city of the arabian , which of old time 
 be govern by those arabian call Zizarii , but Zizarii , a now it be govern by the great Turk where he keep ancient people-an army to his great charge . 
 the arabian call Zizarii have the possession of a great country , and can be overcome of the Turk , because that the sea have divide their country into a hand by channel with the ebb and flow of the sea , and for that cause the Turk can bring a army against they , neither by sea nor by land , and another reason be , the inhabitant of that hand be very strong and warlike man . a day journey before you come to Basora , you shall have a little castle or fort , which be set on that point of the land where the river of Euphrates and Tigris meet together , and the castle at the castle be call Corna : at this point , the two river make a of Coma the monstrous great river , that run into the sea , which ^erEu ' , be call the gulf of Persia , which be towards the south : Tigris do Basora be distant from the sea fifteen mile , and it be meet . a city of great trade of spice and drug which come 
 371 
 from ormus . also there be great store of corn , rice , and date , which the country do yield . i ship ormus be then my self in Basora to go for ormus , and so we sail barren through the persian sea six hundred mile , which be the the^arld^ distance , from Basora to ormus , and we sail in small e ’ ship make of board , bind together with small cord or rope , and in stead of calk they lie between every board certain straw which they have , and so they sow board and board together , with the straw between , wherethorow there come much water , and they be very dangerous . depart from Basora we pass 200 mile with the sea on our right hand , along the gulf , until at length we arrive at a hand call Carichii a Carichii , from whence we sail to ormus in sight of hand in you the persian shore on the left side , and on the right side gulfeofPersia . towards Arabia we discover infinite hand . 
 ormus . 
 ormus be / ARmus be a hand in circuit five and twenty or thirty 
 always re - miles , and it be the barren and most dry hand abun^nce^f * n a wor^ ’ because that in it there be nothing to victuali and and , but salt water , and wood , all other thing neces-yet there be sary for man life be bring out of Persia twelve 
 none that . mile off , and out of other hand near thereunto ad - 
 1^^^^ j°yn’ns ’ in suc^ abundance and quantity , that the city ’ be always replenish with all manner of store : there be stand near unto the water side a very fair castle , in the which the captain of the king of Portugal be always resident with a good band of Portugal , and before this castle be a very fair prospect : in the city dwell the marry man , soldier and merchant of every nation , among who there be moor and great trade Gentiles . in this city there be very great trade for all oh ” ^ sort spice > drug , silk , cloth of silk , brocardo , and diverse other sort of merchandise come out of Persia : and among all other trade of merchandise , the trade of horse be very great there , which they carry from thence into the Indies . this hand have a moor 
 372 
 king of the race of the persian , who be create and make king by the captain of the castle , ’in the name of the king of Portugal ! . at the creation of this king i be there , and see the ceremony that they use in it , which be as follow . the old king be dead , the captain of the Portugal choose another of the blood royal , and make this election in the castle with great ceremony , and when he be elect , the captain swear he to be true and faithful to the king of Portugal , as his lord and governor , and then he give he the sceptre regal . after this with great feast and pomp , and with great company , he be bring into the royal palace in the city . this king keep a good train , and have sufficient revenue to maintain himself without trouble of any , because the captain of the castle do maintain and defend his right , and when that the captain and he ride together , he be honour as a king , yet he can ride abroad with his train , without the consent of the captain first have : it behoove they to do this , and it be necessary , because of the great trade that be in the city : their proper language be the persian tongue . there i ship my self to go for goa , a city in the Indies , in a ship that have fourscore horse in she . this be to advertise those merchant that go from ormus to goa to ship themselves in those ship that carry horse , because every ship that carry twenty horse or upward be privilege , that all the merchandise whatsoever they carry shall pay no custom , whereas the ship that carry no horse be bind to pay eight per cento of all the good they bring . 
 the election of the king of ormus . 
 a privilege for merchant . 
 goa , diu , and Cambaia . 
 goa be the principali city that the Portugal have in the Indies , where be resident the viceroy with his court and minister of the king of Portugal . from ormus to goa be nine hundred four score and ten mile distance , in which passage the first city that you come to 373 
 in the Indies , be call diu , and be situate in a little hand in the kingdom of Cambaia , which be the great strength that the Portugal have in all the Indies , yet a small city , but of great trade , because there they lade very many great ship for the straight of Mecca and ormus with merchandise , and these ship belong to the moor and Christians , but they . Moores can not trade neither sail into those sea without the licence of the viceroy of the king of Portugal , otherwise they be take and make good prize . the merchandise that they lade these ship withal come from Cambaietta a port in the kingdom of Cambaia , which they bring from thence in small bark , because there can no great ship come thither , by reason of the sholdnesse of the water thereabouts , and these shold be a hundred or fourscore mile about in a straight or gulf , which they call Macareo , which be as much to say , as a race of a tide , because the water there run out of that place without measure , so that there be no place like to it , unless it be in the kingdom of Pegu , where there be another Macareo , where the water run out with more force than these doe . the principali city in Cambaia be call Amadavar , it be a day journey and a half from Cambaietta , it be a very great city and very populous , and for a city of the Gentiles it be very well make and bud with fair house and large street , with a fair place in it with many ship , and in show like to Cairo , but not so great : also Cambaietta be situate on the sea side , and be a very fair city . the time that i be there , the city be in great calamity and scarceness , so that i have see the man of the country that be Gentiles take their child , their son and their daughter , and have desire the Portugal to buy they , and i have see they sell for eight or ten larine a piece , which may be of our money x.s. or thirteen . s . four . d . for all this , if i have not see it , i can not have believe that there shall be such a trade at Cambaietta as there be : for in the time of every new moon and every full moon , the 
 374 
 small bark ( innumerable ) come in and out , for at those time of the moon the tide and water be high than at other time they be . Theise bark be lade with all sort of spice , with silk of China , with sandal , with elephant tooth , velvet of Vercini , great quantity of Pannina , which come from Mecca , Chickinos which be piece of gold worth seven shilling a piece sterling , with money , and with diverse sort of other merchandise . also these bark lade out , as it be , a infinite quantity of cloth make of bombast of all sort , as white stamp and paint , with great quantity of indigo , dry ginger and conserve , myrabolan dry and condite , Boraso in paste , great store of sugar , great quantity of cotton , abundance of opium , assa fetida , Puchio , with many other sort of drug , turban make in dui , great stone like to corneolaes , granat , agat , Diaspry , Calcidonii , hematist , and some kind of natural diamond . there be in the city of Cambaietta a order , but no man be bind to keep it , but they that will ; but all the [ ii i . 217. ] Portugal merchant keep it , the which be this . there be in this city certain broker which be Gentiles and of great authority , and have every one of they fifteen or twenty servant , and the merchant that use that country have their broker , with which they be serve : and they that have not be there be inform by their friend of the order , and of what broker they shall be serve . now every fifteen day ( as abovesaid ) that the fleet of small ship enter into the port , the broker come to the water side , and these merchant assoon as they be come on land , do give the cargason of all their good to that broker that they will have to do their business for they , with the mark of all the farthel and pack they have : and the merchant have 
 take on land all his furniture for his house , because it that traveu to be needful that the merchant that trade to the Indies thelndiesmust carry provision of household with they , because that in carry theirpro-every place where they come they must have a new house , the broker that have receive his cargason , come - they . 
 375 
 mand his servant to carry the merchant furniture for his house home , and load it on some cart , and carry it into the city , where the broker have diverse empty house meet for the lodging of merchant , furnish only with bedsted , table , chair , and empty jar for water : then the broker say to the merchant , go and repose your self , and take your rest in the city . the broker tarri at the water side with the cargason , and cause all his good to be discharge out of the ship , and pay the custom , and cause it to be bring into the house where the merchant lie , the merchant not know any thing thereof , neither custom , nor charge . Theise good be bring to this pass into the house of the merchant , the broker demand of the merchant if he have any desire to sell his good or merchandise , at the prize that such ware be worth at that present time ? and if he have a desire to sell his good present , then at that instant the broker sell they away . after this the broker say to the merchant , you have so much of every sort of merchandise neat and clear of every charge , and so much ready money . and if the merchant will employ his money in other commodity , than the broker tell he that such and such commodity will cost so much , put aboard without any manner of charge . the merchant understand the effect , make his account ; and if he think to buy or sell at the price currant , he give order to make his merchandise away : and if he have commodity for 20000 duket , all shall|be barter or sell away in fifteen day without any care or trouble : and when as the merchant think that he can sell his good at the prize currant , he may tarry as long as he will , but they can be sell by any man but by that broker that have take they on land and pay the custom : and perchance tarry sometime for sale of their commodity , they make good profit , and sometime loss : but those merchandise that come not ordinary every fifteen day , in tarry for the sale of they , there be great profit . the bark 
 376 
 steerage with * stem gallery Pilot’s or Maste windlass capstan 
 that lade in Cambaietta go for diu to aid the ship that go from thence for the strait of Mecca and ormus , and some go to Chaul and goa : and these ship be very well appoint , or else be guard by the armada of the Portugal , for that there be many corsary or pirate great store of which go course alongst that coast , rob and spoil - of^arre mg : and for tear of these thief there be no fate tfie coast sail in those sea , but with ship very well appoint Cambaia . and arm , or else with the fleet of the Portugal , as be aforesaid . in fine , the kingdom of Cambaia be a place of great trade , and have much do and traffic with all man , although hitherto it have be in the hand of tyrant , because that at 75 year of age the true king be at the assault of diu , be there slay ; who name sultan Badu . at that time four or five captain of the army divide the kingdom among themselves , and every one of they show in his country what tyranny he can : but twelve year ago the great mogul a moor king of Agra and del , forty day journey within the land of Amadavar , become the governor of all the kingdom of Cambaia without any resistance , because he be of great power and force , devise which way to enter the land with his people , there be not any man that will make he any resistance , although they be tyrant and a beastly people , they be soon bring under obedience . during the time i dwell in a marvellous Cambaietta i see very marvellous thing : there be a infinite number of artificer that make bracelet call m women-mannii , or bracelet of elephant tooth , of diverse colour , for the woman of the gentile , which have their arm full deck with they . and in this occupation there be spend every year many thousand of crown : the reason whereof be this , that when there die any whatsoever of their kindred , then in sign and token of mourning and sorrow , they break all their bracelet from their arm , and present they go and buy new again , because that they have rather be without their meat then without their bracelet . 
 377 
 have pass diu , i come to the second city that the Portugal have , call Daman , situate in the territory of Cambaia , distant from diu and hundred and [ ii i . 218. i twenty mile : it be no town of merchandise , save rice and corn , and have many village under it , where in time of peace the Portugal take their pleasure , but in time of war the enemy have the spoil of they ; in such wise that the Portugal have little benefit by they . next unto Daman you shall have Basan , which be a filthy place in respect of Daman : in this place be rice , corn , and timber to make ship and galley . and a small distance beyond Basan be a little hand call Tana a Tana , a place very populous with Portugal , moor , hand whereof an i Gentiles : these have nothing but rice , there be t > a many maker of Armesine , and weaver of girdle of 4i . ’ ’ wool and bombast black and red like to Moocharies . 
 of the city of Chaul , and of the palmer tree . 
 beyond this hand you shall find Chaul in the firm land ; and they be two city , one of the Portugal , and the other of the moor : that city which the Portugal have be situate low than the other , and govern the mouth of the harbour , and be very strong wall : and as it be a mile and a half distant from this be the city of Moores , govern by their king Zamalluco . in the time of war there can any great ship come to the city of the moor , because the Portugal with their ordinance will sink they , for that they must perforce pass by the castle of the Portugal : both the city be port of the sea , and be great city , and have unto they great traffic and trade of merchandise , of all sort of spice , drug , silk , cloth of silk , sandal , Marsine , Versine , Porcelane of China , velvet and scarlet that come from Portugal , and from Mecca : with many other sort of merchandise . there come every year from Cochin , and from Cananor ten or fifteen great ship 378 
 lade with great nut cure , and with sugar make of the self same nut call Giagra : the tree whereon these nut do grow be call the palmer tree : and throughout all the Indies , and especial from this place to goa there be great abundance of they , and it be like to the date tree . in the whole world there be not a tree more profitable and of more goodness than this tree be , neither do man reap so much benefit of any other tree as they do of this , there be not any part of it but serve for some use , and none of it be worthy to be burn . with the timber of this tree they make ship without the mixture of any other tree , and with the leaf thereof they make sail , and with the fruit thereof , which be a kind of nut , they make wine , and of the wine they make sugar and Placetto , which wine they gather in the spring of the year : out of the middle of the tree where continual there go or run out white liquor like unto water , in that time of the year they put a vessel under every tree , and every evening and morning they take it away full , and then distil it with fire it make a very strong liquor : and then they put it into butt , with a quantity of Zibibbo , white or black and in short time it be make a perfect wine . after this they make of the nut great store of oil : of the tree they make great quantity of board and quarter for building . of the bark of this tree they make cable , rope , and other furniture for ship , and , as they say , these rope be better than they that be make of hemp . they make of the bow , bedsted , after the Indies fashion , and Scavasches for merchandise . the leaf they cut very small , and weave they , and so make sail of they , for all manner of ship , or else very fine mat . and then the first rind of the nut they stamp , and make thereof perfect Ockam to calk ship , gr^at and small : and of the hard bark thereof they make spoon and other vessel for meat , in such wise that there be no part thereof throw away or cast to the fire . when these mat be green they be full 
 379 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 great ordinance make in piece , and yet serviceable . 
 [ ii i . 219. ] 
 the chief place the Portugal have in the Indies . 
 of a excellent sweet water to drink : and if a man be thirsty , with the liquor of one of the mat he may satisfy himself : and as this nut ripen , the liquor thereof turn all to kernel . there go out of Chaul for Mallaca , for the Indies , for Macao , for Portugal , for the coast of melinde , for ormus , as it be a infinite number and quantity of good and merchandise that come out of the kingdom of Cambaia , as cloth of bombast white , paint , print , great quantity of indigo , opium , cotton , silk of every sort , great store of Boraso in past , great store of Fetida , great store of iron , corn , and other merchandise . the moor king Zamalluco be of great power , as one that at need may command , and have in his camp , two hundred thousand man of war , and have great store of artillery , some of they make in piece , which for their greatness can not be carry to and fro ; yet although they be make in piece , they be so commodious that they work with they marvellous well , who shot be of stone , and there have be of that shot send unto the king of Portugal for the rareness of the thing . the city where the king Zamalluco have his be , be within the land of Chaul seven or eight day journey , which city be call abneger . threescore and ten mile from Chaul , towards the Indies , be the port of dabul , a haven of the king Zamalluco : from thence to goa be a hundred and fifty mile . 
 goa . 
 goa be the principali city that the Portugal have in the Indies , wherein the viceroy with his royal 
 court be resident , and be in a hand which may be in circuit five and twenty or thirty mile : and the city with the borough be reasonable big , and for a city of the Indies it be reasonable fair , but the hand be far more fair : for it be as it be full of goodly garden , replenish with diverse tree and with the palmer tree as be aforesaid . this city be of great traffic for all 380 
 sort of merchandise which they trade withal in those part : and the fleet which come every year from Portugal , which be five or six great ship that come direct for goa , arrive there ordinary the six or ten of September , and there they remain forty or fifty day , and from thence they go to Cochin , where they lade for Portugal , and often time they lade one ship at goa and the other at Cochin for Portugal . Cochin be distant from goa three hundred mile . the city of goa be situate in the kingdom of Dialcan a king of the moor , who chief city be up in the country eight day journey , and be call bisapor : this king be of great power , for when i be in goa in the year of our lord 1570 , this king come to give assault to goa , be encamp near unto it by a river side with a army of two hundred thousand man of war , and he lie at this siege fourteen month : in which time there be peace conclude , and as report go among his people , there be great calamity and mortality which breed among they in the time of winter , and also kill very many elephant . then in the year of our lord 1567 , i go from goa to bezeneger the chief city of the kingdom of Narsinga eight day journey from goa , within the land , in the company of two other merchant which carry with they three hundred arabian horse to that king : because the horse of that country be of a small stature , and they pay well for the arabian horse : and it be requisite that the merchant sell they well , for that they stand they in great charge to bring they out of Persia to ormus , and from ormus to goa , where the ship that bring twenty horse and upward pay no custom , neither ship nor good whatsoever ; whereas if they bring no horse , they pay 8 per cento of all their good : and at the go out of goa the horse pay custom , two and forty pagody for every horse , which pagody may be of sterling money six shilling eight penny , they be piece of gold of that value . so that the arabian horse be 
 a most unkind y wicked treason against their prince : this they have for give credit to stranger , rather than to their own native people . 
 of great value in those country , as 300 , 400 , 500 ducat a horse , and to 1000 ducat a horse . 
 bezeneger . 
 the city of bezeneger be sack in the year 1565 , by four king of the moor , which be of great power and might : the name of these four king be these follow , the first be call Dialcan , the second Zamaluc , the three Cotamaluc , and the four Viridy : and yet these four king be not able to overcome this city and the king of bezeneger , but by treason . this king of bezeneger be a gentle , and have , among all other of his captain , two which be notable , and they be moor : and these two captain have either of they in charge threescore and ten or fourscore thousand man . Theise two captain be of one religion with the four king which be moor , wrought mean with they to betray their own king into their hand . the king of bezeneger esteem not the force of the four king his enemy , but go out of his city to wage battle with they in the field ; and when the army be join , the battle last but a while not the space of four hour , because the two traitorous captain , in the chief of the fight , with their company turn their face against their king , and make such disorder in his army , that as astonish they set themselves to flight . thirty year be this kingdom govern by three brethren which be tyrant , the which keep the rightful king in prison , it be their use every year once to show he to the people , and they at their pleasure rule as they list . Theise brethren be three captain belong to the father of the king they keep in prison , which when he die , leave his son very young , and then they take the government to themselves . the chief of these three be call ramaragio , and sit in the royal throne , and be call the king : the second be call temiragio , and he take the government on he : the three be call bengatre , and he be 382 
 captain general of the army . Theise three brethren be in this battle , in the which the chief and the last be never hear of quick nor dead . only temiragio flee in the battle , have lose one of his eye : when the news come to the city of the overthrow in the battle , the wife and child of these three tyrant , with their lawful king ( keep prisoner ) flee away , spoil as they be , and the four king of the moor enter the sack of the city bezeneger with great triumph , and there they the ntj ' remain six month , search under house and in all place for money and other thing that be hide , and then they depart to their own kingdom , [ ii i . 220. i because they be not able to maintain such a kingdom as that be , so far distant from their own country . 
 when the king be depart from bezeneger , this temiragio return to the city , and then begin for to repopulate it , and send word to goa to the merchant , if they have any horse , to bring they to he , and he will pay well for they , and for this cause the aforesaid two merchant that i go in company withal , carry those horse that they have to bezeneger . also this tyrant make a order or law , that if any -4 » excellent merchant have any of the horse that be take in the t0 
 aforesaid battle or war , although they be of his mtra ? man it own mark , that he will give as much for they as they will : and beside he give generail safe conduct to all that shall bring they . when by this mean he see that there be great store of horse bring thither unto he , he give the merchant fair word , until such time as he see they can bring no more . than he licence the merchant to depart , without give they any thing for their horse , which when the poor man see , they be desperate , and as it be mad with sorrow and grief . 
 i rest in bezeneger seven month , although in one month i may have discharge all my business , for it be necessary to rest there until the way be 383 
 a description of the burn place . 
 feast and dance when they shall mourn . 
 clear of thief , which at that time range up and down . and in the time i rest there , i see manystrange and beastly deed do by the gentile . first , when there be any noble man or woman dead , they burn their body : and if a marry man die , his wife must burn herself alive , for the love of her husband , and with the body of her husband : so that when any man die , his wife will take a month leave , two or three , or as she will , to burn her self in , and that day be come , wherein she ought to be burn , that morning she go out of her house very early , either on horseback or on a eliphant , or else be bear by eight man on a small stage : in one of these order she go , be apparel like to a bride , carry round about the city , with her hair down about her shoulder , garnish with jewel and flower , accord to the estate of the party , and they go with as great joy as bride do in Venice to their nuptial : she carry in her left hand a look glass , and in her right hand a arrow , and sing through the city as she pass , and say , that she go to sleep with her dear spouse and husband . she be accompany with her kindred and friend until it be one or two of the clock in the afternoon , than they go out of the city , and go along the river side call Nigondin , which run under the wall of the city , until they come unto a. place where they use to make this burn of woman , be widow , there be prepare in this place a great square cave , with a little pinnacle hard by it , four or five step up : the foresay cave be full of dry wood . the woman be come thither , accompany with a great number of people which come to see the thing , than they make ready a great banquet , and she that shall be burn eat with as great joy and gladness , as though it be her wedding day : and the feast be end , than they go to dance and sing a certain time , accord as she will . after this , the woman of her own accord , comma nd they to make the fire 
 384 
 in the square cave where the dry wood be , and when it be kindle , they come and certify she thereof , then present she leave the feast , and take the near kinsman of her husband by the hand , and they both go together to the bank of the foresay river , where she put off all her jewel and all her clothes , and give they to her parent or kinsfolk , and cover herself with a cloth , because she will not be see of the people be naked , she throw herself into the river , say : oh wretch , wash away your sin . come out of the water , she roll herself into a yellow cloth of fourteen brace long : and again she take her husband kinsman by the hand , and they go both together up to the pinnacle of the square cave wherein the fire be make . when she be on the pinnacle , she talk and reason with the people , recommend unto they her child and kindred . before the pinnacle they use to set a mat , because they shall not see the fierceness of the fire , yet there be many that will have they pluck away , show therein a heart not fearful , and that they be not afraid of that sight . when this silly woman have reason with the people a good while to her content , there be another woman that take a pot with oil , and sprinkle it over her head , and with the same she anoint all her body , and afterward throw the pot into the furnace , and both the woman and the pot go together into the fire , and present the people that be round about the furnace throw after she into the cave great piece of wood , so by this mean , with the fire and with the blow that she have with the wood throw after she , she be quick dead , and after this there grow such sorrow and such lamentation among the people , that all their mirth be turn into howl and weep , in such wise , that a man can scarce bear the hear of it . i have see many burn in this manner , because my house be near to the gate where they go out to the place of burn : and when there die any 
 five 385 2 b 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 mourn when they shall rejoice . 
 the cause why the woman do so burn themselves . 
 Penegonde . 
 great man , his wife with all his slave with who he have have carnali copulation , burn themselves together with he . also in this kingdom i have see among the base sort of people this use and order , that the man be dead , he be carry to the place where they will make his sepulchre , and set he as it be upright , then come his wife before he on her knee , cast her arm about his neck , with embrace and clasp he , until such time as the mason have make a wall round about they , and when the wall be as high as their neck , there come a man behind the woman and strangle she : then when she be dead , the workman finish the wall over their head , and so they lie bury both together . beside these , there be a infinite number of beastly quality among they , of which i have no desire to write . i be desirous to know the cause why these woman will so wilful burn themselves against nature and law , and it be tell i that this law be of a ancient time , to make provision against the slaughter which woman make of their husband . for in those day before this law be make , the woman for every little displeasure that their husband have do unto they , will present poison their husband , and take other man , and now by reason of this law they be more faithful unto their husband , and count their life as dear as their own , because that after his death her own follow present . 
 in the year of our lord God 1567 , for the ill success that the people of bezeneger have , in that their city be sack by the four king , the king with his court go to dwell in a castle eight day journey up in the land from bezeneger , call Penegonde . also six day journey from bezeneger , be the place where they get diamond : i be not there , but it be tell i that it be a great place , compass with a wall , and that they sell the earth within the wall , for so much a squadron , and the limit be set how deep or how low they shall dig . those diamond that be of a certain 386 
 size and big than that size , be all for the king , it be many year ago , since they get any there , for the trouble that have be in that kingdom . the first cause of this trouble be , because the son of this temeragio have put to death the lawful king which he have in prison , for which cause the baron and nobleman in that kingdom will not acknowledge he to be their king , and by this mean there be many king , and great division in that kingdom , and the city of bezeneger be not altogether destroy , yet the house stand still , but empty , and there be dwell in they nothing , as be report , but tiger and other wild beast . the circuit of this city be four and twenty mile about , and within the wall be certain mountain . the house stand wall with earth , and plain , all save the three palace of the three tyrant brethren , and the pagodas which be idol house : these be make with lime and fine marble . i have see many king court , and yet have i see none in greatness like to this of bezeneger , i say , for the order of his palace , for it have nine gate or port . first when you go into the place where the king do lodge , there be five great port or gate : these be keep with captain and soldier : then within these there be four lesser gate : which be keep with porter . without the first gate there be a little porch , where there be a captain with five and twenty soldier , that keep watch and ward night and day : and within that another with the like guard , wherethorow they come to a very fair court , and at the end of that court there be another porch as the first , with the like guard , and within that another court . and in this wise be the first five gate guard and keep with those captain : and then the lesser gate within be keep with a guard of porter : which gate stand open the great part of the night , because the custom of the gentile be to do their business , and make their feast in the night , rather than by day . the city be very safe from thief , for the Portugal merchant sleep in the street , or under 387 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 porch , for the great heat which be there , and yet they never have any harm in the night . at the end of two month , i determine to go for goa in the company of two other Portugal merchant , which be make ready to depart , with two palanchine or little litter , which be very commodious for the way , with eight Falchines which be man hire to carry the palanchine , eight for a palanchine , four at a time : they carry they man ride m as we use to carry barrow . and i buy i two bulhck , and buhock , one of they to ride on , and the other to carry hem on vie my victua^s and provision , for in that country they ride way . on bullock with pannei , as we term they , girt and 
 bridle , and they have a very good commodious pace . from bezeneger to goa in summer it be eight day journey , but we go in the midst of winter , in the month of July , and be fifteen day come to Ancola on the sea coast , so in eight day i have lose my two bullock : for he that carry my victual , be weak and can not go , the other when i come unto a river where be a little bridge to pass over , i put my bullock to swim , and in the midst of the river there be a little hand , unto the which my bullock go , and find pasture , there he remain still , and in no wise we can come to he : and so perforce , i be force to leave he , and at that time there be much rain , and i be [ ii i . 222. ] force to go seven day a foot with great pain : and by great chance i meet with Falchines by the way , who i hire to carry my clothes and victual . we have great trouble in our journey , for that every day we be take prisoner , by reason of the great dissension in that kingdom : and every morning at our departure we must pay reseat four or five page a man . and another trouble we have as bad as this , that when as we come into a new governor country , as every day we do , although they be all tributary to the king of bezeneger , yet every one of they stamp a several coin of copper , so that the money that we take this day will not serve the next : at length , by the help of God , we come 388 
 safe to Ancola , which be a country of the queen of Gargopam , tributary to the king of bezeneger . the themarchan-marchandise that go every year from goa to bezeneger be arabian horse , velvet , damask , and satin , bezeneger Armesine of Portugal , and piece of China , saffron , and every year . scarlet : and from bezeneger they have in Turkey for their commodity , jewel , and pagody which be ducat of gold : the apparel that they use in bezeneger be the velvet , satin , damask , scarlet , or white bombast cloth , accord to the estate of the person with long hat on their head , call Colae , make of velvet , satin , damask , or scarlet , gird themselves in stead of girdle with some fine white bombast cloth : they have breech after the order of the turk : they wear on their foot plain high thing call of they Aspergh , and at their ear they have hanging great plenty of gold . 
 return to my voyage , when we be together in Ancola , one of my companion that have nothing to lose , take a guide , and go to goa , whither they go in four day , the other Portugal . not be dispose to go , tarry in Ancola for that winter . the winter in their wint^r those part of the Indies begin the fifteen of May , u on summer-and last unto the end of October : and as we be in Ancola , there come another merchant of horse in a palanchine , and two Portugal soldier which come from Zeilan , and two carrier of letter , which be christian bear in the Indies ; all these consort to go to goa together , and i determine to go with they , and cause a pallanchine to be make for i very poor of cane ; and in one of they cane i hide privy all the jewel i have , and accord to the order , i take eight Falchines to carry i : and one day about eleven of the clock we set forward on our journey , and about two of the clock in the afternoon , as we pass a mountain which divide the territory of Ancola and Dialcan , i be a little behind my company , be assault by eight thief , four of they have sword and target , and the other four have bow and arrow . 
 389 
 four small fort of the Portugal . 
 when the Falchines that carry i understand the noise of the assault , they let the pallanchine and i fall to the ground , and run away and leave i alone , with my clothes wrap about i : present the thief be on my neck and rifle i , they strip i stark naked , and i feign my self sick , because i will not leave the pallanchine , and i have make i a little bed of my clothes ; the thief seek it very narrow and subtle , and find two purse that i have , well bind up together , wherein i have put my copper money which i have change for four pagody in Ancola . the thief think it have be so many ducat of gold , search no further : than they throw all my clothes in a bush , and hie they away , and as God will have it , at their departure there fall from they a handkerchief , and when i see it , i rise from my pallanchine or couch , and take it up , and wrap it together within my pallanchine . than these my Falchines be of so good condition , that they return to seek i , whereas i think i shall not have find so much goodness in they : because they be pay their money aforehand , as be the use , i have think to have see they no more . before their come i be determine to pluck the cane wherein my jewel be hide , out of my couch , and to have mad6 i a walk staff to carry in my hand to goa , think that i shall have go thither on foot , but by the faithfulness of my Falchines , i be rid of that trouble , and so in four day they carry i to goa , in which time i make hard fare , for the thief leave i neither money , gold , nor silver , and that which i do eat be give i of my man for God sake : and after at my come to goa i pay they for every thing royal that i have of they . from goa i depart for Cochin , which be a voyage of three hundred mile , and between these two city be many hold of the Portugal , as onor , mangalor , barzelor , and Cananor . the hold or fort that you shall have from goa to Cochin that belong to the Portugal , be call onor , which 
 390 
 be in the kingdom of the queen of Battacella , which be tributary to the king of bezeneger : there be no trade there , but only a charge with the captain and company he keep there . And pass this place , you shall come to another small castle of the Portugal call mangalor , and there be very small trade but only for a little rice : and from thence you go to a little fort call barzelor , there they have good store of rice which be carry to goa : and from thence you shall go to a city call Cananor , which be a harquebus shoot distant from the chief city that you king of Cananor have in his kingdom be a king of the gentile : and he and he be very naughty and malicious people , always have delight to be in war with the Portugal , and [ ii i . 223. ] when they be in peace , it be for their interest to let their merchandise pass : there go out of this kingdom of Cananor , all the cardamomum , great store of pepper , ginger , honey , ship lade with great nut , great quantity of Archa , which be a fruit of the bigness of nutmeg , which fruit they eat in all those part of the Indies and beyond the Indies , with the leaf of a herb which they call bettell , the which be like unto our ivy leaf , BetteUisa but a little lesser and thin : they eat it make in plaster with the lime make of oistershel , and through country . the Indies they spend great quantity of money in this composition , and it be use daily , which thing i will not have believe , if i have not see it . the customer get great profit by these herb , for that they have custom for they . when this people eat and chew this in their mouth , it make their spittle to be read like unto blood , and they say , that it make a man to have a very good stomach and a sweet breath , but sure in my judgement they eat it rather to fulfil their filthy lust , and of a knavery , for this herb be moist and hot , and make a very strong expulsion . from Cananor you go to Cranganor , which be another small fort of the Portugal in the land of the king of Cranganor , which be another king of the gentile , and a country of small 
 391 
 within Cochin be the kingdom of pepper . 
 the pepper that the Portugal bring , be not so good as that which go por Mecca , which be bring hither by you strait . 
 importance , and of a hundred and twenty mile , full of thief , be under the king of Calicut , a king also of the gentile , and a great enemy to the Portugal , which when he be always in war , he and his country be the nest and rest for strange thief , and those be call moor of Carposa , because they wear on their head long red hat , and these thief part the spoil that they take on the sea with the king of Calicut , for he give leave unto all that will go a rove , liberal to go , in such wise , that all along that coast there be such a number of thief , that there be no sail in those sea but with great ship and very well arm , or else they must go in company with the army of the Portugal . from Cranganor to Cochin be 15 mile . 
 Cochin . 
 COchin be , next unto goa , the chief place that the Portugal have in the Indies , and there be great trade of spice , drug , and all other sort of merchandise for the kingdom of Portugal , and there within the land be the kingdom of pepper , which pepper the Portugal lade in their ship by bulk , and not in sack : the pepper that go for Portugal be not so good as that which go for Mecca , because that in time past the officer of the king of Portugal make a contract with the king of Cochin , in the name of the king of Portugal , for the prize of pepper , and by reason of that agreement between they at that time make , the price can neither rise nor fall , which be a very low and base price , and for this cause the villain bring it to the Portugal , green and full of filth . the moor of Mecca that give a better price , have it clean and it dry , and better condition . all the spice and drug that be bring to Mecca , be steal from thence as Contrabanda . Cochin be two city , one of the Portugal , and another of the king of Cochin : that of the Portugal be situate near unto the sea , and that of the king of 
 392 
 Cochin be a mile and a half up high in the land , but they be both set on the bank of one river which be very great and of a good depth of water which river come out of the mountain of the king of the pepper , which be a king of the gentile , in who kingdom be many Christians of saint Thomas order : the king of Cochin be also a king of the gentile and a great faithful friend to the king of Portugal , and to those Portugal which be marry , and be citizen in the city Cochin of the Portugal . and by this name of Portugal throughout all the Indies , they call all the Christians that come out of the west , whether they be italian , Frenchman , or alman , and all they that marry in Cochin do get a office accord to the trade he be off : this they have by the great privilege which the citizen have of that city , because there be two principal commodity that they deal withal in that great privi-place , which be these . the great store of silk that come from China , and the great store of sugar have which come from Bengala : the marry citizen pay not any custom for these two commodity : for all other commodity they pay 4. per cento custom to the king of Cochin , rate their good at their own pleasure . those which be not marry and stranger , pay in Cochin to the king of Portugal eight per cento of all manner of merchandise . i be in Cochin when the viceroy of the king of Portugal wrought what he can to break the privilege of the citizen , and to make they to pay custom as other do : at which time the citizen be glad to weigh their pepper in the night that they jade the ship withal that go to Portugal and steal the custom in the night . the king of Cochin have understanding of this , will not suffer any more pepper to be weigh . then present after this , the merchant be license to do as they do before , and there be no more speech of this matter , nor any wrong do . this king of Cochin [ ii i . 224. . ] be of a small power in respect of the other king of 
 393 
 a very strange thing hardly to be believe . 
 the Indies , for he can make but seventie thousand man of arm in his camp : he have a great number of gentleman which he call Amochi , and some be call nairi : these two sort of man esteem not their life any thing , so that it may be for the honour of their king , they will thrust themselves forward in every danger , although they know they shall die . Theise man go naked from the girdle upwards , with a cloth roll about their thigh , go barefooted , and have their hair very long and roll up together on the top of their head , and always they carry their buckler or target with they and their sword naked , these nairi have their wife common among themselves , and when any of they go into the house of any of these woman , he leave his sword and target at the door , and the time that he be there , there dare not any be so hardy as to come into that house . the king child ’ shall not inherit the kingdom after their father , because they hold this opinion , that perchance they be not beget of the king their father , but of some other man , therefore they accept for their king , one of the son of the king sister , or of some other woman of the blood royal , for that they be sure they be of the blood royal . 
 the nairi and their wife use for a bravery to make great hole in their ear , and so big and wide , that it be incredible , hold this opinion , that the great the hole be , the more noble they esteem themselves . i have leave of one of they to measure the circumference of one of they with a thread , and within that circumference i put my arm up to the shoulder , clothe as it be , so that in effect they be monstrous great . thus they do make they when they be little , for than they open the ear , and hang a piece of gold or lead thereat , and within the open , in the hole they put a certain leaf that they have for that purpose , which make the hole so great . they lade ship in Cochin for Portugal and for ormus , but they that go for 394 
 1563-81-ormus carry no pepper but by Contrabanda , as for sinamome they easy get leave to carry that away , for all other spice and drug they may liberal carry they to ormus or Cambaia , and so all other merchandise which come from other place , but out of the kingdom of Cochin proper they carry away with they into Portugal great abundance of pepper , great quantity of ginger dry and conserve , wild cinnamon , good quantity of Arecca , great store of cordage of Cairo , make of the bark of the tree of the great nut , and better than that of hemp , of which they carry great store into Portugal . 
 the ship every year depart from Cochin to go note the de-for Portugal , on the five day of December , or the five day of January . now to follow my voyage for the Indies : from Cochin i go to Coulam , distant from Cochin seventie and two mile , which Coulam be a small fort of the king of Portugal , situate in the kingdom of Coulam , which be a king of the gentile , and of small trade : at that place they lade only half a ship of pepper , and then she go to Cochin to take in the rest , and from thence to Cao Comori be seventie and two mile , and there end the coast of the Indies : and alongst this coast , near to the water side , and also to Cao Comori , down to the low land of Chialo , which be about two hundred mile , the people there be as it be all turn to the christian faith : there be also church of the friar of saint Paul order , which friar do very much good in those place in turn the people , and in convert they , and take great pain in instruct they in the law of Christ . 
 the fish for pearl . 
 the sea that lie between the coast which de - the order how scend from Cao Comori , to the low land of t^yfithfir Chilao , and the hand Zeilan , they call the fish of fearles-pearle , which fish they make every year , begin in march or April , and it last fifty day , but they 
 395 
 do not fish every year in one place , but one year in one place , and another year in another place of the same sea . when the time of this fish draw near , than they send very good diverse , that go to discover where the great heap of oyster be under water , and right against that place where great store of oyster be , there they make or plant a village with house and a Bazaro , all of stone , which stand as long as the fish time last , and it be furnish with all thing necessary , and now and then it be near unto place that be inhabit , and other time far off , accord to the place where they fish . the fisherman be all Christians of the country , and who so will may go to fish , pay a certain duty to the king of Portugal , and to the church of the friar of saint Paul , which be in that coast . all the while that they be fish , there be three or four fuste arm to defend the fisherman from rover . it be my chance to be there one time in my passage , and i see the [ ii i . 225. ] order that they use in fish , which be this . there be three or four bark that make consort together , which be like to our little pilot boat , and a little less , there go seven or eight man in a boat : and i have see in a morning a great number of they go out , and anchor in fifteen or eighteen fathom of water , which be the ordinary depth of all that coast . when they be at anchor , they cast a rope into the sea , and at the end of the rope , they make fast a great stone , and then there be ready a man that have his nose and his ear well stop , and anoint with oil , and a basket about his neck , or under his left arm , than he go down by the rope to the bottom of the sea , and as fast as he can he fill the basket , and when it be full , he shake the rope , and his fellow that be in the bark hale he up with the basket : and in such wise they go one by one until they have lade their bark with oyster , and at evening they come to the village , and then every company make their mountain or 396 
 heap of oyster one distant from another , in such wise that you shall see a great long row of mountain or heap of oyster , and they be not touch until such time as the fish be end , and at the end of the fish every company sit round about their mountain or heap of oyster , and fall to open of they , which they may easy do because they be dead , dry and brittle : and if every oyster have pearl in they , it will be a very good purchase , but there be very many that have no pearl in they : when the fish be end , than they see whether it be a good gather or a bid : there be certain expert in the pearl pary who they call Chitini , which set and make the price arepiseil mor pearl accord to their carract , beauty , and good - carac°s which ness , make four sort of they . the first sort they weigh , be the round pearl , and they be call Aia of portu - every car act gale , because the Portugal do buy they . the second be atnes ’ sort which be not round , be call Aia of Bengala . that prize they the three sort which be not so good as the second , have a in-they call Aia of Canara , that be to say , the kingdom strument of of bezeneger . the four and last sort , which be the 
 least and worst sort , be call Aia of Cambaia . thus which be make the price be set , there be merchant of every country by degree for which be ready with their money in their hand , to sort you so that in a few day all be buy up at the prize set accord to the goodness and caract of the pearl . 
 in this sea of the fish of pearl be a hand call Manar , which be inhabit by Christians of the country which first be Gentiles , and have a small hold of the Portugal be situate over against Zeilan : and between these two hand there be a channel , but not 
 very big , and have but a small depth therein : by reason whereof there can any great ship pass that way , but small ship , and with the increase of the water which be at the change or the full of the moon , and yet for all this they must unlade they and put their good into small vessel to lighten they before they can pass that 
 397 
 way for fear of sholde that lie in the channel , and after lade they into their ship to go for the Indies , and this do all small ship that pass that way , but those ship that go for the Indies eastwardes , pass by the coast of Coromandel , on the other side by the land of Chilao which be between the firm land and the hand manor : and go from the Indies to the coast of Coromandel , they loose some ship , but they be empty , because that the ship that pass that way discharge their good at a hand call Peripatane , and there land their good into small flat bottomed boat which draw little water , and be call take , and can run over every shall without either danger or loss of any thing , for that they tarry in Peripatane until such time as it be fair weather . before they depart to pass the sholde , the small ship and flat bottomed boat go together in company , and when they have sail six and thirty mile , they arrive at the place where the sholde be , and at that place the wind blow so forcible , that they be force to go through , not have any other refuge to save themselves . the flat bottomed boat go safe thorough , where as the small ship if they miss the aforesaid channel , stick fast on the sholde , and by this mean many be lose : and come back from the Indies , they go not that way , but pass by the channel of Manar as be abovesaid , who channel be oazy , and if the ship stick fast , it be great chance if there be any danger at all . the reason why this channel be not more sure to go thither , be , because the wind that reign or blow between Zeilan and Manar , make the channel so shallow with water , that almost there be not any passage . from Cao Comori to the hand of Zeilan be 120. mile overthwart . 
 zeilan . 
 zeilan be a hand , in my judgement , a great deal big than Cyprus : on that side towards the Indies lie westward be the city call Columba , which be a 398 
 1563-81 . hold of the Portugal , but without wall or enemy . 
 it have towards the sea a free port , the lawful king of [ ii i . 226. ] that hand be in Columbo , and be turn Christian and maintain by the king of Portugal , be deprive of his kingdom . the king of the gentile , to who this kingdom do belong , be call Madoni , which have two son , the first name Barbinas the prince ; and the second ragine . this king by the policy of his young son , be deprive of his kingdom , who because he have entice and do that which please the army and soldier , in despite of his father and brother be prince , usurp the kingdom , and become a great warrior . first , this hand have three king ; the king of Cotta with his conquer prisoner : the king of Candia , which be a part of that hand , and be so call by the name of Candia , which have a reasonable power , and be a great friend to the Portugal , which say that he live secret a christian ; the three be the king of Gianifampatan . in thirteen year that this ragine govern this hand , he become a great tyrant . 
 in this hand there grow fine cinnamon , great store of pepper , great store of nut and arochoe : there they make great store of Cairo to make cordage : it cair0 be a bring forth great store of crystal cat eye , or stuu^t , iatt^ Ochi de gati , and they say that they find there some fa ruby , but i have sell ruby well there that i bring which be the with i from Pegu. i be desirous to see how they a gather the cinnamon , or take it from the tree that it tree‘ grow on , and so much the rather , because the time that i be there , be the season which they gather it in , which be in the month of April , at which time the Portugal be in arm , and in the field , with the king of the country ; yet i to satisfy my desire , although in great danger , take a guide with i and go into a wood three mile from the city , in which wood be great store of sinamome tree grow together among other wild tree ; and this sinamome tree be a small tree , and not very high , and have leaf like to our bay tree . 
 399 
 the cut in gather of cinnamon . 
 a rare thing . 
 in the month of march or April , when the sap go up to the top of the tree , than they take the cinnamon from that tree in this wise . they cut the bark of the tree round about in length from knot to knot , or from joint to joint , above and below , and then easy with their hand they take it away , lay it in the sun to dry , and in this wise it be gather , and yet for all this the tree die not , but against the next year it will have a new bark , and that which be gather every year be the best sinamome : for that which grow two or three year be great , and not so good as the other be ; and in these wood grow much pepper . 
 Negapatan . 
 from the hand of Zeilan man use to go with small ship to Negapatan , within the firm land , and seventie two mile off be a very great city , and very populous of Portugal and Christians of the country , and part Gentiles : it be a country of small trade , neither have they any trade there , save a good quantity of rice , and cloth of bombast which they carry into diverse part : it be a very plentiful country of victual , but now it have a great deal less ; and that abundance of victual cause many Portugal to go thither and build house , and dwell there with small charge . 
 this city belong to a noble man of the kingdom of bezeneger be a gentle , nevertheless the Portugal and other Christians be well entreat there , and have their church there with a monastery of saint Francis order , with great devotion and very well accommodate , with house round about : yet for all this , they be among tyrant , which always at their pleasure may do they some harm , as it happen in the year of our lord God one thousand five hundred , sixty and five : for i remember very well , how that the nayer , that be to say , the lord of the city , send to the citizen to demand of they certain arabian horse , and they have deny they unto he , and gainsay his de - 
 400 
 1563-81 . maund , it come to pass that this lord have a desire to see the sea , which when the poor citizen understand , they doubt some evil , to hear a thing which be not wont to be , they think that this ' man will come afiorshfeare to sack the city , and present they embark they - ofp°rtugal5-selves the best they can with their movables , merchandise , jewel , money , and all that they have , and cause the ship to put from the shore . when this be do , as their evil chance will have it , the next night follow , there come such a great storm that it put all the ship on land perforce , and break they to piece , and all the good that come on land and be save , be take from they by the soldier and army of this lord which come down with he to see the sea , and be attendant at the sea side , not think that any such thing will have happen . 
 saint Thomas or San Tome . [ two » > • 227 ] 
 from Negapatan follow my voyage towards the east a hundred and fifty mile , i find the house of bless saint Thomas , which be a church of great s - 7^®^ mrs. devotion , and great regard of the gentile for the great miracle they have hear to have be do by that bless apostle : near unto this church the Portugal have build they a ci tie in the country subject to the king of bezeneger , which city although it be not very great , yet in my judgement it be the fair in all that part of the Indies : and it have very fair house and fair garden in vacant place very well accommodate : it have street large and straight , with many church of great devotion , their house be set close one unto another , with little door , every house have his defence , so that by that mean it be of force sufficient to defend you Portugal against the people of that country . the Portugal there have no other possession but their garden and house that be within the city : the custom belong to the king of bezeneger , which be very small and easy , for that it be a country of great riches 
 five 401 2 c 
 a faint kind of cloth die of diverse colour which those feofle delight much in , and esteem they of great frice . 
 and great trade : there come every year two or three great ship very rich , beside many other small ship : one of the two great ship go for Pegu , and the other for Malacca , lade with fine bombast cloth of every sort , paint , which be a rare thing , because those kind of clothes show as they be gild with diverse colour , and the more they be wash , the lively the colour will show . also there be other cloth of bombast which be weave with diverse colour , and be of great value : also they make in Sant Tome great store of red yarn , which they die with a root call Saia , and this colour will never waste , but the more it be wash , the more red it will show : they lade this yarn the great part of it for Pegu , because that there they work and weave it to make cloth accord to their own fashion , and with lesser charge . it be a marvelous thing to they which have not see the lade and unlade of man and merchandise in saint Tome as they do : it be a place so dangerous , that a man can be serve with small bark , neither can they do their business with the boat of the ship , because they will be beat in a thousand piece , but they make certain bark ( of purpose ) high , which they call masadie , they be make of little board ; one board be sow to another with small cord , and in this order be they make . and-when they be thus make , and the owner will embark any thing in they , either man or good , they lade they on land , and when they be lade , the barkman thrust the boat with her lade into the stream , and with great speed they make haste all that they be able to row out against the huge wave of the sea that be on that shore , until that they carry they to the ship : and in like manner they lade these masady at the ship with merchandise and man . when they come near the shore , the barkman leap out of the bark into the sea to keep the bark right that she cast not thwart the shore , and be keep right , the suff of the sea set her lade dry on land without any hurt or danger , and 
 402 
 i5$3-81-sometimes there be some of they that be overthrow , but there can be no great loss , because they lade but a title at a time . all the merchandise they lade outward , they emball it well with ox hide , so that if it take wet , it can have no great harm . 
 in my voyage , return in the year of our lord God one thousand , five hundred , sixty and six , i go from goa unto Malacca , in a ship or Gallion of the king of Portugal , which go unto Banda for to lade in the hand oj nutmeg and mace : from goa to Malacca be one thousand eight hundred mile , we pass without the jor ^g t£y hand Zeilan , and go through the channel of Nicubar , grow . or else through the channel of Sombrero , which be by the middle of the hand of Sumatra , call in old time Taprobana : and from Nicubar to Pegu be as it be a row or chain of a infinite number of hand , of which many be inhabit with wild people , and they call those 
 hand the hand of Andemaon , and they call their people i ” the hand savage or wild , because they eat one another : also these hand have war one with another , for they have a „ other . small bark , and with they they take one another , and so eat one another : and if by evil chance any ship be lose on those hand , as many have be , there be not one man of those ship lose there that escape uneaten or unslain . Theise people have not any acquaintance with any other people , neither have they trade with any , but live only of such fruit as those hand yield : and if any ship come near unto that place or coast as they pass that way , as in my voyage it happen as i come from Malacca through the channel of Sombrero , there come two of their bark near unto our ship lade with fruit , as with mouce which we call Adam apple , with fresh nut , and with a fruit call Inani , which fruit be like to our turnip , but be very sweet and good to eat : they will not come into the ship for any thing that we can do : neither will they take any money for their fruit , but they will truck for old shirt or piece of old linen breech , these 
 403 
 rag they let down with a rope into their bark unto [ il i . 228. ] they , and look what they think those thing to be ’ worth , so much fruit they will make fast to the 
 rope and let we hale it in : and it be tell i that at sometime a man shall have for a old shirt a good piece of amber . 
 the commodity that grow in the kingdom of as si . 
 the great trade that be at Malacca . 
 Sumatra . 
 this hand of Sumatra be a great hand and divide and govern by many king , and divide into many channel , where through there be passage : upon the headland towards the west be the kingdom of Assi govern by a moor king : this king be of great force and strength , as he that beside his great kingdom , have many foist and galley . in his kingdom grow great store of pepper , ginger , Benjamin : he be a utter enemy to the Portugal , and have diverse time be at Malacca to fight against it , and have do great harm to the borough thereof , but the city always withstand he valiant , and with their ordinance do great spoil to his camp . at length i come to the city of Malacca . 
 the city Malacca . 
 MAlacca be a city of marvellous great trade of all kind of merchandise , which come from diverse part , because that all the ship that sail in these sea , both great and small , be bind to touch at Malacca to pay their custom there , although they unlade nothing at all , as we do at Elsinor : and if by night they escape away , and pay not their custom , than they fall into a great danger after : for if they come into the Indies and have not the seal of Malacca , they pay double custom . i have not pass further than Malacca towards the east , but that which i will speak of here be by good information of they that have be there . the sail from Malacca towards the east be not common for all man , as to China and Japan , and so 
 404 
 forward to go who will , but only for the king of Portugal and his noble , with leave grant unto they of the king to make such voyage , or to the jurisdiction of the captain of Malacca , where he expect to know what voyage they make from Malacca thither , and these be the king voyage , that every year there de-parteth from Malacca 2. galleon of the king , one of they go to you moluccos to lade clove , and the at themoluc-oth go to Banda to lade nutmeg and mace , these two galleon be lade for the king , neither doe ' they carry any particular man good , save the portage of the mariner and soldier , and for this cause they be not voyage for merchant , because that go thither , they shall not have where to lade their good of return ; and beside this , the captain will not carry any merchant for either of these two place . there go small ship of the moor thither , which come from the coast of Java , and change or guild their commodity in the king - 
 dom of Assa , and these be the mace , clove , and the kingdom nutmeg , which go for the strait of Mecca . the of Assa . voyage that the king of Portugal grant to his noble be these , of China and Japan , from China to Japan , and from Japan to China , and from China to the Indies , and the voyage of Bengala , Maluco , and Sonda , with the lade of fine cloth , and every sort of bombast cloth . 
 Sonda be a hand of the moor near to the coast of 
 Java , and there they lade pepper for China . the ship the ship of that go every year from the Indies to China , be call the ship of drug , because she carry diverse drug of e 
 cambaia , but the great part of her lade be silver . 
 from Malacca to China be eighteen hundred mile : and from China to Japan go every year a ship of great importance lade with silk , which for return of their silk bring bar of silver which they truck in China . the distance between China and Japan be four and twenty hundred mile , and in this way there be diverse hand not very big , in which the friar of saint Paul , by the help of God , make many Christians 405 
 A.D. 1563-81 . hand not discover . 
 Chinais under the gsvem-ment of the great tartar . 
 [ ii i . 2x9 . ] 
 a yearly Caravan from Persia to China . 
 there like to themselves . from these hand hitherward the place be not yet discover for the great sholdnesse of sand that they find . the Portugal have make a small city near unto the coast of China call Macao , who church and house be of wood , and it have a bishopric , but the custom belong to the king of China , and they go and pay the same at a city call Canton , which be a city of great importance and very beautiful two day journey and a half from Macao . the people of China be Gentiles , and be so jealous and fearful , that they will not have a stranger to put his foot within their land : so that when the Portugal go thither to pay their custom , and to buy their merchandise , they will not consent that they shall lie or lodge within the city , but send they forth into the suburb . the country of China be near the kingdom of great Tartary , and be a very great country of the gentile and of great importance , which may be judge by the rich and precious merchandise that come from thence , than which i believe there be not better nor in great quantity in the whole world beside . 
 first , great store of gold , which they carry to the Indies , make in plate like to little ship , and in value three and twenty caract a piece , very great abundance of fine silk , cloth of damask and taffeta , great quantity of musk , great quantity of Occam in bar , great quantity of quicksilver and of cinaper , great store of Camfora , a infinite quantity of porcellane , make in vessel of diverse sort , great quantity of paint cloth and square , infinite store of the root of China : and every year there come from China to the Indies , two or three great ship , lade with most rich and precious merchandise . the rhubarb come from thence over land , by the way of Persia , because that every year there go a great carovan from Persia to China , which be in go thither six month . the carovan arrive at a city call lanchin , the place where the king be resident with his court . i speak with 
 406 
 a persian that be three year in that city of lanchin , and he tell i that it be a great city and of great importance . the voyage of Malacca which be in the jurisdiction of the captain of the castle , be these : every year he send a small ship to timor to lade white sandal , for all the best come from this hand : there come some also from solor , but that be not so good : also he send another small ship every year to cauchin China , to lade there wood of aloe , for that all the wood of aloe come from this place , which be in the firm land near unto China , and in that kingdom i can not know how that wood grow by any mean . for that the people of the country will not suffer the Portugal to come within the land , but only for wood and water , and as for all other thing that they want , as victual or merchandise , the people bring that a board the ship in small bark , so that every day there be a mart keep in the ship , until such time as she market keep be lade : also there go another ship for the say °ft , king captain of Malacca to Zion , to lade Verzino : all these z ‘ voyage be for the captain of the castle of Malacca , and when he be not dispose to make these voyage , he sell they to another . 
 the city of Zion , or Siam . 
 Zion be the imperiali seat , and a great city , but in the year of our lord God one thousand five hundred sixty and seven , it be take by the king of Pegu , which king make a voyage or come by land four month journey with a army of man through his land , and the number of his army be a million and four hundred thousand man of war : when he come to the city , he give assault to it , and besiege it one and twenty month before he can win it , with great loss . of his people , this i know , for that i be in Pegu six month after his departure , and see when that his officer that be in Pegu , send five hundred thousand man of war to furnish the place of they 
 407 
 a prince of marvellous strength and power . 
 that be slay and lose in that assault : yet for all this , if there have not be treason against the city , it have not be lose : for on a night there be one of the gate set open , through the which with great trouble the king gate into the city , and become governor of Zion : and when the emperor see that he be betray , and that his enemy be in the city , he poison himself : and his wife and child , friend and nobleman , that be not slay in the first affront of the entrance into the city , be all carry captive into Pegu , where i be at the come home of the king with his triumph and victory , which come home and return from the war be a goodly sight to behold , to see the elephant come home in a square , lade with gold , silver , jewel , and with noble man and woman that be take prisoner in that city . 
 now to return to my voyage : i depart from Malacca in a great ship which go for saint Tome , be a city situate on the coast of Coromandel : and because the captain of the castle of Malacca have understanding by advise that the king of * assi will come with a great army and power of man against they , therefore upon this he will not give licence that any ship shall depart : wherefore in this ship we depart from thence in the night , without make any provision of our water : and we be in that ship four hundred and odd man : we depart from thence with intention to go to a hand to take in water , but the wind be so contrary , that they will not suffer we to fetch it , so that by this mean we be two and forty day in the sea as it be lose , and we be drive too and fro , so that the first land that we discover , be beyond saint Tome , more than five hundred mile which be the mountain of Zerzerline , near unto the kingdom of Orisa , and so we come to Orisa with many sick , and more that be dead for want of water : and they that be sick in four day die : and i for the space of a year after have my throat so sore and hoarse , 408 
 that i can never satisfy my thirst in drink of water : 
 i judge the reason of my hoarseness to be with sop that i wet in vinegar and oil , wherewith i sustain my self many day . there be not any want of bread nor of wine : but the wine of that country be so hot [ ii i . 230. ] that be drink without water they will kill a man : neither be they able to drink they : when we begin to want water , i see certain moor that be officer in the ship , that sell a small dish full for a ducat , after this i see one that will have give a bar of pepper , which be two quintaly and a half , for a little measure of water , and he can not have it . true i believe that i have die with my slave , who than i have to serve i , which cost i very dear : but to provide for the danger at hand , i sell my slave for half that he be worth , because that i will save his drink that he drink , to serve my own purpose , and to save my life . 
 of the kingdom of Orisa , and the river Ganges . ORisa be a fair kingdom and trusty , through the which a man may have go with gold in his hand without any danger at all , as long as the lawful king reign which be a gentle , who continue in the city call Catecha , which be within the land six day journey . this king love stranger marvelous well , especial merchant which have traffic in and out of his kingdom , in such wise that he will take no custom of they , neither any other grievous thing . only the ship that come thither pay a small thing accord to her portage , and every year in the port of Orisa be lade five and twenty or thirty ship great and small , with rice and diverse sort of fine white bombast cloth , oil of Zerzeline which they make of a seed , and it be very good to eat and to fry fish withal , great store of butter , Lacca , long pepper , ginger , mirabolans dry and condite , great store of cloth of herb , which be a kind of silk which grow among the 
 409 
 the commodity that go out of Orisa . 
 this cloth we call Hettle cloth . 
 wood without any labour of man , and when the bowl thereof be grow round as big as a orange , than they take care only to gather they . about sixteen year past , this king with his kingdom be destroy by the king of patten , which be also king of the great part of Bengala , and when he have get the kingdom , he set custom there twenty pro cento , as merchant pay in his kingdom : but this tyrant enjoy his kingdom but a small time , but be conquer by another tyrant , which be the great mogul king of Agra , del , and of all Cambaia , without any resistance . i depart from Orisa to Bengala , to the harbour Piqueno , which be distant from Orisa towards the east a hundred and seventie mile . they go as it be row alongst the coast fifty and four mile , and then we enter into they the river of river Ganges : from the mouth of this river , to a city Ganges . ' call Satagan , where the merchant gather themselves together with their trade , be a hundred mile , which they row in eighteen hour with the increase of the water : in which river it flow and eb as it do in the Thamis , and when the ebb water be come , they be not able to row against it , by reason of the swiftness of the water , yet their bark be light and arm with oar , like to foist , yet they can prevail against that stream , but for refuge must make they fast to the bank of the river until the next flow water , and they call these bark Bazaras and Patvas : they row as well as a galliot , or as well as ever i have see any . a good tide row before you come to Satagan , you shall have a place which be call Buttor , and from thence upward the ship do not go , because that upwards the river be very shallow , and little water . Every year at buttor they make and unmake a village , with house and shop make of straw , and with all thing necessary to their use , and this village stand as long as the ship ride there , and till they depart for the Indies , and when they be depart , every man go to his plot of house , and there set fire on they , which thing make 
 410 
 i to marvel . for as i pass up to satagan , i see this village stand with a great number of people , with a infinite number of ship and bazar , and at my return come down with my captain of the last ship , for who i tarry , i be all amaze to see such a place so soon raze and burn , and nothing leave but the sign of the burn house . the small ship go to satagan , and there they lade . 
 of the city of Satagan . 
 in the port of Satagan every year lade thirty or five and thirty ship great and small , with rice , cloth of bombast of diverse sort , Lacca , great abundance of sugar , mirabolans dry and preserve , long pepper , oil of Zerzeline , and many other sort of merchandise . the city of Satagan be a reasonable fair city for a city of the moor , abound with all thing , and be govern by the king of patten , and now be subject to the great mogul . i be in this kingdom four month , whereas many merchant do buy or fraught boat for their benefit , and with these bark they go up and down the river of Ganges to fair , buy their commodity with a great advantage , because that every day in the week they have a fair , now in one place , and now in another , and i also hire a bark and go up and down the river and do my business , and so in the night i see many strange thing . the kingdom of Bengala in time pass have be as it be in the power of Moores , nevertheless there be great store of Gentiles among they ; always whereas i have speak of Gentiles , be to be understand idolater , and whereas i speak of moor i mean Mahomet sect . those people especial that be within the land do great worship the river of Ganges : for when any be sick , he be bring out of the country to the bank of the river , and there they make he a small cottage of straw , and every day they wet he with that water , whereof there be many that die , and when they be dead , they make 
 the commodity that be lade in satagan . 
 [ ii i . 231 - ] 
 moor be of the sect of Mahomet . 
 411 
 a ceremony of a heap of stick and bough and lay the dead body the gentile thereon , and put fire thereunto , they let the body be alone until it be half roast , and then they take it off from the fire , and make a empty jar fast about his neck , and so throw he into the river . Theise thing every night as i pass up and down the river i see for the space of two month , as i pass to the fair to buy my commodity with the merchant . and this be the cause that the Portugal will not drink of the water of the river Ganges , yet to the sight it be more perfect and clear than the water of Nilus be . from the port Piqueno i go to Cochin , and from Cochin to Malacca , from whence i depart for Pegu be eight hundred mile distant . that voyage be wont to be make in five and twenty or thirty day , but we be four month , and at the end of three month our ship be without victual . the pilot tell we that we be by his altitude not far from a city call tanasary , in the kingdom of Pegu , and these his word be not true , but we be ( as it be ) in the middle of many hand , and many uninhabited rock , and there be also some Portugal that affirm that they know the land , and know also where the city of Tanasari be . 
 this city of right belong to the kingdom of Zion , which be situate on a great river side , which come out of the kingdom of Zion : and where this river run into the sea , there be a village call mirgim , merchandise jn who harbour every year there lade some ship with Xtrivaa . , Nypa , and Benjamin , a few clove , nutmeg and mace which come from the coast of Zion , but the great merchandise there be verzin and Nypa , which be a excellent wine , which be make of the flower of a tree call nype . who liquor they distil , and so make a excellent drink clear as crystal , good to the mouth , and better to the stomach , and it have a excellent gentle virtue , that if one be rot with the french pock , drink good store of this , he shall be 412 
 whole again , and i have see it prove , because that when i be in Cochin , there be a friend of i , who nose begin to drop away with that disease , and he be counsel of the doctor of physic , that he shall go to tanasary at the time of the new wine , and that he shall drink of the nype wine , night and day , as much as he can before it be distil , which at that time be most delicate , but after that it be distil , it be more strong , and if you drink much of it , it will fume into the head with drunkenness . this man go thither , and do so , and i have see he after with a good colour and sound . this wine be very much esteem in the Indies , and for that it be bring so far off , it be very dear : in Pegu ordinary it be good cheap , because it be near to the place where they make it , and there be every year great quantity make thereof . And return to my purpose , i say , be among these rock , and far from the land which be over against tanasary , with great scarcity of victual , and that by the say of the pilot and two Portugal , hold then firm that we be in front of the aforesaid harbour , we determine to go thither with our boat and fetch victual , and that the ship shall stay for we in a place assign . we be twenty and eight person in the boat that go for victual , and on a day about twelve of the clock we go from the ship , assure our self to be in the harbour before night in the aforesaid port , we row all that day , and a great part of the next night , and all the next day without find harbour , or any sign of good land , and this come to pass through the evil counsel of the two Portugal that be with we . 
 for we have overshoot the harbour and leave it behind we , in such wise that we have lose the land inhabit , together with the shippe^ and we eight and twenty man have no manner of victuali with we in the boat , but it be the lord will that one of the mariner have bring a little rice with he in the boat to barter away for 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 taper wine good to cure the french disease . 
 413 
 [ ii i . 232. ] 
 Tavay under the king of Pegu. 
 some other thing , and it be not so much but that three or four man will have eat it at a meal : i take the government of this rice , promise that by the help of God that rice shall be nourishment for we until it please God to send we to some place that be inhabit : and when i sleep i put the rice into my bosom because they shall not rob it from i : we be nine day row alongst the coast , without find any thing but country uninhabited , and desert hand , where if we have find but grass it will have seem sugar unto we , but we can not find any , yet we find a few leaf of a tree , and they be so hard that we can not chew they , we have water and wood sufficient , and as we row , we can go but by flow water , for when it be ebb water , we make fast our boat to the bank of one of those island , and in these nine day that we row , we find a cave or nest of tortoise egg , wherein be one hundred forty and four egg , the which be a great help unto we : these egg be as big as a hen egg , and have no shell about they but a tender skin , every day we sod a kettle full of those egg , with a handful of rice in the broth thereof : it please God that at the end of nine day we discover certain fisher man , a fish with small bark , and we row towards they , with a good cheer , for i think there be never man more glad than we be , for we be so sore afflict with penury , that we can scarce stand on our leg . yet accord to the order that we set for our rice , when we see those fisher man , there be leave sufficient for four day . the first village that we come to be in the gulf of Tavay , under the king of Pegu , whereas we find great store of victual : then for two or three day after our arrival there , we will eat but little meat any of we , and yet for all this , we be at the point of death the most part of we . from Tavay to Martavan , in the kingdom of Pegu , be seventie two mile . we jade our boat with victual 
 414 
 1563-81-which be abundant sufficient for six month , from whence we depart for the port and city of Martavan , where in short time we arrive , but we find not our ship there as we have think we shall , from whence present we make out two bark to go to look for she . and they find she in great calamity , and need of water , be at a anchor with a contrary wind , which come very ill to pass , because that she want her boat a month , which shall have make her provision of wood and water , the ship also by the grace of God arrive safe in the aforesaid port of Martavan . 
 the city of Martavan . 
 we find in the city of Martavan ninety Portugal of Merchants and other base man , which have fall at difference with the retor or governor of the city , and all for this cause , that certain vagabond of the Portugal have slay five falchine of the king of Pegu , which chance about a month after the king of Pegu be go with a million and four hundred thousand man to conquer the kingdom of Zion . they have for custom in this country and kingdom , the king be wheresoever his pleasure be to be out of his kingdom , that every fifteen day there go from Pegu a carovan of Falchines , with every one a basket on his head full of some fruit or other deli - 
 Martavan a title under the king of Pegu. 
 a custom that these people have when the king be in the tvarre . 
 cate of refreshing , and with clean clothes : it chance that this carovan pass by Martavan , and rest themselves there a night , there happen between the Portugal and they word of despite , and from word to blow , and because it be think that the Portugal have the worse , the night follow , when the Falchines be a sleep with their company , the Portugal go and cut off five of their head . now AlawlnPegu there be a law in Pegu , that whosoever kill a man , ktlltn he shall buy the shed blood with his money , accord it to the estate of the person that be slay , but these 
 415 
 Falchines be the servant of the king , the retor dare not do any thing in the matter , without the consent of the king , because it be necessary that the king shall know of such a matter . when the king have knowledge thereof , he give commandment that the malefactor shall be keep until his come home , and then he will due minister justice , but the captain of the Portugal will not deliver those man , but rather set himself with all the rest in arm , and go every day through the city march with his drum and ensign display . for at that time the city be empty of man , by reason they be go all to the war and in business of the king : in the midst of this rumour we come thither , and i think great pride of it a strange thing to see the Portugal use such in-the Portugal . soiencie ; in another man city . and i stand in doubt of that which come to pass , and will not unlade my good because that they be more sure in the ship then on the land , the great part of the lade be the owner of the ship , who be in Malacca , yet there be diverse merchant there , but their good be off small importance , all those merchant tell i that they will not unlade any of their good there , unless i will unlade first , yet after they leave my counsel and follow their own , and put their good a land and lose every whit . the rector with the customer send for i , and demand why i put not my good a land , and pay my custom as other man do ? to who i answer , that i be a merchant that be new come thither , and see such disorder among the Portugal , i doubt the loss of my good which cost i very dear , with the sweat of my face , and for this cause i [ ii i . 233. ] be determine not to put my good on land , until such time as his honour will assure i in the name of the king , that i shall have no loss , and although there come harm to the Portugal , that neither i nor my good shall have any hurt , because i have neither part nor any difference with they in this tumult : my 416 
 reason sound well in the retors ear , and so present he send for the bargit , which be as counseller of the city , and there they promise i on the king head or in the behalf of the king , that neither i nor my good shall have any harm , but that we shall be safe and sure : of which promise there be make public note . and then i send for my good and have they on land , and pay my custom , which be in that country ten in the hundred of the same good , and for my more security i take a house right against the retors house . the captain of the Portugal , and all the Portugal merchant be put out of the city , and i with twenty and two poor man which be officer in the ship , have my dwell in the city . after this , the gentile devise to be revenge of the Portugal ; but they will not put it in execution until such time as our small ship have discharge all her good , and then the next night follow come from Pegu four thousand soldier with some elephant of war ; and remp ° ” before that they make any tumult in the city , the tkeportusf > les-retor send , and give commandment to all Portugal that be in the city , when they hear any rumour or noise , that for any thing they shall not go out of their house , as they tender their own health . than four hour within night i hear a great rumour and noise of man of war , with elephant which throw down the door of the warehouse of the Portugal , and their house of wood and straw , in the which tumult there be some Portugal wound , and one of they slay ; and other without make proof of their manhood , which the day before do so brag , at that time put themselves to flight most shameful , and save themselves a board of little ship , that be at a anchor in the harbour , and some that be in their bed flee away naked , and that night they carry away all the Portugal good out of the suburb into the city , and those Portugal that have their good in the suburb also . after this the Portugal that be 
 five 417 2d 
 flee into the ship to save themselves , take a new courage to themselves , and come on land and set fire on the house in the suburb , which house be make of board and straw , and the wind blow fresh , in small time be burn and consume , with which fire half the city have like to have be burn ; when the Portugal have do this , they be without all hope to recover any part of their good again , which good may amount to the sum of sixteen thousand ducat , which , if they have not set fire to the town , they may have have again without any loss at all . then the Portugal understand that this thing be not do by the consent of the king , but by his lieutenant and the retor of the city be very ill content , know that they have make a great fault , yet the next morning follow , the Portugal begin to bend and shoot their ordinance against the ci tie , which battery of they continue four day , but all be in vain , for the shot never hit the city , but light on the top of a small hill near unto it , so that the city have and harm . when the retor perceive that the Portugal make battery against the city , he take one and twenty Portugal that be there in the city , and send they four mile into the country , there to tarry until such time as the other Portugal be depart , that make the battery , who after their departure let they go at their own liberty without any harm do unto they . i my self be always in my house with a good guard appoint i by the retor , that no man shall do i injury , nor harm i nor my good ; in such wise that he perform all that he have promise i in the name of the king , but he will not let i depart before the come of the king , which be great to my hindrance , because i be twenty and one month sequester , that i can not buy nor sell any kind of merchandise . those commodity that i bring thither , be peper , sandal , and Porcellan of China : so when the king be come home , i make my 
 418 
 supplication unto he , and i be licence to depart when i will . 
 from Martavan i depart to go to the chief city in the kingdom of Pegu , which be also call after the name of the kingdom , which voyage be make by sea in three or four day ; they may go also by land , but it be better for he that have merchandise to go by sea and lesser charge . and in this voyage you shall have a Macareo , which be one of the most marvellous thing in the world that nature have wrought , and i never see any thing so hard to be believe as this , to wit , the great increase and diminish of the water thingmost there at one push or instant , and the horrible earthquake and great noise that the say Macareo make where c0mming0f a it come . we depart from Martavan in bark , tide the earth which be like to our pilot boat , with the increase shall quake . of the water , and they go as swift as a arrow out of a bow , so long as the tide run with they , and when the water be at the high , than they draw themselves out of the channel towards some bank , and there they come to anchor , and when the water be diminish , than they rest on dry land : and when the [ ii i . 2 34-1 bark rest dry , they be as high from the bottom of the channel , as any house top be high from the ground . they let their bark lie so high for this respect , that if there shall any ship rest or ride in the channel , with such force come in the water , that it will u overthrow ship or bark : yet for all this , that the bark be so far out of the channel , and though Severne . the water have lose her great strength and fury before it come so high , yet they make fast their prow to the stream , and oftentimes it make they very fearful , and if the anchor do not hold her prow up by strength , she will be overthrow and lose with man and good . when the water begin to increase , it make such a noise and so great that you will think it a earthquake , and present at the first it make three wave . 
 so that the first wash over the bark , from stem 
 419 
 these tide make their just course as we do . 
 this Macareo be a tide or a currant . 
 house make of cane y cover with leaf of tree . Godon be a place or house for merchant to lay their good in . 
 the form of the building oj the new city of Pegu. 
 to stern , the second be not so furious as the first , and the third raise the anchor , and then for the space of six hour while the water increase , they row with such swiftness that you will think they do fly : in these tide there must be lose no jot of time , for if you arrive not at the stagion before the tide be spend , you must turn back from whence you come . for there be no stay at any place , but at these stagion , and there be more danger at one of these place then at another , as they be high and low one then another . when as you return from Pegu to Martavan , they go but half the tide at a time , because they will lay their bark up aloft on the bank , for the reason aforesaid . i can never gather any reason of the noise that this water make in the increase of the tide , and in diminish of the water . there be another Macareo in Cambaya , but that be nothing in comparison of this . by the help of God we come safe to Pegu , which be two city , the old and the new , in the old city be the merchant stranger , and merchant of the country , for there be the great do and the great trade . this city be not very great , but it have very great suburb . their house be make with cane , and cover with leaf , or with straw , but the merchant have all one house or Magason , which house they call Godon which be make of brick , and there they put all their good of any valour , to save they from the often mischance that there happen to house make of such stufle . in the new city be the palace of the king , and his abide place with all his baron and noble , and other gentleman ; and in the time that i be there , they finish the build of the new city : it be a great city , very plain and flat , and four square , wall round about and with ditch that compass the wall about with water , in which ditche be many crocodile , it have no draw bridge , yet it have twenty gate , five for every square on the wall , there be many place make for centinel to watch , make of wood and cover or gild with gold , the street 
 420 
 thereof be the fair that i have see , they be as straight as a line from one gate to another , and stand at the one gate you may discover to the other , and they be as broad as 10 or 12 man may ride a breast in they : and those street that be thwart be fair and large , these street , both on the one side and on the other , be plant at the door of the house , with nut tree of India , which make a very commodious shadow , the house be make of wood and cover with a kind of tile in form of cup , very necessary for their use , the king palace be in the middle of the city , make in form a rich and of a wall castle , with ditch full of water round about stoteh palace . it , the lodging within be make of wood all over gild , with fine pinnacle , and very costly work , cover with plate of gold . true it may be a king house : within the gate there be a fair large court , from the one side to the other , wherein there be make place for the strong and stout eliphants appoint for the service of the king person , and among all other eliphants , he have four that be white , a thing so rare that a man shall four item hardly find another king that have any such , and if this ^p11^-king know any other that have white eliphante , he send for they as for a gift . the time that i be there , there be two bring out of a far country , and that cost i something the sight of they , for they command the merchant to go to see they , and then be he they must give somewhat ' to the man that bring they : ducat which the broker of the merchant give for every man half may be three a ducat , which they call a Tansa , which amount to a great sum , for the number of merchant that be in Jou , e pence-that city ; and when they have pay the aforesaid Tansa , they make choose whether they will see they at that time or no , because that when they be in the king stall , every man may see they that will : but at that time they must go and see they , for it be the king pleasure it shall be so . this king among all other his title , be call the king of the white eliphants , and it be report that if this king know any other king that have any of these 
 421 
 a excellent devise to hunt and take wild eliphants . 
 white eliphante , and will not send they unto he , that he will hazard his whole kingdom to conquer they , he esteem these white eliphants very dear , and they be have in great regard , and keep with very meet service , every one of they be in a house , all guild over , and they have their meat give they in vessel of silver and gold , there be one black elephant the great that have be see , and he be keep accord to his bigness , he be nine cubit high , which be a marvelous thing . it be report that this king have four thousand elephant of war , and all have their tooth , and they use to put on their two uppermost tooth sharp pike of iron , and make they fast with ring , because these beast fight , and make battle with their tooth ; he have also very many young eliphants that have not their tooth sprowt forth : also this king have a brave devise in hunt to take these eliphants when he will , two mile from the city . he have build a fair palace all guild , and within it a fair court , and within it and round about there be make a infinite number of place for man to stand to see this hunt : near unto this palace be a mighty great wood , through the which the huntsman of the king ride continual on the back of the feminine eliphants , teach they in this business . Every hunter carry out with he five or six of these feminine , and they say that they anoint the secret place with a certain composition that they have , that when the wild elephant do smell thereunto , they follow the feminine and can leave they : when the huntsman have make provision , and the elephant be so entangle , they guide the feminine towards the palace which be call Tambell , and this palace have a door which do open and shut with engine , before which door there be a long strait way with tree on both the side , which cover the way in such wise as it be like darkness in a corner : the wild elephant when he come to this way , think that he be in the wood . at end of this dark way there be a great field , when the hunter have 
 422 
 get this prey , when they first come to this field , they send present to give knowledge thereof to the city , and with all speed there go out fifty or sixty man on horseback , and do beset the field round about : in the great field than the female which be teach in this business go direct to the mouth of the dark way , and when as the wild elephant be enter in there , the hunter shout and make a great noise , as as be possible , to make the wild elephant enter in at the gate of that palace , which be then open , and assoon as he be in , the gate be shut without any noise , and so the hunter with the female eliphants and the wild one be all in the court together , and then within a small time the female withdraw themselves away one by one out of the court , leave the wild elephant alone : and when a excellent he perceive that he be leave alone , he be so mad that for two or three hour to see he , it be the great ’ pleasure in the world : he weep , he flinge , he run , he justle , he thrust under the place where the people stand to see he , think to kill some of they , but the post and timber be so strong and great , that he can hurt any body , yet he oftentimes break his tooth in the grate ; at length when he be weary and have labour his body that he be all wet with sweat , than he pluck in his trunk into his mouth , and then he throw out so much water out of his 
 belly , that he sprinkle it over the head of the looker on , to the uttermost of they , although it be very high : and then when they see he very weary , there go certain officer into the court with long sharp cane in their hand , and prick he that they make he to go into one of the house that be make alongst the court for the same purpose : as there be many which be make long and narrow , that when the elephant be in , he can turn himself to go back again . and it be requisite that these man shall be very wary and swift , for although their cane be long , yet the elephant will kill they if they be not swift to save themselves : at length when 
 423 
 these cane be like to they in Spain which they call joco de tear . 
 they have get he into one of those house , they stand over he in a loft and get rope under his belly and about his neck , and about his leg , and bind he fast , and so let he stand four or five day , and a strange give he neither meat nor drink . at the end of 
 ^lut ^id th686 f°ure or five day , they unloose he and put one 
 shall in so the female unto he > and give they meat and drink , 
 short time be and in eight day he be become tame . in my judgement 
 make tame . there be not a beast so intellective as be these eliphants , 
 nor of more understanding in all the world : for he will do all thing that his keeper say , so that he lack nothing but human speech . 
 the great it be report that the great strength that the king strength that of pegU have be in these eliphants , for when they go tpegu‘hath to battle , they set on their back a castle of wood 
 bind thereto , with band under their belly : and in every castle four man very commodious set to fight with harquebuss , with bow and arrow , with dart and pike , and other lance weapon : and they say that the skin of this elephant be so hard , that a harquebus will not pierce it , unless it be in the eye , 
 a goodly order temple , or some other tender place of his body . and in a barbarous beside this , they be of great strength , and have a very peope . excellent order in their battle , as i have see at their feast which they make in the year , in which feast the king make triumph , which be a rare thing and worthy memory , that in so barbarous a people there 
 the order of shall be such goodly order as they have in their thetr weapon arm ; es which be distinct in square of eliphants , of hl$ man . horseman , or harquebusier and pikeman , that true the number of they be infinite : but their armour and weapon be very nought and weak as well the one as the other : they have very bad pike , their sword be worse make , like long knife without point , his harquebuss be most excellent , and always in his war he have eighty thousand harquebuss , and the number of they increase daily . because the king will have 
 [ ii i . 236. ] they shoot every day at the plank , and so by con-424 
 tinuall exercise they become most excellent shot : also he have great ordinance make of very good mettle ; to conclude there be not a king on the earth that have more power or strength then this king of Pegu , because he have twenty and six crown king at his command . he can make in his camp a million and a half of man of war in the field against his enemy . the state of his kingdom and maintenance of his army , be a thing incredible to consider , and the victual that shall maintain such a number of people in the war . : but he that know the nature and quality of that people , will easy believe it . i have see with my eye , that those people and soldier have eat •of all sort of wild beast that be on the earth , whether it be very filthy or otherwise all serve for their mouth : yea , i have see they eat scorpion and serpent , also they feed of all kind of herb and grass . so that if such a great army want not water and salt , they will maintain themselves a long time in a bush with root , flower and leaf of tree , they carry rice with they for their voyage , and that serve they in stead of comfit , it be so dainty unto they . this king of Pegu have not any army or power by sea , but in the land , for people , dominion , gold and silver , he far exceed the power of the great Turk in treasure and strength . this king have diverse magason full of treasure , as gold , and silver , and every day he increase it more and more , and it be never diminish . also he be lord of the mine of ruby , satire and spinel . near unto his royal palace there be a inestimable treasure whereof he make no account , for that it stand in such a place that every one may see it , and the place where this treasure be , be a great court wall round about with wall of stone , with two gate which stand open every day . and within this place or court be four gild house cover with lead , and in every one of these be certain heathenish idol of a very great valour . in the first house there be a stature of the 
 425 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 26. crown king at his command . fifteen hundred thousand man in one camp . 
 fate open serpent . 
 the riches open the king open Pegu. 
 image of a man of gold very great , and on his head a crown of gold beset with most rare ruby and safire , and round about he be 4. little child of gold . in the second house there be the stature of a man of silver , that be set as it be sit on heap of money : who stature in height , as he sit , be so high , that his highness exceed the height of any one roof of a house ; i measure his foot , and find that they be as long as all my body be in height , with a crown on his head like to the first . and in the third house , there be a stature of brass of the same bigness , with a like crown on his head . in the 4. and last house there be a stature of a man as big as the other , which be make of Gansa , which be the metal they make their money of , and this metal be make of copper and lead mingle together . this stature also have a crown on his head like the first : this treasure be of such a value as it be , stand in a open place that every man at his pleasure may go and see it : for the keeper thereof never forbid any man the sight thereof . i say as i have say before , that this king every year in his feast triumph : and because it be worthy of the note , i think it meet to write thereof , which be as follow . the king ride on a triumphant cart or wagon all gild , which be draw by 16. goodly horse : and this cart be very high with a goodly canopy over it , behind the cart go 20. of his lord and noble , with every one a rope in his hand make fast to the cart for to hold it upright that it fall not . the king sit in the middle of the cart ; and upon the same cart about the king stand 4. of his noble most favour of he , and before this cart wherein the king be , go all his army as aforesaid , and in the middle of his army go all his nobility , round about the cart , there be in his dominion , a marvellous thing it be to see so many people , such riches and such good order in a people so barbarous as they be . this king of Pegu have one principal wife which be keep in a Seralio , he have 300 concubine , of who it be report that he have 426 
 90. child . this king sit every day in person to hear the suit of his subject , but he nor they never speak one to another , but by supplication make in this order . the king sit up aloft in a great hall , on the order of a tribunali seat , and low under he sit all his baron justiceround about , than those that demand audience enter into a great court before the king , and there set they down on the ground 40. pace distant from the king person , and among those people there be no difference no difference in matter of audience before the king , but all alike , and there they sit with their supplication in their hand , - in cmtrwer-which be make of long leaf of a tree , these leaf siet or inn be 3. quarter of a yard long , and two finger broad , which justice . be write with a sharp iron make for y‘ purpose , and in those leaf be their supplication write , and with their supplication , they have in their hand a present or gift , accord to the weightiness of their matter . then come you secretary down to read these supplication , take they and read they before the king , and if the king think it good to do to they that favour or justice that they demand , than he command to take the present out of their hand : but if he think their demand be not just or accord to right , he command they away without take of their gift or present . in the Indies there be not any merchandise that be good to bring to Pegu , unless it be at some time by chance to bring opium of Cambaia , and if he bring money he shall lose by it . now the commodity that come from 
 s. Tome be the only merchandise for that place , which [ ii i . 257. ] be the great quantity of cloth make there , which they commodi-use in Pegu ; which cloth be make of bombast weave and paint , so that the more that kind of cloth be pegU . wash , the more lively they show their colour , which be a rare thing , and there be make such account of this kind of cloth which be of so great importance , that a small bale of it will cost a thousand or two thousand ducat . also from s. tome they lay great store of red yarn , of bombast die with a root which they call 
 427 
 note the departure of the ship from saint Tome to Pegu. 
 commodity bring into Pegu. 
 the chikinos be piece of gold worth sterling 7. shilling . 
 Saia , as aforesaid , which colour will never out . with which merchandise every year there go a great ship from saint Tome to Pegu , of great importance , and they usual depart from saint Tome to Pegu the 11. or 12. of September , and if she stay until the twelve , it be a great hap if she return not without make of her voyage . their use be to depart the sixth of September , and then they make sure voyage , and now because there be a great labour about that kind of cloth to bring it to perfection , and that it be well dry , as also the greediness of the captain that will make a extraordinary gain of his fraught , think to have the wind always to serve their turn , they stay so long , that at sometime the wind turn . for in those part the wind blow firm for certain time , with the which they go to Pegu with the wind in poop , and if they arrive not there before the wind change , and get ground to anchor , perforce they must return back again : for that the gale of the wind blow there for three or four month together in one place with great force . but if they get the coast and anchor there , then with great labour they may save their voyage . also there go another great ship from Bengala every year , lade with fine cloth of bombast of all sort , which arrive in the harbour of Pegu , when the ship that come from saint Tome depart . the harbour where these two ship arrive be call cosmin . from Malaca to Martavan , which be a port in Pegu , there come many small ship , and great , lade with pepper , Sandolo , porcellan of China , Camfora , Bruneo and other merchandise . the ship that come from Mecca enter into the port of Pegu and Cirion , and those ship bring cloth of wool , scarlet , velvet , opium , and Chickinos , by the which they lose , and they bring they because they have no other thing that be good for Pegu : but they esteem not the loss of they , for that they make such great gain of their commodity that they carry from thence out of that kingdom . also the king of Assi his ship come thither 428 
 into the same port lade with peper ; from the coast of saint tome of Bengala out of the sea of Bara to Pegu be three hundred mile , and they go it up the river in four day , with the increase water , or with the flood , to a city call Cosmin , and there they discharge their ship , whither the customer of Pegu come to take the note and mark of all the good of every man , and take the charge of the good on they , and convey they to Pegu , into the king house , wherein they make the custom of the merchandise . when the customer have take the charge of the good and put they into bark , the retor of the city give licence to the merchant to take bark , and go up to Pegu with their merchandise ; and so three or four of they take a bark and go up to Pegu in company . God deliver every man that he give great rigour not a wrong note , and entry , or think to steal any firthesteahng custom : for if they do , for the least trifle that be , he be w10 ™ * - utter undo , for the king do take it for a most great affront to be deceive of his custom ; and therefore they make diligent search , three time at the lade and unlade of the good , and at the take of they a land . in Pegu this search they make when they go out of the ship for diamond , pearl , and fine cloth which take little room : for because that all the jewel that come into Pegu , and be not find of that country , pay custom , but ruby , safyre and spinel pay no custom in nor out : because they be find grow in that country . i have speak before , how that all merchant that mean to go through the Indies , must carry all manner of household stuff with they which be necessary for a house , because that there be not any lodging nor inn nor host , nor chamber room in that country , but the first thing a man do when he come to any city be to hire a house , either by the year or by the month , or as he mean to stay in those part . 
 in Pegu their order be to hire their house for six month . now from cosmin to the city of Pegu 
 429 
 they go in six hour with the flood , and if it be ebb water , than they make fast their boat to the river side , and there tarry until the water flow again . description of it be a very commodious and pleasant voyage , have on the fruitful - side of the river many great village , which they 
 call city : in the which hen , pigeon , egg , milk , rice , and other thing be very good cheap . it be all plain , and a goodly country , and in eight day you may make your voyage up to Macceo , distant from Pegu twelve mile , and there they discharge their good , and lade they in cart or wain draw with ox , and the merchant be carry in a closet which they call deal be a deal , in the which a man shall be very well accommo-smallrt date , with cushion under his head , and cover for the defence of the sun and rain , and there he may aforesaid . sleep if he have will thereunto : and his four Falchines carry he run away , change two at one time and two at another . the custom of Pegu and fraught thither , may amount unto twenty or twenty two per cento , and 23. according as he have more or less steal from he that day they custom the good . it be requisite that a man have his eye watchful , and to be [ ii i . 238. ] careful , and to have many friend , for when they custom in the great hall of the king , there come many gentleman accompany with a number of their slave , and these gentleman have no shame that their slave rob stranger : whether it be cloth in show of it or any other thing , they laugh at it . and although the merchant help one another to keep watch , and look to their good , they can look thereto so narrow but one or other will rob something , either more or less , accord as their merchandise be more or less : and yet on this day there be a worse thing than this : although you have set so many eye to look there for your benefit , that you escape unrob of the slave , a man can choose but that he must be rob of the officer of the custom house . for pay the custom with the same good oftentimes they take the best that 
 43° 
 1563-81 . you have , and not by rate of every sort as they ought to do , by which mean a man pay more than his duty . 
 at length when the good be dispatch out of the custom house in this order , the merchant cause they to be carry to his house , and may do with they at his pleasure . 
 there be in Pegu 8. broker of the king , which be call tareghe , who be bind to sell all the merchandise which come to Pegu , at the common or the currant price : then if the merchant will sell their good at that price , they sei they away , and the broker have two in the hundred of every sort of merchandise , and they be bind to make good the debt of those good , because they be sell by their hand or mean , and on their word , and oftentimes the merchant know not to who he give his good , yet he can lose any thing thereby , for that the broker be bind in any wise to pay he , and if the merchant sei his good without the consent of the broker , yet nevertheless he must pay he two per cento , and be in danger of his money : but this be very seldom see , because the wife , child , and slave of the debtor be bind to the creditor , and when his time be expire and payment not make , the creditor may take the debtor and carry he home to his house , and shut he up in a magasin , whereby present he have his money , and not be able to pay the creditor , he may take the wife , child , and slave of law fir 
 the debtor , and sei they , for so be the law of that king - bankrupt . dome . the currant money that be in this city , and throughout all this kingdom be call Gansa or Ganza , which be make of copper and lead : it be not the money every man of the king , but every man may stamp it that will , because may stamp it have his just partition or value : but they make many tmoneyhe of they false , by put overmuch lead into they , and those will not pass , neither will any take they . with this money Ganza , you may buy gold or silver , ruby and musk , and other thing . for there be no other money currant among they . and gold , silver and 
 431 
 other merchandise be at one time dear than another , as all other thing be . 
 this Ganza go by weight of byze , and this name of Byza go for you account of the weight , and common a Byza of a Ganza be worth ( after our account ) half a ducat , little more or less : and albeit that gold and silver be more or less in price , yet the Byza never change : every Byza make a hundred Ganza of weight , and so the number of the money be Byza . he that go to Pegu to buy jewel , if he will do well , it behoove he to be a whole year there to do his busi-how a man ness . for if so be that he will return with the ship may dispose come jn he can Jo any thing so convenient for the trade in the brevity or the time , because that when they custom Pegu. their good in Pegu that come from saint Tome in their 
 ship , it be as it be about Christmas : and when they have custom their good , then must they sell they for their credit sake for a month or two : and then at the begin of march the ship depart . the merchant that come from saint Tome take for the payment of their good , gold , and silver , which be never want good instrue - there . and 8. or 10. day before their departure they t* ™ 1 ' be all satisfy : also they may have ruby in payment , but they make no account of they : and they that will winter there for another year , it be needful that they be advertise , that in the sale of their good , they specific in their bargain , the term of two or 3. month payment , and that their payment shall|be in so many Ganza , and neither gold nor silver : because that with the Ganza they may buy and sei every thing with great advantage . and how needful be it to be advertise , when they will recover their payment , in what order they shall receive their Ganza ? because he that be not experience may do himself great wrong in the weight of the Gansa , as also in the falseness of they : in the weight he may be great deceive , because that from place to place it do rise and fall great : and therefore when any will receive money or make payment , he must take a public 
 432 
 wayer of money , a day or two before he go about his business , and give he in payment for his labour two byzaes a month , and for this he be bind to make good all your money , and to maintain it for good , for that he receive it and seal the bag with his seal : and when he have receive any store , than he cause it to be bring into the Magason of the merchant , that be the owner of it . 
 that money be very weighty , for fourty Byza be a strong porter burden ; and also where the merchant have any payment to be make for those good which he buy , the common wayer of money that receive his money must make the payment thereof . so that by this mean , the merchant with the charge of two byze a month , receive and pay out his money without loss or trouble . the merchandize that go out of Pegu be gold , silver , ruby , saphire , spinely , great store of Benjamin , long peper , lead , Lacca , rice , wine , some sugar , yet there may be great store of sugar make in the country , for that they have abundance of cane , but they give they to eliphants to eat , and the people consume great store of they for food , and many more do they consume in vain thing , as these follow . in that kingdom they spend many of these sugar cane in make of house and tent which they call vare for their idol , which they call Pagodes , whereof there be great abundance , great and small , and these house be make in form of little hill , like to sugar loaf or to bell , and some of these house be as high as a reasonable steeple , at the foot they be very large , some of they be in circuit a quarter of a mile . the say house within be full of earth , and wall round about with brick and dirt in stead of lime , and without form , from the top to the foot they make a cover for they with sugar cane , and plaster it with lime all over , for otherwise they will be spoil , by the great abundance of rain that fall in those country . also they consume about these varely or idol house 
 five 433 2 e 
 A.D. 
 i563-81 . 
 [ ii i . 239. ] 
 the merchandize that go out of Pegu. 
 i563-81 . idol house cover with gold . 
 ruby exceed cheap in pfgu - 
 great store of leaf-gold , for that they overlay all the top of the house with gold , and some of they be cover with gold from the top to the foot : in cover whereof there be great store of gold spend , for that every 10. year they new overlay they with gold , from the top to the foot , so that with this vanity they spend great abundance of gold . for every 10. year the rain do consume the gold from these house . and by this mean they make gold dear in pegu then it will be , if they consume not so much in this vanity . also it be a thing to be note in the buy of jewel in Pegu , that he that have no knowledge shall have as good jewel , and as good cheap , as he that have be practise there a long time , which be a good order , and it be in this wise . there be in Pegu four man of good reputation , which be call tareghe , or broker of jewel . Theise four man have all the jewel or ruby in their hand , and the merchant that will buy come to one of these tareghe and tell he , that he have so much money to employ in ruby . for through the hand of these four man pass all the ruby : for they have such quantity , that they know not what to do with they , but sell they at most vile and base price . when the merchant have break his mind to one of these broker or tareghe , they carry he home to one of their shop , although he have no knowledge in jewel : and when the jeweller perceive that he will employ a good round sum , they will make a bargain , and if not , they let he alone . the use general of this city be this ; that when any merchant have buy any great quantity of ruby , and have agree for they , he carry they home to his house , let they be of what value they will , he shall have space to look on they and peruse they two or three day : and if he have no knowledge in they , he shall always have many merchant in that city that have very good knowledge in jewel ; with who he may always confer and take counsel , and may show 
 434 
 they unto who he will ; and if he find that he have not employ his money well , he may return his jewel back to they who he have they off , without any loss at all . which thing be such a shame to the tareghe to have his jewel return , that he have rather bear a blow on the face then that it shall be think that he sell they so dear to have they return . for these man have always great care that they afford good pennyworth , especial to those that have no knowledge . this they do , because they will not loose their credit : and when those mar - 
 a honest care of heathen people . 
 chant that have knowledge in jewel buy any , if they buy they deer , it be their own fault and not the broker : yet it be good to have knowledge in jewel , by reason that it may somewhat ease the price . there be also a very good order which they have in buy of jewel , which be this ; there be many merchant that stand by at the make of the bargain , and because they shall not understand how the jewel be sell , the broker and the merchant have their hand under a cloth , and by touch of finger and nip the joint they know what be do , what be bid , and what be ask . so that the stander by know ffgersUndera not what be demand for they , although it be for a cloth . 
 Bargainee make with the nip of 
 thousand or 10. thousand ducat . for every joint and every finger have his signification . for if the merchant that stand by shall understand the bargain , it will breed great controversy among they . and at my be in Pegu in the month of August , in anno 1569. have get well by my endeavour , i be desirous to see my own country , and i think it good to go by the way of saint Tome , but then i shall tarry until march . 
 in which journey i be counsel , yea , and full resolve to go by the way of Bengala , with a ship there ready to depart for that voyage . and then we depart from Pegu to Chatigan a great harbour or port , from whence there go small ship to Cochin , 435 
 before the fleet depart for Portugal , in which ship i be full determine to go to Lisbon , and so to Venice . when i have thus resolve my self , i go a 
 board of the ship of Bengala , at which time it be 
 this Touffon the year of ToufFon : concern which touffon you 
 m 4 » extra - be to understand , that in the east Indies often time , 
 °stormpat sea be not storm as in other country ; but every [ ii i . 240. ] 10. or 12. year there be such tempest and storm , that it be a thing incredible , but to those that have see it , neither do they know certain what year they will come . 
 the Toufim unfortunate be they that be at sea in that year and come but tjme of the touffon , because few there be that escape that danger . in this year it be our chance to be at sea with the like storm , but it happen well unto we , for that our ship be new over-plancked , and have not any thing in she save victuali and balast , silver and gold , which from Pegu they carry to Bengala , and no other kind of merchandise . this touffon or cruel storm endure three day and three night : in which time it carry away our sail , yard , and rudder ; and because the ship labour in the sea , we cut our mast over board : which when we have do she labour a great deal more than before , in such wise , that she be almost full with water that come over the high part of she and so go down : and for the space of three day and three night sixty man do nothing but hale water out of she in this wise , twenty man in one place , and twenty man in another place , and twenty in a third place : and for all this storm , the ship be so good , that she take not one jot of water below through her side , but all run down through the hatch , so that those sixty man do nothing but cast the sea into the sea and thus drive too and fro as the wind and sea will , we be in a dark night about four of the clock cast on a shall : yet when it be day , we can neither see land on one side nor other , and know not where we be . and as it please 436 
 the divine power , there come a great wave of the sea , which drive we beyond the shall . and when we feel the ship aflote , we rise up as man revive , because manifest the sea be calm and smooth water , and then sound we find twelve fathom water , and within a while after fill ™ we have but six fathom , and then present we come those coun-to anchor with a small anchor that be leave we at the stern , for all our other be lose in the storm : and by and by the ship strike a ground , and then we do prop she that she shall not overthrow . 
 when it be day the ship be all dry , and we find she a good mile from the sea on dry land . This Touffon be end , we discover a island not far this island be from we , and we go from the ship on the sand to caUedSondiva . see what island it be : and we find it a place inhabit , and , to my judgement , the fertile island in all the world , the which be divide into two part by a channel which pass between it , and with great trouble we bring our ship into the same chanel , which part the island at flow water , and there we determine to stay 40. day to refresh we . and when the people of the island see the ship , and that we be come a land : present they make a place of bazar or a market , with shop right over against the ship with all manner of provision of victual to eat , which they bring down in great abundance , and sell it so good cheap , that we be amaze at the cheapness thereof . i buy many salt cow there , for the provision of the ship , for half a larine a piece , which Larine may be 12. shilling six penny , be very good and fat ; and 4. wild hog ready dress for a larine ; great fat hen for a bizze a piece , which be at the most a penny : and the people tell we that we be deceive the half of our money , because we buy thing so dear . also a sack of fine rice for a thing of nothing , and consequent all other thing for human sustenance be there in such abundance , that it be a thing incredible but to they that have see it . 
 437 
 Zondwa be the fruitful country in all the world . 
 Chatigan be a port in Bengala , whither the Portugal go with their ship . 
 the king of Pachim , or Aracam , neighbour to Bengala . 
 [ ii i . 241. ] 
 this island be call Sondiva belong to the kingdom of Bengala , distant 120. mile from Chatigan , to which place we be bind . the people be moor , and the king a very good man of a moor king , for if he have be a tyrant as other be , he may have rob we of all , because the Portugal captain of Chatigan be in arm against the retor of that place , and every day there be some slay , at which news . we rest there with no small fear , keep good watch and ward aboard every night as the use be , but the governor of the town do comfort we , and bid we that we shall fear nothing , but that we shall repose our self secure without any danger , although the Portugal of Chatigan have slay the governor of that city , and say that we be not culpable in that fact : and moreover he do we every day what pleasure he can , which be a thing contrary to our expectation , consider that they and the people of Chatigan be both subject to one king . we depart from Sondiva , and come to Chatigan the great port of Bengala , at the same time when the Portugal have make peace and take a truce with the governor of the town , with this condition that the chief captain of the Portugal with his ship shall depart without any lade : for there be then at that time 18. ship of Portugal great and small . this captain be a gentleman and of good courage , be notwithstanding content to . depart to his great hindrance , rather than he will seek to hinder so many of his friend as be there , as also because the time of the year be spend to go to the Indies . the night before he depart , every ship that have any lade therein , put it aboard of the captain to help to ease his charge and to recompense his courtesy . in this time there come a messenger from the king of Rachim to this Portugal captain , who say in the behalf of his king , that he have hear of the courage and valour of he , desire he gentle that , he will vouchsafe to come with the ship into his port , 438 
 i5&3-81-and come thither he shall be very well entreat . 
 this Portugal go thither and be very well satisfy of this king . 
 this Kling of Rachim have his seat in the middle coast between Bengala and Pegu , and the great enemy he have be the king of Pegu : which king of Pegu devise night and day how to make this king of Rachim his subject , but by no mean he be able to do it : because the king of Pegu have no power nor army by sea and this king of * Rachim may or , Aracam . arm two hundred galley or fust by sea , and by land he have certain sluice with the which when the king of Pegu pretend any harm towards he , he may at his pleasure drown a great part of the country . 
 so that by this mean he cut off the way whereby the king of Pegu shall come with his power to hurt he . 
 from the great port of Chatigan they carry for the Indies great store of rice , very great quantity of bombast cloth of every sort , sugar , corn , and money , with other merchandise . and by reason of the war in Chatigan , the Portugal ship tarry there so long , that they arrive not at Cochin so soon as they be wont to do other year . for which cause the fleet that be at Cochin be depart for Portugal before they arrive there , and i be in one of the small ship before the fleet , in discover of Cochin , we also discover the last ship of the fleet that go from Cochin to Portugal , where she make sail , for which i be marvellous discomfort , because that all the year follow , there be no go for Portugal , and when we arrive at Cochin i be full determine to go for Venice by the way of ormus , and at that time the city of goa be besiege by the people of Dialcan , but the citizen force not this assault , because they suppose that it will not continue long . for all this i embark my self in a galley that go for goa , mean there to ship my self for ormus : but when we come to goa , the viceroy 
 the commodity that go from Chatigan to the Indies . 
 the Portugal ship depart towards Portugal out of the harbour of Cochin . 
 goa be besiege . 
 439 
 will not suffer any Portugal to depart , by reason of the war . And be in goa but a small time , i fall sick of a infirmity that hold i four month : which with physic and diet cost i eight hundred ducat , and there i be constrain to sell a small quantity of ruby to sustain my need : and i sell that for five hundred ducat , that be worth a thousand . and when i begin to wax well of my disease , i have but little of that money leave , every thing be so scarce : for every chicken ( and yet not good ) cost i seven or eight liver , which be six shilling , or six shilling eight penny . beside this great charge , the apothecary with their medicine be no small charge to i . at the end of six month they raise the siege , and then i begin to work , for jewel be rise in their price : for , whereas before i sell a few of refuse ruby , i determine then to sell the rest of all my jewel that i have there , and to make a other voyage to Pegu. and for because that at my departure from Pegu , opium be in great request , i go then to cambaya to employ a good round sum of money in opium , and there i buy 60. parcel of opium , which cost i two thousand and a hundred ducat , every ducat at four shilling two penny . Moreover i buy three bale of bombast cloth , which cost i eight hundred ducat , which be a good commodity for Pegu : when i have buy these thing , the viceroy command that the custom of the opium shall be pay in goa , and pay custom there i may carry it whither i will . i ship my 3. bale of cloth at Chaul in a ship that go for Cochin , and i go to goa to pay the aforesaid custom for my opium , and from goa i depart to Cochin in a ship that be for the voyage of Pegu , and go to winter then at saint Tome . when i come to Cochin , i understand that the ship that have my three bale of cloth be cast away and lose , so that i lose my 800. Serafins or ducat : and depart from Cochin to go for saint Tome , in cast about for 
 440 
 the island of Zeilan the pilot be deceive , for that the cape of the island of Zeilan lie far out into the sea , and the pilot think that he may have pass hard aboard the cape , and pay roomer in the night ; when it be morning we be far within the cape , and past all remedy to go out , by reason the wind blow so fierce against we . so that by this mean we lose our voyage for that year , and we go to Manar with the ship to winter there , the ship have lose her mast , and with great diligence we hardly save she , with great loss to the captain of the ship , because he be force to fraught another ship in saint Tome for Pegu with great loss and interest , and i with my friend agree together in Manar to take a bark to carry we to saint Tome ; which thing we do with all the rest of the merchant ; and arrive at saint Tome i have news through or by the way of Bengala , that in Pegu opium be very dear , and i know that in saint Tome there be no opium but i to go for pegu that year , so that i be hold of all the merchant there to be very rich : and so it will have prove , if my adverse fortune have not be contrary to my hope , which be this . at that time there go a great ship from Cambaya , to the king of Assi , with great quantity of opium , and there to lade peper : in which voyage there come such a storm , that the ship be force with wether to go roomer 800. mile , and [ ii i . 242. ] by this mean come to Pegu , whereas they arrive a day before i ; so that opium which be before very dear , be now at a base price : so that which be sell for fifty bizze before , be sell for 2. bizze and a half , there be such quantity come in that ship ; so that i be glad to stay two year in Pegu unless i will have give away my commodity : and at the end of two year of my 2100. ducat which i bestow in Cambaya , i make but a thousand ducat . than i depart again from Pegu to go for the Indies and for ormus with great quantity of Lacca , and from ormus i return into the Indies for Chaul , and from Chaul to Cochin , 
 441 
 clove . 
 nutmeg and mace . 
 white Sandal . 
 Canfora . 
 and from Cochin to Pegu. once more i lose occasion to make i rich , for whereas i may have bring good store of opium again , i bring but a little , be fearful of my other voyage before . in this small quantity i make good profit . and now again i determine to go for my country , and depart from Pegu , i tarry and winter in Cochin , and then i leave the Indies and come for ormus . 
 i think it very necessary before i end my voyage , to reason somewhat , and to show what fruit the Indies do yield and bring forth . first , in the Indies and other east part of India there be pepper and ginger , which grow in all part of India . and in some part of the Indies , the great quantity of peper grow among wild bush , without any manner of labour : save , that when it be ripe they go and gather it . the tree that the peper grow on be like to our ivy , which run up to the top of tree wheresoever it grow : and if it shall not take hold of some tree , it will lie flat and rot on the ground . this peper tree have his flower and berry like in all part to our ivy berry , and those berry be grain of peper : so that when they gather they they be green , and then they lie they in the sun , and they become black . 
 the ginger grow in this wise : the land be till and sow , and the herb be like to Panizzo , and the root be the ginger . Theise two spice grow in diverse place . 
 the clove come all from the Moluccas , which Moluccas be two island , not very great , and the tree that they grow on be like to our laurel tree . 
 the nutmeg and mace , which grow both together , be bring from the island of Banda , who tree be like to our walnut tree , but not so big . 
 all the good white Sandol be bring from the island of timor . Canfora be compound come all from China , and all that which grow in cane come from Borneo , and i think that this Canfora come 
 442 
 not into these part : for that in India they consume 
 great store , and that be very dear . the good lignum lignum aloe . aloe come from Cauchinchina . 
 the Benjamin come from the kingdom of Assi Benjamin . and Zion . 
 long peper grow in Bengala , pegu , and Java . Longpeper . 
 musk come from Tartary , which they make in 7^ / musk this order , as by good information i have be tell . 
 there be a certain beast in Tartary , which be wild and 0jut ha^e as big as a wolf , which beast they take alive , and beat the good musk he to death with small staff y‘ his blood may be and beat the spread through his whole body , than they cut it in °fan . ass , e piece , and take out all the bone , and beat the flesh with ng^e ofit ' the blood in a mortar very small , and dry it , and make purse to put it in of the skin , and these be the cod of musk . 
 true i know not whereof the amber be make , and there be diverse opinion of it , but this be most certain , it be cast out of the sea , and throw on land , and find upon the sea bank . 
 the ruby , saphire , and the spinel be get in ruby , sa-the kingdom of Pegu. the diamond come from phyre , and diverse place ; and i know but three sort of they . 
 that sort of diamond that be call chiappe , come from bezeneger . those that be point natural come from the land of del , and from Java , but the diamond of Java be more weighty than the other . i can never understand from whence they that be call Balassi come . the Balassi 
 pearl they fish in diverse place , as before in this in , , • i 0 t^eilan . 
 book be show . 
 from Cambaza come the spodiom which congele 
 in certain cane , whereof 1 find many in Pegu , when - tn i make my house there , because that ( as i have say Ethiopia , in before ) they make their house there off weave cane the land of like to mat . from Chaul they trade alongst the coast Cafr11 ™ 1 , then of melinde in Ethiopia , within the land of Cafraria : on hatthepor-that coast be many good harbour keep by the moor , tugal have . 
 443 
 buy and sell without word one to another . 
 [ ii i . 243. ] 
 golden trade that the Portugal have . 
 thither the Portugal bring a kind of bombast cloth of a low price , and great store of paternoster or bead make of paltry glass , which they make in Chaul accord to the use of the country : and from thence they carry elephant tooth for India , slave call Cafari , and some amber and gold . on this coast the king of Portugal have his castle call Mozambique , which be of as great importance as any castle that he have in all his Indies under his protection , and the captain of this castle have certain voyage to this Cafraria , to which place no merchant may go , but by the agent of this captain : and ' they use to go in small ship , and trade with the cafar , and their trade in buy and sell be without any speech one to the other . in this wise the Portugal bring their good by little and little alongst the sea coast , and lie they down : and so depart , and the Cafar merchant come and see the good , and there they put down as much gold as they think the good be worth , and so go their way and leave their gold and the good together , then come the Portugal , and find the gold to his content , he take it and go his way into his ship , and then come the Cafar and take the good and carry they away : and if he find the gold there still , it be a sign that the Portugal be not content , and if the Cafar think he have put too little , he add more , as he think the thing be worth : and the Portugal must not stand with they too strict ; for if they do , than they will have no more trade with they : for they disdain to be refuse , when they think that they have offer enough , for they be a peevish people , and have deal so of a long time : and by this trade the Portugal change their commodity into gold , and carry it to the castle of Mozambique , which be in a island not far distant from the firm land of Cafraria on the coast of Ethiopia , and be distant from India 2800. mile . now to return to my voyage , when i come to ormus , i find there master Francis Berettin of Venice , and we 
 444 
 freight a bark together to go for Basora for 70. ducat , and with we there go other merchant , which 
 do ease our fraught , and very commodious we come to Basora and there we stay 40. day for provide a carovan of bark to go to Babylon , because they use 
 not to go two or 3. bark at once , but 25. or 30. because in the night they can go , but must make they fast to the bank of the river , and then we must make a very good and strong guard , and be well provide of armour , for respect and safeguard of our good , because the number of thief be great that come to spoil and rob the merchant . and when we depart for Babylon we go a little with our sail , and the voyage be 38. or 40. day long , but we be 50. day on it . when we come to Babylon we stay there 4. month , until the carovan be ready to go over the wilderness , or desert for Aleppo ; in this city we be 6. merchant that accompany together , five venetian and a Portugal ; who name be as follow , Messer Florinasa with one of his kinsman , Messer Andrea de Polo , the Portugal and m. Francis Berettin and i , and so we furnish our self with victual and bean for our horse for 40. day ; and we buy horse and mule , for that they be very good cheap there , i my self buy a horse there for 11. aken , and sell he after in Aleppo for 30. ducat . also we buy a tent which do we very great pleasure : we have also among we 32. camel lade with merchandise : for the which we pay 2. ducat for every camel lade , and for every 10. camel they make 11 , for so be their use and custom . we take also with we 3. man to serve we in the voyage , which be use to go in those voyage for five d d . a man , and be bind to serve we to Aleppo : so that we pass very well without any trouble : when the camel cry out to rest , our pavilion be the first that be erect . the carovan make but small journey about 20. mile a day , and they set forward every morning before day two hour , and about two in the afternoon they sit down . 
 445 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 a order how to provide to go over the desert from Babylon to Aleppo . 
 $6. day journey over thewildernes . 
 a order how to provide for the go to Jerusalem , 
 we have great good hap in our voyage , for that it rain : for which cause we never want water , but every day find good water , so that we can not take any hurt for want of water . yet we carry a camel lade always with water for every good respect that may chance in the desert , so that we have no want neither of one thing , nor other that be to be have in the country . for we come very well furnish of every thing , and every day we eat fresh mutton , because there come many shepherd with we with their flock , who keep those sheep that we buy in Babylon , and every merchant mark his sheep with his own mark , and we give the shepherd a Medin , which be two penny of our money , for the keep and feed our sheep on the way , and for kill of they . and beside the Medin they have the head , the skin , and the entrails of every sheep they kill . we six buy 20. sheep , and when we come to Aleppo we have 7. alive of they . and in the carovan they use this ofder , that the merchant do lend flesh one to another , because they will not carry raw flesh with they , but pleasure one another by lend one one day , and another another day . 
 from Babylon to Aleppo be 40. day journey , of the which they make 36. day over the wilderness , in which 36. day they neither see house , tree , nor people that inhabit it , but only a plain , and no sign of any way in the world . the pilot go before , and the carovan follow after . and when they sit down all the carovan unlade and sit down , for they know the station where the well be . i say , in 36. day we pass over the wilderness . for when we depart from Babylon two day we pass by village inhabit until we have pass the river Euphrates . and then within two day of Aleppo we have village inhabit . in this carovan there go always a captain that do justice unto all man : and every night they keep watch about the carovan , and come to Aleppo we go to Tripoli , whereas master Florin , and master Andrea Polo , 446 
 and i , with a friar , go and hire a bark to go with we to Jerusalem . depart from Tripoli , we arrive at Jaffa : from which place in a day and half we go to Jerusalem , and we give order to our bark to tarry for we until our return . we stay in Jerusalem 14. day , to visit those holy place : from whence we return to Jaffa , and from Jaffa to Tripoli , and there we ship our self in a ship of Venice call the Bagazzana : and by the help of the divine power , we arrive safe in Venice the five of November 1581. if there be any that have any desire to go into those part of India , let he not be astonish at the trouble that i have pass : because i be entangle in many thing : for that i go very poor from Venice with 1200. ducat employ in merchandise , and when i come to Tripoli , i fall sick in the house of master Regaly Oratio , and this man send away my good with a small carovan that go from Tripoli to Aleppo , and the carovan be rob , and all my good lose save four chest of glass which cost i 200. ducat , of which glass i find many break : because the thief think it have be other merchandise , break they up , and see they be glass they let they all alone . and with this only stock i adventure to go into the Indies : and thus with change and rechange , and by diligence in my voyage , God do bless and help i , so that i get a good stock . i will not be unmindful to put they in remembrance , that have a desire to go into those part , how they shall keep their good , and give they to their heir at the time of their death , and how this may be do very secure . in all the city that the Portugal have in the Indies , there be a house call the school of sancta misericordia comissaria : the governor whereof , if you give they for their paine§ , will take a copy of your will and testament , which you must always carry about you ; and chief when you go into the Indies . in the country of the moor and gentile , in those voyage always there 
 447 
 A.D. 
 1563-81 . 
 [ ii i . 244. ] the author returns to Venice 1581. 
 a very good order that they have in those country for the recover of the good of the dead . 
 go a captain to administer justice to all Christians of the Portugal . also this captain have authority to recover the good of those merchant that by chance die in those voyage , and they that have not make their will and register they in the aforesaid school , the captain will consume their good in such wise , that little or nothing will be leave for their heir and friend . also there go in these same voyage some merchant that be commissary of the school of sancta misericordia , that if any merchant die and have his will make , and have give order that the school of misericordia shall have his good and sell they , than they send the money by exchange to the school of misericordia in Lisbon , with that copy of his testament , then from Lisbon they give intelligence thereof , into what part of Christendom soever it be , and the heir of such a one come thither , with testimoniali that they be heir , they shall receive there the value of his good : in such wise that they shall not loose any thing . but they that die in the kingdom of Pegu loose the third part of their good by ancient custom of the country , that if any Christian die in the kingdom of Pegu , the king and his officer rest heir of a third of his good , and there have never be any deceit or fraud use in this matter . i have know many rich man that have dwell in Pegu , and in their age they have desire to go into their own country to die there , , and have depart with all their good and substance without let or trouble . 
 in pegu the fashion of their apparel be all one , as well the noble man , as the simple : the only difference be in the fineness of the cloth , which be cloth of bombast one fine than another , and they wear their apparel in this wise : first , a white bombast cloth which serve for a shirt , than they gird another paint bombast cloth of fourteen brase , which they bind up betwixt their leg , and on their head they wear a small tock of three brace , make in guise of a mitre , 448 
 and some go without tock , and carry ( as it be ) a hive on their head , which do not pass the low part of his ear , when it be lift up : they go all bare footed , but the noble man never go on foot , but be carry by man in a seat with great reputation , with a hat make of the leaf of a tree to keep he from the rain and sun , or otherwise they ride on horseback with their foot bear in the stirrup . all sort of woman order of 
 whatsoever they be , wear a smock down to the girdle , woman 
 and from the girdle downward to the foot they wear a cloth of three brase , open before ; so strait that they can go , but they must show their secret as it be aloft , and in their go they fain to hide it with their hand , but they can by reason of the straitness of their cloth . they say that this use be invent by a queen to be a occasion that the sight thereof may remove from man the vice against nature , which they be great give unto : which sight shall cause they to regard woman the more . also the woman go bare footed , their arm lade with hoop of gold and jewel : and their finger full of precious ring , with their hair roll up about their head , . many of they wear a cloth about their shoulder in stead of a cloak . 
 now to finish that which i have begin to write , i say , that those part of the Indies be very good , because that a man that have little , shall make a great deal thereof ; always they must govern themselves that they be take for honest man . for why ? to such there shall never want help to do well , but he that be vicious , let he tarry at home and not go thither , because he shall always be a beggar , and die a poor man . 
 . 