a true report of a worthy fight , perform in the voyage from turkic , by five ship of London , against 11. galley , and two frigate of the king of Spain , at Pantalarea within the strait , anno , 1586. write by Philip Jones . 
 he merchant of London , be of the incorporation of the Turkey trade , have receive intelligence , and advertisement , from time to time , that the king of Spain grudge at the prosperity of this kingdom , have not only of late arrest all english ship , body , 
 and good , in Spain , but also malign the quiet traffic which they use to and in the dominion , and province , under the obedience of the great Turk have give order to the captain of his galley in the 46 
 Levant , to hinder the passage of all english ship , and to endeavour by their best mean , to intercept , take , and spoil they , their person , and good : they hereupon think it their best course to set out their fleet for turquoise , in such strength and ability for their defence , that the purpose of their spanish enemy may the better be prevent , and the voyage accomplish with great securi tie to the man and ship . for which cause , five tall , and stout ship , appertain to London , and intend only a merchant voyage , be provide and furnish with all thing belong to the sea ; the name whereof be these : 
 i . the merchant royal , a very brave and good ship , and of great report . 
 2. the Toby . 
 3. the Edward Bonaventure . 
 4. the William , and John. 
 5. the Susan . 
 these five depart from the coast of England , in the month of November 1585. keep together as one fleet , till they come as high as the isle of Sicily , within the Levant . and there , accord to the order and direction of the voyage , each ship begin to take leave of the rest , and to separate himself , set his course for the particular port , whereunto he be bind : one for Tripoli in Syria , another for Constantinople , the chief city of the Turk empire , situate upon the coast of Romania , call of old , Thracia , and the rest to those place , whereunto they be private appoint . but before they divide themselves , they altogether consult , of and about a certain and speciali place for their meet again after the lade of their good at their several port . and in conclusion , the general agreement be to meet at Zante , a island near to the main continent of the west part of Morea , well know of all the pilot , and think to be the fit place of their rendezvous . concern which meeting , it be also covenant on 
 each side , and promise , that whatsoever ship of these 5. shall first arrive at Zante , shall there stay and expect the come of the rest of the fleet , for the space of twenty day . This be do , each man make his best haste accord as wind and wether will serve he to fulfil his course , and to dispatch his business ; and no need be there to admonish or encourage any man , see no time be ill spend , nor opportunity omit on any side , in the performance of each man duty , accord to his place . 
 it fall out that the Toby which be bind for Constantinople have make such good speed , and get such good weather , that she first of all the rest come back to the appoint place of Zante , and not forget the former conclusion , do there cast anchor , attend the arrival of the rest of the fleet , which accord ( their business first perform ) fail not to keep promise . the first next after the Toby be the royal merchant , which together with the William and John come from Tripoli in Syria , and arrive at Zante within the compass of the foresay time limit . Theise ship in token of the joy on all part conceive for their happy meeting , spare not the discharge of their ordinance , the sound of drum and trumpet , the spread of ensign with other warlike and joyful behaviour , express by these outward sign , the inward gladness of their mind , be all as ready to join together in mutual consent to resist the cruel enemy , as now in sport manner they make mirth and pastime among themselves . Theise three have not be long in the haven , but the Edward Bonaventure also , together with the Susan she consort , be come from Venice with their lade , the sight of who increase the joy of the rest , and they no less glad of the presence of the other , salute they in most friendly and kind sort , accord to the manner of the sea : and whereas some of these ship stand at that instant in some want of victual , they be all content 
 to stay in the port , till the necessity of each ship be supply , and nothing want to set out for their return . 
 in this port of Zante , the news be fresh and currant , of two several army and fleet provide by the king of Spain , and lie in wait to intercept they : the one consist of 30. strong galley , so well appoint in all respect for the war , that no necessary thing want : and this fleet hover about the strait of Gibraltar . the other army have in it 20. galley , whereof some be of Sicily , and some of the island of Malta , under the charge and government of John Andrea Dorea , a captain of name serve the king of Spain . Theise two diverse and strong fleet wait and attend in the sea for none , but the english ship , and no doubt make their account and sure reckon that not a ship shall escape their fury . and the opinion also of the inhabitant of the isle of Zante be , that in respect of the number of galley in both these army , have receive such strait commandment from the king , our ship and man be but few , and little in comparison of they , it be a thing in humane reason impossible , that we shall pass either without spoil , if we resist , or without composition at the least , and acknowledgement of duty to the spanish king . 
 but it be neither the report of the attendance of these army , nor the opinion of the people , nor any thing else , that can daunt or dismay the courage of our man , who ground themselves upon the goodness of their cause , and the promise of God , to be deliver from such as without reason seek their destruction , carry resolute mind , notwithstanding all impediment to adventure through the sea , and to finish their navigation , maugre the beard of the spanish soldier . but lest they shall seem too careless , and too secure of their estate , and by lay the whole and entire burden of their safety upon God providence , shall foolish presume altogether of his help , and neglect the mean 
 vi 49 d 
 which be put into their hand , they fail not to enter into counsel among themselves , and to deliberate advise for their best defence . and in the end with generail consent , the merchant royal be appoint admiral ! of the fleet , and the Toby viceadmiral , by who order the rest promise to be direct , and each ship vow not to break from another , whatsoever extremity shall fall out , but to stand to it to the death , for the honour of their country , and the frustrate of the hope of the ambitious and proud enemy . 
 thus in good order they leave Zante and the castle of Graecia , and commit themselves again to the sea , and proceed in their course and voyage in quietness , without sight of any enemy , till they come near to Pantalarea , a island so call , betwixt Sicily , and the coast of Africa : into sight whereof they come the 13. day of July 1586. and the same day in the morning about 7. of the clock they descry 13. sail in number , which be of the galley , lie in wait of purpose for they , in and about that place . as soon as the english ship have spy they , they by and by accord to a common order , make themselves ready for a fight , lay out their ordinance , scour , charge , and prime they , display their ensign , and leave nothing undo to arm themselves thorough . in the mean time , the galley more and more approach the ship , and in their banner there appear the arm of the isle of Sicilia , and Malta , be all as then in the service and pay of the Spaniard . immediate , both the admiral of the galley send from each of they a frigate , to the admiral of our english ship , which be come near they , the sicilian frigate first hail they , and demand of they whence they be ? they answer that they be of England , the arm whereof appear in their colour . whereupon the say frigate expostulate with they , and ask why they delay to send or come with their captain and purser to don Pedro de Leiva their general , to 
 acknowledge their duty and obedience to he in the name [ ii i . 287. ] of the spanish king , lord of those sea ? our man reply , and say , that they owe no such duty nor obedience to he , and therefore will acknowledge none , but command the frigate to depart with that answer , and not to stay long a brabble , upon her peril . with that away she go , and up come towards they the other frigate of Malta , and she in like sort hail the admiral , and will needs know whence they be , and where they have be . our Englishman in the admiral , not disdain a answer , tell they that they be of England , merchant of London , have be at turquoise , and be now return home : and to be requite in this case , they also demand of the ffigat whence she and the rest of the galley be : the messenger answer , we be . e of Malta , and for my own part my name be Cavallero . Theise galley be in service and pay to the king of Spain , under the conduct of don Pedro de Leiva a noble man of Spain , who have be command hither by the king with this present force and army , of purpose to intercept you . you shall therefore ( quoth he ) do well to repair to he to know his pleasure , he be a noble man of good behaviour and courtesy , and mean you no ill . the captain of the english admiral , who name be m. Edward Wilkin - , son , reply and say . we purpose not at this time to make trial of don Pedro his courtesy , whereof we be suspicious and doubtful , and not without good cause : use withal good word to the messenger , and will he to come aboard he , promise security and good usage , that thereby he may the better know the Spaniard mind : whereupon he in deed leave his frigate , and come aboard he , who he entertain in friendly sort , and cause a cup of wine to be draw for he , which he take and begin , with his cap in his hand , and with reverend term to drink to the health of the queen of England , speak very honourable of her majesty , and give good speech of the courteous 
 usage and entertainment that he himself have receive in London , at the time that the duke of Alenson , brother to the late french king be last in England : and after he have well drink , he take his leave , speak well of the sufficiende and goodness of our ship , and especial of the merchant royal , which he confess to have see before , ride in the Thames near London . he be no soon come to don Pedro de Leiva the spanish general , but he be send off again , and return to the english admiral , say that the pleasure of the general be this , that either their captain , master and purser shall come to he with speed , or else he will set upon they , and either take they or sink they . the reply be make by m. Wilkinson aforesaid , that not a man shall come to he : and for the brag and threat of don Pedro , it be not that spanish bravado that shall make they yield a jot to their hindrance , but they be as ready to make resistance , as he to offer a injury . whereupon Cavallero the messenger leave brag , and begin to persuade they in quiet sort , and with many word , but all his labour be to no purpose , and as his threat do nothing terrify they , so his persuasion do nothing move they to do that which he require . at the last he entreat to have the merchant of the admiral carry by he as a messenger to the general , that so he may be satisfy , and assure of their mind by one of their own company . but m. Wilkinson will agree to no such thing , although Richard Rowit the merchant himself seem willing to be employ in that message , and labour by reasonable persuasion to induce m. Wilkinson to grant it , as hope to be a occasion by his presence and discreet answer to satisfy the general , and thereby to save the effusion of christian blood , if it shall grow to a battle . and he seem so much the more willing to be send , by how much deep than oath and protestation of this Cavallero be , that he will ( as he be a true knight and a soldier ) deliver he back 
 again in safety to his company . albeit , m. Wilkinson , which by his long experience have receive sufficient trial of spanish inconstancy and perjury , wish he in no case to put his life and liberty in hazard upon a Spaniard oath . but at last , upon much intreaty , he yield to let he go to the general , think in deed , that good speech and answer of reason will have content he , whereas otherwise refusal to do so , may peradventure have provoke the more discontentment . 
 m. Rowit therefore pass to the spanish general , the rest of the galley have espy he , think in deed that the english be rather determine to yield , than to fight , and therefore come flock about the frigate , every man cry out , que nuevas , que nuevas , have these english man yield ? the frigate answer , not so , they neither have , nor purpose to yield , only they have send a man of their company to speak with our general : and be come to the galley wherein he be , he show himself to m. Rowit in his armour , his guard of soldier attend upon he in armour also , and begin to speak very proud in this sort : thou Englishman , from whence be your fleet , why stand you aloof off " , know you not your duty to the catholique king , who person i here represent ? where be your bill of lade , your letter , passport , and the chief of your man ? think you my attendance in these sea to be in vain , or my person to no purpose ? let all these thing be do out of hand as i command , upon pain of my further displeasure and the spoil of you all : these [ ii i . 288. ] word of the spanish general be not so outrageous pronounce as they be mild answer by m. Rowit , who tell he that they be all marchantman , use traffic in honest sort , and seek to pass quiet , if they be not urge further than reason . as for the king of Spain , he think ( for his part ) that there be amity betwixt he and his sovereign the queen of England , so that neither he nor his officer shall go 
 about to offer any such injury to english merchant , who as they be far from give offence to any man , so they will be loath to take a abuse at the hand of any , or sit down to their loss , where their ability be able to make defence . and as touch his commandment aforesaid , for the acknowledge of duty , in such particular sort , he tell he , that where there be no duty owe , there none shall be perform , assure he that their whole company and ship in general , stand resolute upon the negative , and will not yield to any such unreasonable demand , join with such imperious and absolute manner of command . why then , say he , if they will neither come to yield , nor show obedience to i in the name of my king , i will either sink they or bring they to harbour , and so tell they from i . with that the frigate come away with m. Rowit , and bring he aboard the english admiral again accord to promise : who be no soon enter in , but by and by defiance be sound on both side : the Spaniard hew off the nose of the galley , that nothing may hinder the level of the shot , and the english on the other side courageous prepare themselves to the combat , every man accord to his room , bend to perform his office with alacrity and diligence . in the mean time a cannon be discharge from the admiral of the galley , which be the onset of the fight , be present answer by the english admiral with a culverin : so the skirmish begin , and grow hoit and terrible , there be no powder nor shot spare : each english ship match it self in good order against two spanish galley , beside the inequality of the ffigat on the Spaniard side : and although our man perform their part with singular valour , accord to their strength , insomuch that the enemy as amaze therewith will oftentimes pause and stay , and consult what be best to be do , yet they cease not in the midst of their business to make prayer to almighty God the revenger of all evil , and the giver of victory , that it 
 a report of a worthy fight a.d. 15% . 
 will please he to assist they in that good quarrel of they , in defend themselves against so proud a tyrant , to teach their hand to war , and their finger to fight , that the glory of the victory may redound to his name , and to the honour of true religion which the insolent enemy seek so much to overthrow . contrary , the foolish Spaniard cry out accord to their manner , not to God , but to our lady ( as they term the virgin mary ) say , oh lady help , oh bless lady give we the victory , and the honour thereof shall thou . thus with blow and prayer on both side the fight continue furious and sharp , and doubtful a long time to which part the victory will incline : till at the last the admiral of the galley of Sicily begin to warp from the fight , and to hold up her side for fear of sink , and after she go also two other in like case , who all the sort of they enclose , labour by all their mean to keep they above water , be ready by the force of english shot which they have receive to perish in the sea : and what slaughter be do among the Spaniard themselves , the english be uncertain , but by a probable conjecture apparent afar off , they suppose their loss be so great , that they want man to continue the charge of their piece : whereupon with a fight of five shame and dishonour , after 5. hour spend in the battle , houres-they withdraw themselves : and the english content in respect of their deep lade , rather to continue their voyage then to follow the chase , cease from further blow , with the loss only of two man slay among they all , and another hurt in his arm , who m. 
 Wilkinson with his good word and friendly promise do so comfort , that he nothing esteem the smart of his wound in respect of the honour of the victory , and the shameful repulse of the enemy . 
 thus with dutiful thanks to the mercy of God for his gracious assistance in that danger , the english ship proceed in their navigation , and come as high as Alger , a port town upon the coast of Barbary , they fall 55 
 with it , of purpose to refresh themselves after their weariness , and to take in such supply of fresh water and victual , as they need : they be no soon enter into the port , but immediate the king thereof send a messenger to the ship to know what they be , with which messenger the chief master of each ship repair to the king , and acquaint he not only with the state of their ship , in respect of merchandise , but with the late fight which they have pass with the spanish galley , report every particular circumstance in word as it fall out in action : whereof the say king show himself marvelous glad , entertain they in the best sort , and promise abundant relief of all their want , make general proclamation in the city upon pain of death , that no man of what degree or state soever he be , shall presume either to hinder they in their affair , or to offer they any manner of injury in body or good . by virtue whereof they dispatch all thing in excellent good sort , with all favour and peaceableness : only such prisoner and captive of the Spaniard as be in the city , see the good usage which they receive , and hear also what service they have perform against the foresay galley , grudge exceed against they , and seek as much as they can to practise some mischief against they : and one among the rest see a Englishman alone in a certain lane of the city , come upon he sudden , and with his knife thrust he in the side , yet make no such great wound , but that it be easy recover . the english company hear of it , acquaint the king with the fact , who immediate send both for the party that have receive the wound , and the offender also , and cause a executioner in the presence of himself and the english , to chastise the slave even to death , which be perform to the end that no man shall presume to commit the like part , or to do any thing in contempt of his royal commandment . 
 the english have receive this good justice at the king hand , and all other thing that they want , or 56 
 can crave for the furnish of their ship , take their leave of he , and of the rest of their friend , that be resident in Alger , and put out to sea , look to meet with the second army of the spanish king , which wait for they about the mouth of the strait of Gibraltar , which they be of necessity to pass . but come near to the say strait , it please God to raise at that instant a very dark and misty fog , so that one ship can not discern another , if it be 40. pace off : by mean whereof , together with the notable fair eastern wind that then blow most fit for their course , they pass with great speed through the strait , and may have pass with that good gale , have there be 500 galley to withstand they , and the air never so clear for every ship to be see . but yet the spanish the second galley have a sight of they when they be come within 3. English mile of the town , and make after they in all possible haste , and although they see that they be English . far out of their reach , yet in a vain fury and foolish pride , they shoot off their ordinance , and make a stir in the sea as if they have be in the midst of they , which vanity of they minister to our man notable matter of pleasure and mirth , see man to fight with shadow , and to take so great pain to so small purpose . 
 but thus it please God to deride , and delude all the force of that proud spanish king , which he have provide of purpose to distress the english , who notwithstanding pass through both his army , in the one , little hurt , and in the other nothing touch , ' to the glory of he immortali name , the honour of our prince and country , and the just commendation of each man service perform in that voyage . 
 . 