the voyage pass by sea into Aegypt , by John [ ii i . 281. ] Evesham gentleman . anno 1586. 
 he 5 of December 1586 we depart from Gravesend in the tiger of London , wherein be master under God for the voyage Robert Rickman , and the 21. day at night we come to the isle of wight : depart from thence in the morning follow we have a fair wind , so that 
 on the 27 day we come in sight of the rock of Lisbon , and so sail along we come in sight of the south cape , the 29 of the same , and on the morrow with a westerly wind we enter the straight : and the second of January be as high as cape de gate , we depart from our 
 fleet towards Argier . and the 4 day we arrive at the port of Argier aforesaid , where we stay till the first of march . at which time we set sail towards a place call Tunis , to the eastward of Argier 100 league , where we arrive the 8 of the same . This Tunis be a 
 Tunis . 
 small city up 12 mile from the sea , and at the port or ride where ship doe ride , be a castle or fort call Goletta , sometime in the hand of the christian , but now of the Turk : at which place we remain till the three of April : at which time we set sail towards Alexandria , and have sometime fair wind , sometime contrary , we pass on the 12 day between Sicilia and Malta ( where near adjoin have be the fort and hold of the knight of the Rhodes ) and so the 19 day we fall with the isle of Candy , and from thence to Alexandria , where we arrive the 27 of April , and there continue till the 5 of October . 
 the say city of Alexandria be a old thing decay or the descrip-ruinated , have be a fair and great city near two fan ofalex-mile in length , be all vaunt underneath for provision andria . of fresh water , which water come thither but once every year , out of one of the four river of paradise ( as it be term ) call Nilus , which in September flow 
 near eighteen foot upright high than his accustom manner , and so the bank be cut , as it be a sluice , about thirty mile from Alexandria , at a town call Rossetto , it do so come to the say city , with such abundance , that bark of twelve ton do come upon the same water , which water do fill all the vaut , cistern , and well in the say city , with very good water , and do so continue good , till the next year follow : for they have there very little rain or none at all , yet have they exceed great dew . also they have very good corn , and very plentiful : all the country be very hot , especial in the month of August , September , and October . also within the say city there be a pillar of marble , call by the Turk , king Pharaoh needle , and it be four square , every square be twelve foot , and it be in height 90 foot . also there be without the wall of the say city , about twenty score pace , another marble pillar , be round , call Pompey his pillar : this pillar stand upon a great square stone , every square be fifteen foot , and the same stone be fifteen foot high , and the compass of the pillar be 37 foot , and the heighth of it be 101 foot , which be a wonder to think how ever it be possible to set the say pillar upon the say square stone . the port of the say city be strong fortify with two strong castle , and one other castle within the city , be all very well plant with munition : and there be to the eastward of this Cayro . city , about three day journey the city of grand Cayro , otherwise call Memphis : it have in it by report of the register book which we do see , to the number of 2400 church , and be wonderful populous , and be one day journey about the wall , which be journey by one of our mariner for trial thereof . also near to the say city there be a place call the pyramid , be , as i may well term it , one of the nine wonder of the world : that be , seven several place of flint and marble stone , four square , the wall thereof be seven yard thick in those place that we do see : the squareness be in length 
 about twenty score every square , be build as it be a point diamond , broad at the foot , and small or narrow at the top : the heighth of they , to our judgement , do surmount twice the heighth of Paul steeple : within the say pyramid , no man do know what there be , for that they have no entrance but in the one of they , there be a hole where the wall be break , and so we go in there , have torchlight with we , for that it have no light to it , and within the same , be as it be a great hall , in the which there be a costly tomb , which tomb they say , be make for king Pharaoh in his life time , but he be not bury there , be drown in the red sea : also there be certain vaut or dungeon , which go down very deep under those pyramid with fair stair , but no man dare venture to go down into they , by reason that they can carry no light with they , for the damp of the earth do put out the light : the red sea be but three day journey from this place , and Jerusalem about seven day journey from thence : but to return to Cayro . there be a castle wherein be the house that Pharaoh wife be keep in , and in the palace or court thereof stand 55 marble pillar , in such order , as our exchange stand in London : the say pillar be in heighth 60 foot , and in compass 14 foot : also in the [ ii i . 282. ] say city be the castle be Joseph be in prison , where to this day they put in rich man , when the king will have any sum of money of they : there be seven gate to the say prison , and it go near fifty yard down right : also , the water that serve this castle , come out of the foresay river of Nilus , upon a wall make with arch , five mile long , and it be twelve foot thick . also there be in old Cayro two monastery , the one call S. George , the other saint Maries : and in the court where the church be , be the house of king Pharaoh . in this city be great store of merchandise , especial pepper , and nutmeg , which come thither by land , out of the east India : and it be very plentiful of all manner of victual , especial of bread , root , and 
 herb : to the eastwards of Cayro , there be a well , five mile off , call Matria , and as they say , when the virgin Marie flee from Bethleem , and come into jEgypt , and be there , have neither water , nor any other thing to sustain they , by the providence of God , a angel come from heaven , and strike the ground with his wing , where present issue out a fountain of water : and the wall do open where the Israelite do hide themselves , which fountain or well be wall four square till this day . also we be at a old city , all ruinate and destroy , Carthage , call in old time , the great city of Carthage where 
 Hannibal and queen Dido dwell : this city be but narrow , but be very long : for there be , and be yet to be see , one street three mile long , to which city fresh water be bring upon arch ( as afore ) above 2 5 mile , of which arch some be stand to this day . also we be at diverse other place on the coast , as we come from Cayro , but of other antiquity we see but Argier . few . the town of Argier which be our first and last port , within the strait stand upon the side of a hill , close upon the sea shore : it be very strong both by sea and land , and it be very well victual with all manner of fruit , bread and fish good store , and very cheap . it be inhabit with Turk , moor , and Jew , and so be Alexandria and Cayro . in this town be a great number of Christian captive , whereof there be of Englishmen only fifteen , from which port we set sail towards England , the seven of Januarie , anno 1587 , and the 30 day of the say month , we arrive at Dartmouth on the coast of England . 
 . 