the monson of the Portugal ship for the Indies . 
 the ship which come from Portugal depart thence ordinary betwixt the ten and fifteen of march , come the straight way during the month of July to the coast of melinde , and Mosambique , and from note . thence go straight for goa , and if in the month of July they shall not be at the coast of melinde , they can in no wise that year fetch melinde , but return to the isle of saint Helena , and so be not able , that time be pass , to fetch the coast of India , and to come straight for goa . therefore ( as be abovesaid ) they return to the island of saint Helena , and if they can make the say island , than they run as lose upon the coast of Guinea : but if the say ship be arrive in time upon the coast of melinde , they set forwards for goa , and if by the fifteen of September they can fetch goa , they then go for Cochin , but if they see they can fetch Cochin , they return to Mosambique to winter there upon the say coast . albeit in the year note . of our lord 1580 there arrive the ship call San Lorenzo , be wonderful sore sea-beaten , the eight of October , which be account as a miracle for that the like have not be see before . 
 the monson from India for Portugal . 
 the ship depart from Cochin between the fifteen and last of January , go on till they have sight of Capo de buona speranza , and the isle of saint Helena , which island be about the midway , be in sixteen degree to the south . and it be a little island be fruitful of all thing which a man can imagine , with great store of fruit : and this island be a great succour to the ship which return for Portugal . and not long since the say island be find by the Portugal , and be discover by a ship that come from the Indies in a great storm , in which they find such abundance of wild beast , and boar , and all sort of 
 vi 33 c 
 fruit , that by mean thereof that poor ship which have be four month at sea , refresh themselves both with water and meat very well , and this island they call S. Helena , because it be discover upon saint Helen day . and undoubted this island be a great succour , and so great a aid to the ship of Portugal ! , that many will sure perish if that help want " and therefore the king of Portugal cause a church to be make there for devotion of saint Helena : where there be only resident Eremits , and all other be forbid to inhabit there by the king commandment , to the end that the ship may be the more sufficient furnish with victual , because the ship which come note , from India come but slender victual , because there grow no corn there , neither make they any wine : but the ship which come from Portugal to the Indies touch not in the say island , because they set out be sufficient furnish with bread and water from Portugal for eight month voyage . any other people than the two eremite abovesaid , can inhabit this island , except some sick man that may be set there a shore to remain in the eremites company , for his help and recovery . 
 the monson from goa to Mosambique . 
 the ship depart betwixt the 10 and 15 of Januarie . 
 the monson from Mosambique to goa . 
 the ship depart between the 8 and last of August , and arrive in Chaul or goa in the month of October , till the 15 of November . 
 the monson from ormus to Bengala . 
 the ship depart betwixt the 15 and 20 of June , and go to winter at Teve and depart thence about the 15 of August for Bengala . 
 . 