a description of a voyage to Constantinople and Syria , begin the 21. of march 1593. and end the 9 of August , 1595. wherein be show the order of deliver the second present by master Edward Barton her majesty ambassador , which be send from her majesty to sultan Murad can , emperor of turquoise . 
 [ two . i . 304. ] 
 e set sail in the ascension of London , a new ship very well appoint , of two hundred and three score ton ( whereof be master one William Broadbanke , a provident and skilful man in his faculty ) from Gravesend the one and twenty of march 1593. 
 and upon the eight of April follow we pass the strait of Gibraltar , and with a small western gale , the 24. of the same , we arrive at Zante a hand under the venetian . the four of May we depart , and the one and twenty we arrive at Alexandretta in Cilicia in the very bottom of the Mediterrane sea , a road some 25. mile distant from Antioch , where our merchant land their good to be send for Aleppo . from thence we set sail the five of June , and by contrary wind be drive upon the coast of caramania into a road near a little hand where a castle stand , call castle rosso , some thirty league to the eastwards of the Rhodes , where after long search for fresh water , we can find none , until certain poor greek of the hand bring we to a well where we have 5 or 6 tun . that part of the country next the sea be very barren and full of mountain , yet find we there a old tomb of marble , with a epitaph of a ancient greek character , by antiquity near wear out and past read ; which to the beholder seem a monument of the greatness of the grecian monarchy . 
 from thence we go to the Rhodes , and by contrary wind be drive into a port of candy , call Sittia : candle . this hand be under the venetian , who have there 600 soldier , beside certain Greeks , continual in pay . here with contrary wind we stay six week , and in the end , have the wind prosperous , we sail by Nicaria , Pharos , Delos , and Andros , with sight of many other hand in the archipelago , and arrive at the two castle in Hellespont the 24 of August . within few day after we come to Galipoli some thirty mile from this place , where four of we take a Parma or boat of that place , with two waterman , which row we along the thracian shore to Constantinople , which sometime sail and sometime row , in four day they perform . the first of September we arrive at the famous port of the grand signior , where we be not a little welcome to m. Edward Barton until then her majesty agent , who ( with many other great person ) have for many day expect the present . five or six day after the ship arrive near the seven the ascension tower , which be a very strong hold , and so call of be ' , - have < i at the so many turret , which it have , stand near the sea ‘ side , be the first part of the city that we come unto . 
 here the agent appoint the master of the ascension to stay with the ship until a fit wind and opportunity serve to bring she about the seraglio to salute the grand signior in his moskyta or church : for you shall understand that he have build one near the wall of his seraglio or palace adjoin to the sea side ; whereunto twice or thrice a week he resort to perform such religious rite as their law require : where he be within few day after , our ship set out in their best manner with flag , streamer and pendant of diverse colour silk , with all the mariner , together with most of the ambassador man , have the wind fair , and come within two cable length of this his moskita , where ( he to his great content behold the ship in such bravery ) they discharge 95 
 1593-the ship salutes the grand signior . 
 the cause of stay the present . 
 a Arz to the grand signior . 
 first two voly of small shot , and then all the great ordinance twice over , there be seven and twenty or eight and twenty piece in the ship . which perform , he appoint the bustangi-bassa or captain of the great and spacious garden or park , to give our man thanks , with request that some other day they will show he the like sport when he will have the sultana or empress a beholder thereof which few day after at the ship go to the customhouse they perform . 
 the grand signior salutation thus end , the master bring the ship to a anchor at Rapamat near the ambassador house , where he likewise salute he with all his great ordinance once over , and where he land the present , the delivery whereof for a time be stay : the cause of which stay it shall neither be dishonourable for our nation , or that worthy man the ambassador to show you . at the departure of Sinan Bassa the chief vizir , and our ambassador great friend towards the war of Hungary there be another bassa appoint in his place , a churlish and harsh nature man , who upon occasion of certain Genouezes , escape out of the castle stand towards the euxine sea , now call the black sea , there imprison , apprehend and threaten to execute one of our Englishman call John field , for that he be take thereabouts , and know not many day before to have bring a letter to one of they : upon the solicit of who liberty there fall a jar between the bassa ( be now chief vizir ) and our ambassador , and in choler he give her majesty ambassador such word , as without sustain some great indignity he can not put up . whereupon after the arrival of the present , he make a Arz , that be , a bill of complaint to the grand signior against he , the manner in exhibit whereof be thus perform . 
 the plaintiff expect the grand signior go abroad from his palace , either to Santa Sophia or to his 96 
 church by the sea side , whither , with a perma ( that be one of their usual whirry ) they approach within some two or three score yard , where the plaintiff stand up , and hold his petition over his forehead in sight of the grand signior ( for his church be open to the sea side ) the rest sit still in the boat , who appoint one of his dwarf to receive they , and to bring they to he . a dwarf , one of the ambassador favorite , so soon as he be discern , beckon he to the shore side , take his Arz , and with speed carry it to the grand signior . now the effect of it be this ; that except his highness will redress this so great a indignity , which the vizir he slave have offer he and her majesty in his person , he be purpose to detain the present until such time as he may by letter overland from her majesty be certify , whither she will put up so great a injury as it be . whereupon he present return answer , request the ambassador within a hour after to go to the Dovan of the vizir , unto who himself of his charge will send a gown of cloth of gold , and command he public to put it upon he , and with kind entertainment to embrace he in sign of reconciliation . whereupon our ambassador return home , take his horse , accompany with his man , and come to the vizier court , where , accord to the grand signior command , he with all show of kindness embrace the ambassador , and with courteous speech reconcile himself , and with his own hand put the gown of cloth of gold upon his back . which do , he with his attendant return home , to the no small admiration of all Christians that hear of it , especial of the french and venetian ambassador , who never in the like case against the second person of the turkish empire dare have attempt so bold a enterprise with hope of so friendly audience , and with so speedy redress . this reconciliation with the great vizir thus make , the ambassador prepare himself for the delivery of the vi 97 c 
 A.D. 
 1593 - 
 [ two - i - 3O5 - ] 
 the great hall of justice . 
 reconciliation with the vizir make . 
 present , which upon the 7 of October 1593* in “ “ sister manner he perform . 
 the ambassa - the ascension with her flag and streamer , as afore-dor go to say , repair nigh unto the place where the ambassador 
 tepgo . ^ shall land to go up to the seraglio : for you must 
 understand that all christian ambassador have their dwelling in Pera where most christian abide , from 
 which place , except you will go 4 or 5 mile about , 
 you can by land go to Constantinople , whereas by sea it be little broad than the Thames . our ambassador likewise apparel in a suit of cloth of silver , with a upper gown of cloth of gold , accompany with 7 gentleman in costly suit of satin , with 30 other of his man very well apparel , and all in one livery of sad french russet cloth gown , at his house take boat : at who land the ship discharge all her ordinance , where likewise attend 2 bassa , with 40 or 50 chause to accompany you ambassador to the court , and also horse for the ambassador and his gentleman , very rich furnish , with turkish servant attendant to take the horse when they shall light . the ambassador thus honorable accompany , the chause foremost , next his man on foot all go by two and two , himself last with his Chause and Drugaman or Interpreter , and 4 janissary , which he do usual entertain in his house to accompany he the ambass . continual abroad , come to the seraglio about a come to the english mile from the water side , where first he pass Zeraglto . a great gate into a ] arge court Hke the space 
 before white hall gate ) where he with his gentleman alight and leave their horse . from hence they pass into a other stately court , be about 6 score in breadth , and some 10 score yard long , with many tree in it : where all the court be with great pomp set in order to entertain our ambassador . upon the right captltof " hand a11 the lensth of the court be a gallery arch hundred and ove5 and bear up with stone pillar , much like then of fifty . royal exchange , where stood* most of his guard in 
 98 and 
 rank from the one end to the other in costly array , with round head piece on their head of mettle and gilt over , with a great plume of feather somewhat like a long brush stand up before . on the left hand stand the cappagy or porter , and the chause . all these courtier be about the number of 2000 ( as i may well guess ) most of they apparel in cloth of gold , silver , velvet , satin and scarlet , do together with bow their body , lay their hand upon their breast in courteous manner of salutation , entertain the ambassador : who likewise pass between they , and turn himself sometime to the right hand and sometime to the left , answer they with the like . as he thus pass along , certain chause conduct he to the Dovan , which be the seat of justice , where certain day of the week the grand vizir , with the other vizier , the cadi-lesk or lord chief justice , and the mufti or high priest do sit to determine upon such cause as be bring before they , which place be upon the left side of this great court , whither the ambassador with ambassa-his gentleman come , where he find the vizir thus accompany as aforesaid , who with great show of kind - au1 1 nes receive he : and after receit of her majesty letter , kindness . 
 and conference have of the present , of her majesty health , of the state of England , and such other matter as concern our peaceable traffic in those part : dinner be prepare be by many of you courtier bring dinner bring into another inner room next adjoin , which consist tn-of a hundred dish or thereabouts , most boil and roast , where the ambassador accompany w‘ the vizier go to dinner , his gentleman likewise with the rest of his man have a dinner with the like variety prepare upon you same side of the court , by themselves sit down to their meat , 40 or 50 chause stand at the upper end attend upon the gentleman to see they serve in good order ; their drink be water mingle with rose water and sugar bring in a Luthro ( that be a goat skin ) which a man carry at his back , and under his arm let it run out at a spout into cup as man will call for 
 [ ii i . 306. ] 
 gown of cloth of gold for the ambassador and his gentleman . 
 the present . 
 the present view . 
 it . the dinner thus with good order bring in , and for half a hour with great sobriety and silence perform , be not so orderly take up ; for certain moglans officer of the kitchen ( like her majesty black guard ) come in disorder manner and take away the dish , and he who hungry eye one dish can not satisfy , turn two or three one into the other , and thus of a sudden be a clean riddance make of all . the ambassador after dinner with his gentleman , by certain officer be place at the upper end upon the left side of the court , near unto a great gate which give entrance to a three court be but little , pave with stone . in the midst whereof be a little house build of marble , as i take it , within which sit the grand signior , accord to who commandment give there be gown of cloth of gold bring out of sie wardrobe , and put upon the ambassador and 7 of his gentleman , the ambassador himself have 2 , one of gold , and the other of crimosin velvet , all the rest one a piece . then certain cappagy have the present , which be in trunk there ready , deliver they by the ambassador man , it be 12 goodly piece of gild plate , 36 garment of fine english cloth of all color , 20 garment of cloth of gold , 10 garment of satin , 6 piece of fine holland , and certain other thing of good value ; all which be carry round about the court , each man take a piece , be in number very near 100 parcel , and so 2 and 2 go round that all may see it , to the great glory of the present , and of he to who it be give : they go into the innermost court pass by the window of that room , where the grand signior sit , who , as it go by to be lay up in certain room adjoin , take view of all . present after the present follow the ambassador with his gentleman ; at the gate of which court stand 20 or 30 agaus which be eunuch . within the court yard be the Turk dwarf and dumb man , be most of they youth . at the door of his room stand the bustangi-bassa , with another bassa to lead the ambassador and his 
 100 
 follower to the grand signior who sit in a chair of estate , apparel in a gown of cloth of silver . the floor under his foot , which part be a foot high than the rest , be cover with a carpet of green satin embroidered most rich with silver , orient pearl and great turkese ; the other part of the house be cover with a carpet of carnation satin embroider wl gold , none be in the room with he , but a bassa who stand next the wall over against he hang down his head , and look submiss upon the ground as all his subject do in his presence . the ambassador thus betwixt two fmbassa - 
 which stand at the door be lead in , either of they take a arm , kiss his hand , and so backward with hand . 
 his face to the Turk they bring he nigh the door again , where he stand until they have likewise do so with all the rest of his gentleman . which end , the ambassador , accord as it be the custom when any present be deliver , make his three demand , such as he think most expedient for her majesty honour , 8c the peaceable traffic of our nation into his dominion : whereunto he answer in one word , nolo , which be in turkish as much as , it shall be do : for it be not the manner of the turkish emperor familiar to confer with any christian ambassador , but he appoint his vizir in his the ambassa-person to grant their demand if they be to his like ; dqr demand as to our ambassador he grant all his demand , 8c give e ' order that his daily allowance for his house of money , flesh , wood , 8c hay , shall be augment with half as much more as it have be before . hereupon the ambassador take his leave , depart with his gentleman the same way he come , the whole court salute he as they do at his come in ; 8c come to the second court to take our horse , after we be mount , we stay half a hour , until the captain of the guard with 2000 horseman at the least pass before , after who follow 40 or 50 chause next before the ambassador to accompany he to his house . and as before at his land , so now at his take boat , the ship discharge 
 ioi 
 the sultanas present to the queen . 
 letter send for England . 
 the other vizier present . 
 [ ii i . 3°7 - ] 
 all her great ordinance , where arrive , he likewise have a great banquet prepare to entertain those which come to bring he home . the pomp and solemnity of the present , with the day thus end , he short after present the sultana or empress who ( by reason that she be mother to he which be heir to the crown imperial ) be have in far great reverence than any of his other queen or concubine . the present send she in her majesty name be a jewel of her majesty picture , set with some ruby and diamond , 3 great piece of gild plate , 10 garment of cloth of gold , a very fine case of glass botde silver and gilt , with 2 piece of fine holland , which so grateful she accept , as that she send to know of the ambassador what present he think she may return ill will most delight her majesty : who send word that a suit of princely attire be after the turkish fashion will for the rareness thereof be acceptable in England . whereupon she send a upper gown of cloth of gold very rich , an under gown of cloth of silver , and a girdle of turquoise work , rich and fair , with a letter of gratification , which for the rareness of the stile , because you may be acquaint with it , i have at the end of this discourse hereunto annex , which letter and present , with one from the grand signior , be send by m. Edward Bushell , and m. William Aldridge overland the 20 of march , who pass through Valachia and Moldavia , and so through Poland , where Michael prince of Valachia , and Aron Voivoda prince of Moldavia receive letter from the ambassador , entertain they with all courtesy , through who mean by the great favour which his lordship have with the grand signior , they have not long before both of they be advance to their princely dignity . he likewise present Sigala the admiral of the sea , with abrim bassa , who marry the great Turk daughter , and all the other vizier with diverse piece of plate , fine english cloth and other costly thing : the particular whereof , to avoid tediousness , i omit . all the present thus end , the ship 
 102 
 shoot ten piece of ordinance at the seraglio point , as a last farewell , depart on her journey for England the ascension first of November , my self continue in Constantinople < tyarUik . until the last of July after . this year in the spring there be great preparation for the hungarian war ; and great pre-the great Turk threaten to go himself in person : but like Heliogabalus , his affection be more service - narre . able to Venus then to Mars , he stay at home . yet a great army be dispatch this year ; who , as they come out of Asia to go for Hungary , do so pester the street of Constantinople for the space of two month in the spring time , as scarce either . Christian or Jew can without danger of lose his money pass up and down the city . what insolence , murder and robbery be commit not only upon Christians but also upon Turks i omit to write , and i pray God in England the like may never be see : and yet i can wish , that such among we as have enjoy the gospel with such great and admirable peace and prosperity under her majesty government this forty year , and have not all this time bring forth better fruit of obedience to God , and thankfulness to her majesty , be there but a short time to behold the miserable condition both of Christians and other live under such a infideli prince , who not only be wrap in most palpable and gross ignorance of mind , but be clean without the mean of the true knowledge of God : i doubt not but the sight hereof ( if they be not clean void of grace ) will stir they up to more thankfulness to God , that ever they be bear in so happy a time , and under so wise and godly a prince profess the true religion of Christ . 
 the number of soldier which go to the war of Hungary this year be 470000 , as by the particular give by the admiral to the ambassador hereunder do appear . although all these be appoint and suppose to go , yet the victory which the Christians in the spring have against the turk strike such a 103 
 terror in many of the turkish soldier , as by report diverse upon the way thither leave their captain and steal away . 
 the number of turkish soldier which be appoint to go into Hungary against the christian emperor . May 1594* 
 Sinan bassa generail , with the sanjacke masould , that be , out of office , with the other sanjack in office 
 or of degree , 40000. 
 Achmigi , that be , adventurer , 50000. 
 the Agha or captain with his janissary , and his giebegy , 20000 
 the Beglerbeg of Graecia , with all his sanjack , 40000. 
 the company of Spaheis or horseman , 10000 
 the company of silitari , 6000. 
 the company of sagbulve and of solbulve both to - 
 gether , 8000. the bassa of Belgrade , the bassa of Temiswar . the bassa of Bosna . the bassa of Buda . 
 ► 80000. 
 the Sanjack of gersech . 
 out of Asia . 
 the bassa of Caramania . ' the bassa of Laras . 
 the bassa of Damascus . 
 the bassa of Suas . 
 the bassa of van or Nan . 
 the bassa of Usdrum . 
 of Tartar there be about 100000. 
 120000. 
 thus you may see that the great Turk make war with no small number . and in anno 1597 , when sultan Mahomet himself go in person into Hungary , if a man may believe report , he have a army of 600000. 
 104 
 for the city of Constantinople you shall understand that it be matchable with any city in Europe , aswell in bigness as for the pleasant situation thereof , and commodious traffic and bring of all manner of necessary provision of victual , and whatsoever else man life for the sustentation thereof shall require , be seat upon a promontory , look towards Pontus Euxinus upon the north-east , and to Propontis on the southwest , by which two sea by ship be bring great store of all manner [ ii i . 308. ] of victual . the city it self in form represent a triangular figure , the sea wash the wall upon two side thereof , the other side face the continent of Thracia ; the grand signior seraglio stand upon that point which look into the sea , be cut off " from the city by a wall ; so that you wall of his palace contain in circuit about two english mile : the seven tower speak of before stand at another corner , and Constantine old palace to the north at the three corner . 
 the city have a threefold wall about it ; the innermost very high , the next low than that , and the three a countermure , and be in circuit about ten english mile : it have four and twenty gate : and when the empire be remove out of the west into the east , it be enrich with many spoil of old room by Vespasian and other emperor , have many monument and pillar in it worthy the observation ; among the rest in the midst of Constantinople stand one of white marble call Vespasians pillar , of 38 or 40 yard high , which have from the base to the top proportion of man in armour fight on horseback : it be likewise adorn with diverse goodly building and stately mesquitas , whereof the big be sultan Soliman a great warrior , which live in the time of Charles the five ; but the fair be Santa Sophia , Santa Sophia . which in the time of the christian emperor be the chief cathedral church , and be still in great account with the great Turk : it be build round like other greekish church , the pavement and wall be all of marble , it have beneath 44 pillar of diverse colour 
 105 
 marble of admirable heighth and bigness , which stand upon great round foot of brass , much great than the pillar , and of a great heighth , some ten yard distant from the wall : from which unto these pillar be a great gallery build , which go round about the church ; and upon the outside of the gallery stand 66 marble pillar which bear up the round roof be the top of the church : it have three pulpit or preach place , and about 2000 lamp bring in by the Turk . likewise upon one side in the top be the picture of Christ with the 12 apostle , but their face be deface , with two or three ancient tomb of Christians : to the west stick a arrow in the top of the church , which , as the turk report , sultan Mahomet shoot when he first take the city . near adjoin be two chapel of marble , where lie bury most of the emperor with their child and sultana . the 16 of July , accompany with some other of our nation we go by water to the black sea , be 16 mile distant from Constantinople , the sea all the way thither be little broad than the Thames ; both side of the shore be beautify with fair and goodly building . at the mouth of this Bosphorus lie a rock some fourscore yard from the main land , whereupon stand a white marble pillar call Pompey pillar , the shadow whereof be 23 foot long at nine of the clock in the forenoon : over against it be a turret of stone upon the main land 120 step high , have a great glass-lanthorn in the top four yard in diamiter and three in heighth , with a great copper pan in the midst to hold oil , with twenty light in it , and it serve to give passage into this strait in the night to such ship as come from all part of those sea to Constantinople : it be continual keep by a Turk , who to y‘ end have pay of the grand signior . and thus have spend eleven month in Constantinople , accompany with a chause , and carry certain mandate from the grand signior to the bassa of Aleppo for the kind usage of our nation in those part , the 30 of July i take passage in a turkish car-106 
 mosale or ship bind for Sidon ; and pass through Propontis , have Salimbria with Heraclia most pleasant situate on the right hand , and Proconesus now call Marmora on the left , we come to Gallipoly , and so by gallfly . Hellespont , between the two castle before name call Sestos and Abydos , famous for the passage make there both by Xerxes and great Alexander , the one into Thracia , the other into Asia , and so by the sigean promontory , now call cape janitzary , at the mouth of Hellespont upon Asia side , where Troy stand , where be yet ruin Troy . of old wall to be see , with two hill rise in a pira-midall form , not unlikely to be the tomb of Achilles and Ajax . from thence we sail along , have Tenedos and Lemnos on the right hand , and the trojan field on the left : at length we come to m itylen and Sio long zw . time inhabit by the genouese , but now under the Turk . the hand be beautify with goodly building and pleasant garden , and abound with fruit , wine , and the gum mastic . from thence sail alongst the gulf of Ephesus with Nicaria on the right hand , Samos and Smirna on the left , we come to Patmos , where saint Patmos . John write the revelation . the hand be but small , not above five mile in compass : the chief thing it yield be corn : it have a port for ship , and in it be a monastery of greekish caloiero . from thence by Cos cousin ( now call Lango ) where Hipocrates be bear : and pass many other hand and rock , we arrive at Rhodes , Rhodes . one of the strong and fair city of the east : here we stay three or four day ; and by reason of a by which go in the ship to Paphos in Cyprus , who use i with all kindness , i go about the city , and take the view of all : which city be still with all the house and wall thereof maintain in the same order as they take it from the rhodian knight . over the door of many of the house , which be strong build of stone , do remain undefaced , the arm of England , [ ii i . 309. ] France , Spain , and many other christian knight , as though the Turk in the view thereof glory in the 
 107 
 Antioch . 
 Aleppo . 
 take of all Christendom , who arm there they behold . from thence we sail to Paphos a old ruinous town stand upon the western part of Cyprus , where saint Paul in the act convert the governor . depart hence , we come to Sidon , by the turk call saytosa , within ten or twelve mile of the place where Tirus stand , which now be eat in by the sea , be , as Ezekiel prophesy , a place for the spread out of a net . Sidon be situate in a small bay at the foot of mount Libanus , upon the side of a hill look to the north : it be wall about , with a castle nigh to the sea , and one towards the land which be ruinate , but the wall thereof stand . some half mile up towards the mountain be certain ruin of building , with marble , pillar , remain : here for three day we be kind entertain of the captain of the castle : and in a small bark we sail from hence along the shore to Tripoli , and so to Alexandretta , where the 24 of August we arrive . from thence with a venetian caravan we go by land to Aleppo , pass by Antioch , which be seat upon the side of a hill , who wall still stand with 360 turret upon they , and near a very great plain which bear the name of the city , through which run the river Orontes , in scripture call farfar . in Aleppo i stay until February follow ; in this city , as at a mart , meet many nation out of Asia with the people of Europe , have continual traffic and interchangeable course of merchandise one with another : the state and trade of which place , because it be so well know to most of our nation i omit to write of . the 27 of February i depart from Aleppo , and the five of march embark my self at Alexandretta in a great ship of Venice call the Nana Ferra , to come for England . the 14 we put into Salino in Cyprus , where the ship stay many day to lade cotton wool , and other commodity , in the mean time accompany with m. William Barret my country man , the master of the ship a greek , 
 108 
 and other we take occasion to see Nicosia , the chief city of this hand , which be some twenty mile from this place , which be situate at the foot of a hill : to the east be a great plain , extend it self ill a great length from the north to the south : it be wall about , but of no such strength as Famagusta ( another city in this hand near the sea side ) who wall be cut out of the main rock . in this city be many sumptuous and goodly building of stone , but uninhabited ; the cause whereof do give i just occasion to show you of a rare judgement of God upon the owner sometime of these house , as i be credible inform by a cypriot a merchant of good wealth in this city . before it come in subjection to the turk , while it be under the venetian , there be many baron and noble man of the cipriots , who partly by usurp more superiority over the common people than they ought , and partly through their great revenue which yearly come in by their cotton wool and wine , grow so insolent and proud , and withal so impious wicked , as that they will at their pleasure command both the wife and child of their poor tenant to serve their unclean lust , 8c hold they in such slavery as though they have be no better than dog , will wage they against a grayhound or spaniel , and he who win the wager shall ever after hold they as his proper good and chattel , to do with they as he list , be Christians aswell as themselves , if they may deserve so good a name . as they behave themselves most unchristianly towards their brethren , so and much more ungodly ( which i shall have put in the first place ) do they towards God : for as though they be too great , stand on foot or kneel to serve God , they will come ride on horseback into the church to hear their mass : which church now be make a public basistane or market place for the Turk to sell commodity in : but behold the judgement of the righteous God , who pay the sinner measure for measure . the 
 109 
 A.D. 
 » 595-Nicosia . 
 a great judgement of God upon the noble man of Cyprus . 
 Turk the year before the overthrow give they at Lepanto by don John take Cyprus . Theise mighty nimrods flee some into hole and some into mountain to hide themselves ; whereupon the Turk make generail proclamation , that if they will all come in and yield themselves , they will restore they to their former revenue and dignity : who not mistrust the mischievous pretense of the Turk , assemble together to make themselves know ; who after the Turk have in possession , they ( as the lord executioner ) put they with their wife and child all to the sword , pretend thereby to cut of all future rebellion , so that at this day be not one of the noble race know alive in the hand , only two or three remain in Venice but of little wealth , which in the time of the war escape . after we have stay in this hand some thirty day , we set sail in the foresay ship be about the burden of 900 ton , have in her passenger of diverse nation , as Tartars , persian , Jew , and sundry Christians . among all which i have often conference with a Jew , who by reason of his many year education at safet a place in Judea near Jerusalem , where they study the rabbi with some other art as they think good , as also for his travel into Persia and ormus , he seem to be of good experience in matter abroad , who relate unto i such conference as he have with a baniane at ormus , be one of the Indians inhabit the country of Cambaia . This baniane be a gentle have skill in astronomic , as many of that nation have , who by his book write in his own tongue and character , can tell the time of eclipse both of sun and moon , with the change and full , and by judgement in astrology give answer to any question demand . be ask concern his opinion in religion , what he think of God ? he make answer , that they hold no other god but the sun , ( to which planet they pray both at the rise and set ) as i have see sundry doe in Aleppo : he reason 
 iio 
 be draw from the effect which it work in give light to the moon and other star , and cause all thing to grow and increase upon the earth : answer be make , that it do move with the rest as the wheel of a clock , and therefore of force must have a mover . likewise in the eclipse be darken it be manifest prove that it be not god , for God be altogether goodness and brightness , which can neither be darken nor receive detriment or hurt : but the sun receive both in the eclipse , as it be apparent : to which he can not answer ; but so they have receive from their ancestor , that it be without beginning or end , as in any orbicular or round body neither beginning or end can be find . he likewise say , that there be other gentile in the Indies which worship the moon as chief , and their reason be . the moon when she rise go with thousand of star accompany like a king , and therefore be chief : but the sun go alone , and therefore not so great . against who the banians reason , that it be not true , because the moon and star receive their light from the sun , neither do the sun vouchsafe they his company but when he list , and therefore like a mighty prince go alone , yet they acknowledge the moon as queen or viceroy . law they hold none , but only seven precept which they say be give they from their father Noe , not know Abraham or any other . aman s ’ first , to honour father and mother ; second , not to steal ; three not to commit adultery ; fourthly not to kill any thing live ; fiftly , not to eat any thing live ; sixth , not to cut their hair ; seventh , to go barefoot in their church . Theise they hold most strict , and by no mean will break they : but he that break one be punish with twenty stripe ; but for the great fault they will kill none , neither by a short death nor a long , only he be keep some time in prison with very litde meat , and have at the most not above twenty or five and twenty stripe . in the year 
 iti 
 they have 16 feast , and then they go to their church , where be picture in a broad table the sun , as we use to paint it , the face of a man with beam round about , not have any thing else in it . at their feast they spot their face in diverse part with saffron all yellow , and so walk up and down the street ; and this they do as a custom . they hold , there shall|be a resurrection , and all shall come to judgement , but the account shall|be most straight , insomuch that but one of ioooo shall|be receive to favour , and those shall live again in this world in great happiness : the rest shall|be torment . and because they will escape this judgement , when any man die , he and his wife be both burn together even to ash , and then they be throw into a river , and so disperse as though they have never be . if the wife will not burn with her dead husband , she be hold ever after as a whore . and by this mean they hope to escape the judgement to come . as for the soul , that go to the place from whence it come , but where the place be they know not . that the body shall not be make again they reason w‘ the philosopher , say , that of nothing nothing can be make ( not know that God make the whole world and their god the sun of nothing ) but behold the course of nature , that nothing be make but by a mean , as by the seed of a man be make another , and by corn cast into the ground there come up new corn : so , say they , man can be make except some part of he be leave , and therefore they burn the whole : for if he be bury in the earth , they say there be a small bone in the neck which will never be consume : or if he be eat by a beast , that bone will not consume , but of that bone will come another man ; and then the soul be restore again , he shall come into judgement , whereas now , the body be destroy , the soul shall not be judge : for their opinion be , that both body and soul must be unite together , as they have sin together , to receive 
 112 
 judgement ; and therefore the soul alone can . their seven precept which they keep so strict be not for any hope of reward they have after this life , but only that they may be bless in this world , for they think that he which break they shall have ill success in all his business . 
 they say , the three chief religion in the world be of the christian , Jew , and turk , and yet but one of they true : but be in doubt which be the true of the three , they will be of none : for they hold that all these three shall be judge , and but few of they which be of the true shall be save , the examination shall be so straight ; and therefore , as i have say before , to prevent this judgement , they burn their body to ash . they say , these three religion have too many precept to keep they all well , and therefore wonderful hard it will be to make account , because so few do observe all their religion aright . and thus pass the time for the space of three month in this sea voyage , [ two i . 311. ] we arrive at Venice the ten of June : and after i have see Padua , with other english man , i come the ordinary way over the Alps , by Augusta , Noremberg , and so for England ; where to the praise of God i safe arrive the nine of August 1595. 
 vi 
 “ 3 
 . 