the second voyage to Guinea set out by sir George bairn , sir John York , Thomas Lok , Anthony Hickman and Edward Castelin , in the year 1554. the captain whereof be m. John Lok . 
 s in the first voyage i have declare rather the order of the history , than the course of the navigation , whereof at that time i can have no perfect information : so in the description of this second voyage , my chief intent have be to show the course of the same , accord to the 
 observation and ordinary custom of the mariner , and as i receive it at the hand of a expert pilot , be one of the chief in this voyage , who also with his own 
 * 54 
 hand write a brief declaration of the same , as he find and try all thing , not by conjecture , but by the art of sail , and instrument pertain to the mariner faculty . not therefore assume to my self the commendation due unto other , neither so bold as in any part to change or otherwise dispose the order of this voyage so well •observed by art and experience , i have think good to set forth the same , in such sort and phrase of speech as be common use among they , and as 1 receive it of the say pilot , as i have say . take it therefore as follow . 
 in the year of our lord 1554 the eleven day of 
 October , we depart the river of Thames with three [ ii two . 15. ] goodly ship , the one call the Trinity , a ship of the burden of sevenscore ton , the other call the Bartholomew , a ship of the burden of ninety , the three be the 
 John Evangelist , a ship of seven score ton . with robertgainsh the say ship and two pinnace ( whereof the one be drown on the coast of England ) we go forward on n van ' our voyage , and stay at Dover fourteen day . we stay also at rye three or four day . Moreover last of all we touch at Dartmouth . 
 the first day of November at nine of the clock at night , depart from the coast of England , we set off the start , bear Southwest all that night in the sea , and the next day all day , and the next night after , until the three day of the say month about noon , make our way good , do run threescore league . 
 the 17 day in the morning we have sight of they he the lie of of Madera , which do rise to he that come in the Madera . Northnortheast part upright land in the west part of it , and very high : and to the southsoutheast a low long land , and a long point , with a saddle through the midst of it , stand in two and thirty degree : and in the west part , many spring of water run down from the mountain , and many white field like unto corn field , and some white house to the southeast part of it : and the top of the mountain show very ragged , 
 155 
 from Madera to the isk of palm . 
 grand Canaria . Forteventura . the hand of Gomera . 
 teneriffa . 
 snow . 
 the coast of Barbary . cape blank . 
 if you may see it , and in the north-east part there be a bite or bay as though it be a harbour : also in the say part , there be a rock a little distance from the shore , and over the say bite you shall see a great gap in the mountain . 
 the 19 day at twelve of the clock we have sight of the isle of palm and Teneriffa and the canary . the he of palm rise round , and lie southeast and northwest , and than northwest part be low . in the south be a round hill over the head land , and another round hill above that in the land . there be between the southeast part of they he of Madera and than northwest part of they he of palm seven and fifty league . this isle of palm lie in eight and twenty degree . and our course from Madera to the lie of palm be south and south and by west , so that we have sight of Teneriffa and of the canary . the southeast part of the lie of the palm , and the northnortheast of Teneriffa lie southeast and northwest , and between they be 20 league . Teneriffa and the great canary call grand Canaria , and the west part of Forteventura stand in seven and twenty degree and a half . Gomera be a fair island but very ragged , and lie westsouthwest off7 Teneriffa . and whosoever will come between they two hand must come south and by east , and in the south part of Gomera be a town and a good ride in the say part of the hand : and it stand in seven and twenty degree and three terce . Teneriffa be a high land , with a great high pike like a sugar loaf , and upon the say pike be snow throughout all the whole year . and by reason of that pike it may be know above all other hand , and there we be becalm the twenty day of November , from six of the clock in the morning , until four of the clock at afternoon . 
 the two and twenty day of November , under the Tropike of Cancer the sun go down west and by south . upon the coast of Barbary five and twenty league by north cape blank , at three league off the i56 
 main , there be fifteen fathom and good shelly ground , and sand among and no stream , and two small hand stand in two and twenty degree and a terce . 
 from Gomera to cape de las barbas be a hundred league , and our course be south and by east . the say cape stand in two and twenty and a half : and all that coast be flat , sixteen or seventeen fathom deep . Seven , or eight league off from the river deal the river del oro to cape de las barbas , there use many Spaniard qro-and Portugal to trade for fish , during the month of November : and all that coast be very low land . also we go from cape de las barbas Southsouthwest , and Southwest and by south , till we bring our self in twenty degree and a half , reckon our self seven league off : and there be the least shoal of cape blank . 
 then we go south until we bring our self in 13 degree , reckon our self five and twenty league off . and in 15 degree we do rear the cross - the crossier sier , and we may have rear they soon if we have or cnsse star it look for they . they be not right a cross in the month of November , by reason that the night be short there . nevertheless we have the sight of they the 29 day of the say month at night . 
 the first of December , be in 13 degree we set our course south and by east , until the four day of December at 12 of the clock the same day . than we be in nine degree and a terce , reckon our self 30 league off the shoal of the river call Rio Grande , Rio Grande . be westsouthwest off they , the which shoal be 30 league long . 
 the four of December we begin to set our course southeast , we be in six degree and a half . 
 the nine day of December we set our course east - [ ii two . 16. ] southeast : the fourteenth day of the say month we set our course east , we be in five degree and a half , reckon our self thirty and six league from the coast of Guinea . 
 157 
 the river of Sesto . 
 the river of Sesto . 
 Rio dulce . 
 cape de monte . 
 cave de las Palmas . 
 the nineteenth of the say month we set our course east and by north , reckon our self seventeen league distant from cape Mensurado , the say cape be eastnortheast of we , and the river of Sesto be east . 
 the one and twenty day of the say month , we fall with cape Mensurado to the southeast , about tfao league off . this cape may be easy know , by reason y* the rise of it be like a porpose-head . also towards the southeast there be three tree , whereof the eastermost tree be the high , and the middlemost be like a high stack , and the southermost like unto a gibbet : and upon the main be four or five high hill rise one after another like round hommock or hillock . and the southeast of the three tree , brandiernwise : and all the coast along be white sand . the say cape stand within a little in six degree . 
 the two and twenty of December we come to the river of Sesto , and remain there until the nine and twenty day of the say month . here we think it best to send before we the pinnace to the river dulce , call Rio dulce , that they may have the begin of the market before the come of the John Evangelist . 
 at the river of Sesto we have a ton of grain . this river stand in six degree , lack a terce . from the river of Sesto to Rio dulce be five and twenty league . Rio dulce stand in five degree and a half . the river of Sesto be easy to be know , by reason there be a ledge of rock on the southeast part of the road . and at the enter into the haven be five or six tree that bear no leaf . this be a good harbour , but very narrow at you entrance into the river . there be also a rock in the haven mouth right as you enter . and all that coast between cape de monte , and cape de las Palmas , lie southeast and by east , northwest and by west , be three league off the shore . and you shall have in some place rock two league off : and that , between the river of Sesto and cape de las Palmas . 
 158 
 I555 ’ between the river of Sesto and the river dulce be five and twenty league : and the high land that be between they both , be call Cakeado , be eight league from of the river of Sesto . and to the southeastward of it be Cakead < 1-a place call Shawgro , and a other call shyawe or shauo , where you may get fresh water . off this shyawe shauo . lie a ledge of rock : and to the southeastward lie a headland call Croke . between Cakeado and Croke Croke . be nine or ten league . to the southeastward off , be a harbour call S. Vincent : right over against s. 
 Vincent , be a rock under the water , two league and a * ' 
 half off the shore . to the southeastward of that rock you shall see a island about three or four league off : this island be not past a league off the shore . to the eastsoutheast of the island be a rock that lie above the water , and by that rock go in the river dulce , eriver which you shall know by the say river and rock . the ‘ northwest side of the haven be flat sand , and the southeast side thereof be like a island , and a bare plot without any tree , and so be it not in any other place . 
 in the road you shall ride in thirteen or fourteen fathom , good oaze and sand , be the mark of the road to bring the island and the north-east land together , and here we anchor the last of December . 
 the three day of Januarie , we come from the river dulce . 
 note that cape de las Palmas be a fair high land , cape de las but some low place thereof by the water side look like Palmas . red cliff with white strike like high way , a cable length a piece , and this be the east part of the cape . 
 this cape be the southermost land in all the coast of the coast of Guinea , and stand in four degree and a terce . Guinea . 
 the coast from cape de las Palmas to cape trepointe , or de tres puntas , be fair and clear without rock or other danger . 
 twenty and five league from cape de las Palmas , the land be high than in any place , until we come to cape trepointe : and about ten league before you r59 
 the town of Samma . 
 the pledge be sir John 
 York his nephew . 
 cape Corea . 
 the castle of Mina pertaining to the king of Portugal . 
 come to cape trepointe , the land rise still high and high , until you come to cape trepointe , also before you come to the say cape , after other 5 league to the northwest part of it , there be certain break ground , with two great rock , and within they in the bite of a bay , be a castle call Arra , pertain to the king of Portugal . you shall know it by the say rock that lie off it : for there be none such from cape de las Palmas to cape trepointe . this coast lie east and by north , west and by south . from cape de las Palmas to the say castle be fourscore and fifteen league . and the coast lie from the say castle to the westermost point of trepoynte , southeast and by south , northwest and by north . also the westermost point of trepoynte be a low land , lie half a mile out in the sea : and upon the innermost neck , to the landward , be a tuft of tree , and there we arrive the eleven day of January . 
 the 12 day of January we come to a town call Samma or Samva , be 8 league from cape trepointe towards Eastnortheast . between cape trepointe and the town of Samva be a great ledge of rock a great way out in the sea . we continue four day at that town , and the captain thereof will needs have a pledge a shore . but when they receive the pledge , they keep he still , and will traffic no more , but shoot off their ordinance at we . they have two or three piece of ordinance and no more . 
 the sixteenth day of the say month we make reckon to come to a place call cape Corea , where captain don John dwell , who man entertain we friendly . this cape Corea be four league eastward of the castle of Mina , otherwise call la mina , or Castello de mina , where we arrive the 18 day of the month . here we make sale of all our cloth , save two or three pack . 
 the 26 day of the same month we weigh anchor , and depart from thence to the Trini tie , which be seven league eastward of we , where she sell her ware . 
 160 
 then they of the Trinity will we to go eastward of that eight or nine league , to sell part of their ware , in a place call Perecow , and another place name Perecow Grande , be the eastermost place of both these , which you shall know by a great round hill near unto it , name Monte Rodondo , lie westward from it , and by the water side be many high palm tree . from hence do we set forth homeward the thirteenth day of February , 8c ply up along till we come within seven or eight league to cape trepointe . about eight of the clock the 15 day at afternoon , we do cast about to seaward : and beware of the currant , for they will deceive you sore . whosoever shall come from the coast of Mina homeward , let he be sure to make his way good west , until he reckon himself as far as cape de las Palmas , where the currant set always to the eastward . and within twenty league eastward of cape de las Palmas be a river call de los Potos , where you may have fresh water and ballast enough , and plenty of 
 ivory or elephant tooth . this river stand in four ivory . degree , and almost two terce . and when you reckon your self as far shoot as cape de las Palmas , be in a degree , or a degree and a half , you may go west , and palmas-west by north , until you come in three degree : and than you may go westnorthwest , and northwest and by west , until you come in five degree , and than northwest . and in six degree , we meet northerly wind , and great ruffle of tide . and as we can judge , the currant go to the northnorthwest . Furthermore between cape de monte , and cape Verde , go great currant , which deceive many man . currant . 
 the 22 day of April , we be in 8 degree and two terce : and so we run to the northwest , have the wind at Northeast and Eastnortheast , and sometime at east , until we be at 18 degree and a terce , which be on May day . and so from 18 and two terce , we have the wind at east and Eastnortheast , and sometime at eastsoutheast : and then we reckon the island of 
 vi 161 l 
 Perecow . Perecow grand . 
 monte Rodondo . 
 the currant . 
 from Mina homeward . 
 Rio de los Potos . 
 where they lose the sight oj the north star . 
 how the compass do vary . 
 [ ii two . 18. ] 
 cape verde eastsoutheast of we , we judge our self to be 48 league off . and in 20 and 21 degree , we have the wind more easterly to the southward then before . and so we run to the northwest and northnorthwest , and sometime north and by west and north , until we come into 31 degree , where we reckon our self a hundred and fourscore league Southwest and by south of the island de los flores , and there we meet with the wind at southsoutheast , and set our course Northeast . 
 in 23 degree we have the wind at the south and Southwest , and then we set our course Northnortheast , and so we run to 40 degree , and then we set our course Northeast , the wind be at the southwest , and have the isle de flores east of we , and 17 league off . 
 in the 41 degree we meet with the wind at Northeast , and so we run northwestward , than we meet with the wind westnorthwest , and at the west within 6 league , run towards the northwest , and then we cast about , and lie Northeast , until we come in 42 degree , where we set our course Eastnortheast , judge the he of Corvo south and by west of we , and six and thirty league distant from we . 
 a remembrance , that the 21 day of may we commune with John Ralph , and he think it best to go Northeast , and judge himself 25 league eastward to the isle de flores , and in 39 degree and a half . 
 note , that on the four day of September , under nine degree , we lose the sight of the north star . 
 note also , that in 45 degree , the compass be vary 8 degree to the west . 
 item , in 40 degree the compass do vary 15 degree in the whole . 
 item , in 30 degree and a half , the compass be vary 5 degree to the west . 
 be it also in memory that two or three day before we come to cape de 3 punta , the pinnace go alongst the shore , think to sell some of our ware , and so j 1&2 
 * 555-we come to anchor three or four league west and by south of the cape the 3 punta , where we leave the Trini tie . 
 then our pinnace come aboard with all our man , the pinnace also take in more ware . they tell i moreover that they will go to a place where the primrose be , and have receive much gold at the first the primrose . voyage to these party , and tell i furthermore that it be a good place : but i fear a brigantine that be then upon the coast , do weigh and follow they , and leave the Trinity about four league off from we , and there we ride against that town four day : so that Martine by his own desire , and assent of some of the commissioner that be in the pinnace , go a shore to the town , and there John Berin go to traffic from we , be three mile off traffic at a other town . 
 the town be call Samma or Samva , for Samma and to ™ ™ of Sammaterra , be the name of the two first town , where samma-we do traffic for gold , to the north-east of cape the 3 gold . puntas . 
 hitherto continue the course of the voyage , as it be describe by the say pilot now therefore i will speak somewhat of the country and people , and of such thing as be bring from thence , r 
 they bring from thence at the last voyage four golifonre hundred pound weight and odd of gold , of two and twenty carrat and one grain in fineness : also six and * ' thirty butt of grain , and about two hundred and fifty grain . elephant tooth of all quantity . of these i see and elephant measure some of nine span in length , as they be crooked . some of they be as big as a man thigh above the knee , and weigh about fourscore and ten pound weight a piece . they say that some one have be see of a hundred and five and twenty pound weight . other there be which they call the tooth of calf , of one or two or three year , whereof some be a foot and a half , some two foot , and some 3 or moor , accord to you age of the beast . Theise great tooth or 
 163 
 tusk grow in the upper jaw downward , and not in the nether jaw upward , wherein the painter and arras worker be deceive . at this last voyage be bring the head of from Guinea the head of a elephant , of such huge a elephant . bigness , that only the bone or cranew thereof , beside the nether jaw and great tusk , weigh about two hundred weight , and be as much as i can well lift from the ground : insomuch that consider also herewith the weight of two such great tooth , the nether jaw with the less tooth , the tongue , the great hang ear , the big and long snout or troonke , with all the flesh , brain , and skin , with all other part belong to the whole head , in my judgement it can weigh little less than five hundred weight . this head diverse have see in and ir Andrew the house of the worthy merchant sir Andrew Judde , jf^dde . where also i see it , and behold it , not only with my 
 plation of bodily eye , but much more with the eye of my mind 
 god work , and spirit , consider by the work , the cunning and wisdom of the workemaister : without which consideration , the sight of such strange and wonderful thing may rather seem curiosity , then profitable contemplation . 
 the descrip - the elephant ( which some call a Oliphant ) be the non andpn - big of all four footed beast , his foreleg be long ‘ than his hinder , he have ankle in the low part of his hinder leg , and five toe on his foot undivided , his snout or trunk be so long , and in such form , that it be to he in the stead of a hand : for he neither eat nor drink but by bring his trunk to his mouth , therewith he help up his master or keeper , therewith he overthrow tree . beside his two great tusk , he have on every side of his mouth four tooth , wherewith he eat and grind his meat : either of these tooth be almost a span in length , as they grow along in the jaw , and be about two inch in height , and almost as much in thickness . the tusk of the male be great than of the female : his tongue be very little , and so far in his mouth , that it can be see : of all beast they be most gentle and tractable , for by many sundry way 164 
 they be teach , and do understand : insomuch that 
 they learn to do due honour to a king , and be of quick sense and sharpness of wit . when the male have once season the female , he never after touch she . the male elephant live two hundred year , or at the least one hundred and twenty : the female almost as long , but the flower of their age be but threescore year , as some write . they can suffer winter or cold : they love river , and will often go into they up to the snout , wherewith they blow and snuff , and play in the water : but swim they can , for the weight of their body . Pliny and Soline write , that they use none adultery . if they happen to meet with a man in wilderness be out of the way , gentle they will go before he , and bring he into the plain way . join in battle , they have no small respect unto they that be wound : for they bring they that be hurt or weary into the middle of the army to be defend : they be make tame by drink the juise of barley . they have debate continual war against dragon , which desire their between fa blood , because it be very cold : and therefore the dragon fa^agin lie await as the elephant pass by , wind his tail ( be of exceed length ) about the hinder leg of the elephant , and so stay he , thrust his head into his trunk and exhaust his breath , or else bite he in the ear , whereunto he can reach with his trunk , and when the elephant wax faint , he fall down on [ H. two . 19 ] the serpent , be now full of blood , and with the poise of his body break he : so that his own blood with the blood of the elephant run out of he mingle together , which be cold , be congeal into that substance which the apothecary call sanguis draconis , sanguis dram - ( that be ) dragon blood , otherwise call Cinnabaris , conis-although there be a other kind of Cinnabaris , come - Cinnabaris . mon call cinnabar or vermilion , which the painter use in certain colour . 
 they be also of three kind , as of the marsh , the three kind plain , and the mountain , no less differ in con - °f^bant$ . 
 165 
 dition . Philostratus write , that as much as the elephant of Libya in bigness pass the horse of Nysea , so much do the elephant of India exceed they of Libya : for the elephant of India , some have be see of the height of nine cubit : the other do so great fear these , that they dare not abide the sight of they . of the indian elephant only the male have tusk , but of they of Ethiopia and Libya both kind be tusked : they be of diverse height , as of twelve , thirteen , and fourteen dodrant , every dodrant be a measure of nine inch . some write that a elephant be big than three wild ox or buff . they of India be black , or of the colour of a mouse , but they of Ethiope or Guinea be brown : the hide or skin of they all be very hard , and without hair or bristle : their ear be two dodrant broad , and their eye very little . our man see one drink at a river in Guinea , as they sail into the land . 
 of other property and condition of the elephant , as of their marvelous docility , of their fight and use in the war , of their generation and chastity , when they be first see in the theater and triumph of the roman , how they be take and tame , and when they cast their tusk , with the use of the same in medicine , who so desire to know , let he read Pliny , in the eight book of his natural history . he also write in his twelve book , that in old time they make many goodly work of ivory or elephant tooth : as table , tressel , post of house , rail , lattess for window , image of their god , and diverse other thing of ivory , both colour and uncolour , and intermix with sundry kind of precious wood , as at this day be make certain chair , lute , and virginal . they have such plenty thereof in old time , that ( as far as i remember ) Josephus write , that one of the gate of Jerusalem be call porta Eburnea , ( that be ) the ivory gate . the whiteness thereof be so much esteem , that it be think to represent the natural fairness of man skin : insomuch that such as 166 
 1555-went about to set forth ( or rather corrupt ) natural beauty with colour and paint , be reprove by this proverb , Ebur atramento candefacere , that be , to make ivory white with ink . the poet also describe the fair neck of beautiful virgin , call they Eburnea colla , that be , ivory neck . and to have say thus much of elephant and ivory , it may suffice . 
 now therefore i will speak somewhat of the people the people of and their manner , and manner of live , with a other brief description of Africa also . it be to be understand , that the people which now inhabit the region of the coast of Guinea , and the middle part of Africa , as Libya the inner , and Nubia , with diverse other great and large region about the same , be in old time call TEthiopes and Nigritae , which we now call moor , Moorens , or negro , a people of beastly live , without a god , law , religion , or common wealth , and so scorch and vex with the heat of the sun , that in many place they curse it when it rise . of the region and people about the inner Libya ( call Libya interior ) gemma Phrysius Libyainterior . write thus . 
 Libya interior be very large and desolate , in the which be many horrible wilderness and mountain , replenish with diverse kind of wild and monstrous beast and serpent . first from Mauritania or Barbary towards the south be Getulia , a rough and savage region , who in - GetuSa . habitant be wild and wander people . after these follow the people call Melanogetuli and Pharusii , which wander in the wilderness , carry with they great gourd of water . the ethiopian call Nigritae occupy je mope . a great part of Africa , and be extend to the west ocean . southward also they reach to the river Nigritis , the river who nature agree with the river of Nilus , forasmuch nigritistr as it be increase and diminish at the same time , and e ” sa ' bring forth the like beast as the crocodile . by reason whereof , i think this to be the same river which the Portugal call Senega : for this river be also of the same strange nature . it be furthermore marvelous and very strange thing . 
 167 
 that be say of this river : and this be , that on the one side thereof , the inhabitant be of high stature and black , and on the other side , of brown or tawny colour , and low stature , which thing also our man confirm to be true . 
 Garamantes . there be also other people of Libya call Garamantes , who woman be common : for they contract no matrimony , neither have respect to chastity . after these people of be the nation of the people call Pyrei , Sathiodaphnitae , Odrangi , Mimaces , Lynxamatae , Dolopes , Aganginae , Leuci Ethiope , Xilicei Ethiope , Calcei Ethiope , and Nubi . Theise have the same situation in Ptolome that they now give to the kingdom of Nubia . here be [ ii two . 20. ] certain Christians under the dominion of the great prester John. emperor of . / Ethiopia , call Prester John. from these towards the west be a great nation of people call Aphricerones , who region ( as far as may be gather Regnum by conjecture ) be the same that be now call regnum 
 orguene . orguene , confine upon the east part of Guinea . 
 from hence westward , and somewhat towards the north , Gambra . be the kingdom of Gambra and Budomel , not far from the river of Senega . and from hence towards the inland region , and along by the sea coast , be the region Guinea . of Ginoia or Guinea , which we common call ginnee . 
 on the Westside of these region towards the ocean , be Cabo Verde . the cape or point call Cabo verde , or caput viride , the Portugal ( that be ) the green cape , to the which the Portugal Kf'9 ” i0 first direct their course when they sail to America , or ‘ the land of Brasile . then depart from hence , they turn to the right hand towards the quarter of the wind call Garbino , which be between the west and the south . but to speak somewhat more of . / Ethiopia : although there be many nation of people so name , yet Aethiopia . be Aethiopia chief divide into two part , whereof the one be call Aethiopia under Aegypt , a great and rich the island of region . to this pertain the island Meroe , embrace round about with the stream of the river Nilus . in this island woman reign in old time . Josephus write , 168 
 that it be sometime call Sabea : and that the queen the queen of Saba come from thence to Jerusalem , to hear the wisdom of Salomon . from hence towards the east reign the say christian emperor Prester John , who prester John some call papa Johannes , and other say that he be call Pean Juan ( that be ) great John , who empire reach it far beyond Nilus , and be extend to the coast of the red sea and indian sea . the middle of the region be almost in 66. degree of longitude , and 12. degree of latitude . about this region inhabit the people call people of the clodi , Risophagi , Babylonii , Axiunitae , Molili , and molibse . after these be the region call Troglodytica , ' who inhabitant dwell in cave and den : for these be their house , and the flesh of serpent their meat , as write Pliny , and Diodorus Siculus . they have no speech , but rather a grin and chatter . there be also people without head , call Blemines , have their people without eye and mouth in their breast . likewise Strucophagi , and naked Ganphasantes : satyr also , which have nothing of man but only shape . Moreover oripei , great hunter . Mennones also , and the region of Smyrnophora , which bring forth myrrh . after these be the region of myrrh . Azania , in the which many elephant be find . a great Alania . part of the other region of Africa that be beyond the Aequinoctiali line , be now ascribe to the kingdom of melinde , who inhabitant be accustom to traffic Regnum with the nation of Arabia , and their king be join in meltnde . friendship with the king of Portugal , and pay tribute to prester John. 
 the other Ethiope , call Ethiopia interior ( that be ) Aethiopia the inner Ethiope , be not yet know for the greatness tnterwr-thereof , but only by the sea coast : yet be it describe in this manner . first from the Aequinoctiali towards the south , be a great region of aethiopian , which bring forth white elephant , tiger , and the beast call white rhinocerote . also a region that bring forth plenty elephant . of cynamome , lie between the branch of Nilus . 
 also the kingdom of Habech or Habasia , a region of Habasia . 
 169 
 montes luna . 
 gazatia . 
 Cap. bona spei . 
 Africa without cold . 
 the winter of Africa . 
 flame of fire and noise in the air . 
 the middle region of the air be cold . 
 christian man , lie both on this side and beyond Nilus . here be also the aethiopian , call Ichthiophagi ( that be ) such as live only by fish , and be sometime subdue by the war of great Alexander . Furthermore the aethiopian call Rhapsii , and anthropophagi , y‘ be accustom to eat man flesh , inhabit the region near unto the mountain call Montes Lunae ( that be ) the mountain of the moon . Gazatia be under the Tropike of Capricorn . after this follow the front of Africa , the cape of buena Speranza , or caput bonae spei , that be , the cape of good hope , by the which they pass that sail from Lisbon to Calicut . but by what name the cape and gulf be call , forasmuch as the same be in every globe and card , it be here superfluous to rehearse they . 
 some write that Africa be so name by the grecian , because it be without cold . for the greek letter Alpha or A signify privation , void , or without : and phrice signify cold . for in deed although in the stead of winter they have a cloudy and tempestuous season , yet be it not cold , but rather smother hot , with hot shower of rain also , and somewhere such scorch wind , that what by one mean and other , they seem at certain time to live as it be in furnace , and in manner already half way in purgatory or hell . gemma Phrisius write , that in certain part of Africa , as in Atlas the great , the air in the night season be see shine , with many strange fire and flame rise in manner as high as the moon : and that in the element be sometime hear as it be the sound of pipe , trumpet and drum : which noise may perhaps be cause by the vehement and sundry motion of such fiery exhalation in the air , as we see the like in many experience wrought by fire , air and wind . the hollowness also , and diverse reflection and break of the cloud may be great cause hereof , beside the vehement cold of the middle region of the air , whereby the say fiery exhalation , ascend thither , be sudden strike back with 17° 
 great force : for even common and daily experience teach we , by the whiss of a burn torch , what noise fire make in the air , and much more where it strive when it be enclose with air , as appear in [ ii two . 21. ] gun , and as the like be see in only air enclose , as strtfe 9f in organ pipe , and such other instrument that go by ment ' wind . for wind ( as say the philosopher ) be none wind . other then air vehement move , as we see in a pair of bellows , and such other . 
 some of our man of good credit that be in this last voyage to Guinea , affirm earnest that in the night season they feel a sensible heat to come from the beam the heat of of the moon . the which thing , although it be strange fa moon . and insensible to we that inhabit cold region , yet do it stand with good reason that it may so be , forasmuch as the nature of star and planet ( as write Pliny ) con - the nature of sist of fire , and contain in it a spirit of life , which the starres-cannot be without heat . 
 and , that the moon give heat upon the earth the prophet David seem to confirm in his 121. psalm , where speak of such man as be defend from evil by God protection , he say thus : per diem sol non exuret te , nec luna per noctem . that be to say , in the day the sun shall not burn thou , nor the moon by night . 
 they say furthermore , that in certain place of the spout of sea they see certain stream of water , which they call teattrfdkng spout , fall out of the air into the sea , and that some of these be as big as the great pillar of church : insomuch that sometime they fall into ship , and put they in great danger of drown . some fain that these shall be the cataract of heaven , which be cataract oj all open at Noes flood . but i think they rather to aven . be such fluxion and eruption as Aristotle in his book de mundo say , to chance in the sea . for speak of such strange thing as be see often time in the sea , he write thus . oftentimes also even in the sea be see evaporation of fire , and such eruption and break - 
 171 
 ing forth of spring , that the mouth of river be open . whirlpool , and fluxion be cause of such vthement other vehement motion , not only in the midst of the 
 motums in the sea > but also in creek and strait . at certain time ea‘ also , a great quantity of water be sudden lift up and carry about with the moon , etc by which word of Aristotle it do appear that such water be lift up in one place at one time , and sudden fall down in a other place at another time . and hereunto perhaps pertain it that Richard Chanceller tell i that he a strange hear Sebastian Cabot report , that ( as far as i remember ) either about the coast of Brasile or Rio de plata , his ship or pinnace be sudden lift from the sea , the power of anj cast upon land , i wot not how far . the which nature . thing , and such other like wonderful and strange work 
 of nature while i consider , and call to remembrance the narrowness of man understanding and knowledge , in comparison of her mighty power , i can but cease to marvel and confess with Pliny , that nothing be to her impossible , the least part of who power be not yet know to man . many thing more our man see and consider in this voyage , worthy to be note , whereof i have think good to put some in memory , that the reader may aswell take pleasure in the variety of thing , as knowledge of the history . among other thing therefore , touch the manner and nature of the people , this may seem strange , that their prince and noble man they raze use to pounce and raze their skin with pretty knot in thetr skin . diverse form , as it be branch damask , think that 
 to be a decent ornament . and albeit they go in manner all naked , yet be many of they , and especial their woman , tine jewel , in manner lade with collar , bracelet , hoop , and chain , either of gold , copper , or ivory . i my self have one a bracelet . of their bracelet of ivory , weigh two pound and six 
 ounce of Troy weight , which make eight and thirty ounce : this one of their woman do wear upon her arm . it be make of one whole piece of the big part of the tooth , turn and somewhat carve , with a hole in 
 172 
 the midst , wherein they put their hand to wear it on their arm . some have on every arm one , and as many on their leg , wherewith some of they be so gall , that although they be in manner make lame thereby , yet will they by no mean leave they off . some wear also on their leg great shackle of bright copper , which shackle . they think to be no less comely . they wear also collar , bracelet , garland , and girdle , of certain blue stone like bead . likewise some of their woman wear on their bare arm certain foresleeve make of the plate of beat gold . on their finger also they wear ring , make of golden wire , with a knot or wreath , like ring . unto that which child make in a ring of a rush . among other thing of gold that our man buy of they for exchange of their ware , be certain dog - dogschaine chain and collar . of glide . 
 they be very wary people in their bargain , and will not lose one spark of gold of any value , use weight and measure , and be very circumspect in occupy the same . they that shall have to do with they , must use they gentle : for they will not traffic or bring in any ware if they be evil use . at the first voyage that our man have into these party , it so chance , that at their departure from the first place where they do traffic , one of they either steal a musk cat , or a musk cat . take she away by force , not mistrust that that shall have hinder their bargain in another place whither they intend to go . but for all the haste they can make with full sail , the fame of their misusage so prevent they , that the people of that place also , offend thereby , will bring in no ware : insomuch that they be enforce either to restore the cat , or pay for she [ ii two . 22. ] at their price , before they can traffic there . 
 their house be make of four post or tree , and their house . cover with bough . 
 their common feed be of root , and such fish as theirfeed . they take , whereof they have great plenty . 
 there be also such fly fish as be see in the fly fish . 
 * 73 
 * 555 - sea of the west Indies . our man salt of their fish , hope to provide store thereof : but they will take no salt , and must therefore be eat forthwith as some say . howbeit other affirm , that if they be salt immediady after they be take , they will last uncor - 
 a strange thing . rupt ten or twelve day . but this be more strange , that part of such flesh as they carry with they out of England , which putrify there , become sweet again at their return to the clime of temperate region . 
 their bread . they use also a strange make of bread , in this manner . they grind between two stone with their hand as much corn as they think may suffice their family , and when they have thus bring it to flower , they put thereto a certain quantity of water , and make thereof very thin dough , which they stick upon some post of their house , where it be bake by the heat of the sun : so that when the master of the house or any of his family will eat thereof they take it down and eat it . 
 their wheat . they have very fair wheat , the ear whereof be two handful in length , and as big as a great bulrush , and almost four inch about where it be big . the stem or straw seem to be almost as big as the iide finger of a man hand , or iide less . the grain of this wheat be as big as our peason , round also , and very white , and somewhat shine , like pearl that have lose their colour . almost all the substance of they turn into flower , and make iide bran or none . i tell in one ear two hundred and threescore grain . the ear be enclose in three blade long than it self , and of two inch broad a piece . and by this fruitfulness 
 the sun . the sun seem pardy to recompense such grief and molestation as they otherwise receive by the fervent heat thereof . it be doubdesse a worthy contemplation to consider the contrary effect of the sun : or rather the contrary passion of such thing as receive the influence of his beam , either to their hurt or benefit . their 
 their drink . drink be either water , or the juise that drop from 174 
 1555-the cut branch of the barren date tree , call Palmitos . 
 for either they hang great gourd at the say branch every evening , and let they so hang all night , or else they set they on the ground under the tree , that the drop may fall therein . they say that this kind of drink be in taste much like unto whey , but somewhat sweet , and more pleasant . they cut the branch every evening , because they be sear up in the day by the heat of the sun . they have also great bean as big as chestnut , and very hard , with a shell in the stead of a husk . 
 many thing more may be say of the manner of the people , and of the wonder and monstrous thing that be engender in Africa . but it shall suffice to have say thus much of such thing as our man partly see , and partly bring with they . 
 and whereas before speak of the fruit of grain , grain i describe the same to have hole by the side ( as in deed it have , as it be bring hither ) yet be i afterward inform , that those hole be make to put string or twig through the fruit , thereby to hang they up to dry at the sun . they grow not past a foot and a half , or two foot from the ground , and be as red as blood when they be gather . the grain themselves be call of the physician Grana Paradisi . 
 at their come home the keel of their ship ^ms that be marvellous overgrow with certain shell of to ship . two inch length and more , as thick as they can stand , and of such bigness that a man may put his thumb in the mouth of they . they certain affirm that in these there grow a certain slimy substance , which at the length slip out of the shell and fall in the sea , become those fowl which we call barnacle . the like shell have be see in barnacle . ship return from Iseland , but these shell be not past half a inch in length . of the other that come from Guinea , i see the primerose lie in the dock , and in manner cover with the say shell , which in my 
 175 
 the death of our man . 
 five black moor bring into England . [ ii two . 23. ] cold may be better abiden than heat . 
 judgement shall great hinder she sail . their ship be also in many place eat with the worm call Bromas or Bissas , whereof mention be make in the decade . Theise creep between the plank , which they eat through in many place . 
 among other thing that chance to they in this voyage , this be worthy to be note , that whereas they sail thither in seven week , they can return in no less space than twenty week . the cause whereof they say to be this : that about the coast of Cabo Verde the wind be ever at the east , by reason whereof they be enforce to sail far out of their course into the main ocean , to find the wind at the west to bring they home . there die of our man at this last voyage about twenty and four , whereof many die at their return into the clime of the cold region , as between the island of azore and England . they bring with they certain black slave , whereof some be tall and strong man , and can well agree with our meat and drink . the cold and moist air do somewhat offend they . yet doubtless man that be bear in hot region may better abide cold , than man that be bear in cold region may abide heat , forasmuch as vehement heat resolve the radical moisture of man body , as cold constrain and preserve the same . 
 this be also to be consider as a secret work of nature , that throughout all Africa , under the equinoctial line , and near about the same on both side , the region be extreme hot , and the people very black . whereas p such region of the west Indies as be under the same line be very temperate , and the people neither black , nor with curlde and short wool on their head , as they of Africa have , but of the colour of a olive , with long and black hair on their head : the cause of which variety be declare in diverse place in the decade . 
 it be also worthy to be note that some of they that be at this voyage tell i : that be , that they 176 
 reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv 
 w library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 05 : 12 , subject to 
 overtake the course of the sun , so that they have it north from they at noon , the 14. day of march .. and to have say thus much of these voyage , it may suffice . 
 . 