a letter of m. John Lok to the worshipful company of merchant adventurer for guinie , write 1561 , show reason for his not proceed in a voyage then intend to the foresay country . 
 orshipfull sir ; since the arrival of m. Pet and buttoil monjoy ( as i understand ) for the voyage it be conclude that the minion shall proceed on her voyage , if within 20 day she may be repair of those hurt she have receive by the last storm : or in the month of January 
 also , if the wind will serve therefore . wherefore for that your worship shall not be ignorant of my determine purpose in the same , with the reason that have persuade i thereunto ; i have think good to advertise you thereof , trust that your worship will weigh they , as i upright and plain mean they . and not for any fear or discouragement that i have of my self by the rage of the storm of the sea , for that ( i thank the lord ) these have not be the first that i have abiden , neither trust i they shall the last . First the state of the ship , in which , though i think not but m. Pet can do more for she strengthen then i can conceive , yet for all that , it will neither mend her condition , nor yet make she so staunch that any cabin in she shall staunch for man to lie dry in : the which sore , what a weaken it will be to the poor man after their labour , that they neither can have a shift of apparel dry , nor yet a dry place to rest in , i refer to your discretion . for though that at Harwich she be both bind and caulk as much as may be , both within and without , yet for all that she leave not , afore this flaw , in other weather , be stress , to open those seam , and become in the state she be before ; i mean , in wet her man : notwithstanding her new work . and my judgement , with that little experience 255 
 i have have , lead i to think that the ship who water work and footing be spend and rot can be but leak for man . next , the unseasonable time of the year which be now present . and how only by mean of the unseasonable time in the return from the voyage home , many thereby have decay , to the great misery and calamity of the rest , and also to the great slander of the voyage ( which i much respect ) the last and other voyage have declare . and what it be to make the voyage in unseasonable time , that have the second voyage also declare . wherefore weigh and foresee this ( as i may well term it ) calamity and unevitable danger of man , and that by man she must be bring home again ( except that god will show a extraordinary miracle ) i purpose not nor dare i venture with a safe conscience to tempt God herein . again , forsomuch as she be alone , and have so little help of boat or pinnace in her trade , and also for she water , where a long time of force must be spend , my go , to the accomplishment of your expectation , will be to small effect for this time , because i shall want both vessel and man to accomplish it . and i will not glad so spend my time and travel , to my great charge and pain , and after , for not fall out accord , to lose both pot and water , as the proverb be . as for the primrose , if she be there , her trade will be end or ever we come there , so that she of force , by want of provision , must return : yea , though we shall carry with we a supply for she , yet be the meeting of her doubtful , and though we meet she , yet will the man not tarry , as no reason be they shall : howbeit my opinion of she be that she be put into Ireland . the flowerdeluce be in Milford . thus for that your worship may understand the whole cause why i do not proceed , i have trouble you at this time with this my long letter . And , as God be my judge , not for fear of the Portugal , which there we shall meet ( and yet alone without aid ) as here be a ship which be in Lisbon , who man say that there be in a readiness ( only to meet we ) four great ship , of 2s6 
 the which one be account 700 ton , and other pinnace : yet not for fear of they , nor rage of the sea ( who rage God be above to rule ) but only for the premise : the sequel whereof must by reason turn to a great [ ii two . 54. ] misery to the man : the which i for my part ( though it may turn i to as much gain as the whole come to ) yet will i not be so torment , as the sight thereof will be a corrosive to my heart , and the more , because foresee the same , i shall be so lewd , as yield , to have run into the danger thereof , and therefore i have absolute determine with my self not to go this voyage . howbeit if in a seasonable time of the year i have but one ship sufficient , though much less by the half , i will not refuse ( as trial be make thereof shall appear ) or if i have ability of my self to venture so much , it shall well be see . and this i speak to give you to understand that i refuse not this for fear : if you purpose to proceed herein , send some one who you please ; to who i will not only deliver the article which i have receive , but also will give some particular note which i have note in the affair which you have commit unto i , with the best help and counsel i can . thus the live God keep your worship all . Bristol this 11 of December 1561. 
 your worship to command to his power John Lok . 
 . 