the success of this voyage in part appear [ U. two . 56. ] by certain brief relation extract out of the second voyage of sir John Hawkins to the west Indies , make in the say year 1564. which i think good to set down for want of further instruction , which hitherto i can not by any mean come by , albeit i have use all possible endeavour for the obtain of the same : take they therefore in the mean season as follow . 
 after John Hawkins , with the Jesus of Lubeck a ship of 700. ton , and the Salomon , a ship of 7 score , the tiger a bark of 50 , and the swallow of 30 ton , be all well furnish with man to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordi 
 nance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , depart out of Plymouth the 18 day of October in the year of our lord 1564. with a prosperous wind : at which depart , in cut the foresail , a marvellous misfortune happen to one of the officer in the ship , who by the pully of the sheet be slay out of hand be a sorrowful beginning to they all . and after their set out 10 league to the sea , he meet the same day with the minion a ship of the queen majesty , the minion whereof be captain David carlet , and also her consort Qu* ™ - the John baptist of London be bind to Guinea likewise , who hail one the other after the custom of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which do , the minion depart from he to seek her other consort the Merline of London , which be a stern out of sight , leave in m. Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . 
 thus sail forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 of the same month , at that time a 263 
 ne fire and sink of the Merline bind fin - guinea . 
 great storm arise , the wind be at Northeast about 9 of the clock at night , and continue so 23 hour together , in which storm m. Hawkins lose the company of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace call the swallow , the other 3 ship be sore beat with the storm . the 23 day the swallow , to his not small rejoice , come to he again in the night 10 league to the northward of cape Finister , have put roomer and not be able to double the cape , in that there rise a contrary wind at Southwest . the 25 the wind continue contrary , he put into a place in Galicia call ferol , where he remain 5 day and appoint all the master of his ship a order for the keep of good company . 
 the 26 day the minion come in also where he be , for the rejoice whereof he give they certain piece of ordinance after the courtesy of the sea for their welcome , but the minion man have no mirth because of their consort the Merline , who at their departure from m. Hawkins upon the coast of England , they go to seek , and have meet with she , keep company two day together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of the gunner ) the powder in the gunner room be set on fire , which with the first blast strike out her poop , and therewithal ! lose 3 man , beside many sore burn ( which escape by the brigandine be at her stern ) and immediate to the great loss of the owner , and most horrible sight of the beholder , she sink before their eye . the 30 day of the month m. Hawkins with his consort and company of the minion have now both the brigandine at her stern , weigh anchor , and set sail on their voyage have a prosperous wind thereunto . the 4 of November they have sight of the hand of Madera , and the 6 day of Tenerifla , which they think to have be the canary , in that they suppose themselves to have be to the eastward of Tenerifla but be not : but the minion be 3 or 4 league a head of we keep on her course to Tenerifla , 264 
 have better sight thereof then the other have , and by that mean they part company . 
 the aforesaid sir John Hawkins pass on his voyage by Cavo Verde , and Sierra Leona , and afterward cross over the main ocean come to the town of bur-boroata upon the coast of terra firma in the west Indies , have further information of the evil success of this guinean voyage , as in the same hereafter be verbatim mention . 
 the 29 of April , we be at anchor without the road , a french ship call the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bon temps come in , who salute we after the manner of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance , and we resalute he with the like again : with who have communication , he declare that he have be at the Mina in Guinea , and be beat off by the Portugal galley , and enforce to come thither to make sale of such ware as he have : and further that the like be happen unto the minion : also , that captain David carlet , and a merchant , with a dozen mariner be betray by the negro at their first arrival thither , remain prisoner with the Portugal , beside other misadventure of the loss of their man happen through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubt of bring home the to understand . 
 ship : which be most sorrowful for we 
 . 