the ambassage of m. Edmund Hogan , one of the swear esquire of her majesty person , from her highness to mulai Abdelmelech emperor of Morocco , and king of fe and sus : in the year 1577 , write by himself . 
 Edmund Hogan be appoint ambassador from the queen majesty to the above name emperor and king mulai Abdelmelech , depart with my company and servant from London the two and twenty day of April 1577 , be embark in the good ship call 
 the Gallion of London , and arrive in Azafi a port of Barbary the one and twenty day of May next follow . immediate i send leonell Edgerton a shore with my letter direct to John Williams and John Bampton , who dispatch a Trottero to Morocco to know the king pleasure for my repair to the court , which letter come to their hand on the Thursday night . 
 they with all speed give the king understanding of it , who be glad thereof speed the next day certain captain with soldier and tent , with other provision to Azafi : so that upon Whitsunday at night the say captain with John Bampton , Robert wash-borne , and Robert lion , and the king officer come late to Azafi . 
 in the mean time i remain a board , and cause some of the good to be discharge for lightning of the ship , and i write in my letter that i will not land , till i know the king pleasure . 
 the 22 day be Saturday , the make-speed arrive in the road about two of the clock in the afternoon . 
 the 27 day , be Whitsunday , come aboard the Gallion John Bampton , and other , give i to understand how much the king rejoice of my safe 285 
 m. Hogan his arrival at Azafi in Barbary . May . 
 in Barbary they have no inn but they lodge in open field where they can find water . 
 arrival , come from the queen majesty , and how that for my safe conduct to the court he have send four captain and a hundred soldier well appoint , with a horse furnish which he use himself to ride on with all other furniture accord : they wish i also to come on land in the best order i can , as well for my self as my man , which i do , have to the number of ten man , whereof three be trumpeter . 
 the ship be four appoint themselves in the best order they can for the best show , and shoot off all their ordinance to the value of twenty mark in powder . 
 at my come a shore , i find all the soldier well appoint on horseback , the captain and the governor of the town stand as near the water side as they can , with a jennet of the king , and receive i from the boat declare how glad his majesty be of my safe arrival , come from the queen majesty my mistress , and that he have send they to attend upon i , it be his pleasure that i shall tarry there on shore five or six day for my refresh . 
 so be mount upon the jennet , they conduct i through the town into a fair field upon the seaside where be a tent provide for i , and all the ground spread with turquoise carpet , and the castle discharge a peal of ordinance , and all thing necessary be bring into my tent , where i both take my table and lodging , and have other convenient tent for my servant . 
 the soldier environ the tent , and watch about we day and night as long as i lie there , although i seek my speedy dispatch . 
 on the Wednesday towards night , i take my horse and travel ten mile to the first place of water that we can find , and there pitch our tent till the next morning , and so travel till ten of the clock , 286 
 and then pitch our tent till four , and so travel as long as day light will suffer about 26 mile that day . 
 the next day be Friday i travel in like order but eight and twenty mile at the most , and by a river be about six mile within sight of the city of Morocco we pitch our tent . 
 immediate after come all our english merchant , and the french on horseback to meet i , and before night there come a alcay from the king with fifty man , and diverse mule lade with victuali and banquet , for my supper , declare unto i how glad the king show himself to hear of the queen majesty , and that his pleasure be i shall be receive into his country as never any Christian the like : and desire to know what time the next day i will come into his city , because he will that all the Christians as also his nobility shall meet i , and will John Bampton to be with he early in the morning , which he do . 
 about seven of the clock be accompany with the french and english merchant , and a great number of soldier , i pass towards the city , and by that time i have travel 2 mile , there meet i all the Christians of the Spaniard and Portugal to receive i , which i know be more by the king commandment then of any good will of themselves : for some of they although they speak i fair hang down their head like dog , and especial the Portugal , and i countenance they accord . 
 so i pass on till i come within two english mile of the ci tie , and then John Bampton return , show i that the king be so glad of my come , that he can not devise to do too much , to show the good will that he do owe to the queen majesty , and her realm . 
 he counsellor meet i without the gate , and at the entry of the gate , his footman and guard be 287 
 A.D. 
 1577 - 
 the singular humanity of the king to our ambassador . 
 the Spaniard and Portugal be command by the king in pain of death , to meet the english ambassador . 
 the king of Spain seek to disgrace the queen if her ambassador . 
 place on both side of my horse , and so bring i to the king palace . 
 the king sit in his chair with his counsel about he , as well the moor as the elchy , and accord to his order give unto i before , i there declare my message in spanish , and make delivery of the queen majesty letter , and all that i speak at that present in spanish , he cause one of his elchy to declare the same to the moor present , in the larbe tongue . 
 which do , he answer i again in spanish , yield to the queen majesty great thanks , and offer himself and his country to be at her grace commandment , and then command certain of his counselor to conduct i to my lodging , not be far from the court . 
 the house be fair after the fashion of that country , be daily well furnish with all kind of victuali at the king charge . 
 the same night he send for i to the court , and i have conference with he about the space of two hour , where i thorough declare the charge commit unto i from her majesty , find he conformable , willing to pleasure and not to urge her majesty with any demand , more than convenient she may willing consent unto , he know that out of his country the realm of England may be better serve with lack , than he in comparison from we . 
 further he give i to understand , that the king of Spain have send unto he for a licence , that a ambassador of his might come into his country , and have make great mean that if the queen majesty of England send any unto he , that he will not give he any credit or entertainment , albeit ( say he ) i know what the king of Spain be , and what the queen of England and her realm be : for i neither like of he nor of his religion , be so govern by the inquisition that he can do nothing of himself . 
 288 
 therefore when he come upon the licence which i have grant , he shall well see how little account i will make of he and Spain , and how great i will extol you for the queen majesty of England . 
 he shall not come to my presence as you have do , [ ii two . 66. ] and shall daily : for i mind to accept of you as my companion and one of my house , whereas he shall attend twenty day after he have do his message . 
 after the end of this speech i deliver sir Thomas Gresham letter , when as he take i by the hand , and lead i down a long court to a palace where there run a fair fountain of water , and there sit himself in a chair , he command i to sit down in another , and there call for such simple musician as he have . 
 then i present he with a great base lute , which king °f he most thankful accept , and then he be desirous hoary scent to hear or the musician , and 1 tell he that there be fa musician . great care have to provide they , and that i do not doubt but upon my return they shall come with the first ship . 
 he be willing to give they good entertainment with provision of victuali , and to let they live accord to their law and conscience wherein he urge none to the contrary . 
 i find he to be one that live great in the fear of God , be well exercise in the scripture , as well in the old testament as also in the new , and he bear a great affection to our nation then to other because of our religion , which forbid worship of idol , and the moor call he the christian king . 
 the same night be the first of June , i continue with he till twelve of the clock , and he seem to have so good like of i , that he take from his girdle a rich gift short dagger be set with 200 stone , ruby and turkey , bestow and do bestow it upon i , and so i be conduct ambassador . return to my lodging for that time . 
 the next day because he know it to be Sunday and our sabbath day he do let i rest . but on the Monday in the afternoon he send for i , and i have conference with he again , and music . 
 vi 289 t 
 likewise on the Tuesday by three of the clock he send for i into his garden , find he lay upon a silk bed complain of a sore leg : yet after long conference he walk into another orchard , where as have a fair banqueting-house and a great water , and a new galley in it , he go aboard the galley and take i with he , and pass the space of two or three hour , show the great experience he have in galley , wherein ( as he say ) he have exercise himself eighteen year in his youth . 
 after supper he show i his horse and other commodity that he have about his house , and since that night i have not see he , for that he have keep in with his sore leg , but he have send to i daily . 
 June , the 13 of June at six of the clock at night i have 
 again audience of the king , and i continue with he till midnight , have debate as well for the queen commission as for the well deal with her merchant for their traffic here in these part , say , he will do much more for the queen majesty and the realm , take offer of offering that all english ship with her subject may with t£nkllsft00ur good security enter into his port and dominion as merchant . we^ in trade of merchandise , as for victuali and water , as also in time of war with any her enemy to bring in prize and to make sale as occasion shall serve , or else to depart again with they at their pleasure . 
 likewise for all english ship that shall pass along his coast of Barbary , and through the strait into the Levant sea , that he will grant safe conduct that the say ship and merchant with their good may pass into the Levant sea , and so to the turk dominion , and the king of Algiers , as his own , and that he will write to the Turk and to the king of Argier his letter for the well use of our ship and good . 
 also that hereafter no Englishmen that by any mean may be take captive , shall be sell within any of his dominion : whereupon i declare that the queen majesty accept of these his offer be please to confirm the intercourse and trade of our merchant within 
 290 
 .... i577-this his country , as also to pleasure he with such commodity as he shall have need of , to furnish the a necessity and want of his country in trade of mar - prwiso-chandize , so as he require nothing contrary to her honour and law , and the breach of league with the christian prince her neighbour . 
 the same night i present the king with the case of comb , and desire his majesty to have special regard that the ship may be lade back again , for that i find little store of saltpete in readiness in John bamptons hand . he answer i that i shall have all the assistance therein that he can , but that in sus he think to have some store in his house there , as also that the mountainer have make much in a readiness : i request that he will send down , which he promise to do . 
 the eighteen day i be with he again and so continue there till night , and he show i his house with pastime in duck with water-spaniel , and bait bull with his english dog . 
 at this time i move he again for the send down to sus , which he grant to do , and the 24. day [ ii two . 67. ] there depart alcay mammy , with Lionel Edgerton , and Rowland Guy to sus , and carry with they for our account and his company the king letter to his brother mulai Hammet , and alcay Shauan , and the viceroy . 
 the 23. day the king send i out of Morocco to his garden call shersbonare , with his guard , and alcay mamoute , and the 24. at night i come to the court to see a morris dance , and a play of his elchy . he promise i audience the next day be Tuesday , but he put it off till Thursday : and the Thursday at night i be send for to the king after supper , and then he send alcay Rodwan , and alcay gowry to confer with i , but after a little talk i desire to be bring to the king for my dispatch . And be bring to he , i prefer two bill of John Bamptons which he have make for provision of saltpetre : also two bill for the 
 291 
 the emperor of Manco his privilege to the english . 
 quiet traffic of our english merchant , and bill for sugar to be make by the Jew , as well for the debt past , as hereafter , and for . good order in the ingenios . also i move he again for the saltpetre , and other dispatch , which he refer to be agree upon by the two alcayde . but the Friday be the 20. the alcayde can not intend it , and upon Saturday alcay Rodwan fall sick , so on Sunday we make mean to the king , and that afternoon i be send for to confer upon the bargain with the alcayde and other , but do not agree . 
 upon Tuesday i write a letter to the king for my dispatch , and the same afternoon i be call again to the court , and refer all thing to the king , accept his offer of saltpetre . 
 that night again the king have i into his galley , and the spaniel do hunt the duck . 
 the Thursday i be appoint to way the 300. kintal gross of saltpetre , and that afternoon the tabybe come unto i to my lodging , show i that the king be offend with John Bampton for diverse cause . 
 the Sunday night late be the 7. of July , i get the king to forgive all to John Bampton , and the king promise i to speak again with i upon Monday . 
 upon Tuesday i write to he again for my dispatch , and then he send fray Lewes to i , and say that he have order to write . 
 upon Wednesday i write again , and he send i word that upon Thursday i shall come and be dispatch , so that i shall depart upon Friday without fail , be the twelve of July . 
 so the Friday after accord to the king order and appointment i go to the court , and whereas motion and petition be make for the confirmation of the demand which i have prefer , they be all grant , and likewise the privilege which be on the behalf of our english merchant request , be with great favour and readiness yield unto . and whereas the Jew there resident be to our man in certain round 
 292 
 sum indebt , the emperor pleasure and commandment be , that they shall without further excuse or delay , pay and discharge the same . and thus at length i be dismiss with great honour and speciali countenance , such as have not ordinary be show to other ambassador of the Christians . 
 and touch the private affair entreat upon betwixt her majesty and the emperor , i have letter from he to satisfy her highness therein . so to conclude , have receive the like honourable conduct from his court , as i have for my part at my first land , i embark my self with my foresay company , and arrive not long after in England , i repair to her majesty court , and end my ambassage to her highness good like , with relation of my service perform . 
 . 