a excellent treatise of the kingdom of China , and of the estate and government thereof : print in latin at Macao a city of the Portugal in China , An. Dom. 1590. and write dialogue-wise . the speaker be Linus , Leo , and Michael . 
 Linus . 
 oncern the kingdom of China ( Michael ) which be our next neighbour , we have hear and daily do hear so many report , that we be to request at your hand rather a true than a large discourse and narration thereof . and if there be aught in your knowledge beside that 
 which by continual rumour be wax stale among we , we will right glad give diligent ear unto it . 
 Michael . because the report of this most famous kingdom be grow so common among we , reduce diverse and manifold particular into order , i will especial aim at the truth of thing receive from the father 348 
 of the society , which even now at this present be conversant in China . first of all therefore it be not un - the situation know , that of all part of the main continent this kingdom of China be situate most easterly : albeit it certain hand , as our native japon , and the he of Manilia stand more easterly than China it self . as touch the limit and bound of this kingdom , we may appoint the first towards you west to be a certain he common call Hainan , which stand in 19 degree of northerly latitude . for the continent next adjoin unto this he trend towards the east , and that especial , where the promontory of the city call Nimpo or Liampo do extend it self . howbeit , from that place decline northward , it stretch forth a huge length , insomuch that the far chinian inhabitant that way do behold the north pole elevate , at least 50 degree , and perhaps more also : whereupon a man may easy conjecture ( that i may speak like a astronomer ) how large the latitude of this kingdom be , when as it contain about more than 540 league in direct extension towards the north . but as concern the longitude which be account from east to west , it be not so exact find out , that it may be distinguish into degree . howbeit certain it be , that accord to the map wherein the people of China describe the form of their kingdom , Chinian cos-the latitude thereof do not much exceed you longitude , her . this kingdom therefore be , without all peradventure , of all earthly kingdom the most large and spacious : for albeit diverse other king under their jurisdiction contain in dimension more length and breadth then all china , do possess very many kingdom and far distant asunder : yet none of they all enjoy any one kingdom so large and so ample , as the most puissant king of China do . now , if we shall make enquiry into his the rich revenue and tribute , true it be , that this king of all other , be endue with the great and the rich , both china . in regard of the fertility and greatness of his dominion , and also by reason of the severe collection and exaction 
 349 
 fifteen great province in China . 
 the seat royal of the hingofChina . [ ii two . 89. ] 
 the warlike munition of China , in a marvelous wall . 
 of his duty : yea , tribute be impose upon his subject , not only for land , house , and impost of merchandise , but also for every person in each family . it be likewise to be understand , that almost no lord or potentate in China have authority to levy unto himself any peculiar revenue , or to collect any rent within the precinct of his signory , all such power belong only unto the king : whereas in Europe the contrary be most common see , as we have before signify . in this most large kingdom be contain 15 province , every one of which be in it self sufficient to be make one great kingdom . six of these province do border upon the sea , namely ( y* i may use the name of the chinians themselves ) coantum , foquien , chequiam , Nanquin , Xantum , Paquin : the other 9 be inland province , namely , quiansi , huquam , Honan , xiensi , xansi , Suchuon , queicheu , Junan , coansi . among all the foresay province , two be allot for the king court and seat royal , that be to say , Paquin for his court in the north , and Nanquin for his court in the south . for the king of China be wont to be resident altogether at the south court : but afterward , by reason of the manifold and cruel war move by the Tartar , they be constrain to defixe their princely seat and habitation in that extreme province of the north . whereupon it come to pass , that those northern confine of the kingdom do abound with many more fortress , martial engine , and garrison of soldier . 
 leo . i have hear , among those munition , a certain strange and admirable wall report of , wherewith the people of China do repress and drive back the Tartar attempt to invade their territory . 
 Michael . certes that wall which you have hear tell of be most worthy of admiration ; for it run alongst the border of three northerly province , xiensi , xansi , and Paquin , and be say to contain almost three hundred league in length , and in such sort to be build , that it hinder not the course and stream of any river , 35° 
 their channel be overthwart and fortify with wonderful bridge and other defence . yet be it not unlikely , that the say wall be build in such sort , that only low and easy passage be therewith stop and environ ; but the mountain run between those low passage be , by their own natural strength , and inaccessible heighth , a sufficient fortification against the enemy . 
 Linus . tell we ( Michael ) whether the kingdom of China be so frequent with inhabitant , as we have often be inform , or no ? 
 Michael . it be ( Linus ) in very deed a most populous abundance kingdom , as i have be certify from the father of °f the society : who have see sundry province of tn tna ' Europe renown for the multitude of their inhabitant , do notwithstanding great admire the infinite swarm of people in China . howbeit these multitude be not pellmell and confusive disperse over the land , but most convenient and orderly distribute in their town and famous city : of which assembly there be diverse kind among the chinians . for they have certain principal city call by the name of fu : other inferior city and city call Cheu : and of a three kind also name townes-hien , which be indeed wall town , but be not privilege with the dignity and prerogative of city . to these may be add two other kind of lesser town , which be partly village , and partly garrison of soldier . of the first and principali kind be that most noble city stand near unto the port of Macao , call by the chinians Coanchefu , but by the Portugal common term cantam , which be rather the common name of the province , than a word of their proper imposition . unto the three kind appertain a town , which be yet nigh unto the port of Macao , call by the Portugal ansam , but by the chinians Hiansanhien . all the foresaid province therefore have their great city name fu , and their lesser city call Cheu , unto both of which the other town may be add . Moreover , in every pro - 
 351 
 the chinian river great inhabit . 
 wholesome air , plenty y peace in China . 
 Vince there be a certain principal city which be call the metropolitan thereof , wherein the chief magistrate have their place of residence , as the principal city by i last mention , which be the head of the whole province call coantum . the number of the great city throughout the whole kingdom be more than 150 , and there be the same or rather a great multitude of inferior city . of wall town not endue with the privilege of city there be more than 1120 : the village and garrison can scarce be number : over and beside the which convent it be incredible what a number of country farm or grange there be : for it be not easy to find any place desert or void of inhabitant in all that land . now in the sea , in river , and in bark there be such abundance of people , and of whole family inhabit , that even the europaean themselves do great wonder thereat : insomuch that some ( albeit beyond measure ) have be persuade that there be as many people dwell upon the water as upon the land . neither be they induce so to think altogether without probability : for whereas the kingdom of China be in all part thereof interfuse with commodious river , and in many place consist of water , barge and boat be everywhere very common , it may easy be suppose , that the number of waterman be equal unto the land-inhabitant . howbeit , that be to be understand by amplification , whereas the city do swarm so full with citizen and the country with peasant . 
 leo . the abundance of people which you tell we of seem very strange : whereupon i conjecture the soil to be fertile , the air to be wholesome , and the whole kingdom to be at peace . 
 Michael . you have ( friend Leo ) full judicial conjecture those three : for they do all so excel , y‘ which of the three in this kingdom be more excellent , it be not easy to discern . and hence it be that this common opinion have be rife among the Portugal , namely , that the kingdom of China be never visit with those three 352 
 most heavy and sharp scourge of mankind , war , famine , and pestilence . but that opinion be more common than true : since there have be most terrible intestine and civil war , as in many and most authentical history it be record : since also that some province of the chinian say kingdom , even in these our day , have be afflict stortes-with pestilence and contagious disease , and with famine . howbeit , that the foresay three benefit do mighty flourish and abound in China , it can be deny . for ( that i may first speak of the salubrity of the air ) the father of the society themselves be witness , that [ ii two . 90. ] scarce in any other realm there be so many find that live unto decrepit and extreme old age : so great a multitude be there of ancient and grave personage : neither do they use so many confection and medicine , nor so manifold and sundry way of cure disease , as we see accustom in Europe . for among they they have no phlebotomy or let of blood : but all their cure , as we also in japon , be achieve by fast , decoction of herb , and light or gentle potion . but in this behalf let every nation please themselves with their own custom . now , in fruitfulness of soil this kingdom certes do excel , far surpass all other kingdom of the east : yet be it nothing comparable unto the plenty and abundance of Europe , as i have declare at large in the former treatise . but the kingdom of China be , in this regard , so high extol , because there be not any region in the east part that abound so with merchandise , and from whence so much traffic be send abroad . for whereas this kingdom be most large and full of navigable river , so that commodity may easy be convey out of one province into another : the Portugal do find such abundance of ware within one and the same city , ( which perhaps be the great mart city of throughout the whole kingdom ) that they be very Coanchefu , persuade , that the same region , of all other , most abound with merchandise : which notwithstanding be to be understand of the orientali region : albeit there 
 vi 353 z 
 be some kind of merchandise , wherewith the land of China be better store than any other kingdom . this region afford especial sundry kind of metal , of which the chief , both in excellency and in abundance , great abun - js gold , whereof so many Pezoes be bring from China china‘s to India > and to our country of japon , that i hear say , tn that in one and the same ship , this present year , 2000 
 such piece consist of massy gold , as the Portugal common call golden loaf , be bring unto we for merchandise : and one of these loaf be worth almost 100 ducat . hence it be that in the kingdom of China so many thing be adorn with gold , as for example , bed , table , picture , image , litter wherein nice and dainty dame be carry upon their servant back . neither be these golden loaf only buy by the Portugal , but also great plenty of gold-twine and leaf of gold : for the chinians can very cunning beat and great store of extenuate gold into plate and leaf . there be also great nzw . store of silver , whereof ( that i may omit other argument ) it be no small demonstration , that every year there be bring into the city common call cantam by the Portugal merchant to buy ware , at the least 400 Sestertium thereof , and yet nothing in a manner be convey out of the chinian kingdom : because the people of China abound with all necessary , be not great inquisitive or desirous of any merchandise from other kingdom . i do here omit the silver mine whereof there be great number in China , albeit there be much circumspection use in dig the silver thereout : for the king stand much in fear lest it may be a occasion to stir up the covetous and greedy humour of many . now their silver which they put to use be for the most part pass fine , and purify from all dross , and therefore in try it they use great diligence . what shall i speak of their iron , copper , lead , tin , and other metal , and also of their quicksilver ? of all which in the realm of China there be great abundance , and from thence they be transport into diverse country . hereunto may be 
 354 
 add the wonderful store of pearl , which , at the he pearl . of Hainan , be find in shellfish take very cunning by certain diverse , and do much enlarge the king revenue . but now let we proceed unto the silk or eat store of Bombycine fleece , whereof there be great plenty in China : sllkemchtna-so that even as the husbandman labour in manure the earth , and in sow of rice ; so likewise the woman do employ a great part of their time in preserve of silkworm , and in keem and weave of silk . hence it be that every year the king and queen with great solemnity come forth into a public place , the one of they touch a plough , and the other a mulberry tree , with the leaf whereof silkworm be nourish : and both of they by this ceremony encourage both man and woman unto their vocation and labour : whereas otherwise , all the whole year throughout , no man beside the principali magistrate , may once attain to the sight of the king . of this silk or Bombycine fleece there be such abundance , that three ship for the most part come out of India to the port of Macao , and at the bring lest one every year come unto we , be lade mt0 especial with this freight , and it be use not only in India , but carry even unto Portugal . neither be the fleet it self only transport thence , but also diverse and sundry stuff weave thereof , for the chinians do great excel in the art of weave , and do very much resemble our weaver of Europe . Moreover the kingdom of China abound with most costly spice and odour , and sp^h cam-especially with cinnamon ( albeit not comparable to the y cinnamon of Zeilan ) with camphire also and musk , which ’ be very principal and good . musk derive his name from a beast of the same name ( which beast resemble a beaver ) from the part whereof bruise and putrify proceed a most delicate and fragrant smell which the Portugal high esteem , common call those part of the fdresay beast ( because they be like unto the gorge of fowl ) Papos , and convey great plenty of they [ ii two . 91. ] into India , and to we of japon . but who will believe , 
 355 
 Cotton wool , whereof cali-cut-cloth be make . 
 three quality of porcellan . 
 plant . 
 that there be so much gossipine or cotton-wool in China ; whereof such variety of clothes be make like unto linen ; which we our self do so often use , and which also be convey by sea into so many region ? let we now entreat of that earthen or pliable matter common call porcellan , which be pure white , and be to be esteem the best stuff of that kind in the whole world : whereof vessel of all kind be very curious frame . i say , it be the best earthen matter in all the world , for three quality ; namely , the cleanness , the beauty , and the strength thereof . there be indeed other matter to be find more glorious , and more costly , but none so free from uncleanness , and so durable : this i add , in regard of glass , which indeed be immaculate and clean , but may easy be break in piece . this matter be dig , not throughout the whole region of China , but only in one of the fifteen province call quiansi , wherein continual very many artificer be employ about the same matter : neither do they only frame thereof small vessel , as dish , platter , saltseller , ewer , and such like , but also certain huge ton , and vessel of great quantity , be very fine and cunning wrought , which , by reason of the danger and difficulty of carriage , be not transport out of the realm , but be use only within it , and especial in the king court . the beauty of this matter be much augment by variety of picture , which be lay in certain colour upon it , while it be yet new , gold also be add thereunto , which make the foresay vessel to appear most beautiful . it be wonderful how high the Portugal do esteem thereof , see they do , with great difficulty , transport the same , not only to we of japon and into India , but also into sundry province of Europe . unto the merchandise abovementioned may be add diverse and sundry plant , the root whereof be right wholesome for man body , and very medicinable , which be bring unto our isle of japon , and unto many other hand , among the which that wood may be 356 
 reckon , which ( by a synecdoche ) be call the wood of China , be of notable force to expel out of man body those humour , which will breed contagious disease . to these you may add sugar-cane ( for in the realm of China there be great store of excellent sugar ) sugar . which be convey by the Portugal very plentiful , both into our country , and also into India . my speech utter immediate before concern merchandise only , in regard whereof this kingdom be beneficial not to itself alone , but most profitable to many other nation also . as for those fruit which pertain to yearly sustenance and common food , they can scarce be number ; albeit , of those three commodity which they of Europe so great account of ; namely of corn , vine , and olive china in a the land of China be not very capable : for the chinians ” £ , ™ tute know not so much as the name of a olive tree ( out of the fruit whereof oil be express ) neither yet the y oil . name of a vine . the province of Paquin be not altogether destitute of wine , but whether it be bring from other place , or there make , i be not able to say : although it abound with many other , and those not unpleasant liquor , which may serve in the stead of wine it self . now , as touch corn , there be indeed wheat sow in all the province , howbeit rise be in far more use and request than it : and so in regard of these two commodity profitable for man life ; namely , wine and corn ; the kingdom of China and our country of japon may be compare together . 
 leo . you have discourse ( Michael ) of the fruitfulness of china , whereof i have often hear , that it be no less pleasant than fruitful , and i have be especial Chinian map . induce so to think , at the sight of the chinian map . 
 Michael . the thing it self agree right well with the picture : for they that have see they mediterran or inner part of the kingdom of China , do report it to be a most amiable country , adorn with plenty of wood , with abundance of fruit and grass , and with wonder variety of river , wherewith the chinian kingdom be 
 357 
 the disposition in manner of the chinians . 
 their language . 
 their loyalty unto their superior . 
 [ ii two . 92. ] 
 water like a garden ; diverse of which river do natural flow , and other by art and industry be derive into sundry place . but now i will entreat of the tranquillity and peace of China , after i have speak a word or two concern the manner of the inhabitant . this nation be endue with excellent wit and dexterity for the attain of all art , and , be very constant in their own custom , they light regard the custom or fashion of other people . they use one and the same kind of vesture , yet so , that there be some distinction between the apparel of the magistrate and of the common subject . they all of they do wear long hair upon their head , and , after the manner of woman , do curious keame their dainty lock , hang down to the ground , and , have twine and bind they up , they cover they with call , wear sundry cap thereupon , accord to their age and condition . it seem that in old time one language be common to all the province : notwithstanding , by reason of variety of pronunciation , it be very much alter , and be divide into sundry idiom or propriety of speech , accord to the diverse province : howbeit , among the magistrate , and in public assembly of judgement , there be one and the very same kind of language use throughout the whole realm , from the which ( as i have say ) the speech of each province differ not a little . Moreover this people be most loyal and obedient unto the king and his magistrate , which be the principali cause of their tranquillity and peace . for whereas the common sort do apply themselves unto the discretion and beck of inferior magistrate , and the inferior magistrate of the superior , and the superior magistrate of the king himself , frame and compose all their action and affair unto that level : a world it be to see , in what equability and indifferency of justice all of they do lead their life , and how orderly the public law be administer . which thing notwithstanding shall be handle more at large , when we come to entreat of the government . 
 358 
 Linus . tell we now ( Michael ) of the industry of that laborpeople , whereof we have hear great report . ittduttry . 
 Michael . their industry be especial to be discern in manuary art and occupation , and therein the chinians do surpass most of these easterly nation . for there be such a number of artificer ingenious and cunning frame sundry device out of gold , silver , and other metal , as likewise of stone , wood , and other matter convenient for man use , that the street of city be replenish with their shop and fine workmanship , be very wonder to behold . beside who also there be very many painter , use either the paint . pencil or the needle ( of which the last sort be call embrotherer ) and other also that curious work gold-twine upon cloth either of linen or of cotton : who operation of all kind be diligent convey by the Portugal into India . their industry do no less appear in sound of gun and in make of gun - gun . powder , whereof be make many rare and artificiali firework . to these may be add the art of print , print . albeit their letter be in manner infinite and most difficult , the portraiture whereof they cut in wood or in brass , and with marvellous facility they daily publish huge multitude of book . unto these mechanical and illiberali craft you may add two more ; that be to say , navigation and discipline of war ; both of which have navigation . bene in ancient time most diligent practise by the inhabitant of China : for ( as we have before signify in the three dialogue ) the chinians sail even as far as India , subdue some part thereof unto their own dominion : howbeit afterward , lest they shall diminish the force of their realm by disperse they into many province , alter their counsel , they determine to contain themselves within their own limit : within which limit ( as i have say ) there be in old time vehement and cruel war , both between the people of China yartar themselves , and also against the tartarian king , who ^ramizeii invade their kingdom , and by himself and his sue - over china . 
 359 
 cessours , for a long season , usurp the government thereof . howbeit the king of the tartarian race be wear out , and their stock and family be utter abolish , the chinians begin to lift up their head , and to advance themselves , enjoy for these 200 year last past exceed peace and tranquillity , and at this day the posterity of the same king that expel the Tartar , with great dignity wear the crown , and wield the royal sceptre . albeit therefore the people of China ( especial they that inhabit southerly from the province of Paquin ) be , for the most part , by reason of continual ease and quiet , grow effeminate , and their courage be abate , notwithstanding they will prove notable and brave soldier , if they join use and exercise unto their natural fortitude . as a man may easy observe in they , that maintain continual war against the most barbarous and cruel Tartar . howbeit in this kingdom of China there be so great military regard of military discipline , that no city nor town 
 discipline . there be destitute of a garrison , the captain and gover - 
 nours keep each man his order ; which all of they , in every province , be subject unto the king lieutenant general for the war , who they call Chumpin , and yet he himself be subject unto the Tutan or viceroy . let we now come unto that art , which the chinians do most of all profess , and which . we may , not unfit , we literature call literature or learning . for although it be common of China . report , that many liberali science , and especial natural and moral philosophy be study in China , and that they have university there , wherein such ingenuous art be deliver and teach , yet , for the most part , this opinion be to be esteem more popular than true : but i will declare , upon what occasion this conceit first grow . the people of China do , above all thing , profess the art of literature ; and learn it most diligent , they employ themselves a long time and the better part of their age therein . for this cause , in all city and town , yea , and in petty village also , there be 
 360 
 certain schoolmaster hire for stipend to instruct child : and their literature be ( as we in japon be also ) in manner infinite , their child be put to school even from their infancy and tender year , from whence notwithstanding such be take away , as be judge to be unfit for the same purpose , and be train up to merchandise or to manuary science : but the residue do so dedicate themselves to the study of learning , that ( a strange thing it be to consider ) be conversant in the principali book , they will easy tell you , if they be ask the question , how many letter be contain in every page , and where each letter be place . now , for the great progress and increase of learning , they ( as the manner be in Europe ) do appoint three degree to the degree attain of noble science : that be to say , the low , in leamins-the middle degree , and the high . graduate of the first degree be call Siusai , of the second Quiugin , 
 and of the three Chinzu . and in each city or wall [ ii two . 93. ] 
 town there be a public house call the school , and unto that all they do resort from all private and petty - 
 school that be mind to obtain the first degree ; the first 
 where they do amplify a sentence or theme propound unto they by some magistrate : and they , who stile be more elegant and refine , be , in each city , grace with the first degree . of such as aspire unto the second degree second trial be make only in the metropolitan or principali city de&ree-of the province , whereunto , they of the first degree , every three year , have recourse , and , in one public house or place of assembly , do , the second time , make a oration of another sentence obscure than the former , and do undergo a more severe examination . now , there be common such a huge multitude of people , that this last year , in the foresay famous city of cantam , by reason of the incredible assembly of person flock to that public act or commencement , at the first entrance of the door , there be many tread under foot , and quell to death , as we have be most certain inform . three and moreover they that sue for the high degree be subject high degree . 
 361 
 note the extraordinary honour vouchsafe by the great king of China upon his learned graduate . 
 motall philosophy . 
 natural philosophy . 
 excellent astronomer in China . 
 unto a most severe and exact censure , whereby they be to be examine at the king court only , and that also every three year next ensue the say year wherein graduate of the second degree be elect in each province , and , a certain number be prescribe unto every particular province , they do ascend unto that high pitch of dignity , which be in so great regard with the king himself , that the three principali graduate do , for honour sake , drink off a cup fill even with the king own hand , and be grace with other solemnity . out of this order the chief magistrate be choose : for after that they have attain unto this three degree , be a while train up in the law of the realm , and in the precept of urbanity , they be admit unto diverse function . neither be we to think that the chinians be altogether destitute of other art . for , as touch moral philosophy , all those book be fraught with the precept thereof , which , for their instruction sake , be always conversant in the hand of the foresay student , wherein such grave and pithy sentence be set down , that , in man void of the light of the gospel , more can not be desire . they have book also that entreat of thing and cause natural , but herein it be to be suppose , that aswell their book as we do abound with error . there be other book among they , that discourse of herb and medicine , and other of chivalry and martial affair . neither can i here omit , that certain man of China ( albeit they be but few , and rare to be find ) be excellent in the knowledge of astronomy , by which knowledge of they then day of the new moon incident to every month be true dispose and digest , and be commit to writing and publish : beside , they do most infallible foretell the eclipse of the sun and moon : and whatsoever knowledge in this art we of japon have , it be derive from they . 
 leo . we do free confess that ( Michael ) since our book entreat of the same art be , a great part of they , write in the character or letter of China . 
 362 
 * 59° ' but now , instruct you we as touch their manner of the politic government , wherein the chinians be say great to ° ? 
 excel . ’ 
 Michael . that , that , in very deed , be their chief art , and unto that all their learning and exercise of letter be direct . whereas therefore , in the kingdom of China , one only king bear rule over so many province , it be strange what a number of magistrate be by he create to administer public affair . for ( to omit they which in each town and city have jurisdiction over the townsman and citizen ) there be three principali three magistrate in every province . the first be he that have Pnnc^11 . 
 • • 11 . 1 • „ , , magistrate in 
 to deal in case criminali , and be call Ganchasu : the province . second be the king fosterer , and be call Puchinsu : the three be the lieutenant-general for the war , name , as we say before , Chumpin . Theise three therefore have their place of residence in the chief city of the province : and the two former have certain associate of their own order , but of inferior authority , appoint in diverse city and town , unto who , accord to the variety of cause , the governor of town , and the major of city do appeal . howbeit the three forename magistrate be in subjection unto the Tutan , that be , the viceroy , ordain in each province . and all these magistrate bear office for the space of three year together : yet so , that for the govern of each province , not any of the same province , but stranger , that be , man of another province , be select : whereof it come to pass , that the judge may give sentence with a far more entire and incorrupt mind , than if they be among their own kinsfolk and ally . over and beside all these , there be a annuali or yearly magistrate , which be call chaien , who duty it be to make inquisition of all crime , and especial the crime of magistrate , and also to punish common offence : but concern the fault of the great magistrate to admonish the king himself . of this order , every year , be send out of the king court , for each province , one ; and go over all 
 363 
 two senate or counsel continual hold in China . 
 the cause of peace in China . 
 learn the only step to honour in China . 
 the city and town thereof , they do most diligent ransack and search out all crime , and upon they which be imprison they inflict due punishment , or , be find not guilty , they dismiss they unpunished . hence it be , that all magistrate great fear to be call in question by the chaien be well keep within the limit of their calling . beside all these magistrate there be at either court , namely in the north , and in the south , a senate or honourable assembly of grave counselor , unto the which , out of all province , accord to the nearness and distance of the place , affair of great weight and moment be refer , and by their authority diverse magistrate be create : howbeit the manage and expedition of principali affair be commit unto the senate of Paquin . Moreover there be every year certain magistrate appoint in each province , to go unto the king : and every three year all the governor of city and of town do visit he at once , what time trial be make of they that aspire unto the three degree : upon which occasion there be at the same time a incredible number of people at the king court . by reason of this excellent order and harmony of magistrate place one under another , it can scarce be imagine , what sweet peace and tranquillity flourish throughout the whole realm , especial since , after speedy inquisition , person that be guilty be put ( as the manner be there ) to the punishment of the bastonado : neither yet be suit or action any long time delay . also it be not to be omit , that for the obtain of any dignity or magistracy , the way be open , without all respect of gentry or blood , unto all man , if they be learned , and especial if they have attain unto the three and high degree aforesaid . neither can it be express how obedient and dutiful the common sort be unto their magistrate , and with what magnificence and pomp the say magistrate come abroad : for the most part of they have fifty or threescore sergeant attend upon they , and go before they , two and two in a rank : some of 364 
 procession of the chinian magistrate . 
 they carry halberd , mace , and battle-ax : some the stately if trail iron chain upon the ground : other hold great rod or staff of a certain kind of reed , wherewith malefactor be punish , in their hand : and two there be that carry , enclose in a case , the king seal peculiar for each office : and many other also , that show sundry spectacle unto the people : whereunto may be add the horrible outcry and shout , which between while they utter , to strike a terror into the heart of all man : and at length come the magistrate themselves , be carry in a throne upon the back of four man , six man , or eight man , accord to the dignity of their office . now , as concern their house , they be very large and stately , be build and furnish with all necessary stuff , at the king own cost , in the which , so long as their magistracy last , they lead a brave and a honourable life . the say house be without variety of story one above another , which in the kingdom of China and in our isle of japon also be not ordinary use for habitation , but either to keep watch and ward , or else for solace and recreation sake ( for the which purpose , eight most lofty turret of nine story high be build ) or else for the defence of city . howbeit in other regard these building do show forth no small magnificence : for they have their cistern for the receit of rainwater , which be adorn with beautiful tree , set in order , round about they : and they have also their place design for the administration of justice , and diverse other convenient room to bestow their wife and family in . within the door of the foresay habitation a certain number of sergeant and officer , have cabin or little house allot they on both side , do always give their attendance ; and so long as matter of judgement be in decide , they be always ready at hand , that , at the direction of the magistrate they may either beat malefactor , or by torment constrain they to tell the truth . the say magistrate also have their peculiar barge wherein to 365 
 the house of the chinian magistrate . 
 the magistrate barge . 
 the manner of elect magistrate in China . 
 degree unto honour . 
 [ ii two . 95. ] 
 take the water ; be in breadth and length not much unlike to the galley of Europe , but for swiftness and multitude of oar , far inferior unto they . the rower , sit upon gallery without the hatch or compass of the barge , do move it on forward with their oar : whereupon it come to pass , that the middle part of the barge afford sufficient room for the magistrate themselves to abide in , contain chamber therein almost as convenient and handsome , as in any of their foresay public house , together with buttery and kitchen , and such other place necessary for the provision and stowage of victual . 
 leo . all these thing agree right well with the report , which we have hear of the stately and renown kingdom of China : i will now right glad know somewhat concern the order which be observe in the obtain of magistracy . 
 Michael . you have inquire of a matter most worthy to be know , which i have almost omit to entreat of . the chinians therefore do use a kind of gradation in advance man unto sundry place of authority , which for the most part be perform by the senator of Paquin . for first they be make judge of town : then of city : afterward they be elect to be of that order , which decree punishment in case criminali without further appeal , or of their order , that be the king fosterer . and in both of these order , which be very honourable , there be many place and degree , so that from the inferior place they must ascend unto the superior , until they have attain unto the high dignity of all : and immediate after that they come to be viceroys . howbeit this gradation be not always accomplish in one and the same province , but in change their office they change place and province also . Moreover , next after the office of viceroy they be capable to be choose senator of Nanquin , and last of all to be elect into the senate of Paquin . now , there be such a order and 366 
 method observe in the ascend unto these dignity , that all man may easy conjecture , what office any one be to undertake . and there be so great diligence and celerity use for the substitution of one into the room of another , that , for the same purpose , messenger be dispatch by land , upon swift post-horse , unto diverse ride post . province , almost twenty day journey from the king court . And , to be short , there be such district severity in degrade those that unjust or negligent demean themselves , from a honourable unto a inferior and base office , or altogether in deprive they of the king authority : that all magistrate do stand in fear of nothing in the world more than of that . the same order , almost , be observe among the captain and lieutenant general for the war : except only in they , that their birth and offspring be respect : for many there be , who descend by parentage from such Martiali man as have in time past achieve brave exploit in warfare , so soon as they come to sufficient year , be create centurion , colonel , and governor , until at last they attain to be lieutenant generail and protector of some whole province : who notwithstanding ( as i have say ) be in all thing subject unto the viceroy . all the foresay magistrate both of war and of peace have a set number of attendant allot unto they , enjoy a stipend , and carry certain ensign and peculiar badge of their office : and ( beside the ordinary watch , which soldier appoint for the same purpose do in the night season , after the city gate be shut , keep in their fort ) wheresoever any magistrate be , either at his house or in his barge , the say attendant strike upon a cymbali of brass , at certain appoint time , do keep most circumspect and continual watch and ward about his person . 
 Linus . you have ( Michael ) sufficient discourse of the magistrate : inform we now of the king himself , who name be so renown and spread abroad . 
 Michael . concern this matter i will say so much 367 
 the succession of the ci'owne . 
 the king young brethren . 
 only as by certain rumour have come to . my knowledge : for of matter appertain unto the king court we have no eye-witness , since the father . of the society have not as yet proceed unto Paquin , who so soon as ( by God assistance ) they shall there be arrive , will by their letter more full advertise we . the king of China therefore be honour with wondered reverence and submission throughout his whole realm : and whensoever any of his chief magistrate speak unto he , he call he van-svi , signify thereby that he wish ten thousand of year unto he . the succession of the kingdom depend upon the blood royal : for the elder son bear of the king first and lawful wife obtain the kingdom after his father decease : neither do they deprive themselves of the kingly authority in their life time ( as the manner be in our hand of japon ) but the custom of Europe be there observe . now , that the safety and life of the king may stand in more security , his young brethren , and the rest bear of concubine be not permit to live in the king court : but place of habitation be by the king himself assign unto they in diverse province far distant asunder , where they dwell most com-modiously , be comparable unto king for their building and revenue : howbeit they exercise no authority over the people , but all the government of those city wherein they dwell , concern the magistrate , who notwithstanding have the say prince in high regard and honour , and do visit they twice in a month , and salute they kneel upon their knee , and bow their face down to the earth : and yet they communicate nothing unto they as touch the administration of the commonwealth . these be they which may proper be call the peer or prince of the realm of China : for they derive their house and revenue unto their posterity , and so be these royal family continual preserve . but to return unto the king himself , he be most chary in observe the chinian law and custom , 
 368 
 and diligent exercise himself in learning so much as concern his estate , show himself daily unto his chief magistrate , and commune of matter appertain to the public commodity of the realm . his palace be off wonder largeness and capacity , out of the which he very seidome take his progress ; and whensoever he do so , there be twelve chariot twelve bring forth , all of they most like one to another charmts-both in workmanship and in value , that no man may discern in which the king himself be place . he follow in religion especial the opinion of the the idolatrous magistrate , attribute divine power unto heaven and °^the earth as unto the parent of all , and with great solemnity ' sacrifice unto they . he hath-divers most sumptuous temple dedicate unto his ancestor , whereunto likewise he ascribe divine honour , and yet cease he not to favour priest of other sect , yea he erect temple unto their patron , endow they with most rich revenue ; and so often as any urgent necessity require , he enjoin continual fast and prayer [ ii two . 96. ] unto they : and after this sort he do in a manner patronize all the idolatrous sect of his realm , and show himself ready to embrace any false religion whatsoever , he live in sundry and manifold kind of superstition . out of all the former particular by i cwt^ allege , you may easy conjecture that the administration of the kingdom of China do , for the most part , agreeable to agree with the instinct of nature , authority be come - the instinct of mit , not unto rude and unskilful person , but unto « ature . such as have be conversant in the use and exercise or learning , yea , and in promote learned man unto magistracy , great consideration be have of their wisdom , justice , and of other virtue esteem by the chinians : wherefore the way be open for all man , without any respect of degree or parentage , to obtain any of the foresay dignity , it can not be but that this most mighty and famous kingdom must needs enjoy exceed peace and tranquillity . 
 vi 369 2 a 
 the five virtue principal esteem among the chinians . 
 urbanity . 
 the chinians great piety towards their parent . 
 leo . i will now ( Michael ) right glad understand , what kind of urbanity or civil demeanour both the common people and the magistrate do use one towards another : for it be not likely that where such due administration of justice be , common civility , which so well beseem eth all man , shall be want . 
 Michael . you have hit even the very nail on the head : for among the five virtue , which the chinians principal regard , urbanity or courtesy be one ; the rest be piety , a thankful remembrance of benefit , true deal in contract or bargain , and wisdom in achieve of matter : with the praise and commendation of which virtue the chinian book be full fraught . now as touch their urbanity , it be much unlike unto we in Japan , and unto that of Europe : howbeit under two principali kind the rule of their urbanity or courtesy may be comprehend : whereof one be observe between equal , and the other betwqene superior and inferior . for when man of equal dignity meet together , they stand bend their back , and bow their head down to the ground , and this they do either once or twice , or sometime thrice . now , when the inferior meet with his superior , the say inferior , for the most part kneel low on his knee , incline his countenance down to the earth . but how often and when this obeizance be to be perform it be wonder what a number of rule and prescription be set down , which to recount will require a long time . somewhat also i will say as touch their piety , and especial of the piety which they use towards their parent , which very be so exceed great , that for the space of three whole year together , the son be clothe in mourn vesture do bewail the death of their parent , which duty be perform not only by the common sort , but even by all the magistrate themselves , and that most curious and diligent . And , that all man may whole give their attendance unto this business , it be provide by a most 37® 
 inviolable law among the chinians , that magistrate , upon the death of their parent , must forthwith renounce their authority , and three whole year , for the performance of their father exequy , must betake themselves unto a private kind of live : which also be most due put in practice by the senator of the king own council . for albeit a man be right gracious in the eye of his prince , yea , and such a one , as upon who the administration of the realm do principal depend ; yet have hear of the death of his parent , that be , of his father or his mother , he hie himself immediate home to solemnize their funeral : insomuch that if the king will retain he still in his office , he shall be esteem by the people , as a transgressor of the law and custom of China : which accident ( as it be record ) in ancient time fall out even so . for whenas a certain king most a memorable familiar use a certain senator of he about the storymanage and expedition of public affair , and understand well how necessary the help of his foresay senator be , will glad , after the death of his father , have retain he still in his office : yet a certain other man , be a wellwiller unto the chinian law , can in no case abide it , but check his prince with sharp rebuke , object the transgression of the law against he . the king wax wrath menace present death unto the man : but when the party be no wit daunt with the terror of death , persist still in his say , the king change his determination dismiss the senator to mourn for his father , but as for his repre-hend he advance he unto a high dignity . 
 Linus . i perceive ( Michael ) that draw to a end of these dialogue , and be weary of your long race , you begin to affect brevity : yet let it not seem troublesome unto you to speak somewhat of the religion of China , the religion which only thing seem to be want in this present °fchina-dialogue . 
 Michael . i confess indeed that i endeavour to be brief , not so much in regard of wearisomeness , as for 371 
 [ ii two . 97 - ] three principali sect among the chinians . 
 Confucius author of the first sect . 
 Confucius his doctrine . 
 fear least i have be over tedious unto you : howbeit i will not fail but accomplish that which i have undertake , and ( accord to your request ) add somewhat more concern religion . whereas therefore the kingdom of China have hitherto be destitute of true religion , and now the first beginning thereof be include in most narrow bound , that nation be otherwise a people most ingenious , and of a extraordinary and high capacity , have always live in great error and ignorance of the truth , be distract into sundry opinion , and follow manifold sect . and among these sect there be three more famous than the rest : the first be of they that profess the doctrine of one Confucius a notable philosopher . this man ( as it be report in the history of his life ) be one of most upright and incorrupt manner , whereof he write sundry treatise very pithy and large , which above all other book , be serious read and peruse by the chinians . the same doctrine do all magistrate embrace , and other also that give their mind to the study of letter , a great part whereof Confucius be say to have invent : and he be have in so great honour , that all his follower and client , upon the day of the new and full moon , do assemble themselves at the common school , which i have above mention , and before his image , which be worship with burn of incense and with taper , they do thrice bend their knee , and bow their head down to the ground ; which not only the common scholar , but the chief magistrate do perform . the sum of the foresay doctrine be , that man shall follow the light of nature as their guide , and that they shall diligent endeavour to attain unto the virtue by i before mention : and last , that they shall employ their labour about the orderly government of their family and of the commonwealth . all these thing be in very deed praiseworthy , if Confucius have make any mention of almighty God and of the life to come , and have not ascribe so much unto the heaven , and unto fatal necessity , nor yet have so curious entreat 
 37 « 
 of worship the image of their forefather . in which regard he can very hardly or not at all be excuse from the crime of idolatry : notwithstanding it be to be grant , that none other doctrine among the chinians approach so near unto the truth as this do . the second sect xequiam avis of they which follow the instruction of Xaquam , or as 
 the chinians call he xequiam , who opinion , because whosefollower they be well know among we , it be bootless for be call cen i to repeat ; especial since , in the catechism come - or Bonzi . pose by our grave visitor , they be notable refute . this doctrine do all they embrace , which be in China call Cen , but with we at japon be name Bonzi . for this i do brief and by the way give you to understand , that all word of the chinians language be of one syllable note . only , so that if there be any word that consist of more syllable than one , it consist also of more word than one . Theise sectary call cen do shave their beard and their head , and do for the most part , together with diverse of their associate , inhabit the temple of Xaquam , or of other which in regard of the same profession have in their calendar be canonize for saint , and do rehearse certain prayer after their manner , either upon book or bead , use other ceremony after the manner of our Bonzi . Theise man have some inkling of the life to come , and of the reward of good man , and the punishment of the wicked : howbeit all their asser - 
 tion be fraught with error . the three sect be of they the three sect . which be call Tauzu : and those do imitate a certain other man , to be adore , as they think , for his holiness . 
 these also be priest after their kind , howbeit they let their hair grow , and do in other observation differ from the former . now , because the sect of Confucius be the most famous of all the three , and the two other sect call Cen and Tauzu be not much addict unto learning , their religion prevail only among the common sort , the priest of both the say sect do lead a most base and servile life among the chinians , insomuch that they kneel down before the magistrate , and 
 373 
 christian religion plant in China . 
 [ il two . 98. ] 
 be not permit to sit beside they , and sometime , if the magistrate please , be abase unto the punishment of the bastonado : whereas in our isle of japon it be far otherwise , priest , even of false religion , be have in so great honour among we . 
 leo . i hear also ( Michael ) that the Saracen superstition take place in China : now , whether it do or not , you can resolve we . 
 Michael . that foreign superstition be bring into China what time the Tartar invade the kingdom , and usurp the government thereof . all the Saracen therefore in China be original descend of the Tartar , who , because they be a infinite number , can not utter be expel and root out of the kingdom , but remain still there , have propagate their posterity , though not their religion . Theise therefore be soldier for the great part of they , and sometime do obtain martial dignity : and except a few ceremony of their superstition which be now become stale and almost wear out , they do live altogether after the chinians fashion , their predecessor be , bring into the same kingdom about four hundred year ago . 
 Linus . now ( Michael ) let we hear you say somewhat of the christian religion , which as we hope have set most happy foot in that kingdom . 
 Michael . i can say much concern those most wish and acceptable beginning , be they not already publish in japon by the letter of the father : howbeit i will make a brief rehearsal of all thing , that i may not seem altogether to have abandon this labour . you know that from the time wherein the father of the society arrive in our hand , to the end they may augment Christian religion , they be in like sort most careful how they may insinuate themselves into the innermost part of the kingdom of China . in the midst of this endeavour and travel Francis Xavier , a most devout man of the foresay society , depart out of this present life at the he of sancian ( which some call 374 
 sangiam ) leave a example unto the rest of his associate , how they shall likewise do their best to plant the religion of Christ in that nation . this man be second by other , who use all mean , and leave no practice attempt , that they may bring these good beginning unto a prosperous issue : howbeit they be great hinder by reason of a ancient custom in China , in ancient regard whereof they do not without great difficulty and circumspection admit any stranger into their dominion , ’ 
 except those which have a long time execute the office of ambassador do ordinary every three year present themselves before the king : in the admission of who likewise there be marvellous care use , that they may not easy espy and become acquaint with the affair of the realm . hereunto may be add , that the chinians chinians be great contemner or other nation , and most constant 
 i ° r , • - i , ’ . „ .. , nation .. 
 observer or their own law and custom : in all which respect it come to pass , that there be wonder labour and diligence employ above thirty year together , only to get a entrance , until in the year one thousand five hundred fourscore and three , two father of the foresay society , that have pretty skill in the letter and language of China , utter despair of man help , and depend upon the providence of almighty God , obtain licence of the Tutan or viceroy to build they a house and a church in the city of Xauquin , which by reason of the commodiousness thereof be the seat of the viceroy himself . this work be begin , the say father of the society , for the novelty thereof , be a few year right well entreat by the magistrate : insomuch that two other out of India have free and easy access unto they , one couple remain still in their foresay house at Xauquin , and the other two take their journey for the inner province , to convert more people unto the faith : who notwithstanding afterward , other magistrate not approve of their attempt , be constrain to retire . now all the time wherein the foresay father abode at Xauquin 
 375 
 ( be more than five year ) certain of the common people be restrain from false superstition to christian religion , and seventy person be baptize . but the enemy of mankind , who omit none opportunity for the hindrance of christian religion , suggest into the mind of the chinians ( be , as i say , of their own nature , a people estrange from the traffic and acquaintance of other nation , and always be too too suspicious of stranger ) that they shall exhibit letter of supplication unto the caien and i the Tutan their principali magistrate , to have the father expel out of Xauquin : which magistrate repair unto their foresay house and church enter consultation how they may banish they out of they ( say city of Xauquin : in which thing very they use great moderation , not any way offend or exasperate the mind of the father , but only signify that they have regard unto the estate of their commonwealth . for the Tutan or viceroy call the father unto he , and ( to let pass other accident ) use courteous and familiar conference with they , declare by many argument , that their habitation in the city of Xauquin be not convenient , especial since so many magistrate resort unto that city , who will take great offence at the presence of stranger . for the which cause he persuade they to accept some part of the money which they have bestow in the build of their house , and so to return either home into their own country , or unto the port of Macao . howbeit , such be the instant supplication of the father , and so worthy of compassion , that the Tutan or viceroy , in the extreme and mediterrane border of the province of Coantum , assign unto they a new habitation at the city call Xaucheo , commend they also to a certain magistrate , who be come from the same place to salute he . thither therefore the say father , not without great sorrow and grief of the christian , hie themselves , and as we be inform by 
 376 
 their last letter , they have even now lay the foundation of their first build , and have also write that they be like to live much more peaceable and convenient for the propagate of Christian religion . 
 these be the first beginning of Christianity in China , where , even as in other place of the christian commonwealth , the seed be to be sow with , great labour and tear , that acceptable fruit may be reap with gladness . 
 leo . it be even as you have say ( Michael ) and now for this your pleasant and eloquent discourse we do acknowledge our self much bind unto you . 
 . 