the same in english . 
 this be a copy well and true translate of a edict of Muley Hamet king of Fez and emperor of Morocco , who tenor be as follows : to wit , that no Englishmen shall be molest or make slave in any part of his dominion , obtain by the aforesaid m. Henry Roberts . 
 n the name of the pitiful and the merciful God , etc the servant of the supreme God , the conqueror in his cause , the successor advance by God , the emperor of the moor , the son of the emperor of the moor , the jariffe , the Hageny , who honour God long 
 increase and advance his estate . this our princely commandment be deliver into the hand of the english merchant , which remain in the protection of our stately palace : to the end that all man which shall see this present writing , may understand that our princely counsel will defend they by the favour of God , from any thing that may impeach or hurt they in what sort soever they shall|be wrong : and that , which way soever they shall travail , no man shall take they captive in these our kingdom , port , and place which belong unto we , which also may protect and defend they by our 429 
 authority from any molestation whatsoever : and that no man shall hinder they by lay violent hand upon they , and shall not give occasion that they may be grieve in any sort by the favour and assistance of God . and we charge and command our officer of our haven and fortress , and all such as bear any authority in these our dominion , and likewise all the common people , that in no wise they do molest they , in such sort that they be no way offend or wrong . and this our commandment shall remain inviolable , be register in the midst of the month of Rabel in the year 996. 
 the date of this letter agree with the 20. of march 1587. which in Abdel Rahman el Catan , interpretor for his majesty , have translate and turn out of the arabian into spanish word for word as be contained therein : and in witness thereof have subscribe my name as aforesaid . 
 . 