the valiant fight perform by 10. merchant ship of London , against 12. Spanish galley in the strait of Gibraltar , the 24. of April 1590. 
 t be not long since sundry valiant ship appertain to the merchant of London , be freight and rig forth , some for Venice , some for Constantinople , and some to sundry other place of traffic , among who these ensue meet within the strait of Gibraltar , as they be 
 take their course homeward , have before escape all other danger . the first whereof be the Salomon appertain to m. Aiderman Barnam of London , and m. bond , and m. Twyd of Harwich ; which go forth the first day of February last . the second be the Margaret and John belong to m. wat of London : the third be the minion : the four be the ascension . the five be the centurion of master cordal : the sixth the violet : the seven the Samuel : the eight the crescent : the nine the Elizabeth : and the 10. be the Richard belong to m. Duffield . all these ship be of notable and approve service , coming near to the mouth of the strait hard by the coast of Barbary , descry twelve tall galley brave furnish and strong provide with man and munition , ready to seize upon these english ship : which be perceive by the captain and master thereof , we make speedy preparation for the defence of our self , 31 
 [ ii two . 167. ] 
 February 
 I59° - 
 still wait all the night long for the approach of the enemy . in the morning early be the Tuesday in Easter week , and the 24 of April 1590. accord to our usual custom , we say service and make our prayer unto almighty God , beseech he to save we from the hand of such tyrant as the Spaniard , who we just imagine to be , and who we know and have find to be our most mortali enemy upon the sea and have finish our prayer , and set our self in a readi ness , we perceive they to come towards we , and that they be indeed the spanish galley that lie under the conduct of Andre Doria , who be viceroy for the king of Spain in the strait of Gibraltar , and a notable know enemy to all Englishman . so when they come somewhat near unto we , they wave we a main for the king of Spain , and we wave they a main for the queen of England , at which time it please almighty God great to encourage we all in such sort , as that the near they come the less we fear their great multitude and huge number of man , which be plant in those galley to the number of two or three hundred man in each galley . and it be thus conclude among we , that the four first and tall ship shall be place hindmost , and the weak and small ship foremost , and so it be perform , every man be ready to take part of such success as it shall please God to send . 
 at the first encounter the galley come upon we very fierce , yet God so strengthen we , that if they have . bene ten time more , we have not fear they at all . whereupon the Salomon be a hot ship , and have sundry cast piece in she , give the first shoot in such a sour sort , as that it share away so many man as sit on the one side of a galley , and pierce she through in such manner , as that she be ready to sink , which make they to assault we the more fierce . whereupon the rest of our ship , especial the four chief , namely , the Margaret and John , the minion , and the ascension 
 follow , and give a hot charge upon they , and they at we , where begin a hot and fierce battle with great valiancy the one against the other , and so continue for a figjit if six the space of six hour . about the begin of this tu > ure our fight there come two Fleming to our fleet , who see the force of the galley to be so great , the one of they present yield , strike his sail , and be take by the galley , whereas if they will have offer they - p^^ self to have fight in our behalf and their own defence , they need not to have be take so cowardly as they be to their cost . the other Fleming be also ready to perform the like piece of service begin to veil his sail , and intend to have yield immediate . 
 but the trumpeter in that ship pluck forth his falchion and step to the pilot at the helm , and vow that if he do not speedy put off to the english fleet , and so take part with they , he will present kill he : which the pilot for fear of death do , and so by that mean they be defend from present death , and from the tyrannic of those Spaniard , which doubtless they shall have find at their hand . 
 thus we continue in fight six hour and somewhat more , wherein God give we the upper hand , and we escape the hand of so many enemy , who be constrain to fly into harbour and shroud themselves from we , and with speed to seek for their own safety . this be the handy work of God , who defend we all from danger in such sort , as that there be not one man of we slay . and in all this fierce assault make upon we by the spanish power , we sustain no hurt or damage at all more than this , that the shroud and backestay of the Salomon , who give the first and last shot , and gall the enemy shrewd all the time of the battle , be clean strike off 
 the battle be cease , we be constrain for want of wind to stay and waft up and down , and then go back again to tition in Barbary , which be six league off from Gibraltar , and when we come thither we find vn 33 c 
 the people wondrous favourable to we , who be but moor and heathen people show we where to have fresh water and all other necessary for we . and there we have such good entertainment , as if we have be in any place of England . 
 the governor be one that favour we great , who we in respect of his great friendship present with gift and such commodity as we have in our custody , which he wonderful well accept of : and here we stay four day . 
 after the battle be cease , which be on easter Tuesday , we stay for want of wind before Gibraltar , until the next morning , where we be becalm , and [ ii two . 168. ] therefore look every hour when they will have send forth some fresh supply against we , but they be far unable to do it , for all their galley be so sore batter , that they dare not come forth of the harbour , by reason of our hot resistance which they so late before have receive . yet be they great urge thereunto by the governor of the say town of Gibraltar . 
 at our being at tition in Barbary , there we hear report of the hurt that we have do to the galley , for at our come from they we can not well discern any thing at all by reason of the smoke which the powder have make : there we hear that we have almost spoil those twelve galley by shoot they clean through , that two of they be ready to sink , and that we have slay of their man such great abundance , as that they be not able to furnish forth any more galley at all for that year . 
 thus after we come from tition , we assay to depart the straight three several time , but can not pass , yet , God be thank , the four time we come safe away , and so sail with a pleasant wind until we come upon the coast of England , which be in the begin of the month of July 1590. 
 . 