the cast away of the Toby near cape espartel corrupt call cape Sprat without the strait of Gibraltar on the coast of Barbary . x593 - 
 he Toby of London a ship of 250 ton man with fifty man , the owner whereof be the worshipful m. Richard staper , be bind for Livorno , Zante and Patras in Morea , be lade with merchandise to the value of 11 or 12 thousand pound sterling , set sail 
 from Blackwall the 16 day of August 1593 , and we go thence to Portesmouth where we take in great quantity of wheat , and set sail forth of Stokes bay in the isle of wight , the 6. day of October , the wind be fair : and the 16 of the same month we be in the heighth of cape S. Vincent , where on the next morning we descry a sail which lie in try right a head off we , to which we give chase with very much wind , the sail be a Spaniard , which we find in fine so good of sail that we be fain to leave she and give she over . two day after this we have sight of mount Chiego , which be the first highland which we descry on the spanish coast at the entrance of the strait of Gibraltar , where we have very foul weather and the wind scant two day together . here we lay off to the sea . the master , who name be George Goodlay , be a young man , and one which never take charge before for those part , be very proud of that charge which he be little able to discharge , neither will take any counsel of any of his company , but do as he think best himself , and in the end of the two day of foul weather cast about , and the wind be fair , bare in with the straight mouth . the 19 day at night he think that he be far off the land than he be , bare sail all that night , and a hour and 124 
 the cast away of the ‘ Toby ’ a.d. 
 . * 593 - 
 a half before day have run our ship upon the ground on the coast of Barbary without the straight four league to the south of cape Espartel . whereupon be all not a little astonish , the master say unto we , i pray you forgive i ; for this be my fault and no man else . the company ask he whether they shall cut off the main mast : no say the master we will hoist out our boat . but one of our man ' come speedy up , say , sir , the ship be full of water , well say the master , then cut the maine-mast over board : which thing we do with all speed . but the after part sudden split a sunder in such sort that no man be able to stand upon it , but all flee upon the foremast up into the shroud thereof ; and hang there for a time : but see nothing but present death approach ( be so sudden take that we can not make a raft which we have ■ determine ) we commit our self unto the lord and begin with doleful tune and heavy heart to sing the 12 psalm . help lord for good and godly man etc howbeit before we have finish four verse the wave of the sea have stop the breath of most of our man . for the foremast with the weight of our man and the force of the sea fall down into the water , and upon the fall thereof there be 38 drown , and only 12 by God providence partly by swim and other mean of chest goat on shore , which be about a quarter of a mile from the wrack of the ship . the [ ii two . 202. ] master call George Goodley , and William Palmer his mate , both perish . m. Caesar also be captain and owner be likewise drown : none of the officer be save but the carpenter . 
 we twelve which the lord have deliver from extreme danger of the sea , at our come ashore fall in a manner into as great distress . at our first come on shore we all fall down on our knee , pray the lord most humble for his merciful goodness . our prayer be do , we consult together what course 
 I25 
 to take , see we be fall into a desert place , and we travel all that day until night , sometime one way and sometime another , and can find no kind of inhabitant ; only we see where wild beast have be , and place where there have be house , which after we perceive to have be burn by the Portugal . so at night fall into certain grove of olive tree , we climb up and sit in they to avoid the danger of lion and other wild beast , whereof we see many the next morning . the next day we travel until three of the clock in the afternoon without any food , but water and wild date root : then go over a mountain , we have sight of cape Espartel ; whereby we know somewhat better which way to travel , and then we go forward until we come to a hedgerow make with great long cane ; we spy and look over it , and behold a number of man aswell horseman as footman , to the number of some five thousand in skirmish together with small shot and other weapon . and after consultation what we be best to do , we conclude to yield our self unto they , be destitute of all mean of resistance . So rise up we march towards they , who espy we , forthwith some hundred of they with their javelin in their hand come run towards we as though they will have run we through : howbeit they only strike we flatling with their weapon , and say that we be Spaniard : and we tell they that we be Englishman ; which they will not believe yet . by and by the conflict be end , and night approaching , the captain of the moor , a man of some 56 year old , come himself unto we , and by his interpretor which speak Italian , ask what we be , and from whence we come . one Thomas Henmer of our company which can speak Italian , declare unto he that we be merchant , and how by great misfortune our ship , merchandise , and the great part of our company be pitiful cast away upon their coast . but he void of humainity and all manhood , for all this , cause 126 
 the cast away of the ‘ Toby ’ a.d. 
 i593-his man to strip we out of our apparel even to our shirt to see what money and jewel we have about we : which when they have find to the value of some 200 pound in gold and pearl they give we some of our apparel again , and bread and water only to comfort we . the next morning they carry we down to the shore where our ship be cast away , which be some sixteen mile from that place . in which journey they use we like their slave , make we ( be extreme weak , ) to carry their stuff , and offer to beat we if we go not so fast as they . we ask they why they use we so , and they reply , that we be their captive : we say we be their friend , and that there be never Englishman captive to the king of Morocco . 
 so we come down to the ship , and lie there with they seven day , while they have get all the good they can , and then they part it among they . after the end of these seven day the captain appoint twenty of his man well arm , to bring we up into you country : and the first night we come to the side of a river call Alarach , where we lie on the grass all that night : so the next day we go over the river in a frigate of nine oar on a side , the river be in that place above a quarter of a mile broad : and that day we go to a town of thirty house , call Totteon : there we lie four day have nothing to feed on but bread and water ; and than we go to a town call Cassuri , and there we . be deliver by those twenty soldier unto the Alcaide , which examine we what we be : and we tell he . he give we a good answer , and send we to the Jew house , where we lie seven day . in the mean while that we lay here , there be bring thither twenty Spaniard and twenty Frenchman , which Spaniards be take in a conflict on land , but the Frenchman be by foul weather cast on land within the strait about cape de gate , and so make captive . thus at the seven day end we twelve Englishmen , the twelve french , 
 127 
 and the twenty Spaniard be all conduct towards Morocco with nine hundred soldier , horseman and fotman , and in two day journey we come to the river of Fez , where we lodge all night , be provide of tent . the next day we go to a town call Salle , and lie without the town in tent . from thence we travel almost a hundred mile without find any town , but every night we come to fresh water , which be partly run water and sometime rain water . so we come at last within three mile of the city of Morocco , where we pitch our tent : and there we meet with a carrier which do travel in the country for the english merchant : and by he we send word unto they of our estate : and they return the next day unto we a moor , which bring we victual , be at that instant very feeble and hungry ; and withal send we a letter with pen , ink , and paper , will we to write unto they what ship it be that be cast away , and how many and what man there be alive . for say they we will know with speed , for to morrow be the king court : and therefore we will know , for that you shall come into the city like captive . but for all that we be carry in as captive and with rope about our neck as well English as the french and Spaniards . and so we be carry before the king : and when we come before he he do commit we all to ward , where we lie 15 day in close prison : and in the end we be clear by the english merchant to their great charge : for our deliverance cost they 700 ounce , every ounce in that country containing two shilling . and when we come out of prison we go to the alfandica , where we continue eight week with the english merchant . at the end of which time be well apparel by the bounty of our merchant we be convey down by the space of eight day journey to saint Cruz , where the english ship road : where we take ship about the 20 of march , two in the anne Francis of London , and five more of we five 
 128 
 day after in the expedition of London , and two more in a flemish flyboat , and one in the mary Edward also of London , other two of our number die in the country of the bloody-flux : the one at our first imprisonment at Morocco , who name be George Hancock , and the other at saint Cruz , who name be Robert Swancon , who death be hasten by eat of root and other unnatural thing to slake their rage hunger in our travail , and by our hard and cold lodging in the open field without tent . thus of fifty person through the rashness of a unskilful master ten only survive of we , and after a thousand misery return home poor , sick , and feeble into our country . 
 Richard Johnson . Thomas Henmore . 
 William William carpenter . John Silvester . 
 John Durham . Thomas Whiting . 
 Abraham rouse . William church . 
 John Matthewes . John fox . 
 . 