a true report of the honourable service at sea perform by sir John Burrough knight , lieutenant generail of the fleet prepare by the honour . sir Walter Ralegh knight , lord warden of the stannery of Cornwall and Devon . wherein chief the Santa Clara of Biscay , a ship of 600 ton be take , and the two east indian carack , the Santa Cruz ' and the Madre de Dios be force , the one burn , and the other take and bring into Dartmouth the seven of September , 1592. 
 ir Walter Ralegh upon commission receive from her majesty for a expedition to be make to the west Indies , slack not his uttermost diligence to make full provision of all thing necessary , as both in his choice of good ship , and sufficient man to perform the action 
 evident appear . for his ship which be in number 14 or 15 , those two of her majesty , the garland and the foresight be the chief ; the rest 
 either his own or his good friend or adventurer of London . for the gentleman his consort and officer , to give they their right , they be so well quality in courage , experience , and discretion , as the great prince may repute himself happy to be serve with their like . the honour of lieutenant general be impose upon sir John Burrough , a gentleman , for his manifold good and heroical part , think every way worthy of that commandment : with who after sir W. R. return be join in commission sir Martin Frobisher , who for his speciali skill and knowledge in marine cause have former carry employment of like or great place . the rest of the captain , soldier , and sailor be man of notable resolution , and for the most part such as heretofore have give to the world sufficient proof of their valour in diverse service of the like nature . with these ship thus man sir Walter Ralegh depart towards the west country , there to store himself with such further necessary as the state of his voyage do needful require : where the westerly wind blow for a long time contrary to his course , bind and constrain he to keep Rarborough so many week , that the fit season for his purpose be go , the mind of his people much alter , his victual consume ; and withal , her majesty understand how cross all this sort , begin to call the proceed of this preparation into question : insomuch that , whereas the sixth of May be first come before sir Walter can put to sea , the very next day sir Martin Frobisher in a pinnace of my lord admiral call the disdain , meet he , and bring to he from her majesty letter of revocation , with commandment to relinquish ( for his own part ) the [ ii two . 195. ] intend attempt , and to leave the charge and conduct of all thing in the hand of sir John Burrough and sir Martin Frobisher . but sir Walter find his honour so far engage in the undertake of this voyage , as without proceed he see no remedy either to salve his reputation , or to content those his friend which have put 
 106 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ in adventure of great sum with he ; and make construction of the queen letter in such sort as if her commandment have be propound in indifferent term , either to advance forward or to retire , at his own discretion ; will in no case yield to leave his fleet now under sail . wherefore continue his course into the sea , he meet within a day or two , with certain sail late come from Spain : among which be a ship appertain to monsieur Gourdon governor of Caleis , and find aboard her one m. Nevel Davies a Englishman , who have endure a long and miserable captivity for the space of twelve year , partly in the inquisition in Spain , be now by good fortune escape , and upon return to his country . this man , among other thing , report for certain , that there be little hope of any good this year to be do in the west India ; consider that the king of Spain have send express order to all the port both of the hand and of terra firma , that no ship shall stir that year , nor any treasure be lay aboard for Spain . but neither this unpleasant relation nor ought else can stay his proceed , until a tempest of strange and uncouth violence arise upon Thursday the 11 of May , when he be athwart the cape Finister , have so scatter the great part of the fleet , and sink his boat and pinnace , that as the rest be drive and sever , some this way and some that , sir Walter himself be in the garland of her majesty be in danger to be swallow up of the sea whereupon sir W. Ralegh find that the season of the year be too far go to proceed with the enterprise which he have upon Panama , have be hold on the english coast from February till may , and thereby spend three month victual ; and consider withal , that to lie upon the spanish coast or at the hand to attend the return of the east or West indian fleet be rather a work of patience then ought else : he give direction to sir John Burgh and sir m. Frobisher to divide the fleet in two part ; sir m. with the garland , cap . George Gifford , 107 
 the santa Clara a Biscain ship oj 600 ton take . 
 cap . Henry thin , cap . Grenvile and other to lie off the south cape , thereby to amaze the spanish fleet , and to hold they on their own coast ; while sir J. Burgh , captain . Robert cross , captain . Tomson , and other shall attend at the hand for the carack or any other spanish ship come from Mexico or other part of the west Indies . which direction take effect accord ; for the king of Spain admiral receive intelligence that the english fleet be come on the coast , attend to defend the south part of Spain , and to keep himself as near sir Mart. Frobisher as he can , to impeach he in all thing which he may undertake ; and thereby neglect the safeconduct of the carack , with who it fare as hereafter shall appear . before the fleet sever themselves they meet with a great Biscain on the spanish coast call Santa Clara a ship of 600 ton . 
 the noise of the artillery on both side be hear , immediate they draw to their fleet ; where after a reasonable hot fight , the ship be enter and master , which they find freight with all sort of small ironwork , as horse-shoe , nail , ploughshare , iron bar , spike , bolt , lock , gimbol , and such like , value by we at 6000 or 7000 livre . but worth to they treble the value . This Biscain be sail towards saint Lucar , there to take in some further provision for the west India . this ship be first roomage , and after send for England , our fleet coast along towards the southcape of S. Vincent , and by the way , about the rock near Lisbon , sir John Burrough in the roebuck spy a sail afar off , give her present chase ; which be a flyboat and of good sail , draw he far southwards before he can fetch she ; but at last she come under his lee and strike sail . the master of which flyboat come aboard he , confess that the king indeed have prepare a great fleet ' in saint Lucar and Cadiz , and ( as the report in Spain be currant ) for the west Indies . but in deed the spanish king have provide this fleet upon this counsel . he receive intelligence , that sir Walter Ralegh be to put 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ 
 out strong for the west India : to impeach he , and to ranconter his force he appoint this fleet ; although look for the arrival of his east indian carack , he first ordain those ship to waft they from the azore . but persuade himself , that if the fleet of sir Walter Ralegh do go for the west India , than the hand shall have none to infest they but small man of war , which the carack of themselves will be well able to match ; his order be to don Alonso de ba ? a brother to the mark of Santa Cruz , and general of his armada , to pursue sir Walters fleet , and to confront he , what course soever he hold . and that this be true , our man in short time by proof understand : for sir John Burrough , not long after the take of his last prize the flyboat , as he sail back again towards the rest of his company , discover the spanish fleet to seaward of he : which have likewise espy he betwixt they and the shore , make full account to bring he safe into spanish harbour ; and therefore spread themselves in such sort before he , that indeed his danger be very great : for both the liberty of the sea be bring into a narrow straight , and the shore be enemy can give he no comfort of relief : so that trust to god help only and his good sail , he thrust out from among they in spite of all their force , and to the notable illusion of all their cunning , which they show to the uttermost , in lay the way for his apprehension . but now sir John Burrough have happy escape their douche , find the coast guard by this fleet , and know it be but folly to expect a meeting there with sir Martin Frobisher ( who understanding of this armada aswell as himself , will be sure not to come that way ) begin to shape his course to the azore accord to sir W. ralegh direction , and come in sight of saint Michael , run so near by villa Franca , that he may easy discern the ship lie there at anchor . diverse small caravel both here and between saint George and the pike in his course towards Flores he intercept ; of which no great intelli - 
 109 
 [ ii two . 196. ] 
 sir John Burrough in great danger of the spanish fleet . 
 the lie of . Michael . 
 diverse small ship take . 
 gence for his affair can be understand . arrive before Flores upon Thursday the 21 of June , towards evening , accompany only with captain Caufield and the master of his ship , the rest not be yet arrive , he make towards the shore with his boat , find all the Santa Cruz a people of Santa Cruz , a village of that hand , in arm , wbagemthe fear their land , and ready marshal to defend e oj oar , town from spoil . sir John contrariwise make sign of amity unto they by advance a white flag , a common token of peace , which be answer again of they with the like : whereupon ensue intercourse of good friendship ; and pledge be take on both side , the captain of the town for they , and captain Caufield for we : so that whatsoever our man want , which that place can supply either in fresh water , victual , or the like , be very willing grant by the inhabitant : and good leave have they to refresh themselves on shore as much and as oft as they will without restraint . at new of the this Santa Cruz sir John Burrough be inform , that arah^ * ndeed there be among they no expectation of any ’ fleet to come from the west , but from the east , that no 
 long since than three day before his arrival a carrack be pass by for Lisbon , and that there be four carack more behind , of one consort . sir John be very glad of this news , stay no long on shore , but present embark himself , have only in company a small bark of threescore ton belong to one m. Hopkins of Bristol . in the mean while that these thing thus pass at Flores , part of the rest of the english fleet , which sir John Burrough have leave upon the coast of Spain , draw also towards the azore : and whereas he quick at sea have discover one of the carack , the same evening he may descry two or three of the earl of cumberland ship ( whereof one m. Norton be captain ) which have in like sort ken the carrack , pursue she by that course which they see she to run towards the hand . but on no side be there any way make by reason of a great calm which yield 
 iio 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ a.d. 
 1592-no breath to spread a sail . insomuch that fit to discover she what she be , of what burden , force , and countenance , sir John Burrough take his boat , and row the space of three mile , to make she exact : and be return , he consult with the better sort of the company then present , upon the board she in the morning . but a very mighty storm arise in the night , the extremity thereof force they all to weigh anchor , yet their care be such in wrestle with the weather not to lose the carrack , that in the morning , the tempest be qualify , and our man bear again with the shore , they may perceive the carrack very near the land , and the Portugal confuse carry on shore such thing as they can any manner of way convey out of she ; and see the haste our man make to come upon they , forsake she : but first , that nothing may be acarakcal left commodious to our man , set fire to that which they can not carry with they , intend by that mean whole to consume she ; that neither glory of victory nor benefit of ship may remain to we . and lest the approach and industry of the english shall bring mean to extinguish the flame , thereby to preserve the residue of that which the fire have not destroy ; be four hundred of they in number and well arm , they intrench themselves on land so near to the carrack , that she be by their force protect , and our man keep aloof off , the fire may continue to the consumption of the whole . This be note by sir John Burrough he soon provide a present remedy for this mischief . for land one hundred of his man , whereof many do swim a hundred and wade more than breast high to shore , and easy °four man scatter those that present themselves to guard the ' land ' coast , he no soon draw towards their new trench , but they flee immediate , leave as much as the fire have spare to be the reward of our man pain . here be take among other one Vincent Fonseca a Portugal , purser of the carrack , with two other , one a almain and the second a low-dutchman , canonier : who refuse 
 to make any voluntary report of those thing which be demand of they , have the torture threaten , the fear whereof at the last wrest from they this intelligence , that within fifteen day three other great carack than that late fire will arrive at the same hand : and that be five carack in the fleet at their departure from goa , to wit , the Buen Jesus admiral , the Madre de Dios , the saint Bernardo , the saint Christophero , and the saint Cruz , ( who fortune you have already hear ) they have receive speciali commandement from the king not to [ ii two . 197. ] touch in any case at the hand of S. Helena , where the 
 Portugal carack in their return from the east India be always till now wont to arrive to refresh themselves with water and victual . and the king reason be ; because of the english man of war , who ( as he be inform ) lie there in wait to intercept they . if therefore their necessity of water shall drive they to Angola a new seek supply any where , he appoint they Angola in foi^thecaraks ma*ne Africa , with order there to stay only the 
 ’ take in of water to avoid the inconvenice of infection , whereunto that hot latitude be dangerous subject . the last rendezvous for they all be the hand of Flores , where the king assure they not to miss of his armada thither send of purpose for their waft to Lisbon . upon this information sir John draw to counsel , meet there captain Norton , captain Dounton , captain Abraham cock , captain of three ship of the earl of Cumberland , m. Tomson of Harwich cap . of the dainty of sir John haukin , one of sir W. ralegh fleet , and m. Christopher Newport cap . of the golden dragon new return from the west India , and other . Theise be assemble , he communicate with they what he have understand of the foresay examinate , and what great presumption of truth their relation do carry : wish that forasmuch as God and good fortune have bring they together in so good a season , they will show the uttermost of their endeavour to bring these Easterling under the lee of the english obedience . hereupon a 
 i i 2 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ present accord on all side follow not to part company or leave of those sea till time shall present cause to put their consultation in execution . the next day her majesty good ship the foresight command by sir Rob. Crosse come in to the rest : and he likewise inform of the matter be soon draw into this service . thus sir John with all these ship depart thence 6 or 7 league to the west of Flores , they spread themselves abroad from the north to the south , each ship two league at the least distant from another . by which order of extension they be able to discover the space of two whole degree at sea . in this sort they lie from the 29 of June to the three of August , what time cap . Thomson in the dainty have first sight of the huge carrack call the Madre de Dios , one of the great receit belong to the crown of Portugal . the dainty be off excellent sail get the start of the rest of our fleet , and begin the conflict somewhat to her cost , with the slaughter and hurt of diverse of her man . within a while after , sir John Burrough in the roebuck of sir W. ralegh , be at hand to second she , who salute she with shot of great ordinance , and continue the fight within musket shoot assist by cap . Tomson and cap . Newport till sir R. across viceadmiral of the fleet come up be to leeward , at who arrival sir J. Burgh demand of he what be best to be do , who answer , that if the carrack be not board she will recover the shore and fire herself as the other have do . whereupon sir J. Burgh conclude to entangle she ; and sir R. cross promise also to fasten himself to she together at the instant ; which be perform : but after a while sir John Burgh receive a shot with a canon pery under water , and ready to sink , desire sir R. C. to fall off , that he may also clear himself , and save his ship from sink , which with difficulty he do : for both the roebuck and the foresight be so entangle , as with much ado can they clear themselves . 
 the same evening sir R. across find the carrack then unto 113 h 
 sure and draw near the hand persuade his company to board she again , or else there be no hope to recover she : who after many excuse and fear , be by he encourage , and so fall athwart her foreship all alone ; and so hinder she sail that the rest have time to themadrede come up to his succour , and to recover the carrack year she Dios take . recover the land : and so towards the evening after he have fight with her alone three hour single , my lord of cumberland two ship come up , and with very little loss enter with sir R. cross , who have in that time break their courage , and make the assault easy for the rest . 
 the general have disarm the Portugal , and stow they for better security on all side , first have present to his eye the true proportion of the vast body of this carrack , which do then and may still just provoke the admiration of all man not former acquaint with such a sight . but albeit this first appearance of the hugeness thereof yield sight enough to entertain our man eye ; yet the pitiful object of so many body slay and dismember can not but draw each man eye to see , and heart to lament , and hand to help those miserable people , who limne be so tear with the violence of shot , and pain make grievous with the multitude of wound . no man can almost step but upon a dead carcase or a bloody floor , but special about the helm , where very many of they fall sudden from stir to die . for the greatness of the stirrage require the labour of twelve or fourteen man at once , and some of our ship beat she in at the stern with their ordinance often time with one shot slay four or five labour on either side of the helm ; who room be still furnish with fresh supply , and our artillery still play upon they with continual volley , it can not be but that much blood shall be shed in that place . exceed whereupon our general move with singular commiser-shmecpto the ation their misery , send they his own chirurgeon , enemy . deny they no possible help or relief that he or any 
 114 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ a.d. 
 1592. 
 of his company can afford they . among the rest of [ ii two . 198. ] those , who state this chance have make very deplorable , be don Fernando de Mendosa grand captain and commander of this carake : who indeed be descend of the house of Mendosa in Spain ; but be marry into Portugal , live there as one of that nation ; a gentleman well strike in year , well speak , of comely personage , of good stature , but of hard fortune . in his several service against the moor he be twice take prisoner , and both time ransom by the king . in a former voyage of return from the east India he be drive upon the Baxos or sand of Juda near the coast of Cephala , be then also captain of a carrack which be there lose , and himself , though escape the seadanger , yet fall into the hand of infidel on land ; who keep he under long and grievous servitude . once more the king carry a love respect to the man , and desirous to better his condition , be content to let he try his fortune in this easterly navigation , and commit unto he the conduct of this carrack , wherein he go from Lisbon general of the whole fleet , and in that degree have return , if the vice-rey of goa embark for Portugal in the bon Jesus have not , by reason of his late office , be prefer . sir John intend not to add too much affliction to the afflict , move with pity and compassion of humane misery , in the end resolve free to dismiss this captain and the most part of his follower to their own country , and for the same purpose ’ bestow they in certain vessel furnish with all kind of necessary provision . this business thus dispatch , good leisure have he to take such view of the good as conveniency may afford . and have very prudent ( to cut off the unprofitable spoil and pillage whereunto he see the mind of many incline ) seize upon the whole to her majesty use , after a short and slender rummage and search of such thing as first come to hand , he perceive that you wealth will arise nothing disanswerable to expectation ; but that the variety and 
 a brief cata-hpie of you sundry rich commodity of the Madre de Dios. 
 grandure of all rich commodity will be more theft sufficient to content both the adventurer desire and the soldier travel . and here i can but enter into the consideration and acknowledgement of God great favour towards our nation , who by put this purchase into our hand have manifest discover those secret trade and indian riches , which hitherto lie strange hide , and cunning conceal from we ; whereof there be among some few of we some small and unperfect glimpse only , which now be turn into the broad light of full and perfect knowledge . whereby it shall seem that the will of God for our good be ( if our weakness can apprehend it ) to have we communicate with they in those east indian treasure , and by the erection of a lawful traffic to better our mean to advance true religion and his holy service . the carrack be in burden by the estimation of the wise and experience no less than 1600 ton have full 900 of those stow with the gross bulk of merchandise , the rest of the tunnage be allow , partly to the ordinance which be 32 piece of brass of all sort , partly to the passenger and the victual , which can not be any small quantity , consider the number of the person betwixt 600 and 700 , and the length of the navigation . to give you a taste ( as it be ) of the commodity , it shall suffice to deliver you a general particularity of they , accord to the catalogue take at leaden hall the 15 of September 1592. where upon good view it be find , that the principali ware after the jewel ( which be no doubt of great value , though they never come to light ) consist of spice , drug , silk , calico , quilt , carpet and colour , etc the spice be pepper , clove , mace , nutmeg , cinamom , green ginger : the drug be benjamim , frankincense , galingale , mirabolan , aloe zocotrina , camphire : the silk , damask , taffatas , sarcenet , altobassos , that be , counterfeit cloth of gold , unwrought China silk , sleaved silk , white twist such , curl cypress . the calico be book-calico , calico-lanes , broad white calico , fine 116 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ aa 1592-starched calico , course white calico , brown broad calico , brown course calico . there be also canopy , and course diaper-towel , quilt of course sarsenet and of calico , carpet like those of Turkey ; whereunto be to be add the pearl , musk , civet , and amber-griece . the rest of the ware be many in number , but less in value ; as elephant tooth , porcellan vessel of China , coconut , hide , eben-wood as black as jet , bedsted of the same , cloth of the rind of tree very strange for the matter , and artificiali in workmanship . all which pile of commodity be by man of approve judgement rate but in reasonable sort amount to no less than 150000 livre . sterling , which be divide among the adventurer ( whereof her majesty be the chief ) be sufficient to yield contentment to all party . the cargazon be take out , and the good freight in ten of our ship send for London , to the end that the bigness , heighth , length , breadth , and other dimension of so huge a vessel may by the exact rule of Geometricali observation be true take , both for present knowledge , and derivation also of the same unto posterity , one m. 
 Robert Adam , a man in his faculty of excellent skill , capacity omit nothing in the description , which either his art can demonstrate , or any man judgement think worthy jytos 
 the memory . after a exquisite survey of the whole frame he find the length from the beakhead to the stern ( whereupon be erect a lantern ) to contain 165 foot . the breadth in the second close deck whereof [ ii two . 199. ] she have three , this be the place where there be most extension of breadth , be 46 foot and 10 inch . she draw in water 31 foot at her departure from Cochin in India , but not above 26 at her arrival in Dartmouth , be lighten in her voyage by diverse mean , some 5 foot . she carry in height 7 several story , one main orlop , three close deck , one forecastle , and a spar-deck of two floor a piece . the length of the keel be 100 foot , of the mainmast 121 foot , and the circuit about at the partner 10 foot 7 inch , the mainyard be 106 
 117 
 foot long . by which perfect commensuration of the part appear the hugeness of the whole , far beyond the mould of the big ship use among we either for war or receit . 
 do Alonso de ba ? an have a great fleet and suffer these two carack , the Santa Cruz to be burn , and the Madre de Dios to be take , be disgrace by his prince for this negligence . 
 . 