a discourse write by sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , to prove a passage by the northwest to Cathaia , and the east Indies . 
 the table of the matter in every chapter of this discourse . 
 Capitulo 1. 
 o prove by authority a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , China , and to the east India . 
 Capitulo 2. 
 to prove by reason a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , Moluccas , etc 
 Capitulo 3. 
 to prove by experience of sundry man travail the open of this northwest passage , whereby good hope remain of the rest . 
 158 
 to prove by circumstance , that the northwest passage have be sail throughout . 
 Capitulo 5. 
 to prove that such Indians as have be drive upon the coast of Germany come not thither by the southeast , and Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America . 
 Capitulo 6. 
 to prove that the indian aforenamed come not by the north-east , and that there be no thorough passage navigable that way . 
 Capitulo 7. 
 to prove that these Indians come by the northwest , which induce a certainty of this passage by experience . 
 Capitulo 8. 
 what several reason be allege before the queen majesty , and certain lord of her highness privy council , by m. Anth. Jenkinson a gentleman of great travail and experience , to prove this passage by the north-east , with my several answer then allege to the same . 
 Capitulo 9 
 how that this passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the north-east , if there be any such . 
 Capitulo 10. 
 what commodity will ensue , this passage be once discover . 
 [ to prove 
 159 
 to prove by authority a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cathaia , and the east India . 
 chapter 1. 
 when i give my self to the study of Geographic , after i have peruse and diligent scan the description of Europe , Asia and Africa , and confer they with the map and globe both antique and modern : i come in fine to the four part of the world , common call America , which by all description i find to be a hand environ round about with sea , have on the southside of it the frete or straight of Magellan , on the west side mar deal Sur , which sea run towards the north , separate it from the east part of Asia , where the dominion of the cathaians be : on the east part our west ocean , and on the north side the sea that sever it from Groneland , through which northern sea the passage lie , which i take now in hand to discover . 
 Plato in Timaeo , and in the dialogue call Critias , discourse of a incomparable great hand then call Atlantis , be great than all Africa and Asia , which lie westward from the strait of Gibraltar , navigable round about : affirm also that the prince of Atlantis do aswell enjoy the governance of all Africa , and the most part of Europe , as of Atlantis it self . 
 also to prove Plato opinion of this hand , and the inhabit of it in ancient time by they of Europe , to be of the more credit ; Marinseus Siculus in his chronicle of Spain , report that there have be find by the Spaniard in the gold mine of America , certain piece of money engrave with the image of Augustus Caesar : which piece be send to the pope for a testimony of the matter , by John Rufus archbishop of Consentinum . 
 moreover , this be not only think of Plato , but by Marsilius Ficinus , and excellent florentine philosopher , 160 
 Crantor the grecian , and Proclus , and Philo the famous pnclut page . Jew ( as appear in his book de mundo , and in the 24-commentary upon Plato ) to be overflow and swallow up with water , by reason of a mighty earthquake , and stream down of the heavenly fludgate . the like whereof happen unto some part of Italy , when by the forciblenes of the sea , call Superum , it cut off Sicilia from the continent of Calabria , as appear in Justine , in the begin of his four book . also Justine Lib. there chance the like in Zetland a part of Flanders . 
 and also the city of Pyrrha and Antissa , about Pliny . Meotis palus : and also the city Burys , in the corynthian bosom , common call Sinus Corinthiacus , have be swallow up with the sea , and be not at this day to be discern : by which accident America grow to be unknown of long time , unto we of the late age , and be late discover again , by Americus Vespucius , in the year of our lord 1497. which some say to have be first discover by Christophorus Columbus a genuois , anno 1492. 
 the same calamity happen unto this isle of Atlantis 600. and odd year before Plato his time , which some of the people of the southeast part of the world accounted as 9000. year : for the manner then be to reckon the moon her period of the zodiak for a year , which be our usual month , depend a Luminari minori . 
 so that in these our day there can no other main or island be find or judge to be parcel of this Atlantis , than those western island , which bear now the name of America : countervail thereby the name of Atlantis , in the knowledge of our age . 
 then , if when no part of the say Atlantis be oppress by water , and earthquake , the coast round about the same be navigable : a far great hope now remain of the same by the northwest , see the most part of it be ( since that time ) swallow up with a minore ad water , which can not utter take away the old deep mai^-and channel , but rather , be a occasion of the enlarge 
 seven 161 l 
 of the old , and also a enforce of a great many new : why then shall we now doubt of our northwest passage and navigation from England to India ? etc see that Atlantis now call America , be ever know to be a island , and in those day navigable round about , which by access of more water can not be diminish . 
 also Aristotle in his book de mundo , and the learned germane Simon Gryneus in his annotation upon the same , say that the whole earth ( mean thereby , as manifest do appear , Asia , Africa , and Europe , be all the country then know ) be but one island , compass about with the reach of the sea Atlantine : which likewise prove America to be a island , and in no part adjoin to Asia , or the rest . 
 Strabo lib . 15. also many ancient writer , as Strabo and other , call both the ocean sea , ( which lie east of India ) Atlanticum pelagus , and that sea also on the west coast of Spain and Africa , mare Atlanticum : the distance between the two coast be almost half the compass of the earth . 
 so that it be incredible , as by Plato appear manifest , that the east indian sea have the name Atlanticum pelagus of the mountain Atlas in Africa , or yet the sea adjoin to Africa , have the name Oceanus Atlanticus Valerius of the same mountain : but that those sea and the anselmus in mountain Atlas be so call of this great island rum Orin Atlantis , and that the one and the other have their name dpium . folio 6. for a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas , sometime king Gen. 9 10. thereof , who be Japhet young son to Noah , in who time the whole earth be divide between the three brethren , Sem , cam , and Japhet . 
 wherefore i be of opinion that America by the northwest will be find favourable to this our enterprise , and be the rather embolden to believe the same , for that i find it not only confirm by Plato , Aristotle , and other ancient philosopher : but also by all the best [ two modern geographer , as gemma Frisius , Munsterus , Appianus , Hunterus , Gastaldus , Guyccardinus , Michael 162 
 Tramasinus , Franciscus Demongenitus , Bernardus Puteanus , Andreas Vavasor , Tramontanus , Petrus martyr , and also Ortelius , who do coast out in his general map set out anno 1569 , all the country and cape , on the northwest side of America , from Hochelaga to cape de Paramantia : describe likewise the sea coast of Cataia and Gronland , towards any part of America , make both Gronland and America , island disjoin by a great sea , from any part of Asia . 
 all which learned man and painful traveller have affirm with one consent and voice , that America be a island : and that there lie a great sea between it , Cataia , and Grondland , by the which any man of our country , that will give the attempt , may with small danger pass to Cataia , the Moluccas , India , and all other place in the east , in much short time , then either the Spaniard , or Portugal do , or may do , from the near part of any of their country within Europe . 
 what move these learned man to affirm thus much , wh i know not , or to what end so many and sundry traveller of both age have allow the same : but i reverent conjecture that they will never have so constant opinion of affirm , or notify their opinion therein to the world , worthy man . if they have not have great good cause , and many probable reason , to have lead they thereunto . 
 now lest you shall make small account of ancient writer or of their experience which travel long before our time , reckon their authority among fable of no importance : i have for the better assurance of those proof , set down some part of a discourse , write in the saxon tongue , and translate into english by m. Nowell servant to sir William Cecil , lord Burleigh , and lord high treasurer of England , wherein there be describe a navigation , which one ochther make , in the time of a navigation king Alfred , king of westsaxe anno 871. the word of ofoneqchther which discourse be these : he sail right north , have always the desert land on the starborde , and on the larboard the main sea , continue his course , until 
 163 
 a perfect description ofour Moscovia voyage - 
 by sir Hugh Willouglibie knight , chancellor and borough . 
 he perceive that the coast bow direct towards the east , or else the sea open into the land he can not tell how far , where he be compel to stay until he have a western wind , or somewhat upon the north , and sail thence direct east alongst the coast , so far as he be able in four day , where he be again enforce to tarry until he have a north wind , because the coast there bow direct towards the south , or at least open he know not how far into the land , so that he sail thence along the coast continual full south , so far as he can travel in the space of five day , where he discover a mighty river , which open far into the land , and in the entry of this river he turn back again . 
 whereby it appear that he go the very same way , that we now do yearly trade by saint Nicholas into mos-covia , which way no man in our age know for certainty to be by sea , until it be since discover by our english man , in the time of king Edward the sixth ; but think before that time that Groneland have join to Normoria , Byarmia , etc and therefore be account a new discovery , be nothing so indeed , as by this discourse of ochther it appear . 
 nevertheless if any man shall have take this voyage in hand by the encouragement of this only author , he shall have be think but simple : consider that this navigation be write so many year past , in so barbarous a tongue by one only obscure author , and yet we in these our day find by our own experience his former report to be true . 
 how much more than ought we to believe this passage to Cataia to be , be verify by the opinion of all the best , both antique , and modern geographer , and plain set out in the best and most allow map , Charts , globe , cosmographical table and discourse of this our age , and by the rest not deny , but left as a matter doubtful . 
 164 
 to prove by reason , a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cataia , etc 
 Chap. 3. 
 first , all sea be maintain by the abundance of experiment water , so that the near the end any river , bay 
 or haven be , the shallower it wax , ( although by some er ' accidentali bar , it be sometime find otherwise ) but the far you sail west from island towards the place , where this fret be think to be , the more deep be the sea : which give we good hope of continuance of the same sea with mar deal Sur , by some fret that lie between America , Groneland and Cataia . 
 2 also if that America be not a island , but a part of you continent adjoin to Asia , either the people which inhabit Mangia , Anian , and quinzay , etc be borderer upon it , will before this time have make some road into it , hope to have find some like commodity to their own . 
 3 or else the scythian and tartarian ( which often time heretofore have seek far and near for new seat , drive thereunto through the necessity of their need make cold and miserable country ) will in all this time have the old we t0 find the way to America , and enter the same , have the ’ passage be never so strait or difficult ; the country be so temperate , pleasant and fruitful , in comparison of their own . but there be never any such people find there by any of the Spaniard , Portugal , or Frenchmen , who first discover the inland of that country : which Spaniards , or Frenchmen must then of necessity have see some one civil man in America , consider how full of civil people Asia be : but they never see so much as one token or sign , that ever any man of the know part of the world have be there . 
 4 furthermore it be to be think , that if by reason of mountain , or other craggy place , the people neither 
 165 
 motum fluxus y refluxus . 
 3 motum circularem . 
 ad coeli motum elementa omnia ( excepta terra ) moventur . 
 of Cataia or Tartary can enter the country of America , or they of America have enter Asia if it be so join : yet some one savage or wander beast will in so many year have pass into it : but there have not any time be find any of the beast proper to Cataia , or Tartary etc in America : nor of those proper to America , in Tartary , Cataia , etc or any part of Asia . which thing prove America , not only to be one island , and in no part adjoin to Asia : but also that the people of those country , have not have any traffic with each other . 
 5 moreover at the least some one of those painful traveller , which of purpose have pass the confine of both country , with intent only to discover , will as it be most likely have go from the one to the other : if there have be any piece of land , or Isthmos , to have join they together , or else have declare some cause to the contrary . 
 6 but neither Paulus Venetus , who live and dwell a long time in Cataia , ever come into America , and yet be at the sea coast of Mangia , over against it where he be embark , and perform a great navigation along those sea : neither yet Verarzanus , or Franci scus Vasques de Coronado , who travel the north part of America by land , ever find entry from thence by land to Cataia , or any part of Asia . 
 7 also it appear to be a island , insomuch as the sea run by nature circular from the east to the west , follow the diurnal motion of primum Mobile , which carry with it all inferior body movable , aswell celestial as elemental : which motion of the water be most evident see in the sea , which lie on the southside of Africa , where the current that run from the east to the west be so strong ( by reason of such motion ) that the Portugal in their voyage eastward to Calicut , in pass by Cap. de buona speranda be enforce to make diverse course , the current there be so swift as it strike from thence all along westward 
 166 
 1576. upon the fret of Magellan , be distant from thence , near the four part of the longitude of the earth : and not have free passage and entrance through the fret towards the west , by reason of the narrowness of the say strait of Magellan , it run to salve this wrong ( nature not yield to accidentali restraint ) all along the eastern coast of America , northwards so far as cape Fredo , be the far know place of the same continent towards the north : which be about 4800 league , reckon therewithal ! the trending of the land . 
 8 so that this current be continual maintain with such force , as Jaques Cartier affirm it to be , who meet with the same be at baccalaos , as he sail along the coast of America , then either it must of necessity have way to pass from cape Fredo , through this fret , westward towards Cataia , be know to come so far , only to salve his former wrong , by the authority before name : or else it must needs strike over , upon the coast of island , Norway , Finmarke , and Lappia , ( which be east from the say place about 360 league ) with great force than it do from cape de Posita causa , buona speranda , upon the fret of Magellan , or from effec-the fret of Magellan to cape Fredo , upon which coast ' Jaques Cartier meet with the same , consider the shortness of the cut from the say cape Fredo , to island , Lappia , etc and so the cause efficient remain , it will have continual follow along our coast , through the narrow sea , which it do not , but be digested about the north of Labrador , by some through passage there through this fret . 
 the like course of the water in some respect happen in the mediterrane sea ( as affirm Conterenus ) whereas Conterenus . the current which come from Tanais , and Pontus Euxinus , run along all the coast of Greece , Italy , France , and Spain , and not find sufficient way out through Gibraltar , by mean of the straitness of the fret it run back again along the coast of Barbary , by Alexandria , Anatolia , etc 
 167 
 a objection answer . the sea do evermore per-fbrme this circular motion , either in Suprema , or concava superficie aqua . 
 the ice set westward every year from island . Auth. Jona arngrimo . 
 it may ( peradventure ) be think that this course of the sea do sometime surcease , and thereby impugn this principle , because it be not discern all along the coast of America , in such sort as Jaques Cartier find it : whereunto i answer this : that albeit , in every part of the coast of America , or elsewhere this current be not sensible perceive , yet it have evermore such like motion , either in the uppermost or nethermost part of the sea : as it may be prove true , if you sink a sail by a couple of rope , near the ground , fasten to the nethermost corner two gun chamber or other weight : by the drive whereof you shall plain perceive , the course of the water , and current , run with such course in the bottom . 
 by the like experiment , you may find the ordinary motion of the sea , in the ocean : how far soever you be off the land . 
 9 also there come another current from out the north-east from the scythian sea ( as m. Jenkinson a man of rare virtue , great travail and experience , tell i ) which run westward towards Labrador , as the other do , which come from the south : so that both these current , must have way through this our fret , or else encounter together and run contrary course , in one line , but no such conflict of stream , or contrary course be find about any part of Labrodor , or terra nova , as witness our yearly fisher , and other sailor that way , but be there digest , as aforesaid , and find by experience of Barnard de la Torre , to fall into mar deal Sur. 
 10 furthermore , the current in the great ocean , can not have be maintain to run continual one way , from the begin of the world unto this day , have there not be some thorough passage by the fret aforesaid , and so by circular motion be bring again to maintain it self : for the tide and course of the sea be maintained by their interchangeable motion : as fresh river be by spring , by ebb and flow , by rarefaction and condensation . 
 168 
 so that it rest not possible ( so far as my simple reason can comprehend ) that this perpetuali current can by any mean be maintain , but only by continual reaccess of the same water , which pass through the fret , and be bring about thither again , by such circular motion as aforesaid . and the certain fall thereof by this fret into mar deal Sur be prove by the testimony and experience , of Bernard de la Torre , who be send from P. de la Natividad to the Moluccae , anno domini 1542. by commandment of Anthony Mendoza , than viceroy of Nova Hispania , which Bernard sail 750. league , on the northside of the aequator , and there meet with a current , which come from the north-east the which drive he back again to Tidore . 
 wherefore , this current be prove to come from C. de buona speranda to the fret of Magellan , and want sufficient entrance there , by narrowness of the strait , be by the necessity of nature force , bring to terra de Labrador , where Jaques Cartier meet the same , and thence certain know , not to strike over upon island , Lappia , etc and find by Bernard de la Torre in Mar del Sur , on the backside of America : therefore this current ( have none other passage ) must of necessity , fall out through this our fret into mar deal Sur , and so trending by the Moluccae , China , and C. de buona speranda , maintain it self by circular motion , which be all one in nature , with motus ab orient in occidentem . 
 A.D. 
 1576. 
 the flow m occasion by reason that the heat of the moon boil , and make the water thin by way of rarefaction . a experience to prove the fall of this current into mar deal Sur. 
 so that it seem , we have now more occasion to doubt of our return , than whether there be a passage that way , yea or no : which doubt , hereafter shall be sufficient remove . wherefore , in my opinion , reason it self , ground upon experience , assure we of this passage , if there be nothing else to put we in hope thereof . but least these may not suffice , i have add in this chapter follow , some further proof hereof , by the experience of such as have pass some part of this discovery : and in the next adjoin to that the authority 169 
 of those , which have sail whole , through every part thereof . 
 to prove by experience of sundry man travel , the open of some part of this northwest passage : whereby good hope remain of the rest . 
 alcatrani be pelican . 
 Baros lib . 9 of his first decas cap . 1. 
 Chap. 3. 
 PAulus Venetus , who dwell many year in Cataia , affirm that he sail 1500 mile upon the coast of Mangia , and Anian , towards the north-east : always find the sea open before he , not only as far as he go , but also as far as he can discern . 
 2 also Franciscus Vasques de Coronado pass from Mexico by Cevola , through the country of Quivira , to Siera Nevada , find there a great sea , where be certain ship lade with merchandise , carry on their prowess the picture of certain bird call Alcatrarzi , part whereof be make of gold , and part of silver , who signify by sign , that they be thirty day come thither : which likewise prove America by experience to be disjoined from Cataia , on that part by a great sea , because they can not come from any part of America , as native thereof : for that , so far as be discover , there have not be find there any one ship of that country . 
 3 in like manner , John Baros testify that the cosmographers of china ( where he himself have be ) affirm that the sea coast trend from thence Northeast , to 50 degree of septentrional latitude , be the further part that way which the Portugal have then knowledge of : and that the say cosmographer know no cause to the contrary , but that it may continue further . 
 by who experience America be prove to be separate from those part of Asia , direct against the same . and not content with the judgement of these learned man only , i have search what may be further say for the confirmation hereof . 
 170 
 4 and i find that Franciscus Lopez de Gomara affirm America to be a island , and likewise Gronland : and that Gronland be distant from Lappia 40 league , and from terra de Labrador , 50. 
 5 moreover , Alvarus Nunnius a Spaniard , and learned cosmographer , and Jacobus Cartier , who make two voyage into those part , and sail 900 mile upon the north-east coast of America do in part confirm the same . 
 6 likewise Hieronymus Fracastorius , a learned italian , and traveler in the north part of the same land . 
 7 also Jaques Cartier have do the like , hear say at Hochelaga in Nova Francia , how that there be a great sea at Saguinay , whereof the end be not know : which they presuppose to be the passage to Cataia . 
 furthermore , Sebastian Cabota by his personal ex - write in the perience and travel have set forth , and describe this discourse of passage in his Charts , which be yet to be see in the 1 avl^a wn ' queen majesty privy gallery at Whitehall , who be send to make this discovery by king Henry the seven , and enter the same fret : affirm that he sail very far westward , with a quarter of the north , on the northside of Terra de Labrador the eleven of June , until he come to the septentrionali latitude of 67 degree and a half , and find the sea still open , say , that he may , and will have go to Cataia , if the mutiny of the master and mariner have not be . 
 now as these man experience have prove some part of this passage : so the chapter follow shall put you in full assurance of the rest , by their experience which have pass through every part thereof . 
 [ to prove 
 171 
 2 Auditus . 
 3 olfactus . 
 4 Gustus . 
 5 tactus . Singularia sensu , universalia vero mente percipiuntur . 
 Lib. i.cap . ss . 
 [ three . 17. i 
 page - s^o . 
 to prove by circumstance that then northwest passage have be sail throughout . 
 Chap. 4. 
 the diversity between bruit beast and man , or between the wise and the simple be , that the one judge by sense only , and gather no surety of any thing that he have not see , feel , hear , taste , or smell : and the other not so only , but also find the certainty of thing by reason , before they happen to be try . wherefore i have add proof of both sort , that the one and the other may thereby be satisfy . 
 1 first , as gemma Frisius recite , there go from Europe three brethren through this passage : whereof it take the name of Fretum trium fratrum . 
 2 also Pliny affirm out of Cornelius Nepos , ( who write 57 year before Christ ) that there be certain Indians drive by tempest , upon the coast of Germany which be present by the king of sum evia , unto quintus Metellus Celer , the proconsuli of France . 
 3 and Pliny upon the same say , that it be no marvel though there be sea by the north , where there be such abundance of moisture : which argue that he doubt not of a navigable passage that way , through which those Indians come . 
 4 and for the better proof that the same authority of Cornelius Nepos be not by i wrest , to prove my opinion of they northwest passage : you shall find the same affirm more plain in that behalf , by the excellent geographer Dominicus Marius Niger , who show how many way the indian sea stretch it self , make in that place recital of certain Indians , that be likewise drive through the north sea from India , upon the coast of Germany , by great tempest , as they be sail in trade of merchandise . 
 172 
 5 also while Frederic Barbarossa reign emperor , avouch by anno do. 1160. there come certain other Indians upon franciscuslo-the coast of Germany . pesdeGomara 
 r t , • i . r 0 tn his histone 
 o . likewise otnon in the stone of the Goth affirm , of India , lib . that in the time of the germane emperor , there be i . cap . io . also certain Indians cast by force of weather , upon the coast of the say country , which foresay Indians can not possible have come by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America , nor yet by the north-east : therefore they come of necessity by this our northwest passage . 
 to prove that these Indians aforenamed come not by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any other part of Africa , or America . 
 Cap. 5. 
 first , they can not come from the southeast by the cape de bona speranda , because the roughness of the sea there be such ( occasion by the current and great wind in that part ) that the great armada the king of Portugal have , can without great difficulty pass that way , much less than a Canoa of India can live in those outrageous sea without shipwreck ( be a vessel of very small burden ) and have conduct themselves to the place aforesaid , be man unexpert in the art of navigation . 
 2 also , it appear plain that they be not able to come from alongst the coast of Africa aforesaid , to those part of Europe , because the wind do ( for the most part ) blow there easterly off from the shore , and the current run that way in like sort , shall have drive they westward upon some part of America : for such wind and tide can never have lead they from thence to the say place where they be find , nor yet can they have come from any of the country aforesaid , keep the sea always , without skilful mariner 
 173 
 this five reason by late experience be prove utter untrue . 
 that the Indians can not be native either of Africa , or of America . 
 to have conduct they such like course as be necessary to perform such a voyage . 
 3 presuppose also , if they have be drive to the west ( as they must have be , come that way ) than they shall have perish , want supply of victual , not have any place ( once leave the coast of Africa ) until they come to America , nor from America until they arrive upon some part of Europe , or the island adjoin to it , to have refresh themselves . 
 4 also , if ( notwithstanding such impossibility ) they may have recover Germany by come from India by the southeast , yet must they without all doubt have strike upon some other part of Europe before their arrival there , as the isle of the azore , Portugal , Spain , France , England , Ireland , etc which if they have do , it be not credible that they shall or will have depart undiscovered of the inhabitant : but there be never find in those day any such ship or man but only upon the coast of Germany , where they have be sundry time and in sundry age cast aland : neither be it like that they will have commit themselves again to sea , if they have so arrive , not know where they be , nor whither to have go . 
 5 and by the southwest it be unpossible , because the current aforesaid which come from the east , strike with such force upon the fret of Magellan , and fall with such swiftness and fury into mar deal Zur , that hardly any ship ( but not possible a Canoa , with such unskilful mariner ) can come into our western ocean through that fret , from the west sea of America , as magellans experience have partly teach we . 
 6 and further , to prove that these people so arrive upon the coast of Germany , be Indians , and not in-habiters of any part either of Africa or America , it be manifest , because the native both of Africa and America neither have , or have at this day ( as be report ) other kind of boat then such as do bear neither mast nor sail , ( except only upon the coast of Barbary and the 
 174 
 Turk ship ) but do carry themselves from place to place near the shore by the ore only . 
 to prove that those Indians come not by the north-east , and that there be no thorough navigable passage that way . 
 Cap. 6. 
 it be likely that there shall be no thorough passage by the north-east , whereby to go round about the world , because all sea ( as aforesaid ) be maintain by the abundance of water , wax moor shallow and shelffie towards the end , as we find it do by experience in mare glaciali , towards the east , which breed small hope of any great continuance of that sea , to be navigable towards the east , sufficient to sail thereby round about the world . 
 2 also , it stand scarce with reason , that the Indians dwell under torrida zona , can endure the injury of the cold air , about the septentrional latitude of 80. degree , under which elevation the passage by the north-east can be ( as the often experience have of all the south part of it show ) see that some of the inhabitant of this cold climate ( who summer be to they a extreme winter ) have be strike to death with the cold damp of the air about 72 degree , by a accidental mishap , and yet the air in such like elevation be always cold , and too cold for such as the Indians be . 
 3 furthermore , the pierce cold of the gross thick air so near the pole will so stiffen and fur the sail and ship tackle , that no mariner can either hoist or strike they ( as our experience far near the south , than this passage be presuppose to be , have teach we ) without the use whereof no voyage can be perform . 
 4 also , the air be so darken with continual ! mist and fog so near the pole , that no man can well see , either to guide his ship , or direct his course . 
 5 also the compass at such elevation do very 
 175 
 quicquid ■ natural loco privatur , quam citissime corrumpitur . 
 Qualls causa talis effectus . 
 quicquid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur . 
 omne simile gignit svi simile . 
 sudden vary , which thing must of force have be their destruction , although they have be man of much more skill than the Indians be . 
 6 moreover , all bay , gulf , and river do receive their increase upon the flood , sensible to be discern on the one side of the shore or the other , as many way as they be open to any main sea , as mare mediterraneum , mare rubrum , Sinus Persicus , Sinus Bodicus , Thamesis , and all other know haven or river in any part of the world , and each of they open but on one part to the main sea , do likewise receive their increase upon the flood the same way , and none other , which mare Glaciale do , only by the west ; as m. Jenkinson affirm unto i : and therefore it follow that this Northeast sea , receive increase but only from the west , can possible open to the main ocean by the east . 
 7 moreover , the far you pass into any sea towards the end of it , on that part which be shut up from the main sea ( as in all those above mention ) the less and less the tide rise and fall . the like whereof also happen in mare Glaciale , which prove but small continuance of that sea towards the east . 
 8 also , the further you go towards the east in mare Glaciale , the less salt the water be : which can not happen , if it be open to the salt sea towards the east , as it be to the west only , see every thing natural engender his like : and then must it be like salt throughout , as all the sea be , in such like climate and elevation . 
 and therefore it seem that this Northeast sea be maintain by the river ob , and such like freshet , as mare Goticum , and mare mediterraneum , in the uppermost part thereof by the river Nilus , Danubius , neper , Tanais , etc 
 9 furthermore , if there be any such sea at that elevation , of like it shall be always freeze throughout ( there be no tide to hinder it ) because the extreme coldness of the air be in the uppermost part , and the extreme coldness of the earth in the bottom , the sea 176 
 sir Humphrey GILBERT’S map of the world , a.d. 1576 
 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv 
 downlo^dedfomthttpsv / www . cambridge.org / core^u^ library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 06 : 09 , subject to 
 there be but of small depth , whereby the one accidentali coldness do meet with the other , and the sun not have his reflection so near the pole , but at very blunt angel , it can never be dissolve after it be freeze , notwithstanding the great length of their day : for that the sun have no heat at all in his light or beam , but proceed only by a accidentali reflection , which there want in effect . 
 io and yet if the sun be of sufficient force in that elevation , to prevail against this ice , yet must it be break before it can be dissolve , which can be but through the long continuance of the sun above their horizon , and by that time the summer will be so far spend , and so great darkness and cold ensue , that no man can be able to endure so cold , dark , and discomfortable a navigation , if it be possible for he then , and there to live . 
 11 further , the ice be once break , it must of force so drive with the wind and tide , that no ship can sail in those sea , see our fisher of island , and the new find land , be subject to danger through the great island of ice which fleet in the sea ( to the sailor great danger ) far to the south of that presuppose passage . 
 12 and it can be that this Northeast passage shall be any near than south , then before recite , for than it shall cut off Ciremissi , and Turbi Tartari , with Uzesucani , Chisani , and other from the continent of Asia , which be know to be adjoin to Scythia , Tartary , etc with the other part of the same continent . 
 and if there be any thorough passage by the north-east , yet be it to small end and purpose for our traffic , because no ship of great burden can navigate in so shallow a sea : and ship of small burden [ three . 19 i be very unfit 8c unprofitable , especial towards the bluster north , to perform such a voyage . 
 [ to prove 
 seven 177 m 
 to prove that the indian aforenamed , come only by the northwest , which induce a certainty of our passage by experience . 
 Cap. 7. 
 it be as likely that they come by the northwest , as it be unlikely that they shall come either by the southeast , Southwest , Northeast , or from any other part of Africa or America , and therefore this northwest passage have be already so many way prove , by disprove of the other , etc i shall the less need in this place , to use many word otherwise then to conclude in this sort , that they come only by the northwest from England , have these many reason to lead i thereunto . 
 1 first , the one half of the wind of the compass may bring they by the northwest , bear always between two sheat , with which kind of sail the indian be only acquaint , not have any use of a bow line , or quarter wind , without the which no ship can possible come either by the southeast , Southwest or Northeast , have so many sundry cape to double , whereunto be require such change and shift of wind . true , both in 2 and it seem likely that they shall come by oblique northwest , because the coast whereon they be oho indentis drive , lay east from this our passage , and all wind ex diametro do natural drive a ship to a opposite point from spirantibus , whence it blow , not be otherwise guide by art , which the Indians do utter want , and therefore it seem that they come direct through this our fret , which they may do with one wind . 
 3 for if they have come by the cape de buona speranda , then must they ( as aforesaid ) have fall upon the south part of America . 
 4 and if by the fret of Magellan , then upon the coast of Africa , Spain , Portugal , France , Ireland or England . 
 178 
 5 and if by the north-east , then upon the coast of Ceremissi , Tartarii , Lappia , island , terra de Labrador , etc and upon these coast ( as aforesaid ) they have never be find . 
 so that by all likelihood they can never have come without shipwreck upon the coast of Germany , if they have first strike upon the coast of so many country , want both art and ship to make orderly discovery , and altogether ignorant both in the art of navigation , and also of the rock , flat , sand or haven of those part of the world , which in most of these place be plentiful ! . 
 6 and further it seem very likely , that the inhabitant of the most part of those country , by which they must have come any other way beside by the northwest , be for the most part anthropophagi , or man eater , will have devour they , slay they , or ( at the least wise ) keep they as wonder for the gaze . 
 so that it plain appear that those Indians ( which as you have hear in sundry age be drive by tempest upon the shore of Germany ) come only through our northwest passage . 
 7 moreover , the passage be certain prove by a navigation that a Portugal make , who pass through this fret , give name to a promontory far within the same , call it after his own name , Promontorium Corterialis , near adjoin unto Polisacus fluvius . 
 8 also one Scolmus a Dane enter and pass a great part thereof . 
 9 also there be one Salvaterra , a gentleman of Victoria in Spain , that come by chance out of the west India into Ireland , anno 1568. who affirm they northwest passage from we to Cataia , constant to be believe in America navigable . and further say in the presence of sir Henry Sidney ( than lord Deputie of Ireland ) in my hear , that a friar of Mexico , call Andrew Urdaneta , more than eight year before 
 179 
 his then come into Ireland , tell he there , that he come from mar deal Sur into Germany through this northwest passage , and show Salvaterra ( at that time be then with he in Mexico ) a sea card make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , wherein be plain set down and describe this northwest passage , agree in all point with Ortelius map . 
 and further , this friar tell the king of Portugal ( as he return by that country homeward ) that there be ( of certainty ) such a passage northwest from England , and that he mean to publish the same : which do , the king most earnest desire he not in any wise to disclose or make the passage know to any nation : for that ( say the king ) if England have know-^the kin^of kdge and experience thereof , it will great hinder Portugal , to both the king of Spain and i . this friar ( as Sal-Andro Urda - vaterra report ) be the great discoverer by sea , neta a friar , that have be in our age . also Salvaterra be touch then nerswade of this passage by the friar Urdaneta , and this northwest then common opinion of the Spaniard inhabit 
 passage from America , offer most willing to accompany i in England to this discovery , which of like he will not have do Cataia . if he stand in doubt thereof . 
 and now as these modern experience can be impugn , so , lest it may be object that these thing ( gather out of ancient writer , which write so many year past ) may serve little to prove this a objection , passage by the north of America , because both America and India be to they then utter unknown : to Aristotle lib . remove this doubt , let this suffice : that Aristotle ( who be 300. year before Christ ) name mare indi-5 cum . also Berosus ( who live 330 year before Christ ) have these word , Ganges in India . also in the first chapter of Hester be these word , in the day of Assuerus which rule from India to Aethiopia , which Assuerus live 580 year before Christ . also Quintus Curtius ( where he speak of the conquest of Alexander ) mention India . also , Arianus , Philostratus , 180 
 and Sidrach in his discourse of the war of the king of Bactria , and of Garaab , who have the most part of India under his government . all which assure we , that both India and Indians be know in those day . 
 these thing consider , we may ( in my opinion ) not only assure our self of this passage by the northwest , but also that it be navigable both to come and go , as have be prove in part and in all , by the experience of diverse , as Sebastian Cabota , Corterialis , the three brethren above name , the Indians , and Urdaneta the friar of Mexico , etc 
 and yet notwithstanding all this , there be some that have a better hope of this passage to Cataia by the north-east then by the west , who reason with my several answer ensue in the chapter follow . 
 certain reason allege for the prove of a passage by the north-east , before the queen majesty , and certain lord of the counsel , by master Anthony Jenkinson , with my several answer then use to the same . 
 Cap. 8. 
 because you may understand as well those thing allege against i , as what do serve for my purpose , i have here add the reason of master Anthony Jenkinson a worthy gentleman , and a great traveller , who conceive a better hope of the passage to Cataia from we , to be by the north-east , then by the northwest . 
 he first say that he think not to the contrary , the north-but that there be a passage by the northwest , accord - west passage ing to my opinion : but assure he be , that there assent unt0 ' may be find a navigable passage by the north-east from England , to go to all the east part of the world , which he endeavour to prove three way . 
 the first be that he hear a fisherman of Tartary the first say in hunt the morce , that he sail very far reas°n . 
 181 
 visus nonnun-quam fallitur in suo objecto . 
 the second reason or allegation . 
 the answer or resolution . 
 towards the southeast , find no end of the sea : whereby he hope a thorough passage to be that way . 
 whereunto i answer , that the tartarian be a barbarous people , and utter ignorant in the art of navigation , not know the use of the sea card , compass or star , which he confess to be true : and therefore they can not ( say i ) certain know the southeast from the north-east , in a wide sea , and a place unknown from the sight of the land . 
 or if he sail any thing near the shore , yet he ( be ignorant ) may be deceive by the double of many point and cape , and by the trending of the land , albeit he keep continual alongst the shore . 
 and further , it may be that the poor fisherman through simplicity think that there be nothing that way but sea , because he see no land : which proof ( under correction ) give small assurance of a navigable sea by the north-east , to go round about the world . for that he judge by the eye only , see we in this our clear air do account twenty mile a ken at sea 
 he second reason be , that there be a unicorn horn find upon the coast of Tartary , which can not come ( say he ) thither " by any other mean then with the tide , through some fret in the north-east of mare Glaciale , there be no unicorn in any part of Asia , save in India and Cataia : which reason ( in my simple judgement ) force as little . 
 first , it be doubtful whether those barbarous tartarian do know a unicorn horn , yea , or no : and if it be one , yet it be not credible that the sea can have drive it so far , be of such nature that it will not swim . 
 also the tide run too and fro , will have drive it as far back with the ebb , as it bring it forward with the flood . 
 there be also a beast call asinus Indicus ( who horn most like it be ) which have but one horn like a unicorn in his forehead , whereof there be great 182 
 ... isib ' plenty in all the north part thereunto adjoin , as in Lappia , noruegia , Finmarke , etc as Jacobus Zieglerus write in his history of Scondia . 
 and as Albertus say , there be a fish which have but one horn in his forehead like to a unicorn , and therefore it seem very doubtful both from whence it come , and whether it be a unicorn horn , yea , or no . 
 he three and last reason be , that there come a con - than three and tinuall stream or current through mare Glaciale , of such swiftness ( as a colmax tell he ) that if you cast any ’ thing therein , it will present be carry out of sight towards the west . 
 whereunto i answer , that there do the like from the answer or Maeotis Palus , by Pontus Euxinus , Sinus Bosphorus , resolution-and along the coast of Graecia , etc as it be affirm by Contarenus , and diverse other that have have experience of the same : and yet that sea lie not open to any main sea that way , but be maintain by freshet as by Tanais , Danubius , etc 
 in like manner be this current in mare Glaciale increase and maintain by the Dwina , the river ob , etc 
 now as i have here brief recite the reason allege , to prove a passage to Cataia by the north-east , with my several answer thereunto : so will i leave it to your judgement , to hope or despair of either at your pleasure . 
 how that the passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the east , if there be any such . 
 Cap. 9 
 first , by the north-east ( if your wind do not give you a marvelous speedy and lucky passage ) you be in danger ( be so near the pole ) to be benight almost the one half of the year , and what danger that be , to live so long comfortless , void of light , ( if the 183 
 cold kill you not ) each man of reason or understanding may judge . 
 some doubt of 2 also Mangia , Quinzai , and the Moluccae be near unto we by the northwest , then by the north-east , more than two five part , which be almost by the half . 
 3 also we may have by the west a yearly return , it be at all time navigable , whereas you have but 4. month in the whole year to go by the north-east : the passage be at such elevation as it be former express , for it can be any near than south . 
 4 furthermore , it can be finish without diverse wintring by the way , have no haven in any temperate climate to harbour in there : for it be as much as we can well sail from hence to saint Nicholas , in the trade of Moscovia , and return in the navigable season of the year , and from saint Nicholas to Cerimissi Tartari , which stand at 80 degree of the septentrionali latitude , it be at the least 400 league , which amount scarce to the three part of the way , to the end of your voyage by the north-east . 
 5 and yet after you have double this cape , if then there may be find a navigable sea to carry you southeast accord to your desire , yet can you not winter convenient , until you come to 60 degree , and to take up one degree run southeast , you must sail 24 league and three four part , which amount to 495 league . 
 6 furthermore , you may by the northwest sail thither with all easterly wind , and return with any westerly wind , whereas you must have by the north-east sundry wind , and those proper , accord to the lie of the coast and cape , you shall|be enforce to double , which wind be not always to be have , when they be look for : whereby your journey shall be great prolong , and hardly endure so near the pole . as we be teach by sir Hugh Willoughbie , who be freeze to death far near the south . 
 7 moreover , it be very doubtful , whether we shall 184 
 long enjoy that trade by the north-east , if there be any such passage that way , the commodity thereof once know to the Moscovite , what privilege soever he have grant , see policy with the mass of excessive gain , to the enrich ( so great ) of himself and all his dominion will persuade Kim to presume the same , have so great opportunity to utter the commodity of those country by the narve . 
 but by the northwest , we may safe trade without danger or annoyance of any prince live , Christian or heathen , it be out of all their trade . 
 8 also the queen majesty dominion be near than northwest passage than any other great prince that may pass that way , and both in their go and return , they must of necessity succour themselves and their ship upon some part of the same , if any tempestuous weather shall happen . 
 further , no prince navy of the world be able to encounter the queen majesty navy , as it be at this present : and yet it shall be great increase by the traffic ensue upon this discovery , for it be the long voyage that increase and maintain great ship . 
 now it seem necessary to declare what commodity will grow thereby , if all these thing be , as we have heretofore presuppose , and think they to be : which next adjoin be brief declare . 
 what commodity will ensue , this passage once discover . 
 Cap. 10. 
 first , it be the only way for our prince , to possess the wealth of all the east part ( as they term they ) of the world , which be infinite : as appear by the experience of Alexander the great , in the time of his conquest of India , and other the east part of the world , allege by Quintus Curtius , which will be a great advancement to our country , a wonderful enrich to 
 185 
 our prince , and a unspeakable commodity to all the inhabitant of Europe . 
 2 for through the shortness of the voyage , we shall be able to sell all manner of merchandise , bring from thence , far better cheap than either the Portugal or Spaniard do or may do . and further , we shall share with the Portugal in the east , and the Spaniard in the west , by trade to any part of America , through mar deal Sur , where they can no manner of way offend we . 
 3 also we may sail to diverse very rich country , both civil and other , out of both their jurisdiction , trade and traffic , where there be to be find great abundance of gold , silver , precious stone , cloth of gold , silk , all manner of spice , grocery ware , and other kind of merchandise of a inestimable price , which both the Spaniard and Portugal , through the length of their journey , can well attain unto . 
 4 also we may inhabit some part of those country , and settle there such needy people of our country , which now trouble the common wealth , and through want here at home be enforce to commit outrageous offence , whereby they be daily consume with the gallows . 
 3 moreover , we may from all the aforesaid place have a yearly return , inhabit for our staple some convenient place of America , about Sierra Nevada , or some other part , whereas it shall seem best for the shorten of the voyage . 
 6 beside utter of our country commodity , which the Indians , etc much esteem : as appear in Hester , where the pomp be express of the great king of India , Assuerus , who match the colour clothes , wherewith his house and tent be apparel , with gold and silver , as part of his great treasure : not mention either velvet , silk , cloth of gold , cloth of silver , or such like , be in those country most plentiful : whereby it plain appear in what great estimation they will have the clothes of this our country , so 
 186 
 1576. that there will be find a far better vent for they by this mean , then yet this realm ever have : and that without depend either upon France , Spain , Flanders , Portugal , Hamborow , Emden , or any other part of Europe . 
 7 also , here we shall increase both our ship and mariner , without burden of the state . 
 8 and also have occasion to set poor man child to learn handy craft , and thereby to make trifle and such like , which the Indians and those people do much esteem : by reason whereof , there shall be none occasion to have our country cumber with loiterer , vagabond , and such like idle person . 
 all these commodity will grow by follow this our discovery , without injury do to any christian prince , by cross they in any of their use trade , whereby they may take any just occasion of offence . 
 thus have i brief show you some part of the ground of my opinion , trust that you will no long judge i fantastic in this matter : see i have conceive no vain hope of this voyage , but be persuaded thereunto by the best cosmographer of our age , the same be confirm both by reason and certain experience . 
 also this discovery have be diverse time heretofore by other both offer , attempt , and perform . 
 it have be offer by Stephan Gomes unto Carolus 
 the five emperor , in the year of our lord God 1527 , as Alphonso Ullva testify in the story of Carolus life : who will have set he forth in it ( as the story men-tioneth ) if the great want of money , by reason of his long war have not cause he to surcease the same . 
 and the king of Portugal fear least the emperor will have persevere in this his enterprise , give he to this discovery leave the matter unattempted , the sum of 350000 crown : and it be to be think that the king of Portugal will not have give to the emperor such sum of money for egg in moonshine . 
 187 
 the labour of this discovery shorten by other man travel . 
 why you king of Spain and Portugal will not persevere in this discovery . 
 it have be attempt by Sebastian Cabota in the time of king Henry the seven , by Corterialis the Portugal , and Scolmus the Dane . 
 and it have be perform by three brethren , the indian aforesaid , and by Urdaneta the friar of Mexico . 
 also diverse have offer the like unto the french king , who have send two or three time to have discover the same : the discoverer spend and consume their victual in search the gulf and bay between Florida and terra de Labrador , whereby the ice be break to the after comer . 
 so that the right way may now easy be find out in short time : and that with little jeoperdie and less expense . 
 for America be discover so far towards the north as cape Frio , which be at 62 degree , and that part of Grondland next adjoin be know to stand but at 72 degree . so that we have but 10 degree to sail north and south , to put the world out of doubt hereof : and it be likely that the king of Spain , and the king of Portugal will not have fit out all this while , but that they be sure to possess to themselves all that trade they now use , and fear to deal in this discovery , lest the queen majesty have so good opportunity , and find the commodity which thereby may ensue to the common wealth , will cut they off , and enjoy the whole traffic to her self , and thereby the Spaniard and Portugal , with their great charge , shall beat the bush , and other man catch the bird : which thing they foresee , have command that no pilot of they upon pain of death , shall seek to discover to the northwest , or plat out in any sea card any thorough passage that way by the northwest . 
 now , and if you will indifferent compare the hope that remain , to animate i to this enterprise , with those likelihood which Columbus allege before Ferdinando the king of Castilia , to prove that there be such island in the west ocean , as be after by he 188 
 and other discover to the great commodity of Spain and all the world : you will think then this northwest passage to be most worthy travel therein . 
 for Columbus have none of the west Islands set forth unto he , either in globe or card , neither yet once mention of any writer ( Plato except , and the commentary upon the same ) from 942 year before Christ , until that day . 
 moreover , Columbus himself have neither see America nor any other of the island about it , neither , understand he of they by the report of any other that have see they , but only comfort himself with this hope , that the land have a beginning where the sea have a end : for as touch that which the Spaniard do write of a Biscaine , which shall have teach he the way thither , it be think to be imagine of they , to deprive Columbus of his honour , be none of their country man , but a stranger bear . 
 and if it be true of the Biscaine , yet do he but rove at the matter , or ( at the least ) gather the knowledge of it , by conjecture only . 
 and albeit my self have not see this passage or any part thereof , but be ignorant of it as touch experience ( as Columbus be before his attempt make ) yet have i both the report , relation , and authority of diverse most credible man , which have both see and pass through some and every part of this discovery , beside sundry reason for my assurance thereof : all which Columbus want . 
 these thing consider , and indifferent weigh togeth , with the wonderful commodity which this discovery may bring , especial to this realm of England : i must needs conclude with learned Baptista Ramusius , and diverse other learned man , who say , that this discovery have be reserve for some noble prince or worthy man , thereby to make himself rich , and the world happy : desire you to accept in good part this brief and simple discourse , write in haste , which if 189 
 i may perceive that it shall not sufficient satisfy you in this behalf , i will then impart unto you a large discourse , which i have write only of this discovery . 
 and further , because it suffice not only to know that such a thing there be , without ability to perform the same , i will at leisure make you partaker of another simple discourse of navigation , wherein i have not a little travel , to make my self as sufficient to bring these thing to effect , as i have be ready to offer my self therein . 
 and therein i have devise to amend the error of usual sea card , who common fault be , to make the degree of longitude in every latitude of one like bigness . 
 and have also devise therein a spherical instrument , with a compass of variation for the perfect know of the longitude . 
 and a precise order to prick the sea card , together with certain infallible rule for the shorten of any discovery , to know at the first enter of any fret , whether it lie open to the ocean more way than one , how far soever the sea stretch it self into the land . 
 desire you hereafter never to mislike with i , for the take in hand of any laudable and honest enterprise : for if through pleasure or idleness we purchase shame , the pleasure vanish , but the shame remain for ever . 
 and therefore to give i leave without offence , always to live and die in this mind , that he be not worthy to live at all , that for fear , or danger of death , shun his country service , and his own honour : see death be inevitable , and the fame of virtue immortali . wherefore in this behalf , mutare vel timere sperno . 
 190 
 certain other reason , or argument to prove a passage by the northwest , learned write by m. Richard Willes gentleman . 
 four famous way there be speak of to those fruitful and wealthy island , which we do usual call Moluccaes , continual haunt for gain , and daily travel for riches therein grow . Theise Islands , although they stand east from the meridian , distant almost half the length of the world , in extreme heat , under the equinoctial line , possess of infidel and barbarian : yet by our neighbour great abundance of wealth there be painful seek in respect of the voyage . dear buy , and from thence dangerous bring home unto we . our neighbour i call the Portugal in comparison of the molucchians for nearness unto we , for like situation westward as we have , for their usual trade with we , for that the far southeasterling do know this part of Europe by no other name then Portugal , not great acquaint as yet with the other nation thereof . their voyage be very well understand of all man , and the southeasterne way round about 1 by the Africa by the cape of good hope more speak of , better o^ttst . know and travel , then that it may seem needful to discourse thereof any further . 
 the second way lie southwest , between the west 2 A ? tJie India or south America , and the south continent , through authwest-that narrow strait where Magellan first of all man that ever we do read of , pass these latter year , leave thereunto therefore his name . the way no doubt the Spaniard will commodious take , for that it lie near unto their dominion there , can the eastern current and levant wind as easy suffer they to return , be a er ' as speedy therewith they may be carry thither : for it the which difficulty , or rather impossibility of strive against the force both of wind and stream , this passage be little or nothing use , although it be very well know . 
 191 
 3 by the the three way by the north-east , beyond all Europe Northeast . anj Asia , that worthy and renown knight sir Hugh Willoughbie seek to his peril , enforce there to end his life for cold , congeal and freeze to death . and true this way consist rather in the imagination of geographer , then allowable either in reason , or approve by experience , as well it may appear by the dangerous Ortel . tab . trending of the scythish cape set by Ortelius under •A ™ * the 80 degree north , by the unlikely sail in that northern sea always clad with ice and snow , or at the least continual pester therewith , if happy it be at any time dissolve : beside bay and shelf , the water wax moor shallow towards the east , that we say nothing of the foul mist and dark fog in the cold clime , of the little power of the sun to clear the air , of the uncomfortable night , so near the pole , five month long . 
 4 by the a four way to go unto these aforesaid happy island Northeast . moluccas sir Humphrey Gilbert a learned and valiant knight discourse of at large in his new passage to Cathayo . the enterprise of it self be virtuous , the fact must doubtless deserve high praise , and whensoever it shall be finish , the fruit thereof can be small : where virtue be guide , there be fame a follower , and fortune a companion . but the way be dangerous , the passage doubtful , the voyage not thorough know , and therefore gainsay by many , after this manner . 
 Ob. 1. first , who can assure we of any passage rather by the northwest , then by the north-east ? do not both way lie in equal distance from the north pole ? stand not the north cape of either continent under like elevation ? be not the ocean sea beyond America far distant from our meridian by 30. or 40. degree west , than the extreme point of Cathayo eastward , if Ortelius InTheatro . general ! card of the world be true ? in the north-east that noble knight sir Hugh Willoughbie perish for cold : and can you then promise a passenger any better hap by the northwest ? who have go for trial sake at any time this way out of Europe to Cathayo ? 
 192 
 if you seek the advice herein of such as make profession in cosmography , Ptolome the father of Geographic , and his elder child , will answer by their map with a negative , conclude most of the sea within the land , and make a end of the world northward , near the 63. degree . the same opinion , when learn chief flourish , be receive in the roman time , as by their poet write it may appear : tibi serviat ultima Thyle , say Virgil , be of opinion , that island be the extreme part of the world habitable towards the north . Joseph Moletius a italian , and Mercator a germane , for knowledge man able to be compare with the best geographer of our time , the one in his half sphere of the whole world , the other in some of his great globe , have continue the west Indies land , even to the north pole , and consequent , cut off all passage by sea that way . 
 the same doctor , Mercator in other of his globe and map , Moletius in his sea card , nevertheless doubt of so great continuance of the former continent , have open a gulf betwixt the west Indies and the extreme northern land : but such a one , that either be not to be travel for the cause in the first objection allege , or clean shut up from we in Europe by Greenland : the south end whereof Moletius make firm land with America , the north part continent with Lappeland and Norway . 
 third , the great favourer of this voyage can not deny , but that if any such passage be , it lie subject unto ice and snow for the most part of the year , whereas it stand in the edge of the frosty zone . before the sun have warm the air , and dissolve the ice , each one well know that there can be no sail : the ice once break through the continual abode the sun make a certain season in those part , how shall it be possible for so weak a vessel as a ship be , to hold out amid whole island , as it be of ice continual beat on each side , and at the mouth of 
 seven 193 n 
 A.D. 
 £576 . 
 Ob. 2. 
 Ob. 3. 
 that gulf , issue down furious from the north , and safe to pass , when whole mountain of ice and snow shall be tumble down upon she ? 
 Ob. 4. well , grant the west Indies not to continue continent unto the pole , grant there be a passage between these two land , let the gulf lie near we then common in card we find it set , namely , between the 61. and 64. degree north , as gemma Frisius in his map and globe imagine it , and so leave by our countryman Sebastian Cabot in his table which the earl of Bedford have at cheinies : let the way be void of all difficulty , yet do it not follow that we have free passage to Cathayo . for example sake : you may trend all Norway , Finmarke , and Lappeland , and then bow southward to saint Nicholas in Moscovia : you may likewise in the mediterranean sea fetch Constantinople , and the mouth of Tanais : yet be there no passage by sea through Moscovia into Pont euxine , now call mare Maggiore . again , in the aforesaid mediterranean sea , we sail to Alexandria in Egypt , the barbarian bring their pearl and spice from the molucca up the red sea or arabian gulf to sue , scarce three day journey from the aforesaid haven : yet have we no way by sea from Alexandria to the molucca , for that Isthmos or little straight of land between the two sea . in like manner although the northern passage be free at 61 degree of latitude , and the west ocean beyond America , usual call mar deal Zur , know to be open at 40. degree elevation from the island Japan , yea three hundred league northerly above Japan : yet may there be land to hinder the thorough passage that way by sea , as in the example aforesaid it fall out , Asia and America there be join together in one continent . ne can this opinion seem altogether frivolous unto any one that diligent peruse our cosmographer do . Josephus Moletius be of that mind , not only in his plain hemisphere of the world , but also in his sea card . the french geographer in like manner be of 
 194 
 the same opinion , as by their map cut out in form of a hart you may perceive : as though the west Indies be part of Asia . which sentence well agree with that old conclusion in the school : quicquid praeter africam and Europam est , Asia est , whatsoever land do neither appertain unto Africa nor to Europe , be part of Asia . 
 furthermore it be to small purpose to make so long , Ob. 5. so painful , so doubtful a voyage by such a new find way , if in Cathayo you shall neither be suffer to land for silk and silver , nor able to fetch the Molucca spice and pearl for piracy in those sea . of a law deny all alien to enter into China , and forbid all the inhabiter under a great penalty to let in any stranger into those country , shall you read in the report of Galeotto Perera there imprison with other Portugal : as also in the japonish letter , how for that cause the worthy traveller Xavierus bargain with a barbarian merchant for a great sum of pepper to be bring into Canton , a port in China . the great and dangerous piracy use in those sea no man can be ignorant of , that list to read the japonish and East indian history . 
 final , all this great labour will be lose , all these Ob. 6. charge spend in vain , if in the end our traveller may not be able to return again , and bring safe home into their own native country that wealth and riches , which they in foreign region with adventure of good , and danger of their life have seek for . by the north-east there be no way , the southeast passage the Portugal do hold as the lord of those sea . at you southwest magellans experience have partly teach we , and partly we be persuade by reason , how the eastern current strike so furious on that straight , and fall with such force into that narrow gulf , that hardly any ship can return that way into our west ocean out of Mar deal Zur . the which if it be true , as true it be , than we may say that the aforesaid eastern current or levant course of water continual 
 * 95 
 follow after the heavenly motion , lodse not altogether his force , but be double rather by a other current from out the north-east , in the passage between America and the north land , whither it be of necessity carry : have none other way to maintain it self in circular motion , and consequent the force and fury thereof to be no less in the strait of Anian , where it strike south into mar deal Zur , beyond America ( if any such straight of sea there be ) than in Magellans fret , both straight be of like breadth : as in Belognine zalterius table of new France , and in don Diego Hermano de Toledo his card for navigation in that region we do find precise set down . 
 nevertheless to approve that there lie a way to Cathayo at the northwest from out of Europe , we have experience , namely of three brethren that go that journey , as gemma Frisius record , and leave a name unto that strait , whereby now it be call Fretum trium fratrum . we do read again of a Portugal that pass this straight , of who master Frobisher speak , that be imprison therefore many year in Lisbon , to verify the old spanish proverb , i suffer for do well . likewise Andrew Urdaneta a friar of Mexico come out of Mar deal Zur this way into Germany : he card ( for he be a great discoverer ) make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , have be see by gentleman of good credit . 
 Cic. 1. de now if the observation and remembrance of thing he breed experience , and of experience proceed art , ea ? ' and the certain knowledge we have in all faculty , as the best philosopher that ever be do affirm : true the voyage of these aforesaid traveller that have go out of Europe into mar deal Zur , and return thence at the northwest , do most evident conclude that way to be navigable , and that passage free . so much the Lib. i Geog. moor we be so to think , for that the first principle Cap. 2. and chief ground in all geographic , as Ptolome say , 196 
 be the history of travel , that be , report make by traveller skilful in geometric and astronomic , of all such thing in their journey as to Geographic do belong . it only then remain , that we now answer to those argument that seem to make against this former conclusion . 
 the first objection be of no force , that general table Sol. i . of the world set forth by Ortelius or Mercator , for it great skill not , be unskilful draw for that point : as manifest it may appear unto any one that confer the same with gemma Frisius his universali map , with his round quarter card , with his globe , with Sebastian Cabota his table , and Ortelius his general map alone , worthy prefer in this case before all Mercator and Ortelius other do : for that Cabota be not only a skilful sea man , but a long traveller , and such a one as enter personal that straight , send by king Henry the seven to make this aforesaid discovery , as in his own discourse of navigation you may read in his card draw with his own hand , that the mouth of the north wester ne straight lie near the 318. Meridian , between 61. and 64. degree in the elevation , continue the same breed that about 10. degree west , where it open southerly moor and more , until it come under the tropic of cancer , and so run into mar deal Zur , at the least 18. degree more in breadth there , than it be where it first begin : otherwise i can as well imagine this passage to be more unlikely than the voyage to Moscovia , and more impossible than it for the far situation and continuance thereof in the frosty clime : as now i can affirm it to be very possible and most likely in comparison thereof , for that it neither coast so far north as the moscovian passage do , neither be this straight so long as that , before it bow down southerly towards the sun again . 
 the second argument conclude nothing . Ptolome Sol. 2. know not what be above sixteen degree south 
 197 
 beyond the equinoctial line , he be ignorant of all passage northward from the elevation of 63. degree : he know no ocean sea beyond Asia , yet have the Portugal trend the cape of good hope at the south point of Africa , and travel to Japan a island in the east ocean , between Asia and America : our merchant in the time of king Edward the sixth discover the moscovian passage far north than Thyle , and show Greenland not to be continent with Lappeland and Norway : the like our northwestern traveller have do , declare by their navigation that way , the ignorance of all cosmographer that either do join Greenland with America , or continue the west Indies with that frosty region under the north pole . as for Virgil he sing accord to the knowledge of man in his time , as a other poet do of the hot zone . 
 Ovid . 1. Quarum quae media est , non est habitabilis aestu . etam ' imagine , as most man then do , Zonam torridam , the hot zone to be altogether dishabit for heat , though present we know many famous and worthy kingdom and city in that part of the earth , and the island of S. Thomas near ^Ethiopia , and the wealthy island for the which chief all these voyage be take in hand , to be inhabit even under the equinoctial line . 
 so / . 3. to answer the three objection , beside Cabota and all other traveller navigation , the only credit of m. Frobisher may suffice , who late through all these island of ice , and mountain of snow , pass that way , even beyond the gulf that tumble down from the north , and in some place though he draw one inch thick ice , as he return in August do , yet come he home safe again . 
 sol 4. the four argument be altogether frivolous and vain , for neither be there any isthmo or strait of land between America and Asia , ne can these two land joint be one continent . the first part of my answer be manifest allow of by Homer , who that excellent 198 
 geographer Strabo follow , yield he in this Lib. Geog. faculty the price . the author of that book likewise irepi Kotlov to Alexander , attribute unto Aristotle , be of the same opinion that Homer and Strabo be of , in two or three place . Dionysius in oiKovnevw irepuiywi have this verse wr « ? anceavo irepiSeSpo / ae yatav airacrav . 
 so do the ocean sea run round about the world : speak only of Europe , Africa and Asia , as than Asia be travel and know . with these doctor may note . you join Pomponius Mela. cap . 2. lib . I. Plinius lib . 
 2. cap . 67. and Pius 2. cap . 2. in his description of Asia . all the which writer do no less confirm the whole eastern side of Asia to be compass about with the sea , than Plato do affirm in Timaeo , under the name Atlantis , the west Indies to be a island , as in a special discourse thereof R. Eden write , agreeable Richard Eden . unto the sentence of Proclus , Marsilius Ficinus , and other . out of Plato it be gather that America be a island . Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Dionysius , Mela , Pliny , pius 2. affirm the continent of Asia , Africa , and Europe , to be environ with the ocean . i may therefore bold say ( though late intelligence thereof have we none at all ) that Asia and the west Indies be not tie together by any Isthmos or straight of land , contrary to the opinion of some new cosmographer , by who doubtful this matter have be bring in controversy . and thus much for the first part of my answer unto the four objection . 
 the second part , namely that America and Asia can be one continent , may thus be prove , koto Lib. 2. me-trjv r^s be koikorrjta pei km twv troTa / Mov to trX^Ooi . the ttor‘ ca ? ' 1 • most river take down that way their course , where the earth be most hollow and deep , write Aristotle : and the sea ( say he in the same place ) as it go further , so be it find deep . into what gulf do the Moscovian river Onega , Duina , ob , power out their stream northward out of Moscovia into the sea ? 
 which way do that sea strike ? the south be main 
 199 
 land , the eastern coast wax more and more shallow : from the north , either natural , because that part of the earth be high Aristot. 2 Met. cap . 1. or of necessity , for that the forcible influence of some northern star cause the earth there to shake off the sea , as some philosopher do think : or final for the great store of water engender in that frosty and cold climate , that the bank be not able to hold they . Alber , in 2. meteor , cap . 6. from the north , i say , continual fall down great abundance of water . so that this northeastern currant must at the length abrupt bow towards we south on the west side of Finmarke and Norway : or else strike down southwest above groan-land , or betwixt groneland and Iseland , into the northwest strait we speak of , as of congruence it do , if you mark the situation of that region , and by the report of m. Frobisher experience teach we . and m. Frobisher the further he travail in the former passage , as he tell i , the deep always he find the sea lay you now the sum hereof together . the river run where the channel be most hollow , the sea in take his course wax deep , the sea water fall continual from the north southward , the northeastern current strike down into the straight we speak of , and be there augment with whole mountain of ice and snow fall down furious out from the land under the north pole . where store of water be , there be it a thing impossible to want sea , where sea not only do not want , but wax deep , there can be discover no land . final , whence i pray you come the contrary tide , that m. Frobisher meet withal after that he have sail no small way in that passage , if there be any Isthmos or straight of land betwixt the aforesaid northwestern gulf , and mar deal Zur , to join Asia and America together ? that conclusion frequent in school quicquid praeter , etc be mean of the part of the world then know , and so be it of right to be understand . 
 200 
 the five objection require for answer wisdom and sol 5. policy in the traveler , to win the barbarian favour by some good mean : and so to arm and strengthen himself , that when he shall have the repulse in one coast , he may safe travail to a other , commodious take his convenient time , and discreet make choice of they with who he will thorough deal . to force a violent entry , will for we Englishman be very hard , consider the strength and valour of so great a nation , far distant from we , and the attempt thereof may be most perilous unto the doer , unless their part be very good . 
 touch their law against stranger , you shall read nevertheless in the same relation of Galeotto Perera , that the cathaian king be wont to grant free access unto all foreigner that trade into his country for merchandise , and a place of liberty for they to remain in : as the moor have , until such time as they have bring the Loutea or lieutenant of that coast to be a circumcise Saracene : wherefore some of they be put to the sword , the rest be scatter abroad : at fuquien a great city in China , certain of they be yet this day to be see . as for the japans they be most desirous to be acquaint with stranger . the Portugal though they be strait handle there at the first , yet in the end they find great favour at the prince his hand , insomuch that the Loutea or precedent that misuse they be therefore put to death . the rude indian Canoa hall those sea , the Portugal , the saracenes , and moor travail continual up and down that reach from Japan to China , from China to Malacca , from Malacca to the molucca : and shall a Englishman , better appoint than any of they all ( that i say no more of our navy ) fear to sail in that ocean ? what sea at all do want piracy ? what navigation be there void of peril ? 
 to the last argument . our traveller need not to Sol. 6. seek their return by the north-east , neither shall they be constrain , except they listen , either to attempt 
 201 
 what the 
 eastern cut rent be . 
 magellans straight at the southwest , or to be in danger of the Portugal for the southeast : they may return by the northwest , that same way they do go forth , . as experience have show . 
 the reason allege for proof of the contrary may be disprove after this manner . and first it may be call in controversy , whether any current continual be force by the motion of primum mobile , round about the world , or no ? for learned man do diverse handle that question . the natural course of all water be downward , wherefore of congruence they fall that way where they find the earth most low and deep : in respect whereof > it be erst say , the sea do strike from the northern land southerly . violent the sea be toss and trouble diverse way with the wind , increase and diminish by the course of the moon , hoist up and down through the sundry operation of the sun and the star : final , some be of opinion , that the sea be carry in part violent about the world , after the daily motion of the high movable heaven , in like manner as the element of air and fire , with the rest of the heavenly sphere , be from the east unto the west . and this they do call their eastern current , or levant stream . some such current may not be deny to be of great force in the hot zone , for the nearness thereof unto the centre of the sun , and bluster eastern wind violent drive the sea westward : howbeit , in the temperate clime , the sun be further off , and the wind more diverse , blow as much from the north , the west and south , as from the east , this rule do not effectual withhold we from travail eastward , neither be we keep ever back by the aforesaid Levant wind and stream . but in Magellans straight we be violent drive back westward : ergo , through the northwestern straight or Anian fret shall we not be able to return eastward ? it follow not . the first , for that the northwestern straight have more sea room at the least by one hundred english miles , than 202 
 1576. Magellans fret have , the only want whereof cause all narrow passage general to be most violent . so will i say in the Anian gulf , if it be so narrow as don Diego and zalterius have paint it out , any return that way to be full of difficulty , in respect of such straightness thereof , not for the nearness of the sun , or eastern wind , violent force that way any levant streamer but in that place there be more sea room by many degree , if the card of Cabota , and gemma Frisius , and that which Tramezine imprint , be true . 
 and hitherto reason see i none at all , but that i may as well give credit unto their do , as to any of the rest . it must be peregrinationis historia , that be , true report of skilful traveller , as Ptolome write , that in ca ? ' 2 ' such controversy of Geographic must put we out of doubt . Ortelius in his universali table , in his particular map of the west Indies , of all Asia , of the northern kingdom , of the east Indies , Mercator in some of his globe , and generail map of the world , Moletius in his universali table of the globe divide , in his sea card , and particular table of the east Indies , zalterius , and don Diego , with Ferdinando berte , and other , do so much differ from gemma Frisius and Cabota , among themselves , and in diverse place from themselves , concern the diverse situation and sundry limit of America , that one may not so rash , as true surmise , these man either to be ignorant in those point touch the aforesaid region , or that the map they have give out unto the world , be collect only by they , and never of their own draw . 
 . 