here follow the course from belle isle , Carpont , and the grand bay in Newfoundland up the river of Canada for the space of 230. league , observe by John Alphonse of Xanctoigne chief pilot to monsieur Roberval , 1542. 
 else isle be in 51 degree and % . bell Belle isle . Isles and Carpont be northnorthwest and southsoutheast , and they be ten league distant . Carpont be in 52 de - carpant inn agree . Carpont and bell isle from the 52 - degree . grand bay be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance from bell isle to the 
 grand bay be 7 league . the midst of the grand bay be the grand in 52 degree and a half , and on the northside thereof there be a rock : half a league from the isle , over against i ' Carpont towards the east there be a small flat island , and on the side towards the north-east there be a flat rock . a flat rock . and when thou come out of the harbour of Carpont thou must leave this rock on the starreboord side , and also on the larboard side there be two or three small isle : and when thou come out on the north-east side , range along the shore towards the west about two pike length in the midway there be a shall which lie on thy starboard side : and sail thou by the north coast , and leave two part of the grand bay towards the south ; because there be a rock which run 2 or 3 league into the sea . and when thou be come athwart the haven of Butes , run along the north shore about one league or Butes . a half off , for the coast be without all danger : bell isle in the mouth of the grand bay , and the isle of Blanc the isle of Sablon , which be within the grand bay , near unto the Blanc sablm north shore lie Northeast , west and Southwest , and the °r m lie san * distance be 30 league . the grand bay at the entrance the several be but 7 league broad from land to land until it come bq^ndba* over against the bay des chasteaux : and from thence you forward it have not pass 5 league in breadth . and 
 275 
 Blanc Sab Ion. in 51. deg . 2. thirdpart . 
 the isle de la damoiselle in 50. deg . 3. four part . 
 many isle wonderful good harbour . 
 cape tienot in 50 deg . one four part . 
 against Blanc Sablon it be 8 league broad from land to land . and the land on the south shore be all low land along the sea coast . the north shore be reasonable high land , Blanc Sablon be in 5 if degree . the isle of Blanc Sablon and the isle de la damoiselle , be north-east , Westsouthwest , and take a little of the westsouthwest , and they be distant 36 league : these isle be in 50. deg . 
 and there be a good haven : and you may enter by a high cape which lie along towards the north-east , and within the distance of a pike and a half , because of a rock which lie on your larrebord side , and you may anchor in 10 fathom water over against a little nook : and from the great headland unto the place where thou do anchor there be not above the length of 2 cable . and if thou will go out by the west side , thou must sail near the isle by the starrebord , and give room unto the isle on the larboard at the come forth : and when thou be not past a cable length out thou must sail hard by the isle on the larboard side , by reason of a sink flat which lie on the starrebord , and thou shall sail so on to the southsouthwest , until thou come in sight of a rock which shine , which be about half a league in the sea distant from the isle , and thou shall leave it on the larrebord : ( and from the isle of damoiselle unto Newfoundland the sea be not in breadth above 36. league , because that Newfoundland even unto cape Briton run not but northnortheast and Southsouthwest . ) between the isle de la damoiselle and the isle of blank Sablon there be many isle and good harbour : and on this coast there be falcon and hawk , and certain fowl which seem to be feasant . the isle de la damoiselle and cape Tienot be Northeast and Westsouthwest and take a little of the north-east and southwest , and they be distant 18 league . cape Tienot be in 50. deg . and f . and there the sea be broad . and it may be to the end of Newfoundland , which be at the entrance of Cape briton 70 league , which be the great breadth of the sea . and there be 6 or 7 isle between the isle de 
 276 
 la damoiselle and cape Tienot . cape Tienot have in the sea 5 or 6 league distant from it a sink hand dangerous for ship . the cape Tienot and the midst of the isle of ascension be north-east and southsouthwest , and they be 22. league distant , the midst of the isle of ascension be the in 49 deg . and J. ‘ the say isle lie northwest and southeast , then northwest end be in 50. degree of latitude or natiscotec . and the southeast end be in 48. degree and a half and it be about 25. league long and 4. or 5. league broad : and from the northwest end of the isle unto the firm land of the north side the sea be not above seven league broad , but unto the firm land on the south side be about 15. league . cape Tienot and the end of the isle of ascension towards the southeast be north-east and Southwest , and be distant 30. league . the say cape of Tienot and than northwest end of the isle of ascension be east and west , and take a little of the north-east and Southwest , and they be distant 34. league . the isle of the com-ascension be a goodly isle , and a goodly champion land without any hill , stand all upon white rock and i alabaster , all cover with tree unto the sea shore , and there be all sort of tree as there be in France : and there 
 be wild beast , as bear , lusern , porkespick . and from cape from the southeast end of the isle of ascension unto the t0 tJie entrance of cape Briton be but 50. league . the north - 
 west end of the isle and the cape des Monts nostre dame , ascension be which be on the main land towards the south , be north - but tfileague . east and westsouth west , and the distance between they cape °f be 15. league . the cape be in 49. degree , which be a D^n‘ ! tri very high land . the cape and end of the isle of ascension towards the southeast be east and west and there be 
 15. league distance between they . the bay of molve the bay of or gaspay be in 48. degree , and the coast lie north molve or and south , and take a quarter of the north-east and as^ ' southwest unto the bay of heat : and there be 3. Isles , one great one and two small : from the bay of heat the bay de until you pass the Monts nostre dame all the land be C^^roro^ high and good ground all cover with tree . Ognedoc * 
 277 
 great store and better fish than in Newfoundland . bowl . 
 tree . 
 the mouth of the river of Canada twenty five lease broad . the 7 isle in 50 degree and a hafe . 
 the nver be here but 1o league broad . 
 the point of Ongear in 49 degree and a quarter . 
 the isle of raquelle in 48 degree and two three part . 
 be a good bay and lie northnorthwest and southsoutheast , and it be a good harbour : and you must sail along the shore on the northside by reason of the low point at the entrance thereof : and when you be pass the point bring your self to a anchor in 15. or 20. fathom of water towards the south shore , and here within this haven be two river , one which go towards the northwest , and the other to the southwest . and on this coast there be great fish for cod and other fish , where there be more store than be in Newfoundland , and better fish . and here be great store of river foul , as malards , wild goose , and other : and here be all sort of tree , rise tree , raspess , Filbird tree , apple tree , pear tree , and it be hot here in summer then in France . the isle of ascension and the 7. Isles which lie on the north shore lie southeast and westnorthwest , and be distant 24. league . the cape of Ognedoc and the 7. isle be northnorthwest and southsoutheast , and be distant 35. league . the cape of Monts nostre dame and the 7. isle be north and south , and the cut over from the one to the other be 25. league : and this be the breadth of this sea , and from thence upward it begin to wax narrow and narrow . the 7. isle be in 50. degree and the 7. Isles and the point of Ongear lie Northeast and Southwest and the distance between they be 15. league , and between they be certain small island : and the point of ongear and the mountain nostre Dame , which be on the south side of the entrance of the river , be north and south : and the cut over from the one to the other be ten league : and this be here the abredth of the sea the point of ongear and the river of Caen lie east and west , and they be distant 12. league . and all the coast from the isle of ascension hither be very good ground , wherein grow all sort of tree that be in France and some fruit . the point of ongear be in 49. degree and and the river of Caen and the isle of raquelle lie Northeast and Southwest , and they be distant 12. league . the isle of raquelle be 278 
 in 48. degree and in this river of Caen there be great store of fish . and here the sea be not past 8. league the river % broad . the isle of raquelle be a very low isle , which be hoad . near unto the south shore , hard by a high cape which be call the cape of marble . there be no danger there at all . and between raquelle and the cape of marble ship may pass . and there be not from the isle to the south shore above one league , and from the isle unto the north shore about four league . the isle of raquelle and the entrance of Saguenay be Northeast Westsouthwest , and be distant 14. league , and there be between they two 
 small island near the north shore . the entrance the entrance of Saguenay be in 48. degree and and the entrance have not pass a quarter of a league in breadth , and it be dangerous towards the southwest : and two or three league within the entrance it begin to wax wide and wide : and it seem to be as it be a arm 
 of the sea : and i think that the same run into 
 the sea of Cathay , for it send forth there a great the sea of current , and there do run in that place a terrible raze 
 or tie . and here the river from the north shore to the river not the south shore be not past four league in breadth , and it be a dangerous passage between both the land , because ‘ there lie bank of rock in the river . the isle of raquelle and the isle of hare lie Northeast and Southwest , and take i of the east and the west , and they be distant 18. league . the entrance of Saguenay and the isle of liepueres or hare lie Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and be distant 5. league . the entrance of Saguenay and the isle of raquelle be northnorthwest , and southsouthwest , and be distant three league . The the isle of isle of hare be in 48 and a of a degree . from the mountain of nostre dame unto Canada and unto fg^ port 0 Hochelaga , all the land on the south coast be fair , a low land and goodly champagne , all cover with tree unto the brink of the river . and the land on the north side be high , and in some place there be high mountain . 
 and from the isle of hare unto the isle of Orleans the 
 279 
 note . river be not past 4 or 5 league broad . between the isle of hare and the highland on the north side the sea be not past a league and a half broad , and it be very deep , for it be above 100 fathom deep in the midst . to the east of the isle of hare there be 2 or 3 small isle and rock . and from hence to the isle des coudre or of filbeard , all be nothing but isle and rock on the south shore : and towards the north the sea be fair and deep . the isle of hare and the isle of filbeard lie north-east , west and Southwest , and they be distant 12 league . and you must always run along the high land on the north shore ; for on the other shore there be nothing but rock . and you must pass by the side of the isle of filbeard , and the river there be not past a quarter of a league broad , and you must sail in the midst of the chanel : and in the midst run the best passage either at a hie or a low water , because the sea run there strong , and there be great danger of rock , and you have need of good anchor and cable . the isle of filbeard be a small isle , about one league long , and half a league broad , but they be all bank of sand . 
 the isle of the isle of filbert stand in 47. deg . and f . the isle filbeard in of fuberd and the isle of Orleans lie north-east and ‘ and ‘ ^quar - southwest , and they be distant 10 league , and thou must ters . pass by the high land on the northside about a quarter of a league , because that in the midst of the river there be nothing but shold and rock . and when thou shall be over against a round cape , thou must take over to the south shore southwest , and a quarter towards the south ; and thou shall sail in 5. 6 and 7 fathom : and there then the beginning river of Canada begin to be fresh , and the salt water of the fresh end . and when thou shall be athwart the point of waUr ' the isle of Orleans , where the river begin to be fresh , 
 thou shall sail in the midst of the river , and thou shall leave the isle on the starreboord , which be on the right the river but hand : and here the river be not past a quarter of a league a quarter of a broad , anj have 2o and 30 fathom water . and towards a^ie roa . gouth shore there be a ledge of isle all cover with 280 
 tree , and they end over against the point of the isle of Orleans . and the point of the isle of Orleans towards the north-east be in 47 degree and one terce of a degree . and the isle of Orleans be a fair isle , all cover with tree even unto the river side : and it be about 5 league long , and a league and a half broad . and on the north shore there be another river , which fall into the main river at the end of the island : and ship may very well pass there . from the midst of the isle unto Canada the river run west ; and from the place of Canada unto france-roy the river turn west Southwest : and from the west end of the isle to Canada be but one league ; and unto france-roy 4 league . and when thou be come to the end of the isle , thou shall see a great river which fall fifteen or twenty fathom down from a rock , and make a terrible noise . the fort of france-roy stand in 47 degree , and one sixth part of a degree . 
 the extension of all these land , upon just occasion be call new France . for it be as good and as temperate as France , and in the same latitude . and the reason wherefore it be cold in the winter be , because the fresh river be natural more cold than the sea ; and it be also broad and deep : and in some place it be half a league and above in breadth . and also because the land be not till , nor full of people , and be all full of wood , which be the cause of cold , because there be not store of fire nor cattle . and the sun have his meridian as high as the meridian at rochel : and it be noon here when the sun be at south Southwest at rochel . and here the north star by the compass stand north north-east . and when at rochel it be noon , it be but half a hour past nine at france-roy . from the say place unto the ocean sea and the coast of new France , be not above 50 league distance . and from the entrance of Norumbega unto Florida be 300 league : and from this place of france-roy to Hochelaga , be about 80 league : and unto the isle of Rasus 30 381 
 1542. 
 the isle of Orleans in 47 degree and one three part . 
 Canada 1 league to the west of the isle of Orleans . 
 the fort of france-roy stand in 47 degree and one sixth part . 
 why the country be cold in the winter then France . 
 a second reason . 
 the variation of the compass . 
 from the fort of France Roy unto you mouth of the grand bay 230 leag . 
 gold and silver like to be find in Canada . 
 a bay in 42. degree gyve some hope of a passage . 
 tree . 
 red plum . 
 foul . 
 corn . 
 ivhe eat to be sow in march . 
 league . and i doubt not but Norumbega enter into the river of Canada , and unto the sea of Saguenay . and from the fort of france-roy until a man come forth of the Grande bay be not above 230 league . and the course be Northeast and west Southwest not above 5 degree and £ difference : and reckon 16 league and ah half to a degree . by the nature of the climate the land towards Hochelaga be still better and better , and more fruitful . and this land be fit for fig and pear . and i think that gold and silver will be find here , accord as the people of the country say . Theise land lie over against Tartary , and i doubt not but that they stretch towards Asia , accord to the roundness of the world . and therefore it be good to have a small ship of 70 ton to discover the coast of new France on the back side of Florida : for i have be at a bay as far as 42 degree between Norumbega and Florida , and i have not search the end thereof , and i know not whether it pass through . and in all these country there be oak , and bortz , ash , elm , arable , tree of life , pine prussetree , ceder , great wall nut tree , and wild nut , hasel-tree , wild pear tree , wild grape , and there have be find red plum . and very fair corn grow there , and peason grow of their own accord , gooseberry and strawberry . and there be goodly forest , wherein man may hunt . and there be great store of stag , dear , porkepick , and the savage say there be unicorn . foul there be in abundance , as bustard , wild goose , crane , turtle dove , raven , crow , and many other bird . all thing which be sow there , be not pass 2. or 3. day in come up out of the ground . i have tell in one ear of corn a hundred and twenty grain , like the corn of France . and you need not to sow your wheat until march , and it will be ripe in the midst of August . the water be better and perfect than in France . and if the country be till and replenish with people , it will be as hot as rochel . and the reason why it 
 282 
 .. I54X snow there often then in France be , because it rain the cause of there but seidome : for the rain be convert into the often snow-tnetn Canada . snow . 
 all thing above mention , be true . 
 John Alphonse make this voyage with monsieur Roberval . 
 there be a pardon to be see for the pardon of monsieur de saine terre , lieutenant of the say monsieur de Roberval , give in Canada in the presence of the say John Alphonse . 
 . 