a short and brief narration of the navigation make by the commandment of the king of France , to the island of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and diverse other which now be call new France , with the particular custom , and manner of the inhabitant therein . 
 Chap. i . 
 n the year of our lord 1535 , upon Whitsunday , be the 16. of may , by the commandment of our captain James Cartier , and with a common accord , in the cathedral church of S. Malo we devout each one confess our self , and receive the sacrament : 
 and all enter into the quire of the say church , we present our self before the reverend father in Christ , the lord bishop of S. Malo , who bless we all , be in his bishop robe . the Wednesday follow , be the 19 of may , there arise a good gale of wind , and therefore we hoist sail with three ship , that be to say , the great Hermina , be in burden about a hundredth , or a hundred and twenty ton , wherein the foresay captain James Cartier be general , and master Thomas Frosmont chief master , accompany with master Claudius de Pont Briand , son to the lord of Montcevell , and cupbearer to the dolphin of France , Charles of pomeray , John Powlet , and other gentleman . in the second ship call the little Hermina , be of 210 
 threescore ton burden , be captain under the say Cartier , mace Salobert , and master William marry . in the three ship call the Hermerillon , be of forty ton in burden , be captain m. William Britton , and m. James Maingare . so we sail with a good and prosperous wind , until the 20 of the say month , at which time the weather turn into storm and tempest , the which with contrary wind , and darkness , endure so long that our ship be without any rest , suffer as much as any ship that ever go on sea : so that the 25 of June , by reason of that foul and foggy weather , all our ship lose sight one of another again till we come to newfound land where we have appoint to meet . after we have lose one another , we in the general ship be with contrary wind toss to and fro on the sea , until the seven of July , upon which day we arrive in new find land , and come to the island call the island of bird , which lie from the main land 14 league . this island be so full of bird , that all our ship may easy have be freight with they , and yet for the great number that there be , it will not seem that any be take away . we to victuali our self fill two boat of they . this island have the pole elevate 49 degree , and 40 minute . upon the eight of the say month we sail further , and with a prosperous weather come to the port call the port of white sand , that be in the bay call the bay of castle , where we have purpose to meet and stay together the 15 of the say month . in this place therefore we look for our fellow , that be to say , the other two ship , till the 26 of the month , on which day both come together . so soon as our fellow be come , we set our ship in a readiness , take in both water , wood , and other necessary . and then on the 29 of the say month , early in the morning we hoist sail to pass on further , and sail along the northern coast that run north-east and Southwest , till two hour after sunset or thereabouts , than we cross along two island , which 
 211 
 the isle oj bird in 49 degree 40 minute . 
 the bay des chaste aux ere the grand bay 
 do stretch further forth than the other , which we call saint William island , be distant about 20 league or more from the port of breast . all the coast from the castle to that place lie east and west , Northeast and Southwest , have between it sundry little island , altogether barren and full of stone , without either earth or tree , except certain valley only . the next day be the 30 of July , we sail on westward to find out other island which as yet we have not find 12 league and a half , among which there be a great bay towards the north all full of island and great creek where many good harborough seem to be : they we name saint Martha island , from which about a league and a half further into the sea there be a dangerous shallow , wherein be five rock , which lie from saint Martha island about seven league as you pass into the say island , on the east and on the west side , to which we come the say day a hour after noon , and from that hour until midnight we sail about fifteen league athwart a cape of the low island , which we name saint germane island southeastward , from which place about three league , there be a very dangerous shallow . likewise between saint germane cape and saint Martha , about two league from the say island , there lie a bank of sand , upon which bank the water be but four fathom deep , and therefore see the danger of the coast , we strike sail and go no further that night : the next day be the last of July , we go all along the coast that run east and west , and somewhat southeasterly which be all environ about with island and dry sand , and in truth be very dangerous . the length from saint germane cape to the say island be about 17 league and a half , at the end of which there be a goodly plot of ground full of huge and high tree , albeit the rest of the coast be compass about with sand without any sign or show of harborough , till we come to cape thiennot , which trend northwest about seven league from the foresay island , which cape thiennot we note in 
 212 
 our former voyage , and therefore we sail on all that night west and westnorthwest , till it be day , and then the wind turn against we , wherefore we go to seek a haven wherein we may harbour our ship , and by good hap , find one fit for our purpose , about seven league and a half beyond cape thiennot , and that we name saint Nicholas haven , it lie amid 4 island that stretch into the sea : upon the near we for a token Nicholas . set up a wooden cross . but note by the way , that this cross must be bring Northeast , and then bend towards it , leave it on the left hand and you shall find six fathom water , and within the haven four . also you be to take heed of two shelf that lean outward half a league . all this coast be full of should and very dangerous , albeit in sight many good haven seem to be there , yet be there nought else but shelf and sand . we stale and rest our self in the say haven , until the seven of August be Sunday : on which day we hoist sail , and come towards land on the south side towards cape Rabast , distant from the cape Rabast . say haven about twenty league northnortheast , and southsouthwest : but the next day there rise a stormy and a contrary wind , and because we can find no haven there towards the south , thence we go coast along towards the north , beyond the abovesaid haven about ten league , where we find a goodly great gulf , full of island , passage , and entrance towards what wind soever you please to bend : for the knowledge of this gulf there be a great island that be like to a cape of land , stretch somewhat further forth than the other , and about two league within the land , there be a hill fashion as it be a heap of corn . we name the 
 say gulf saint Laurence his bay . the twelve of they the gulf of say month we go from the say saint Laurence s - laurence-his bay , or gulf , sail westward , and discover a cape of land towards the south , that run west and cape of 
 by south , distant from the say saint Laurence his we of 
 bay , about five and twenty league . and of the two tm " 
 213 
 wild man which we take in our former voyage , it be tell we , that this be part of the southern coast , and that there be a island , on the southerly part of which be the way to go from honguedo ( where the year before we have take they ) to Canada , and that two day journey from the say cape , and island begin the kingdom of Saguenay , on the north shore extend towards Canada , and about three league athwart the say a mighty cape , there be above a hundred fathom water . Moreover 
 shale i believe that there be never so many whale see 
 ‘ as we see that day about the say cape . the next day after be our lady day of August the fifteen of the month , have pass the straight , we have notice of certain land that we leave towards the south , which land be full of very great and high hill , and this the isle of cape we name the island of the assumption , and Assumption . one qape of the sajj high country lie Eastnortheast , and westsouthwest , the distance between which be about five and twenty league . the country lie north may plain be perceive to be high than the southerly , more than thirty league in length . we trended the say land about towards the south : from the say day until Tewesday noon follow , the wind come west , and therefore we bend towards the north , purpose to go and see the land that we before have spy . be arrive there , we find the say land , as it be join together , and low towards the sea and the northerly mountain that be upon the say low land stretch east , and west , and a quarter of the south . our wild man tell we that there be the begin of Saguenay , and that it be land inhabit , and that thence come the red copper , of they name caignetdaze . there be between the southerly land , and the northerly about thirty league distance , the mouth of and more than two hundred fathom depth . the say ocheu f man moreover certify unto we , that there be then about thirty and begin of the great river of Hochelaga league broad , and ready way to Canada , which river the further it 
 214 
 go the narrow it come , even into Canada , and that then there be fresh water , which go so far upward , that they have never hear of any man who have go to the head of it , and that there be no other passage but with small boat . our captain hear their talk , and how they do affirm no other passage to be there , will not at that time proceed any further , till he have see and note the other land , and coast towards the north , which he have omit to see from saint Laurence his gulf , because he will know , if between the land towards the north any passage may be discover . 
 how our captain cause the ship to return back again , only to know if in saint Laurence gulf there be any passage towards the north . 
 Chap. 2. 
 upon the 18 of August be Wednesday , our captain cause his ship to wind back , and bend towards the other shore , so that we trended the say northerly cost , which run Northeast and Southwest , be fashion like unto half a bow , and be a very high land , but yet not so high as that on the south part . the Thursday follow we come to seven very the seven high island , which we name the round island . Theise islesislands be distant from the south shore about 40 league , and stretch out into the sea about 3 or 4 league . against these there be goodly low ground to be see full of goodly tree , which we then Friday follow , with our boat compass about . overthwart these land there be diverse sandy shelf more than two league into the sea , very dangerous , which at a low water remain almost dry . at the further bound of these low land , that contain about ten league , there be a river of fresh water , that with such swiftness run a swift river . into the sea , that for the space of one league within it the water be as fresh as any fountain water . we with our boat enter into the say river , at the entrance of which we find about one fathom and a half of water . 
 215 
 sea-horse . there be in this river many fish shape like horse , which as our wild man tell we , all the day long lie in the water , and the night on land : of which we see therein a great number . the next day be the 21 of the month , by break of day we hoist sail , and sail so long along the say coast , that we have sight of the rest of the say northern coast , which as yet we have the isle of not see , and of the island of the assumption which Assumption , we go to discover , depart from the say land : ' which thing so soon as we have do , and that we be certify not other passage to be there , we come to our ship again , which we have leave at the say island , where be a good harbour , the water be about nine or ten fathom . in the same place by occasion of contrary wind and foggy mist , we be constrain to stay , not be either able to come out of it , or hoist sail , till the 24 of the month : on which day we depart and come to a haven on the southerly coast about 80 league from a haven on the say island . this haven be over against three flat the southern isiand that lie amid the river , because on the midway ’ between those island , and the say haven towards the 
 great north , there be a very great river that run between 
 rw ' the high and low land , and more than three league into the sea it have many shelf , and there be not altogether two fathom water , so that the place be very dangerous : and near unto the say shelf , there be either fifteen or 20 fathom from shore to shore . all the northerly coast run north-east and by north , and Southwest 8c by south . the say haven wherein we stay on the south side , be as it be but a sluice of the water that rise by the flood , 8c but of small saint Johns islet , account : we name they saint Johns islet , because we find they , 8c enter into they the day of the behead of that saint . and before you come to the say haven , there be a island lie eastward about 5 league distant from the same : between which and the land there be no passage save only for small boat . the haven of saint Johns islet dry up all the water that rise 216 
 by flow , although they flow two fathom at the least . the best place to harbour ship therein be on the south part of a little island that be over against the say haven , whereby the bank or shore of the island rise . upon the first of September we depart out of the say haven , purpose to go towards Canada ; and about 15 league from it towards the west , and westsouthwest , amid the river , there be three island , over against the which there be a river which run swift , and be of a great depth , and it be that which lead , and run into the country and kingdom of Saguenay , as by the two wild man of Canada it be tell we . this river pass and run along very high and steep hill of bare stone , where very little earth be , and notwithstanding there be great quantity of sundry sort of tree that grow in the say bare stone , even as upon good and fertile ground , in such sort that we have see some so great as well will suffice to make a mast for a ship of 30 ton burden , and as green as possible can be , grow in a stony rock without any earth at all . at the entrance of the say river we meet with 4 boat full of wild man , which as far as we can perceive , very fearful come towards we , so that some of they go back again , and the other come as near we as easy they may hear and understand one of our wild man , who tell they his name , and then take acquaintance of they , upon who word they come to we . the next day be the 2 of September , we come out of the say river to go to Canada , and by reason of the sea flow , the tide be very swift and dangerous , for that on the south part of it there lie two island , about which , more than three league compass , lie many rock and great stone , and but two fathom water : and the flow amid those island be very unconstant and doubtful , so that if it have not be for our boat , we have be in great dailger to lose our pinnace : and coast along the say dry sand , there be more than 30 fathom water . 
 217 
 this be the river of Tadascu or of Saguenay . 
 about five league beyond the river of Saguenay Southwest , there be another hand on the northside , aguenay . wherein be certain high land , and thereabouts we think to have cast anchor , on purpose to stay the next tide , but we can sound no ground in a 120 fathom , within a flight shoot from shore , so that we be constrain to wind back to the say hand , where we sound again and find 3 5 fathom . the next morning we hoist sail and go thence , sail further on , where we have notice of a certain kind of fish never before of any man see or know . they be about the bigness of a porpose , yet nothing like they , of body very well proportion , head like grayhound , altogeth as white as snow without any spot , within which river there be great quantity of they : they do live altogether between the sea and the fresh water . Theise people of the country call they Adhothuys , they tell we that they be very savoury and good to be eat . Moreover they affirm none to be find elsewhere but in the mouth of that river . the six of the month , the weather be calm and fair , we go about 15 league more upward into the river , and there light on a hand that look northward , and it make a little innumerable haven or creek wherein be many and innumerable great tortoise . tortoyze , continual lie about that hand . there be likewise great quantity of the say Adhothuys take by the inhabitor of the country , and there be as great a current in that place as be at Bourdeaux in France at every tide . this hand be in length about three league , and in breadth two , and be a goodly and fertile plot of ground , replenish with many goodly and great tree of many sort . among the rest there be many filbert-tree , which we find hang full of they , somewhat big and better in savour than we , but somewhat than we of hard , and therefore we call it the hand of filbert . iaerds^ sevent^ month be our lady even , after ‘ service we go from that hand to go up high into the river , and come to 14 hand seven or eight league 218 
 from the hand of filbert , where the country of Canada begin , one of which land be ten league in length , and five in breadth , great inhabit of such man as only live by fish of such sort of fish as the river afford , accord to the season of they . after we 
 have cast anchor between the say great hand , and the this great northerly coast , we go on land and take our two 
 wild man with we , meet with many or those country qriean 0 people , who will not at all approach unto we , but rather flee from we , until our two man begin to speak unto they , tell they that they be Taignoagny and Domagaia , who so soon as they have take acquaintance of they , begin great to rejoice , dance and show many sort of ceremony : and many of the chief of they come to our boat and bring many eel and other sort of fish , with two or three burden of great millet Matz . wherewith they make their bread , and many great musk million . the same day come also many other boat full of those countryman and woman , to see and take acquaintance of our two man , all which be as courteous receive and friendly entertain of our captain , as possible can be . and to have they the better acquaint with he , and make they his friend , he give they many small gift , but of small value : nevertheless they be great content with they . the next day follow , the lord of Canada ( who proper name be Donnacona , but by the name of lord they call he Agouhanna ) with twelve boat come to our ship , accompany with many people , who cause ten of his boat to go back with the other two , approach unto we with sixteen man . then begin the say Agouhanna over against the small of our ship , accord to their manner and fashion , to frame a long oration , move all his body and member after a strange fashion , which thing be a ceremony and sign of gladness and security among they , and then come to the general ship , where Taignoagny and Domagaia be , he speak with they and they with he , where they begin 
 219 
 to tell and show unto he what they have see in France , and what good entertainment they have have : hear which thing the say lord seem to be very glad thereof , and pray our captain to reach he his arm , that he may kiss it , which thing he do : their lord take it , lay it about his neck , for so they use to do when they will make much of one . than our captain enter into agouhannas boat , cause bread and wine to be bring to make the say lord and his company to eat and drink , which thing they do , and be great thereby content and satisfy . our captain for that time give they nothing , because he look for a fit opportunity . Theise thing be do , each one take leave of other , and the say lord go with his boat again to his place of abode . our captain then cause our boat to be set in order , that with the next tide he may go up high into the river , to find some safe harbour for our ship : and we pass up the river against the stream about ten league , coast the say hand , at the end whereof , we find a goodly and pleasant sound , where be a little river and haven , where by reason of the flood there be about three fathom water . this place seem to we very fit and commodious to harbour our ship therein , and so we do very safe , Santa Croix , we name it the holy cross , for on that day we come thither . near unto it , there be a village , whereof donna-cona be lord , and there he keep his abode : it be call Stadacona . Stadacona , as goodly a plot of ground as possible may be see , and therewithal ! very fruitful , full of goodly tree even as in France , as Okes , elm , ash , walnut tree , maple tres , cydron , vine , and white thorn , that bring forth fruit as big as any damson , and many other sort of tree , under which grow as fair tall goodly hemp , hemp , as any in France , without any seed or any man work or labour at all . have consider the place , and find it fit for our purpose , our captain withdraw himself on purpose to return to our ship : but behold , as we be come out of the river we meet come 
 220 
 against we one of the lord of the say village of stada-cona , accompany with many other , as man , woman , and child , who after the fashion of their country , in sign of mirth and joy , begin to make a long oration , the woman still sing and dance up to the knee in water . our captain know their good will and kindness towards we , cause the boat wherein they be , to come unto he , and give they certain trifle , as knife , and bead of glass , whereat they be marvellous glad , for be go about three league from they , for the pleasure they conceive of our come , we may hear they sing , and see they dance for all they be so far . 
 how our captain go to see and note the bigness of the hand , and the nature of it , and then return to the ship , cause they to be bring to the river of the holy cross . 
 Chap. 3. 
 after we be come with our boat unto our ship again , our captain cause our bark to be make ready to go on land in the say hand , to note the tree that in show seem so fair , and to consider the nature and quality of it : which thing we do , and find it full of goodly tree like to we . also we see many goodly vine , a thing not before of we see in those country , and therefore we name it Bacchus hand . it be in length about twelve league , in sight very pleasant , but full of wood , no part of it manure , unless it be in certain place , where a few cottage be for fisher dwelling as before we have say . the next day we depart with our ship to bring they to the place of the holy cross , and on the 14 of that month we come thither , and the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , with 25 boat full of those people , come to meet we , come from the place whence we be come , and go towards Stadacona , where their abide be , and all come to our ship , show sundry and diverse gesture of gladness 
 221 
 A.D. 
 I535 - 
 the lie of Bacchus , or the ik of Orleans . 
 and mirth , except those two that we have bring , to wit , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , who seem to have alter and change their mind and purpose , for by no mean they will come unto our ship , albeit sundry time they be earnest desire to do it , whereupon we begin to mistrust somewhat . our captain ask they if according to promise they will go with he to Hochelaga ? they answer yea , for so they have purpose , and then each one withdraw himself . the next day be the fifteen of the month , our captain go on shore , to cause certain pole and pile to be drive into the water , and set up , that the better and safe we may harbour our ship there : and many of those country people come to meet we there , among who be Donnacona and our two man , with the rest of their company , who keep themselves aside under a point or nook of land that be upon the shore of a certain river , and no one of they come unto we as the other do that be not on their side . our captain understanding that they be there , command part of our man to follow he , and he go to the say point where he find the say Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and diverse other : and after salutation give on each side , Taignoagny settle himself foremost to speak to our captain , say that the lord Donnacona do great grieve and sorrow that our captain and his man do wear warlike weapon , and they not . our captain answer , that albeit it do grieve they , yet will not he leave they off , and that ( as he know ) it be the manner of France . but for all these word our captain and Donnacona leave not off to speak one to another , and friendly to entertain one another . then do we perceive , that whatsoever Taignoagny speak , be only long of himself and of his fellow , for that before they depart thence our captain and Donnacona enter into a marvellous steadfast league of friendship , whereupon all his people at once with a loud voice , cast out three great cry , ( a horrible thing to hear ) and each one have take leave of the 
 222 
 other for that day , we go aboard again . the day follow we bring our two great ship within the river and harbour , where the water be at the high , be three fathom deep , and at the low , but half a fathom . we leave our pinnace without the road to the end we may bring it to Hochelaga . so soon as we have safe place our ship , behold we see Donnacona , Taignoagny and Domagaia , with more than five hundred person , man , woman and child , and the say lord with ten or twelve of the chief of the country come aboard of our ship , who be all courteous receive , and friendly entertain both of our captain and of we all : and diverse gift of small value be give they . 
 then do Taignoagny tell our captain , that his lord do great sorrow that he will go to Hochelaga , and that he will not by any mean permit that any of they shall go with he , because the river be of no importance . our captain answer he , that for all his say , he will not leave off his go thither , if by any mean it be possible , for that that he be command by his king to go as far as possible he can : and that if he ( that be to say Taignoagny ) will go with he , as he have promise , he shall be very well entertain , beside that , he shall have such a gift give he , as he shall well content himself : for he shall do nothing else but go with he to Hochelaga and come again . to who Taignoagny answer , that he will not by any mean go , and thereupon they sudden return to their house . the next day be the 17 of September , Donnacona and his company return even as at the first , and bring with he many eel , with sundry sort of other fish , whereof they take great store in the say river , as more large hereafter shall be show . and as soon as they be come to our ship , accord to their wont use they begin to sing and dance . this do , Donnacona cause all his people to be set on the one side : then make a round circle upon the sand he cause our captain with all his people to enter thereinto , 
 223 
 than he begin to make a long oration , hold in one of his hand a maiden child of ten or twelve year old , which he present unto our captain : then sudden begin all his people to make three great shriek , or howl , in sign of joy and league of friendship : present upon that he do present unto he two other young male child one after another , but young than the other , at the give of which even as before they give out shriek and howl very loud , with other ceremony : for which present , our captain give the say lord great and hearty thanks . then Taignoagny tell our captain , that one of the child be his own brother , and that the maiden child be daughter unto the say lord own sister , and the present be only give he to the end he shall not go to Hochelaga at all : to who our captain answer , that if they be only give he to that intent , if so he will , he shall take they again , for that by no mean he will leave his go off , for as much as he be so command of his king . but concern this , Domagaia tell our captain that their lord have give he those child as a sign and token of goodwill and security , and that he be content to go with he to Hochelaga , upon which talk great word arise between Taignoagny and Domagaia , by which we plain perceive that Taignoagny be but a crafty knave , and that he intend but mischief and treason , as well by this deed as other that we by he have see . after that our captain cause the say child to be put in our ship , and cause two sword and two copper basin , the one wrought , the other plain , to be bring unto he , and they he give to Donnacona , who be therewith great content , yield most hearty thanks unto our captain for they , and present upon that he command all his people to sing and dance , and desire our captain to cause a piece of artillery to be shoot off , because Taignoagny and Domagaia make great brag of it , and have tell they marvellous thing , and also , because they have never hear nor see 
 224. 
 any before : to who our captain answer , that he be content : and by and by he command his man to shoot off twelve cannon charge with bullet into the wood that be hard by those people and ship , at who noise they be great astonish and amaze , for they think that heaven have fall upon they , and put themselves to flight , howl , cry , and shriek , so that it seem hell be break loose . but before we go thence , Taignoagny cause other man to tell we , that those man which we have leave in our pinnace in the road , have slay two man of their company , with a piece of ordinance that they have shoot off , whereupon the rest have put themselves all to flight , as though they shall all have be slay : which afterward we find untrue , because our man have not shoot off any piece at all that day . 
 how Donnacona and Taignoagny with other , devise a pretty sleight or policy : for they cause three of their man to be attire like devil , feign themselves to be send from their god Cudruaigny , only to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga . 
 Chap. 4. 
 the next day be the eighteenth of September , these man still endeavour themselves to seek all mean possible to hinder and let our go to Hochelaga , and devise a pretty guile , as hereafter shall show . they go and dress three man like devil , be wrap in dog skin white and black , their face besmear as black as any coal , with home on their head more than a yard long , and cause they secret to be put in one of their boat , but come not near our ship as they be wont to do , for they lie hide within the wood for the space of two hour , look for the tide , to the end the boat wherein the devil be , may approach and come near we , which when time be , come , and all the rest issue out of the wood come to we , but yet not so near as they be wont to do . there begin Taignoagny to salute 
 viii 225 p 
 our captain , who ask he if he will have the boat to come for he ; he answer , not for that time , but after a while he will come unto our ship : then present come that boat rush out , wherein the three counterfeit devil be with such long home on their head , and the middlemost come make a long oration and pass along our ship without turn or look towards we , but with the boat go towards the land . then do Donnacona with all his people pursue they , and lie hold on the boat and devil , who so soon as the man be come to they , fall prostrate in the boat even as if they have be dead : then be they take up and carry into the wood , be but a stone cast off , than every one withdraw himself into the wood , not one stay behind with we , where be , they begin to make a long discourse , so loud that we may hear they in our ship , which last above half a hour , and be end we begin to espy Taignoagny and Domagaia come towards we , hold their hand upward together , carry their hat under their upper garment , show a great admiration , and Taignoagny look up to heaven , cry three time Jesus , Jesus , Jesus , and Domagaia do as his fellow have do before , cry , Jesus Maria , James Cartier . our captain hear they , and see their gesture and ceremony , ask of they what they ail , and what be happen or chance anew ; they answer , that there be very ill tiding befall , say in french , Nenni est il bon , that be to say , it be not good : our captain ask they again what it be , then answer they , that their god cudruaigny have speak in Hochelaga : and that he have send those three man to show unto they that there be so much ice and snow in that country , that whosoever go thither shall die , which word when we hear , we laugh and mock they say , that their god Cudruaigny be but a fool and a noddy , for he know not what he do or say : then bid we they show his messenger from we , that Christ will defend they all 
 226 
 from cold , if they will believe in he . then do they ask of our captain if he have speak with Jesus : he answer no , but that his priest have , and that he tell they they shall have fair weather : which word when they have hear , they thank our captain , and depart towards the wood to tell those news unto their fellow , who sudden come all rush out of the wood , seem to be very glad for those word that our captain have speak , and to show that thereby they have have , and feel great joy , so soon as they be before our ship , they altogether give out three great shriek , and thereupon begin to sing and dance , as they be wont to do . but for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia tell our captain , that their lord Donnacona will by no mean permit that any of they shall go with he to Hochelaga , unless he will leave he some hostage to stay with he : our captain answer they , that if they will not go with he with a good will , they shall stay , and that for all they he will not leave off his journey thither . 
 how our captain with all his gentleman and fifty mariner depart with our pinnace , and the two boat from Canada to go to Hochelaga : and also there be describe , what be see by the way upon the say river . 
 Chap. 5. 
 the next day be the 19 of September we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and two boat depart to go up the river with the flood , where on both shore of it we begin to see as goodly a country as possible can with eye be see , all replenish with very goodly tree , and vine lade as full of grape as can be all lade along the river , which rather seem to have be plant 8wes-by man hand than otherwise . true it be , that because they be not dress and wrought as they shall be , their bunch of grape be not so great nor sweet as we : also we see all along the river many house 
 227 
 inhabit of fisher , which take all kind of fish , and they come with as great familiarity and kindness unto we , as if we have be their countryman , and bring we great store of fish , with other such thing as they have , which we exchange with they for other ware , who lift up their hand towards heaven , give many sign of hochelay . joy : we stay at a place call Hochelai , about five and twenty league from Canada , where the river waxes very narrow , and run very swift , wherefore it be very dangerous , not only for that , but also for certain great stone that be therein : many boat and bark come unto we , in one of which come one of the chief lord of the country , make a long discourse , who be come near we , do by evident sign and gesture show we , that the high the river go , the more dangerous it be , and bid we take heed of our self . the say lord present and give unto our captain two of his own child , of which our captain take one be a wench 7 or 8 year old , the man child he give he again , because it be too young , for it be but two or three year old . our captain as friendly and as courteous as he can do entertain and receive the say lord and his company , give they certain small trifle , and so they depart towards the shore again . afterwards the say lord and his wife come unto Canada to visit his daughter , bring unto our captain certain small present . from the nineteenth until the eight and twenty of September , we sail up along the say river , never lose one hour of time , all which time we see as goodly and pleasant a country as possible can be wish for , full ( as we have say before ) of all sort of goodly tree , that be to say , oak , elm , walnut-tree , cedar , firre , ash , box , willow , and great store of vine , all as full of grape as can be , so that if any of our fellow go on shore , they come home lade with they : there be likewise many crane , swan , goose , duck , feasant , partridge , thrush , blackbird , turtle , finche , redbreast , nightingale , 228 
 sparrow of diverse kind , with many other sort of bird , even as in France , and great plenty and store . upon the 28 of September , we come to a great wide lake in the middle of the river five or six league broad , the la^e of and twelve long , all that day we go against the tide , have but two fathom water , still keep the say scantling : be come to one of the head of the lake , we can espy no passage or go out , nay , rather it seem to have be close and shut up round about , and there be but a fathom and a half of water , little more or less . and therefore we be constrain to cast anchor , and to stay with our pinnace , and go with our two boat to seek some go out , and in one place we find four or five branch , which out of the river come into the lake , and they come from Hochelaga . but in the say branch , because of the great fierceness and swiftness wherewith they break out , and the course of the water , they make certain bar and should , and at that time there be but a fathom water . 
 those shoulde be pass , we find four or five fathom , and as far as we can perceive by the flood , it be that time of the year that the water be low , for at other time they flow high by three fathom . all these four or five branch do compass about five or six hand very pleasant , which make the head of the lake : about fifteen league beyond , they do all come into one . that day we land in one of the say hand , and meet with five man that be hunt of wild beast , who as free and familiar come to our boat without any fear , as if we have ever be bring up together . our boat be somewhat near the shore , one of they take our captain in his arm , and carry he on shore , as light and as easy as if he have be a child of five year old : so strong and sturdy be this fellow . we find that they have a great heap of wild rat that live in the water , as big as a cony , rat as and very good to eat , which they give unto our cap - as taine , who for a recompense give they knife and 
 229 
 Hochelaga distant from the lake of angolesme 45. league . 
 glassen bead . we ask they with sign if that be the way to Hochelaga , they answer yea , and that we have yet three day sail thither . 
 how our captain cause our boat to be mend and dress to go to Hochelaga : and because the way be somewhat difficult and hard , we leave our pinnace behind : and how we come thither , and what entertainment we have of the people . 
 Chap. 6. 
 the next day our captain see that for that time it be not possible for our pinnace to go on any further , he cause our boat to be make ready , and as much munition and victual to be put in they , as they can well bear : he depart with they , accompany with many gentleman , that be to say , Claudius of Ponte Briand , cupbearer to the lord dolphin of France , Charles of Pommeraye , John gouion , John Powlet , with twenty 8c eight mariner : and mace Jallobert , and William briton , who have the charge under the captain of the other two ship , to go up as far as they can into that river : we sail with good and prosperous weather until the second of October , on which day we come to the town of Hochelaga , distant from the place where we have leave our pinnace five and forty league . in which place of Hochelaga , and all the way we go , we meet with many of those countryman , who bring we fish and such other victual as they have , still dance and great rejoice at our come . our captain to lure they in , and to keep they our friend , to recompense they , give they knife , bead , and such small trifle , wherewith they be great satisfy . so soon as we be come near Hochelaga , there come to meet we above a thousand person , man , woman and child , who afterward do as friendly and merry entertain and receive we as any father will do his child , which he have not of long time see , the man dance on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on 
 230 
 * 535-anoth : after that they bring we great store of fish , and 
 of their bread make of Millet , cast they into our boat so thick , that you will have think it to fall from heaven . which when our captain see , he with many of his company go on shore : so soon as ever we be aland they come cluster about we , make very much of we , bring their young child in their arm , only to have our captain and his company to touch they , make sign and show of great mirth and gladness , that last more than half a hour . our captain see their love kindness and entertainment of we , cause all the woman orderly to be set in array , and give they bead make of tin , and other such small trifle , and to some of the man he give knife : than he return to the boat to supper , and so pass that night , all which while all those people stand on the shore as near our boat as they may , make great fire , and dance very merry , still cry aguiaze , which in their tongue signify mirth and safety . 
 how our captain with five gentleman and twenty arm man all well in order , go to see the town of Hochelaga , and the situation of it . 
 Chap. 7. 
 our captain the next day very early in the morning , the three of have very gorgeous attire himself , cause all qct0^r . 
 his company to be set in order to go to see the town and habitation of those people , and a certain mountain that be somewhat near the city : with who go also five gentleman and twenty mariner , leave the rest to keep and look to our boat : we take with we three man of Hochelaga to bring we to the place . all along as we go we find the way as well beat and frequent as can be , the fair and best country that possible can be see , full of as goodly great oak as be in any wood in France , under which the ground be all cover over . with fair acorn . after we have go about four or bernik from five mile , we meet by the way one of the chief lord of the rivet side . 
 231 
 the city , accompany with many more , who so soon as he see we beckon and make sign upon we , that we must rest we in that place where they have make a great fife and so we do . after that we have rest our self there a while , the say lord begin to make a long discourse , even as we have say above , they be accustom to do in sign of mirth and friendship , show our captain and all his company a joyful countenance , and good will , who give he two hatchet , a pair of knife and a cross which he make he to kiss , and then put it about his neck , for which he give our captain hearty thanks . this do , we go along , and about a mile and a half far , we begin to find goodly and large field , full of such corn as the country yield . it be even as the millet of Bresil , as great and somewhat big than small peason , wherewith they live even as we do with we . in the midst of those field be the city of Hochelaga , place near , and as it be join to a great mountain that be till round about , very fertili , on the top of which you may see very far , we name it mount royal . the city of Hochelaga be round , compass about with timber , with three course of rampire , one within another frame like a sharp spire , but lay across above . the middlemost of they be make and build , as a direct line , but perpendicular . the rampire be frame and fashion with piece of timber , lay along on the ground , very well and cunning join together after their fashion . this enclosure be in height about two rod . it have but one gate or entry thereat , which be shut with pile , stake , and bar . over it , and also in many place of the wall , there be place to run along , and ladder to get up , all full of stone , for the defence of it . there be in the town about fifty house , about fifty pace long , and twelve , or fifteen broad , build all of wood , cover over with the bark of the wood as broad as any board , very fine and cunning join together . within the say house , there be many room , lodging and chamber . in the midst of every one there be a great 
 232 
 court , in the middle whereof they make their fire . they live in common together : then do the husband , wife and child each one retire themselves to their chamber . they have also on the top of their house certain garret , wherein they keep their corn to make their bread withal : they call it carraconny , which they make as hereafter shall follow . they have certain piece of wood , make hollow like those whereon we beat our hemp , and with certain beetle of wood they beat their corn to powder : than they make paste of it , and of the paste , cake or wreathe , than they lie they on a broad and hot stone , and then cover it with hot stone , and so they bake their bread in stead of oven . they make also sundry sort of pottage with the say corn and also of pease and of bean , whereof they have great store , as 
 ... - ... 0 - cumber , and 
 also with other fruit , as musk-millions , and very great other fruit . 
 cucumber . they have also in their house certain vessel as big as any but or tun , wherein they preserve and keep their fish , cause the same in summer to be dry in the sun , and live therewith in winter , whereof they make great provision , as we by experience have see . all their viand and meat be without any taste or savour of salt at all . they sleep upon bark of tree lay all along upon the ground be overspread with the skin of certain wild beast , wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves . the thing most precious that they have in all the world they call Asurgny : it be as white as any snow : they take it in the say river of Cornibotz , in the manner follow . when any one have deserve death , or that they take any of their enemy in war , first they kill he , then with certain knife they give great slash and stroke upon their buttock , flank , thigh , and shoulder : then they cast the same body so mangle down to the bottom of the river , in a place where the say Esurgny be , and there leave it ten dr 12 hour , than they take it up again , and in the cut find the say Esurgny or Cornibotz . of they they make bead , and wear they about their 233 
 Matz , pease , bean , muskmillton , cu - 
 plenty offish and the preserve thereof . 
 neck , even as we do chain of gold and silver , account it the precious thing in the world . they have this virtue and property in they , they will stop or staunch bleed at the nose , for we have prove it . Theise people be give to no other exercise , but only to husbandry and fish for their sustenance : they have no care of any other wealth or commodity in this world , for they have no knowledge of it , and that be , because they never travel and go out of their country , as those of Canada and Saguenay do , albeit the Canadians with eight or nine village more alongst that river be subject unto they . 
 how we come to the town of Hochelaga , and the entertainment which there we have , and of certain gift which our captain give they , with diverse other thing . 
 Chap. 8. 
 so soon as we be come near the town , a great number of the inhabitant thereof come to present themselves before we after their fashion , make very much of we : we be by our guide bring into the midst of the town . they have in the middlemost part of their house a large square place , be from side to side a good stone cast , whither we be bring , and there with sign be command to stay : then sudden all the woman and maiden of the town gather themselves together , part of which have their arm full of young child , and as many as can came to rub our race , our arm , and what part of the body soever they can touch , weep for very joy that they see we , show we the best countenance that possible they can , desire we with their sign , that it will please we to touch their child . that do , the man cause the woman to withdraw themselves back , than they every one sit down on the ground round about we , as if they will have show and rehearse some comedy or other show : then present come the woman again , 234 
 every one bring a four square mat in manner of carpet , and spread they abroad on the ground in that place , they cause we to sit upon they . that do , the lord and king of the country be bring upon 9 or 10 man shoulder , ( who in their tongue they call Agouhanna ) sit upon a great stag skin , and they lay he down upon the foresay mat near to the captain , every open beckon unto we that he be their lord and king . This Agouhanna be a man about fifty year old : he be no whit better apparel than any of the rest , only except , that he have a certain thing make of the skin of hedgehog like a red wreath , and that be in stead of his crown . he be full of the palsy , and his member shrink together . after he have with certain sign salute our captain and all his company , and by manifest token bid all welcome , he show his leg and arm to our captain , and with sign desire he to touch they , and so he do , rub they with his own hand : then do Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he have about his head , and give it unto our captain : that do they bring before he diverse disease man , some blind , some cripple , some lame and impotent , and some so old that the hair of their eyelid come down and cover their cheek , and lay they all along before our captain , to the end they may of he be touch : for it seem unto they that God be descend and come down from heaven to heal they . our captain see the misery and devotion of this poor people , recite the gospel of saint John , that be to say , in the beginning be the word ; touch every one that be disease , pray to God that it will please he to open the heart of this poor people , and to make they know his holy word , and that they may receive baptism and Christendom : that do , he take a service-book in his hand , and with a loud voice read all the passion of Christ , word by word , that all the standard by may hear he : all which while this poor people keep silence , and be 
 235 
 marvellous attentive , look up to heaven , and imitate we in gesture . than he cause the man all orderly to be set on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on a other , and to the chief of they he give hatchet , to the other knife , and to the woman bead and such other small trifle . then where you child be , he cast ring , counter , and brooch make of tin , whereat they seem to be very glad . that do , our 
 captain command trumpet and other musical instrument to be sound , which when they hear , they be very merry . than we take our leave and go to our boat : the woman see that , put themselves before to stay we , and bring we out of their meat that they have make ready for we , as fish , pottage , bean , and such other thing , think to make we eat , and dine in that place : but because the meat have no savour at all of salt , we like they not , but thank they , and with sign give they to understand that we have no need to eat . when we be out of the town , diverse of the man and woman follow we , and bring we to the top mount royal . of the foresay mountain , which we name mount 
 royal , it be about a league from the town . when as we be on the top of it , we may discern and a ridge of plain see thirty league about . on the northside of mountain to ; it there be many hill to be see run west and Hochelaga h . ast , and as many more on the south , among and 
 and another between the which the country be as fair and as to the south , pleasant as possible can be see , be level , smooth , and very plain , fit to be husband and till : and in the midst of those field we see the river further up a great way than where we have leave our boat , where be the great and the swift fall of water that any where have be see , and as great , wide and large as our sight may discern , go Southwest along three fair the 3 fault and round mountain that we see , as we judge about late in ? afteene league from we . those which bring we degree of^ thither tell and show we , that in the say river there latitude . be three such fall of water more , as that be where we 236 
 1535-had leave our boat : but because we can not understand their language , we can not know how far they be one from another . Moreover they show we with sign , that the say three false be pass , a man may sail the space of three month more alongst that river , and that along the hill that be on the north side there be a great river , which ( even as the other ) come from 
 the west , we think it to be the river that run 2% mor of through the country of Saguenay : and without any a&uenay sign or question move or ask of they , they take west the chain of our captain whistle , which be of silver , where there be and the dagger-haft of one of our fellow mariner , gold and hang on his side be of yellow copper guilt , and show we that such stuff come from the say river , and that there be Agouionda , that be as much to say , as evil people , who go all arm even to their finger end . also they show we the manner and make of their armour : they be make of cord and wood , fine and cunning wrought together . they give we also to understand that those Agouionda do continual war one against another , but because we do not understand they well , we can not perceive how far it be to that country . our captain show they red copper , which in their language they call caignetadze , and look toward that country , with sign ask they if any come from thence , they shake their head answer no : but they show we that it come from Saguenay , and that lie clean contrary to the other . Red copper in after we have hear and see these thing of they , we draw to our boat accompany with a great multitude of those people : some of they when as they see any of our fellow weary , will take they up on their shoulder , and carry they as on horseback . so soon as we come to our boat we hoist sail to go towards our pinnace , doubt of some mischance . our departure grieve and displease they very much , for they follow we along the river as far as they can : we go so fast that on Monday be the four of October 
 237 
 we come where our pinnace be . the Tuesday follow be the five of the month , we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and boat depart from thence towards the province of Canada , to the port of the holy cross , where we have leave our ship . the seven day we come against a river that come from the north , and enter into that river , at the entrance whereof be four little hand full of fair and goodly tree : we name that river the river of Fovetz : but because one of those island stretch it self a great way into the river , our captain at the point of it cause a goodly great cross to be set up , and command the boat to be make ready , that with the next tide he may go up the say river , and consider the quality of it , which we do , and that day go up as far as we can : but because we find it to be of no importance , and very shallow , we return and sail down the river . 
 how we come to the port of the holy cross , and in what state we find our ship : and how the lord of the country come to visit our captain , and our captain he : and of certain particular custom of the people . 
 Chap. 9 
 upon Monday be the 11 of October we come to the port of the holy cross , where our ship be , and find that the master and mariner we have leave there , have make and rear a trench before the ship , altogether close with great piece of timber set upright [ three . 223. i and very well fasten together : then have they beset the say trench about with piece of artillery and other necessary thing to shield and defend themselves from the power of all the country . so soon as the lord of the country hear of our come , the next day be the twelve of October , he come to visit we , accompany with Taignoagny , Domagaia and many other , feign to be very glad of our come , make 238 
 much of our captain , who as friendly as he can , entertain they , albeit they have not deserve it . Donnacona their lord desire our captain the next day to come and see Canada , which he promise to do : for the next day be the 13 of the month , he with all his gentleman and fifty mariner very well appoint , go to visit Donnacona and his people , about a league from our ship . the place where they make their abode be call Stadacona . when we be about a stone cast from their house , many of the inhabitant come to meet we , be all set in a rank , and ( as their custom be ) the man all on one side , and the woman on the other , still dance and sing without any cease : and after we have salute and receive one another , our captain give they knife and such other sleight thing : than he cause all the woman and child to pass along before he , give each one a ring of tin , for which they give he hearty thanks : that do , our captain be by Donnacona and Taignoagny , bring to see their house , which ( the quality consider ) be very well provide , and store with such victual as the country yield , to pass away the winter withal . than they show we the skin of five man head spread upon board as we do use parchment : Donnacona tell we that they be skin of Toudamani , a people dwell towards the south , who continual do war against they . Moreover they tell we , that it be two year past that those toudamans come to assault they , yea even into the say river , in a hand that lie over against Saguenay , where they have be the night before , as they be go a warfaring in Hognedo , with 200 person , man , woman , and child , who be all asleep in a fort that they have make , they be assault by the say Toudamans , who put fire round about the fort , and as they will have come out of it to save themselves , they be all slay , only five except , who escape . for which loss they yet sorrow , show 
 Stadacona . 
 Toudamani dwell southward of Canada . 
 239 
 with sign , that one day they will be revenge : that do , we come to our ship again . 
 the manner how the people of that country live : and of certain condition : of their faith , manner , and custom . 
 Chap. io . 
 this people believe no whit in God , but in one who they call Cudruaigni : they say that often he speak with they and tell they what weather shall follow , whether good or bad . Moreover they say , that when he be angry with they he cast dust into their eye : they believe that when they die they go into the star , and thence by little and little descend down into the horizon , even as the star do , and that then they go into certain green field full of goodly fair and precious tree , flower , and fruit . after that they have give we these thing to understand , we show they their error , and tell that their Cudruaigni do but deceive they , for he be but a devil and a evil spirit : affirm unto they , that there be but one only God , who be in heaven , and who give we all necessary , be the creator of all himself , and that only we must believe in he : moreover , that it be necessary for we to be baptise , otherwise we be damn into hell . Theise and many other thing concern our faith and religion we show they , all which they do easy believe , call their Cudruaigni , Agouiada , that be to say , nought , so that very earnest they desire and pray our captain that he will cause they to be baptise , and their lord , and Taignoagny , doma-they desire io gaia , and all the people of the town come unto we , be baptize , hope to be baptise : but because we do not thorough know their mind , and that there be no body can teach they our belief and religion , we excuse our self , desire Taignoagny , and Domagaia , to tell the rest of their countryman , that he will come again another time , and bring priest and chrisome with we , for 
 240 
 without they they can not be baptise : which they do easy believe , for Domagaia and Taignoagny have see many child baptise in Britain while they be there . which promise when they hear they seem to be very glad . they live in common together : and of such commodity as their country yield they be indifferent well store , the inhabitant of the country cloth themselves with the skin of certain wild beast , but very miserable . in winter they be hose and shoe make of wild beast skin , and in summer they go barefooted . they keep and observe the rite of matrimony , save that every one wed 2 or 3 wife , which ( their husband be dead ) do never marry again , but for the death of their husband wear a certain black weed all the day of their life , besmear all their face with coaldust and grease mingle together as thick as the back of a knife , and by that they be know to be widow . they have a filthy and detestable use in marry of their maiden , and that be this , they put they all ( after they be of lawful age to marry ) in a common place , as harlot free for every man that will have to do with they , until such time as they find a match . this i say , because i have see by experience many house full of those damosel , even as our school be full of child in France to learn to read . Moreover , the misrule and riot that they keep in those house be very great , for very wanton they sport and dally together , show whatsoever God have send they . they be no man of great labour . they dig their ground with certain piece of wood , as big as half a sword , on which ground grow their corn , which they call Offici : it their Maiz. be as big as our small peason : there be great quantity of it grow in bresill . they have also great store of musk-millions , pompion , gourd , cucumber , peason and Beanes * of every colour , yet differ from we . there grow also a certain kind of herb , whereof in summer they make great provision for all the year , 
 vin 241 q 
 make great account of it , and only man use of it , and first they cause it to be dry in the sun , then wear it about their neck wrap in a little beast skin make like a little bag , with a hollow piece of stone or wood like a pipe : then when they please they make powder of it , and then put it in one of the end of the say cornet or pipe , and lay a coal of fire upon it , at the other end suck so long , that they fill their body full of smoke , till that it come out of their mouth and nostril , even as out of the tonnell of a chimney . they say that this do keep they warm and in health : they nev^r go without some of it about they . we our self have try the same smoke , and have put it in our mouth , it seem almost as hot as pepper . the woman of that country do labour much more than the man , as well in fish ( whereto they be great give ) as in till and husband their ground , and other thing : as well the man as woman and child , be very much more able to resist cold then savage beast , for we with our own eye have see some of they , when it be cold ( which cold be extreme raw and bitter ) come to our ship stark naked go upon snow and ice , which thing seem incredible to they that have not see it . when as the snow and ice lie on the ground , they take great store of wild beast , as faun , stag , bear , martern , hare and fox , with diverse other sort who flesh they eat raw , have first dry it in you sun or smoke , and so they do their fish . as far forth as we can perceive and understand by these people , it be a very easy thing to bring they to some familiarity and civility , and make they learn what one will . the lord God for his mercy sake set thereunto his help hand when he see cause . amen . 
 242 
 of the greatness and depth of the say river , and of the sort of beast , bird , fish , and other thing that we have see , with the situation of the place . 
 Chap. 11. 
 the say river begin beyond the hand of the assumption , over against the high mountain of Hognedo , and of the seven hand . the distance over from one side to the other be about 35 or 40 league . in the midst it be above 200 fathom deep . the sure way to sail upon it be on the south side . and towards the north , that be to say , from the say 7 hand , from side to side , there be seven league distance , where be also two great river that come down from the hill of Saguenay , and make diverse very dangerous shelf in the sea . at the entrance of those two river we see many and great store of whale and sea horse . overthwart the say hand there be another little river that run along those marsh ground about 3 or 4 league , wherein there be great store of water fowl . from the entrance of that river to Hochelaga there be about 300 league distance : the originali beginning of it be in the river that come from Saguenay , which rise and spring among high and steep hill : it enter into that river before it come to the province of Canada on the north side . that river be very deep , high , and straight , wherefore it be very dangerous for any vessel to go upon it . after that river follow the province of Canada , wherein be many people dwell in open borough and village . there be also in the circuit and territory of Canada , along , and within the say river , many other hand , some great and some small , among which there be one that contain above ten league in length , full of goodly and high tree , and also many vine . you may go into it from both side , but yet the sure passage be on the south side . on the shore or bank of that river westward , there be a goodly , fair , and delectable bay or creek , convenient and fit for to 243 
 it be now find to be but 200 league . 
 harbour ship . hard by there be in that river one place very narrow , deep , and swift run , but it be not pass the three part of a league , over against the which there be a goodly high piece of land , with a town therein : and the country about it be very well till and wrought , and as good as possible can be see . that be the place and abode of Donnacona , and of our two man we take in our first voyage , it be call Stadacona . but before we come to it , there be 4 other people town , that be to say , Ayraste , Starnatan , Tailla , which stand upon a hill , Scitadin , and then Stadagona , under which town towards the north the river and port of the holy cross be , where we stay from the 15 of September , until the 16 of May 1536 , and there our ship remain dry , as we have say before . that place be pass , we find the habitation of the people call Teguenondahi , stand upon a high mountain , and the valley of hochelay , which stand in a champagne country . all the say country on both side of the river as far as hochelay and beyond , be as fair and plain as ever be see . there be certain mountain far distant from the say river , which be to be see above the foresay river fall town , from which mountain diverse river descend , from moun - which fall into the say great river . all that country 
 ‘ be full of sundry sort of wood and many vine , unless 
 it be about the place that be inhabit , where they have pull up the tree to till and labour the ground , and to build their house and lodging . there be great store of beast . stag , deer , bear , and other such like sort of beast , as cony , hare , martern , fox , otter , beaver , weasel , badger , and rat exceed great , and diverse other sort of wild beast . they cloth themselves with the skin of those beast , because they have nothing else to make they apparel ! withal . there be bird . also many sort of bird , as crane , swan , bustard , wild goose white and grey , duck , thrush , blackbird , turtle , wild pigeon , Lenites , finche , redbreast , stare , nightingale , sparrow , and other bird , 
 244 
 even as in France . also , as we have say before , the say river be the plentifull of fish that ever have of any man fish . be see or hear of , because that from the mouth to the end of it , accord to their season , you shall find all sort of fresh water fish and salt . there be also 
 many whale , porpoise , seahorse , and adhothuis , which be a kind of fish that we have never see nor hear of 
 before . they be as great as porpoise , as white as any snow , their body and head fashion as a grayhound , they be wont always to abide between the fresh and salt water , 
 which begin between the river of Saguenay and Canada . 
 of certain advertisement and note give unto we by those countryman , after our return from Hochelaga . 
 Chap. 12. 
 after our return from Hochelaga , we deal , traffic , and with great familiarity and love be conversant with those that dwell near unto our ship , except that sometime we have strife and contention with certain naughty people , full sore against the will of the other . we understand of Donnacona and of other , that the say river be call the river of Saguenay , and go to ' Saguenay , be somewhat more than a league far westnorthwest , and that 8 or 9 day journey beyond , it will bear but small boat . but the right and ready the right way way to Saguenay be up that river to Hochelaga , and then t0 Saguenay . into another that come from Saguenay , and then enter into the foresay river , and that there be yet one month sail thither . Moreover , they tell we and give we to understand , that there be people clad with cloth as we be , very honest , and many inhabit town , and that they have great store of gold and red copper : and that tear °f about the land beyond the say first river to Hochelaga read copper . and Saguenay , be a hand environ round about with that and other river , and that beyond Saguenay the say Twg or three river enter into two or 3 great lake , and that there be great lake . 
 245 
 the river of irrouacasfalling into the lake ofango-lesme . 
 a sea of fresh water find , and as they have hear say of those of Saguenay , there be never man hear of that find out the end thereof : for , as they tell we , they themselves be never there . Moreover they tell we , that where we have leave our pinnace when we go to Hochelaga , there be a river that go southwest , from whence there be a whole month sail to go to a certain land , where there be neither ice nor snow see , where the inhabitant do continual war one against another , where be great store of orange , almond , nut , and apple , with many other sort of fruit , and that the man and woman be clad with beast skin even as they : we ask they if there be any gold or red copper , they answer no . i take this place to be towards Florida , as far as i can perceive and understand by their sign and token . 
 of a strange and cruel disease that come to the people of Stadacona , wherewith because we do haunt their company , we be so infect , that there die 25 of our company . 
 Chap. 13. 
 in the month of December , we understand that the pestilence be come among the people of Stadacona , in such sort , that before we know of it , accord to their confession , there be dead above 50 : whereupon we charge they neither to come near our fort , nor about our ship , or we . and albeit we have drive they from we , the say unknown sickness begin to spread itself among we after the strange sort that ever be either hear of or see , insomuch as some do lose all their strength , and can not stand on their foot , then do their leg swell , their sinew shrink as black as any cole* other also have all their skin spot with spot of blood of a purple colour : then do it ascend up to their ankel , . knee , thigh , shoulder , arm , and neck : their mouth become stink , their gum so rot , that all the flesh do fall off , even to the root of the tooth , which . 
 246 
 do also almost all fall out . with such infection do this sickness spread it self in our three ship , that about the middle of February , of a hundred and ten person that we be , there be not ten whole , so that one can not help the other , a most horrible and pitiful case , consider the place we be in , forsomuch as the people of the country will daily come before our fort , and see but few of we . there be already eight dead , and more than fifty sick , and as we think , past all hope of recovery . our captain see this our misery , and that the sickness be go so far , ordain and command , that every one shall devout prepare himself to prayer , and in remembrance of Christ , cause his image to be set upon a tree , about a flight shoot from the fort amid the ice and snow , give all man to understand , that on the Sunday follow , service shall be say there , and that whosoever can go , sick or whole , shall go thither in procession , sing the seven psalm of David , with other litany , pray most hearty that it will please the say our Christ to have compassion upon we . service be do , and as well celebrate as we can , our captain there make a vow , that if it will please God to give he leave to return into France , he will go on pilgrimage to our lady of Rocquemado . that day Philip Rouge-mount , bear in Amboise , die , be 22 year old , and because the sickness be to we unknown , our captain cause he to be rip to see if by any mean possible we may know what it be , and so seek mean to save and preserve the rest of the company : he be find to have his heart white , but rot , and more than a quart of red water about it : his liver be indifferent fair , but his lung black and mortify , his blood be altogether shrink about the heart , so that when he be open great quantity of rot blood issue out from about his heart : his milt towards the back be somewhat perish , rough as if it have be rub against a stone . Moreover , because one of his thigh be very black without , it be 
 247 
 open , but within it be whole and sound : that do , as well as we can he be bury . in such sort do the sickness continue and increase , that there be not above three sound man in the ship , and none be able to go under hatch to draw drink for himself , nor for his fellow . sometime we be constrain to bury some of the dead under the snow , because we be not able to dig any grave for they the ground be so hard freeze , and we so weak . beside this , we do great fear that the people of the country will perceive our weakness and misery , which to hide , our captain , who it please God always to keep in health , will go out with two or three of the company , some sick and some whole , who when he see out of the fort , he will throw stone at they and chide they , feign that so soon as he come again , he will beat they , and then with sign show the people of the country that he cause all his man to work and labour in the ship , some in calk they , some in beat of chalk , some in one thing , and some in another , and that he will not have they come forth till their work be do . and to make his tale seem true and likely , he will make all his man whole and sound to make a great noise with knock stick , stone , hammer , and other thing together , at which time we be so oppress and grieve with that sickness , that we have lose all hope ever to see France again , if God of his infinite goodness and mercy have not with his pitiful eye look upon we , and reveal a singular and excellent remedy against all disease unto we , the best that ever be find upon earth , as hereafter shall follow . 
 248 
 how long we stay in the port of the holy cross amid the snow and ice , and how many die of the say disease , from the begin of it to the midst of march . 
 Chap. 14. 
 from the midst of November until the midst of 
 march , we be keep in amid the ice above two fathom thick , and snow above four foot high and more , high than the side of our ship , which last till that time , in such sort , that all our drink be freeze in the vessel , and the ice through all the ship be above a handbreadth thick , as well above hatch as beneath , and so much of the river as be fresh , even to Hochelaga , be freeze , in which space there die five and twenty of our best and chief man , and all the rest be so sick , that we think they shall never recover again , only three or four except . than it please God to cast his pitiful eye upon we , and send we the knowledge of remedy of our health and recovery , in such manner as in the next chapter shall be show . 
 how by the grace of God we have notice of a certain tree , whereby we all recover our health : and the manner how to use it . 
 Chap. 15. 
 our captain consider our estate ( and how that sickness be increase and hot among we ) one day go forth of the fort , and walk upon the ice , he see a troop of those countryman come from Stadacona , among which be Domagaia , who not pass ten or twelve day afore , have be very sick with that disease , and have his knee swell as big as a child of two year old , all his sinew shrink together , his tooth spoil , his gum rot , and stink . our captain see he whole and sound , be thereat marvellous glad , hope to understand and 
 249 
 a perfect remedy against the french pock . 
 know of he how he have heal himself , to the end he may ease and help his man . so soon as they be come near he , he ask Domagaia how he have do to heal himself : he answer , that he have take the juice and sap of the leaf of a certain tree , and therewith have heal himself : for it be a singular remedy against that disease . than our captain ask of he if any be to be have thereabouts , desire he to show he , for to heal a servant of he , who while he be in Canada with Donnacona , be strike with that disease : that he do because he will not show the number of his sick man . Domagaia straight send two woman to fetch some of it , which bring ten or twelve branch of it , and therewithal ! show the way how to use it , and that be thus , to take the bark and leaf of the say tree , and boil they together , then to drink of the say decoction every other day , and to put the dregs of it upon his leg that be sick : moreover , they tell we , that the virtue of that tree be , to heal any other disease : the tree be in their language call Ameda or Hanneda , this be think to be the sassafras tree . our captain present cause some of that drink to be make for his man to drink of it , but there be none dare taste of it , except one or two , who venture the drink of it , only to taste and prove it : the other see that do the like , and present recover their health , and be deliver of that sickness , and what other disease soever , in such sort , that there be some have be disease and trouble with the french pock four or five year , and with this drink be clean heal . after this medicine be find and prove to be true , there be such strife about it , who shall be first to take of it , that they be ready to kill one another , so that a tree as big as any oak in France be spoil and lop bare , and occupy all in five or six day , and it wrought so well , that if all the physician of Mountpelier and Louvain have be there with all the drug of Alexan - 
 250 
 dria , they will not have do so much in one year , as that tree do in six day , for it do so prevail , that as many as use of it , by the grace of God recover their health . 
 how the lord Donnacona accompany with Taignoagny and diverse other , feign that they will go to hunt stag , and deer , tarry out two month , and at their return bring a great multitude of people with they , that we be not wont to see before . 
 A.D. 
 * 535 - 
 Chap. 16. 
 while that disease last in our ship , the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , with many other go from home , feign that they will go to catch stag and deer , which be in their tongue call Ajounesta , and asquenoudo , because the ice and snow be not so break along the river that they can sail : it be tell we of Domagaia and other , that they will stay out but a fortnight , and we believe it , but they stay above two month , which make we mistrust that they have be go to raise the country to come against we , and do we some displeasure , we see our self so weak and faint . albeit we have use such diligence and policy in our fort , that if all the power of the country have be about it , they can have do nothing but look upon we : and while they be forth , many of the people come daily to our ship , and bring we fresh meat , as stag , deer , fish , with diverse other thing , but hold they at such a excessive price , that rather then they will sell they any thing cheap , many time they will carry they back again , because that year the winter be very long , and they Alongwmter . have some scarcity and need of they . 
 [ how Donnacona 25x 
 how Donnacona come to Stadacona again with a great number of people , and because he will not come to visit our captain , feign himself to be sore sick , which he do only to have the captain come see he . 
 Chap. 17. 
 on the one and twenty day of April Domagaia come to the shore side , accompany with diverse lusty and strong man , such as we be not wont to see , and tell we that their lord Donnacona will the next day come and see we , and bring great store of dear flesh , and other thing with he . the next day he come and bring a great number of man to Stadacona , to what end , and for what cause we know not , but ( as the proverb say ) he that take heed and shield himself from all man , may hap to escape from some : for we have need to look about we , consider how in number we be diminish , and in strength great weaken , both by reason of our sickness and also of the number that be dead , so that we be constrain to leave one of our ship in the port of the holy cross . our captain be warn of their come , and how they have bring a great number of man with they , for Domagaia come to tell it we , and dare not pass the river that be betwixt Stadacona and we , as he be wont to do , whereupon we mistrust some treason . our captain see this , send one of his servant to they , accompany with John Poulet be best belove of those people , to see who be there , and what they do . the say Poulet and the other feign themselves only to be come to visit Donnacona , and bring he certain present , because they have be together a good while in the say donnaconas town . so soon as he hear of their come , he get himself to bed , feign to be very sick . that do , they go to Taignoagny his house to see he , and wheresoever they go , they see so many people , that in a manner one 
 252 
 can not stir for another , and such man as they be never wont to see . Taignoagny will not permit our man to enter into any other house , but still keep they company , and bring they half way to their ship , and tell they that if it will please our captain to show he so much favour as to take a lord of the country , who name be agonna , of who he have receive some displeasure , and carry he with he into France , he shall therefore for ever be bind unto he , and will do for he whatsoever he will command he , and bid the servant come again the next day , and bring a answer . our captain be advertise of so many people that be there , not know to what end , purpose to play a pretty prank , that be to say , to take their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and some more of the chief of they prisoner , in so much as before he have purpose , to bring they into France , to show unto our king what he have see in those western part , and marvel of the world , for that Donnacona have tell we , that he have be in the country of Saguenay , in which be infinite ruby , gold , and other riches , and Rubles , gold , that there be white man , who clothe themselves with woollen cloth even as we do in France . Moreover he riches in report , that he have be in another country of a Saguenay . people call picquemians , and other strange people . a people call the say lord be a old man , and even from his picquemians . childhood have never leave off nor cease from travail into strange country , as well by water and river , as by land . the say Poulet , and the other have tell our captain their embassage , and show he what Taignoagny his will be , the next day he send his servant again to bid Taignoagny come and see he , and show what he shall , for he shall be very well entertain , and also part of his will shall be accomplish . Taignoagny send he word , that the next day he will come and bring the lord Donnacona with he , and he that have so offend he , which he do not , but stay two day , in which time none come from Stadacona to 
 253 
 our ship , as they be wont to do , but rather flee from we , as if we will have slay they , so that than we plain perceive their knavery . 
 the town of but because they understand , that those of Sidatin do tdatm . frequent our company , and that we have forsake the bottom of a ship which we will leave , to have the old nail out of it , the three day follow they come from Stadacona , and most of they without difficulty do pass from one side of the river to the other with small skiff : but Donnacona will not come over : Taignoagny , and Domagaia stand talk together above a hour before they will come over , at last they come to speak with our captain . there Taignoagny pray he that he will cause the foresay man to be take and carry into France . our captain refuse to do it , say , that his king have forbid he to bring any man or woman into France , only that he may bring two or three young boy to learn the language , but that he will willing carry he to Newfoundland , and there leave he in a island . our captain speak this , only to assure they , that they shall bring Donnacona with they , who they have leave on the other side : which word , when Taignoagny hear , he be very glad , think he shall never return into France again , and therefore promise to come the next day , which be the day of the holy cross , and to bring Donnacona and all the people with he . 
 how that upon Holy-rood day our captain cause a cross to be set up in our fort : and how the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and other of their company come : and of the take of the say lord . 
 Chap. 18. 
 the three of May be Holyroode day , our captain for the solemn nitie of the day , cause a goodly fair cross of 35 foot in height to be set up , under the crosset of which he cause a shield to be hang , 254 
 wherein be the arm of France , and over they be write in antique letter , Franciscus primus dei gratia francorum rex regnat . and upon that day about noon , there come a great number of the people of Stadacona , man , woman , and child , who tell we that their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia be come , whereof we be very glad , hope to retain they . about two of the clock in the afternoon they come , and be come near our ship , our captain go to salute Donnacona , who also show he a merry countenance , albeit very fearful his eye be still bend towards the wood . Shortly after come Taignoagny , who bid Donnacona that he shall not enter into our fort , and therefore fire be bring forth by one of our man , Sc kindle where their lord be . our captain pray he to come into our ship to eat and drink as he be wont to do , and also Taignoagny , who promise , that after a while he will come , and so they do , and enter into our ship : but first it be tell our captain by Domagaia that Taignoagny have speak ill of he , and that he have bid Donnacona he shall not come aboard our ship . our captain perceive that , come out of the fort , and see that only by Taignoagny his warning the woman run away , and none but man stay in great number , wherefore he straight command his man to lay hold on Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , and Donnacona , two more of the chief who he point unto : then Taignoagny , he command they to make the other to retire . present after , the say lord enter into the fort with the captain , but by and by Taignoagny come to make he come out again . our captain see that there be no other remedy , begin to call unto they to take they , at who cry and voice all his man come forth , and take the say lord with the other , who they have appoint to take . the Canadians see their lord take , begin to run away , even as sheep before the wolf , some cross over the river , some through the wood , each one seek for his own advantage . that 
 255 
 four and twenty chain of Esurgny 
 do , we retire our self , and lay up the prisoner under good guard and safety . 
 how the say Canadians the night follow come before our ship to seek their man , cry and howl all night like wolves : of the talk and conclusion they agree upon the next day : and of the gift which they give our captain . 
 Chap. 19 
 the night follow they come before our ship , ( the river be betwixt we ) strike their breast , and cry and howl like wolf , still call Agouhanna , think to speak with he , which our captain for that time will not permit , neither all the next day till noon , whereupon they make sign unto we , that we have hang or kill he . about noon , there come as great a number in a cluster , as ever we see , who go to hide themselves in the forest , except some , who with a loud voice will call and cry to Donnacona to speak unto they . our captain then command Donnacona to be bring up on high to speak unto they , and bid he be merry , for after he have speak , and show unto the king of France what he have see in Saguenay and other country , after ten or twelve month , he shall return again , and that the king of France will give he great reward , whereat Donnacona be very glad , and speak to the other , tell it they , who in token of joy , give out three great cry , and then Donnacona and his people have great talk together , which for want of interpreter , can be describe . our captain bid Donnacona that he shall cause they to come to the other side of the river , to the end they may better talk together without any fear , and that he shall assure they : which Donnacona do , and there come a boat full of the chief of they to the ship , and there anew begin to talk together , give great praise to our captain , and give he a present of four and twenty chain of Esurgny , for that be the great 256 
 and precious riches they have in this world , for they esteem more of that , then of any gold or silver . after they have long talk together , and that their lord see that there be no remedy to avoid his go into France , he command his people the next day , to bring he some victual to serve he by the way . our captain give Donnacona , as a great present , two fry pan of copper , eight hatchet , and other small trifle , as knife , and bead , whereof he seem to be very glad , who send they to his wife and child . likewise , he give to they that come to speak with Donacona , they thank he great for they , and then go to their lodging . 
 how the next day , be the five of May , the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and how four woman come to the shore to bring he victual . 
 Chap. 20. 
 upon the five of May , very early in the morning , a great number of the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and send a boat , which in their tongue they call Casnoni , wherein be only four woman , without any man , for fear their man shall be retain . 
 these woman bring great store of victual , as great millet , which be their corn that they live withal , flesh , fish , and other thing , after their fashion . 
 these woman be come to our ship , our captain do very friendly entertain they . then Donnacona pray our captain to tell those woman that he shall come again after ten or twelve month , and bring Donnacona to Canada with he : this he say only to appease they , which our captain do : wherefore the woman , as well by word as sign , seem to be very glad , give our captain thank , and tell he , if he come again , and bring Donnacona with he , they will give he many thing : in sign whereof , each one give our captain a chain of Esurgny , and then pass vin 257 r 
 coudre . 
 a knife of red copper bring from Saguenay . 
 the isle of hare . 
 to the other side of the river again , where stand all the people of Stadacona , who take all leave of their lord , go home again . on Saturday follow , be the sixth of the month , we depart out of the say port of Santa Croix , and come to harbour a little beneath the island of Orleans , about twelve league from the port of the holy cross , and upon Sunday we come to the island of filbert , where we stay until the sixteenth of that month , till the fierceness of the water be pass , which at that time run too swift a course , and be too dangerous to come down along the river , and therefore we stay till fair weather come . in the mean while many of donnaconas subject come from the river of Saguenay to he , but be by Domagaia advertise , that their lord be take to be carry into France , they be all amaze : yet for all that they will not leave to come to our ship , to speak to Donnacona , who tell they that after twelve month he shall come again , and that he be very well use by the captain , gentleman , and mariner . which when they hear , they great thank our captain and give their lord three bundle of beaver , and sea wolves skin , with a great knife of red copper that come from Saguenay , and other thing . they give also to our captain a chain of Esurgny , for which our captain give they ten or twelve hatchet , and they give he hearty thanks , and be very well content . the next day , be the sixteenth of May , we hoist sail , and come from the say island of filbert , to another about fifteen league from it , which be about five league in length , and there , to the end we may take some rest the night follow , we stay that day , in hope the next day we may pass and avoid the danger of the river of Saguenay , which be great . that evening we go aland and find great store of hare , of which we take a great many , and therefore we call it the island of hare : in the night there arise a contrary wind , with such storm and tempest , that we be constrain to 258 
 return to the island of filbert again , from whence we be come , because there be none other passage among the say island , and there we stay till the one and twenty of that month , till fair weather and good wind come again : and then we sail again , and that so prosperous , that we pass to honguedo , which passage until that time have not be discover : we cause our ship to course athwart cape Prat which be the beginning of the port of Chaleur : and because the wind be good and convenient , we sail all day and all night without stay , and the next day we come to the middle of brion island , which we be not mind lsle °f to do , to the end we may shorten our way . Theise brion-two land lie northwest , and southeast , and be about fifty league one from another . the say island be in latitude 47 degree and a half . upon Thursday be the twenty six of the month , and the feast of the ascension of our lord , we coast over to a land and shallow of low sand , which be about eight league southwest from brion island , above which be large champain , full of tree and also a enclose sea , whereas we can neither see , nor perceive any gap or way to enter thereinto . on Friday follow , be the 27 of the month , because the wind do change on the coast , we come to brion island again , where we stay till the begin of June , and towards the southeast of this island , we see a land , seem unto we as a island , we coast it about two league and a half , and 
 by the way we have notice of three other high island , lie towards the sand : after we have know these thing we return to the cape of the say land , which do divide it self into two or three very high cape : the water there be very deep , and the flood of the sea run so swift , that it can possible be swift . that day we come to cape loreine , which be in forty seven degree and a half towards the south : on which cape there be a low land , and it seem that there be some entrance of a river , but there be no haven of any worth . 
 259 
 above these land we see another cape towards the south , we name it saint Paul cape , it be at 47 degree and a quarter . 
 the Sunday follow , be the four of June , and Whitsonday , we have notice of the coast lie eastsoutheast , distant from the Newfoundland about two and twenty league : and because the wind be against we , we go to a haven , which we name saint spiritus porte , where we stay till Tewesday that we depart thence , sail along that coast until ! we come to saint Peter island . we find along the say coast many very dangerous island and shelf , which lie all in the way eastsoutheast and westnorthwest , about three and twenty league into the sea . while we be in the say saint Peter island we meet with many ship of France and of Britain , we stay there from saint Barnabas day , be the eleven of the month , until the sixteenth that we depart thence and come to cape raze , and enter into a port call Rognoso , where we take in fresh water , and wood to pass the sea : there we leave one of our boat . then upon Monday , be the nineteenth of June , we go from that port , and with such good and prosperous weather we sail along the sea , in such sort , that upon the sixth of July 1536 we come to the porte of saint Malo , by the grace of God , to who we pray , here end our navigation , that of his infinite mercy he will grant we his grace and favour , and in the end bring we to the place of everlasting felicity . amen . 
 here follow the language of the country , and kingdom of Hochelaga and Canada , of 
 we call new France : but first the name 
 of their number . 
 Secada 1 Indahir 6 
 tigneni 2 Aiaga 7 
 Hasche 3 Addigue 8 
 hannaion 4 madellon 9 
 Oviscon s 260 assem 10 
 here follow the name of the chief part of man , 
 and other word necessary to be know . 
 the head aggonzi God cudragny 
 the brow the eye hegueniascon higata give i " | some drink 1 quazahoaquea 
 the ear abontascon give i to | [ f quaso hoa 
 the mouth esahe breakfast j i [ quascaboa 
 the tooth esgongay give i my ] 1 i quaza hoa | i quatfriam 
 the tongue osnache supper i 
 the throat a gonhon let we go ] 1 i casigno ag - [ ( nydahoa 
 the beard hebelim to bed j 
 the face h tegouascon a man aguehum 
 the hair aganiscon a woman agruaste 
 the arm ajayascon a boy addegesta 
 the flank aissonne a wench agniaquesta 
 thestomacke aggruascon a child exiasta 
 the belly eschehenda a gown cabata 
 the thigh < [ hetnegradas-l con a doublet Hosen caioza hemondoha 
 the knee 1 agochine - [ godascon shoe a shirt atha amgoua 
 the leg [ agouguene-i bind a cap corn castrua osizi 
 the foot onchidascon bread carraconny 
 the hand aignoascon water ame 
 the finger agenoga flesh quahouascon 
 the nails a gedascon Reisins queion 
 a man 1 damson honnesta 
 member 1 > ainoascon fig absconda 
 a woman 1 grape ozoba 
 member j > castaigne nut quahoya 
 a eel esgueny a hen sahomgahoa 
 a snail l indeguezi a lamprey zisto 
 a tortoise heuleuxima a salmon ondacon 
 wood conda a whale ainne honne 
 leave of ] i k ioga a goose sadeguenda 
 tree i r a street 6i add 
 2 
 cucumber 1 seed i to morrow the heaven the earth the sun the moon the star the wind 
 good morrow aignag 
 let we go to play . come and i speak with i i baptize 1 casigno j ( caudy i i assigniquad - [ ( dadia 
 look upon i 1 > quagathoma 
 hold your 1 peace i let we go | with you boat i > aista 1 f casigno cas-j ( novy 
 give i a ] knife j 1 ( buazahca ag - baptize ( oheda 
 a hatchet a bow adogne ahenca 
 casconda 
 achide quenhia damga ysmay assomaha stagnehoham cohoha 
 quahetan h casigno 
 donnascat aionnesta asquenondo sourhanda 
 agaya Canada 
 agogasy coda 
 cohena agacha honnesca 
 camsa athau odazani azista 
 quea canoca sahe adhotathny addathy adanahoe addagrim adhoasseve 
 a dart let we go a hunt a stag a sheep a hare a dog a town the sea the wave of the sea a island a hill the ice snow cold hot fire smoke a house Beanes cinnamom my father my mother my brother my sister 
 they of Canada say , that it be a month sail to go to a land where cinnamom and clove be gather . 
 here end the relation of James Cartiers discovery and navigation toi the Newfoundlands , by he name new France . 
 . 