the four voyage make to Virginia with three ship , in the year 1587. wherein be transport the second colony . 
 the year of our lord 1587. sir Walter Ralegh intend to persevere in the plant of his country of Virginia , prepare a new colony of one hundred and fifty man to be send thither , under the charge of John white , who he appoint governor , and also appoint unto he twelve assistant , unto who he give a charter , and incorporate they by the name of governor and assistant of the city of Ralegh in Virginia . 
 April . 
 our fleet be in number three sail , viz. the admiral a ship of one hundred and twenty ton , a flyboat , and a pinnace , depart the six and twenty of April from Portesmouth , and the same day come to a anchor at the cow in the isle of wight , where we stay eight day . 
 386 
 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 
 1587. 
 may . 
 the five of May , at nine of the clock at night we come to Plymouth , where we remain the space of two day . 
 the 8 we weigh anchor at Plymouth , and depart thence for Virginia . 
 the 16 Simon Ferdinando , master of our admiral , lewd forsake our flyboat , leave her distress in the bay of Portugal . 
 June . 
 the 19 we fall with “ Dominica , and the same evening we sail between it , and Guadalupe : the 21 the flyboat also fall with Dominica . 
 the 22 we come to a anchor at a island call Santa Cruz , where all the planter be set on land , stay there till the 25 of the same month . at our first land on this island , some of our woman , and man , by eat a small fruit like green apple , be fearful trouble with a sudden burn in their mouth , and swell of their tongue so big , that some of they can not speak . also a child by suck one of those woman breast , have at that instant his mouth set on such a burn , that it be strange to see how the infant be torment for the time : but after 24 hour , it wear away of it self . 
 also the first night of our be on this island , we take five great Torteses , some of they of such bigness , that sixteen of our strong man be tire with carrying of one of they but from the sea side to our cabin . in this island we find no water place , but a stand pond , the water whereof be so evil , that many of our company fall sick with drink thereof : and as many as do but wash their face with that water , in the morning before the sun have draw away the corruption , their face do so burn and swell , that their eye be shut up , and can not see in five or six day , or long . 
 387 
 “ one of the isle of the Indies inhabit with savage . 
 circumspection to be use in strange place . 
 the second day of our abode there , we send forth some of our man to search the island for fresh water , three one way , and two another way . the governor also , with six other , go up to the top of a high hill , to view the island , but can perceive no sign of any man , or beast , nor any goodness , but parrot , and tree of Guiacum . return back to our cabin another way , he find in the descent of a hill , certain potsherd of savage make , make of the earth of that island : whereupon it be judge , that this island be inhabit with savage , though Fernando have tell we for certain the contrary . the same day at night , the rest of our company very late return to the governor . the one company affirm , that they have scene in a valley eleven Savages , and diverse house half a mile distant from the steep , or top of the hill where they stay . the other company have find run out of a high rock a very fair spring of water , whereof they bring three bottle to the company : for before that time , we drink the stink water of the pond . 
 the same second day at night captain Stafford , with the pinnace , depart from our fleet , ride at Santa Cruz , to a island , call beak , lie near saint John , be so direct by Ferdinando , who assure he he shall there find great plenty of sheep . the next day at night , our planter leave Santa Cruz , and come all aboard , and the next morning after , be the 25 of June we weigh anchor , and depart from Santa Cruz. 
 the seven and twenty we come to anchor at Cottea , where we find the pinnace ride at our come . 
 the 28 we weigh anchor at Cottea , and present come to anchor at saint Johns in Musketos bay , where we spend three day unprofitable in take in fresh water , spend in the mean time more beer than the quantity of the water come unto . 
 388 
 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 
 1587. 
 Julie . 
 the first day we weigh anchor at “ Musketoes bay , “ Musketos where be leave behind two irish man of our come - 
 pany , Derby Glaven , and Denice Carrell , bear along fa soot ] i the coast of saint Johns till evening , at which time we fall of . Johns with Rosse bay at this place Ferdinando have promise island , where we shall take in salt , and have cause we before , to t % e ™ make and provide as many sack for that purpose , as i we can . the governor also , for that he understand there be a town in the bottom of the bay , not far from the salt hill , appoint thirty shot , ten pike , and ten target , to man the pinnace , and to go aland for salt . Ferdinando perceive they in a readiness , send to the governor , use great persuasion with he , not to take in salt there , say that he know not well whether 
 the same be the place or not : also , that if the pinnace go into the bay , she can not without great danger come back , till the next day at night , and that if in the mean time any storm shall rise , the admiral be in danger to be cast away . while he be thus persuading , he cause the lead to be cast , and have crafty bring the ship in three fathom and a half water , he sudden begin to swear , and tear God in piece , dissemble great danger , cry to he at the helm , bear up hard , bear up hard : so we go off , and be disappoint of our salt , by his mean . 
 the next day sail along the west end of saint John , the governor determine to go aland in saint german “ bay , to gather young plant of orange , pine , Mameas , and Plantanos , to set at Virginia , which we know might easy be have , for that they grow near the shore , and the place where they grow , well know to the governor , and some of the planter : but our Simon deny it , say : he will come to a anchor at Hispaniola , and there land the governor , and some other of the assistant , with the pinnace , to see if he can speak with his friend Alanson , of who he hope to be furnish both 
 “ a pleasant andfruitfull country , lie on the west end of 8. Johns island , where grow plenty of orange , lemon , plantan , y Pines . 
 of cattle , and all such thing as we will have take in at s. John : but he mean nothing less , as it plain do appear to we afterward . 
 the next day after , be the three of July , we see Hispaniola , and bear with the coast all that day , look still when the pinnace shall be prepare to go for the place where Ferdinando his friend Alanson be : but that day pass , and we see no preparation for land in Hispaniola . 
 the 4 of July , sail along the coast of Hispaniola , until the next day at noon , and no preparation yet see for the stay there , we have knowledge that we be past the place where Alanson dwell , and be come with Isabel : hereupon Ferdinando be ask by the governor , whether he mean to speak with Alanson , for the take in of cattle , and other thing , accord to his promise , or not : but he answer that he be now past the place , and that sir Walter Ralegh tell he , the french ambassador certify he , that the king of Spain have send for Alanson into Spain : wherefore he think he dead , and that it be to no purpose to touch there in any place , at this voyage . 
 the next day we leave sight of Hispaniola , and hale oflf for Virginia , about four of the clock in the afternoon . 
 the sixth of July we come to the island Caycos , wherein Ferdinando say be two salt pond , assure we if they be dry , we may find salt to shift with , until the next supply : but it prove as true as find of sheep at Baque . in this island , while Ferdinando solace himself ashore , with one of the company , in part of the island , other spend the latter part of that day in other part of the island , some to seek the salt pond , some fowl , some hunt swan , whereof we catch many . the next day early in the morning we weigh anchor , leave Caycos , with good hope , that the first land that we see next shall be Virginia . 
 about the 16 of July we fall with the main of Virginia , which Simon Ferdinando take to be the island of 
 390 
 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 
 1587 croatoan , where we come to anchor , and ride there two or three day : but find himself deceive , he weigh , and bear along the coast , where in the night , have not captain Stafford be more careful in look out , than our Simon Ferdinando , we have be all cast away upon the breach , call the cape of fear , for we be come within two cable length upon it : such be the carelessness , and ignorance of our master .. 
 the two and twenty of July we arrive safe at Hatorask , where our ship and pinnace anchor : the governor go aboard the pinnace , accompany with forty of his best man , intend to pass up to Roanoak forthwith , hope there to find those fifteen Englishman , which sir Richard Grinvile have leave there the year before , with who he mean to have conference , concern the state of the country , and savage , mean after he have so do , to return again to the fleet , and pass along the coast , to the bay of chesepiok , where we a intent to intend to make our seat and fort , accord to the charge give we among other direction in writing , under sepi0^ the hand of sir Walter Ralegh : but assoon as we be put with our pinnace from the ship , a gentleman by the mean of Ferdinando , who be appoint to return for England , call to the sailor in the pinnace , charge they not to bring any of the planter back again , but to leave they in the island , except the governor , and two or three such as he approve , say that the summer be far spend , wherefore he will land all the planter in no other place . unto this be all the sailor , both in the pinnace , and ship , persuade by the master , wherefore it boot not the governor to contend with they , but pass to Roanoak , and the same night at sunset go aland on the island , in the place where our fifteen man be leave , but we find none of they , nor any sign that they have be there , save only we find the bone of one of those fifteen , which the savage have slay long before . 
 the three and twenty of July the governor with 
 391 
 diverse of his company , walk to the north end of the island , where master Ralph lane have his fort , with sundry necessary and decent dwell house , make by his man about it the year before , where we hope to find some sign , or certain knowledge of our fifteen man . when we come thither , we find the fort raze down , but all the house stand unhurt , save that the nether room of they , and also of the fort , be overgrow with melon of diverse sort , and deer within they , feed on those melon : so we return to our company , without hope of ever see any of the fifteen man live . 
 the same day order be give , that every man shall be employ for the repair of those house , which we find stand , and also to make other new cottage , for such as shall need . 
 the 25 our flyboat and the rest of our planter arrive all safe at Hatoraske , to the great joy and comfort of the whole company : but the master of our admiral Ferdinando grieve great at their safe coming : for he purposely leave they in the bay of Portugal , and steal away from they in the night , hope that the master thereof , who name be Edward Spicer , for that he never have be in Virginia , will hardly find the place , or else be leave in so dangerous a place as that be , by mean of so many man of war , as at that time be abroad , they shall sure be take , or slay : but God disappoint his wicked pretence . 
 the eight and twenty , George Howe , one of our twelve assistant be slay by diverse savage , which be come over to Roanoak , either of purpose to espy our company , and what number we be , or else to hunt deer , whereof be many in the island . Theise Savages be secret hide among high reed , where oftentimes they find the deer asleep , and so kill they , espy our man wade in the water alone , almost naked , without any weapon , save only a small fork stick , catch crab therewithal , and also be stray two mile from 
 392 
 his company , and shoot at he in the water , where they give he sixteen wound with their arrow : and after they have slay he with their wooden sword , they beat his head in piece , and flee over the water to the main . 
 on the thirty of July master Stafford and twenty of our man pass by water to the island of croatoan , with Manteo , who have his mother , and many of his kindred dwell in that island , of who we hope to understand some news of our fifteen man , but especial to learn the disposition of the people of the country towards we , and to renew our old friendship with they . at our first land they seem as though they will fight with we : but perceive we begin to march with our shot towards they , they turn their back , and flee . then Manteo their country man call to they in their own language , who , assoon as they hear , they return , and throw away their bow and arrow , and some of they come unto we , embrace and entertain we friendly , desire we not to gather or spill any of their corn , for that they have but little . we answer they , that neither their corn , nor any other thing of they , shall be diminish by any of we , and that our come be only to renew the old love , that be between we and they at the first , and to live with they as brethren and friend : which answer seem to please they well , wherefore they request we to walk up to their town , who there feast we after their manner , and desire we earnest , that there may be some token or badge give they of we , whereby we may know they to be our friend , when we meet they any where out of the town or island . they tell we further , that for want of some such badge , diverse of they be hurt the year before , be find out of the island by master lane his company , whereof they show we one , which at that very instant lie lame , and have lie of that hurt ever since : but they say , they know our man mistake they , and hurt they in stead of winginos man , wherefore they hold we excuse . 
 393 
 A.D. 
 I587 - 
 August . 
 the next day we have conference further with they , concern the people of Secotan , Aquascogoc , and pomeiok , will they of croatoan to certify the people of those town , that if they will accept our friendship , we will willing receive they again , and that all unfriendly deal past on both part , shall be utter forgive and forget . to this the chief man of croatoan answer , that they will glad do the best they can , and within seven day , bring the wiroance and chief governor of those town with they , to our governor at Roanoak , or their answer . we also understand of the man of croatoan , that our man master how be slay by the remnant of winginos man dwell then at Dasamonguepeuk , with who Wanchese keep company : and also we understand by they of croatoan , how that the 15 Englishman leave at Roanoak the year before , by sir Richard Grinvile , be sudden set upon , by 30 of the man of Secota , Aquascogoc , and Dasamonguepeuk , in manner follow . they convey themselves secret behind the tree , near the house where our man careless live : and have perceive that of those fifteen they can see but eleven only , two of those savage appear to the 11 Englishman , call to they by friendly sign , that but two of their chief man shall come arm to speak with those two savage , who seem also to be unarm . wherefore two of the chief of our Englishman go glad to they : but while one of those savage traitorous embrace one of our man , the other with his sword of wood , which he have secret hide under his manteli , strike he on the head and slay he , and present the other eight and twenty Savages show they self : the other Englishman perceive this , flee to his company , who the savage pursue with their bow , and arrow , so fast , that the Englishman be force to take the house , wherein all their victuali , and weapon be : but the 394 
 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. . 1587 - 
 savage forthwith set the same on fire : by mean whereof our man be force to take up such weapon as come first to hand , and without order to run forth among the savage , with who they skirmish above a hour . in this skirmish another of our man be shot into the mouth with a arrow , where he die : and also one of the Savages be shoot into the side by one of our man , with a wild fire arrow , whereof he die present . the place where they fight be of great advantage to the savage , by mean of the thick tree , behind which the savage through their nimbleness , defend themselves , and so offend our man with their arrow , that our man be some of they hurt , retire fight to the water side , where their boat lie , with which they flee towards Hatorask . by that time they have row but a quarter of a mile , they espy their four fellow come from a creek thereby , where they have be to fetch oyster : these four they receive into their boat , leave Roanoak , and land on a little island on the right hand of our entrance into the harbour of Hatorask , where they remain a while , but afterward depart , whither as yet we know not . 
 have now sufficient dispatch our business at croatoan , the same day we depart friendly , take our leave , and come aboard the fleet at Hatorask . 
 the eight of August , the governor have long expect the come of the wiroanse of pomeiok , Aquascogoc , Secota , and Dasamonguepeuk , see that the seven day be pass , within which they promise to come in , or to send their answer by the man of croatoan , and no tiding of they hear , be certain also inform by those man of croatoan , that the remnant of Wingina his man , which be leave alive , who dwell at Dasamonquepeuk , be they which have slay George Howe , and be also at the drive of our eleven Englishman from Roanoak , he think to defer the revenge thereof no long . wherefore the same night about midnight , he pass over the water , 
 395 
 accompany with captain Stafford , and 24 man , whereof Manteo be one , who we take with we to be our guide to the place where those savage dwell , where he behave himself towards we as a most faithful Englishman . 
 the next day , be the 9 of August , in the morning so early that it be yet dark , we land near the dwell place of our enemy , and very secret convey our self through the wood , to that side , where we have their house between we and the water : and have espy their fire , and some sit about it , we present set on they : the miserable soul herewith amaze , flee into a place of thick reed , grow fast by , where our man perceive they , shoot one of they through the body with a bullet , and therewith we enter the reed , among which we hope to acquit their evil do towards we , but we be deceive , for those savage be our friend , and be come from croatoan to gather the corn and fruit of that place , because they understand our enemy be flee immediate after they have slay George Howe , and for haste have leave all their corn , tobacco , and pompion stand in such sort , that all have be devour of the bird , and deer , if it have not be gather in time : but they have like to have pay dear for it : for it be so dark , that they be naked , and their man and woman apparel all so like other , we know not but that they be all man : and if that one of they which be a wiroances wife have not have a child at her back , she have be slay in stead of a man , and as hap be , another Savage know master Stafford , and run to he , call he by his name , whereby he be save . find our self thus disappoint of our purpose , we gather all the corn , pease , pompion , and tobacco that we find ripe , leave the rest unspoiled , and take menatoan his wife , with the young child , and the other savage with we over the water to Roanoak . 
 396 
 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 
 although the mistake of these savage somewhat grieve Manteo , yet he impute their harm to their own folly , say to they , that if their wiroance have keep their promise in come to the governor at the day appoint , they have not know that mischance . 
 the 13 of August our savage Manteo , by the commandment of sir Walter Ralegh , be christen in Roanoak , and call lord thereof , and of dasamonguepeuk , in reward of his faithful service . 
 the 18 Elinor , daughter to the governor , and wife to Ananias dare one of the assistant , be deliver of a daughter in Roanoak , and the same be christen there the Sunday follow , and because this child be the first christian bear in Virginia , she be name Virginia . by this time our ship have unlade the good and victual of the planter , and begin to take in wood , and fresh water , and to new calk and trim they for England : the planter also prepare their letter and token to send back into England . 
 our two ship , the lion and the flyboat almost ready to depart , the 21 of August , there arise such a tempest at Northeast , that our admiral then ride out of the harbour , be force to cut his cable , and put to sea , where he lie beat off and on six day before he can come to we again , so that we fear he have be cast away , and the rather for that at the time that the storm take they , the most and best of their sailor be leave aland . 
 at this time some controversy arise between the governor and assistant , about choose two out of the twelve assistant , which shall go back as factor for the company into England : for every one of they refuse , save only one , which all other think not sufficient : but at length by much persuade of the governor , Christopher Cooper only agree to go for England : but the next day , through the persuasion of diverse of his familiar friend , he change his mind , so that now the matter stand as at the first . 
 397 
 the next day , the 22 of August , the whole company both of the assistant and planter come to the governor , and with one voice request he to return himself into England , for the better and soon obtain of supply , and other necessary for they : but he refuse it , and allege many sufficient cause , why he will not : the one be , that he can not so sudden return back again without his great discredit , leave the action , and so many who he partly have procure through his persuasion , to leave their native country , and undertake that voyage , and that some enemy to he and the action at his return into England will not spare to slander false both he and the action , by say , he go to Virginia , but politic , and to no other end but to lead so many into a country , in which he never mean to stay himself , and there to leave they behind he . theirmeaning also he allege , that see they intend to remove to remove 50 mne far up into the main present , he be country . then absent , his stuff and good may be both spoil , and most of they pilfer away in the carriage , so that at his return he shall be either force to provide himself of all such thing again , or else at his come again to Virginia find himself utter unfurnish , whereof already he have find some proof , be but once from they but three day . wherefore he conclude that he will not go himself . 
 the next day , not only the assistant but diverse other , as well woman as man , begin to renew their request to the governor again , to take upon he to return into England for the supply , and dispatch of all such thing as there be to be do , promise to make he their bond under all their hand and seal for the safe preserve of all his good for he at his return to Virginia , so that if any part thereof be spoil or lose , they will see it restore to he , or his assign , whensoever the same shall be miss 398 
 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 
 1587. and demand : which bond , with a testimony under their hand and seal , they forthwith make , and deliver into his hand . the copy of the testimony i think good to set down . 
 may it please you , her majesty subject of England , we your friend and countryman , the planter in Virginia , do by these present let you and every of you to understand , that for the present and speedy supply of certain our know and apparent lack and need , most requisite and necessary for the good and happy plant of we , or any other in this land of Virginia , we all of one mind 8c consent , have most earnest entreat , and uncessant request John white , governor of the planter in Virginia , to pass into England , for the better and more assure help , and set forward of the foresay supply : and know assure that he both can best , and will labour and take pain in that behalf for we all , and he not once , but often refuse it , for our sake , and for the honour 8c maintenance of the action , have at last , though much against his will , through our importunacy , yield to leave his government , and all his good among we , and himself in all our behalf to pass into England , of who knowledge and fidelity in handle this matter , as all other , we do assure ourselves by these present , and will you to give all credit thereunto , the 25 of August 1587. 
 the Governour be at the last through their extreme entreat constrain to return into England , have then but half a day respite to prepare himself for the same , depart from Roanoak the seven and twenty of August in the morning , and the same day about midnight , come aboard the flyboat , who already have weigh anchor , and ride without the bar , the admiral ride by they , who but the same morning be new come thither again . the same day both the ship weigh anchor , and set sail for England : at this weigh their anchor , twelve of the man which 
 399 
 be in the flyboat be throw from the Capstone , which by mean of a bar and brake , come so fast about upon they , that the other two bar thereof strike and hurt most of they so sore , that some of they never recover it : nevertheless they assay present again to weigh their anchor , but be so weaken with the first fling , they be not able to weigh it , but be throw down and hurt the second time . wherefore have in all but fifteen man aboard , and most of they by this unfortunate beginning so bruise , and hurt , they be force to cut their cable , and lose their anchor . nevertheless , they keep company with the admiral , until the seventeenth of September , at which time we fall with Corvo , and see Flores . 
 September . 
 the eighteenth , perceive of all our fifteen man in the flyboat there remain but five , which by mean of the former mischance , be able to stand to their labour : and that the admiral mean not to make any haste for England , but to linger about the island of Tercera for purchase : the flyboat depart for England with letter , where we hope by the help of God to arrive short : but by that time we have continue our course homeward about twenty day , have have sometime scarce and variable wind , our fresh water also by leak almost consume , there arise a storm at Northeast , which for six day cease not to blow so exceed , that we be drive further in those six then we can recover in thirteen day : in which time other of our sailor begin to fall very sick and two of they die , the weather also continue so close , that our master sometime in four day together can see neither sun nor star , and all the beverage we can make , with stink water , dregs of beer , and lees of wine which remain , be but three gallon , and therefore now we expect nothing but famine to perish at sea 
 400 
 the 16 of October we make land , but we know not what land it be , bear in with the same land at that day : about sun set we put into a harbour , where we find a hulk of Dublin , and a pinnace of Hampton ride , but we know not as yet what place . this be , neither have we any boat to go ashore , until the pinnace send off their boat to we with 6 or 8 man , of who we understand we be in Smerwick in the west part of Ireland : they also relieve we present with fresh water , wine , and other fresh meat . 
 the 18 the governor and the master rid to dingen a cushe , 5 mile distant , to take order for the new victual of our flyboat for England , and for relief of our sick and hurt man , but within four day after the boatswain , the steward , and the boatswain mate die aboard the flyboat , and the 28 the master mate and two of our chief sailor be bring sick to dingen . 
 Smerwick in the west of Ireland . 
 November . 
 the first the governor ship himself in a ship call the monkey , which at that time be ready to put to sea from dingen for England , leave the flyboat and all his company in Ireland . the same day we set sail , and on the three day we fall with the north side of the land end , and be shut up the Severne , but the next day we double the same for mount bay 
 the 5 the governor land in England at martasew , near saint Michael mount in Cornwall . 
 the 8 we arrive at Hampton , where we understand that our consort the admiral be come to Portsmouth , and have be there three week before : and also that Ferdinando the master with all his company be not only come home without any purchase , but also in such weakness by sickness , and death of their chief man , that they be scarce able to bring their ship into harbour , but be force to let fall anchor without , which they vin 401 2 c 
 can not weigh again , but may all have perish there , if a small bark by great hap have not come to they to help they . the name of the chief man that die be these , Roger large , John Matthew , Thomas smith , and some other sailor , who name i know not at the write hereof . An. Dom. 1587. 
 . 