the three voyage make by a ship send in the year 1586 , to the relief of the colony plant in Virginia , at the sole charge of sir Walter Ralegh . 
 n the year of our lord 1586 sir Walter Ralegh at his own charge prepare a ship of a hundred ton , freight with all manner of thing in most plentiful manner , for the supply and relief of his colony then remain in Virginia : but before they set sail from England it 
 be after easter , so that our colony half despair of the come of any supply : wherefore every man prepare for himself , determine resolute to spend the residue of their life time in that country . and for the better performance of this their determination , they sow , plant , and set such thing as be necessary for their relief in so plentiful a manner as may have suffice they two year without any further labour . thus trust to their own harvest , they pass the summer till the ten of June : at which time their corn which they have sow be within one fortnight of reap : but than it happen that sir Francis drake in his prosperous return from the sack of Sant Domingo , Cartagena , and saint Augustine , determine in his way homeward to visit his countryman the english colony then remain in Virginia . So pass along the coast of Florida , he fall with the part where our english colony inhabit : and have espy some of that company , there he anchor and go aland , where he confer with they of their state and welfare , and how thing have pass with they . they answer he that they live all ; but hitherto in some scarcity : and as yet can hear of no supply out of England : therefore they request he that he will leave with they some two or three ship , that if in some reasonable time they hear not out of 346 
 England , they may then return themselves . which he agree to . while some be then write their letter to send into England , and some other make report of the accident of their travel each to other , some on land , some on board , a great storm arise , and drive the most of their fleet from their anchor to sea , in which ship at that instant be the chief of the english colony : the rest on land perceive this , haste to those three sail which be appoint to be leave there ; and for fear they shall be leave behind they leave all thing confuse , as if they have be chase from thence by a mighty army : and no doubt so they be ; for the hand of God come upon they for the cruelty and outrage commit by some of they against the native inhabitant of that country . 
 immediate after the depart of our english colony out of this paradise of the world , the ship abovemention send and set forth at the charge of sir Walter Ralegh and his direction , arrive at Hatorask ; who after some time spend in seek our colony up in the country , and not find they , return with all the aforesaid provision into England . 
 about fourteen or fifteen day after the departure of the aforesaid ship , sir Richard Grinvile general of Virginia , accompany with three ship well appoint for the same voyage , arrive there ; who not find the aforesaid ship accord to his expectation , nor hear any news of our english colony there seat , and leave by he anno 1585 , himself travel up into diverse place of the country , aswell to see if he can hear any news of the colony leave there by he the year before , under the charge of master lane his deputy , as also to discover some place of the country : but after some time spend therein , not hear any news of they , and find the place which they inhabit desolate , yet unwilling to loose the possession of the country which Englishmen have so long hold : after good deliberation , he determine to leave some man behind to retain 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 this ship arrive in Virginia . 
 sir Richard grinvil three voyage . 
 347 
 fifteen man possession of the country : whereupon he land more left tn fifteen man e of Roanoak , furnish plentiful ‘ with all manner of provision for two year , and so depart for England . 
 not long after he fall with the isle of azore , on some of which island he land , and spoil the town of all such thing as be worth carriage , where also he take diverse Spaniard . with these and many other exploit do by he in this voyage , aswell outward as homeward , he return into England . 
 . 