a true report of a voyage undertake for the west Indies by m. Christopher Newport general of a fleet of three ship and a pinnace , viz. the golden dragon admiral , whereof be captain m. Newport himself ; the prudence viceadmiral , under the conduct of captain Hugh Merrick ; the Margaret under captain Robert Fred ; and the virgin our pinnace under captain Henry Kidgil : begin from London the 25. of Januarie 1591. write by m. John twit of Harewich , Corporali in the dragon . in which voyage they take and burn upon the coast of Hispaniola , within the bay of Honduras , and other place , 3. town , and 19 sail of ship and frigate . 
 he 12. day of February An. 1591. we set sail from Dover ride , and have a prosperous wind , the 27. day of the same month we fall with cape Cantin on the coast of Barbary , and on the 28. we arrive at Santa Cruz ride , where have refresh our self some 3. or 4. 
 day , we put off to sea again , and about the 5. of march we pass by the hand of the canary : and have a favourable wind , the 4. of April An. 1592. we fell with Dominica in the west Indies : where make stay a day or two , we barter with the savage for certain commodity of they , viz. tobacco , hen , potato root , etc 
 pass from thence to a water place on the other side of the cliff , we take a Portugal ship of Lisbon of 300. tun , which come from guinie , and be bind for Cartagena , wherein be 300. Negros young and old . which ship we take along with we to saint Juan de Puerto 184 
 rico , where we land the merchant and one Spaniard moor within a league of the town , and land some 20. or 30. musketeer , some 20. horseman make towards we ; but we retire to our boat without any service do . 
 the 9 we lay hover all day before the town , the castle make a shot or two at we . 
 the reason why we set the Portugal merchant aland there be , for that he hope to help we to some money for his negro there , but he falsify his word with we , so that pass along to the westermost end of the say hand , about some 9 or 10. league from the town we land the negro , and sink their ship . 
 the 11. of April we pass from thence to Mona some 15. league off , where we land : there be on the hand about 19 soul , the child of a old Portugal ! , and his wife who afford we such fruit as their hand yield , viz. swine flesh , potato root , etc 
 from thence along we pass to Saona , a long hand and very fruitful , replenish with store of wild beast and swine , where we land , hunt , and train our man . 
 pass from hence westward along the south coast of Hispaniola , we descry a frigate , which we chase and take : wherein be 22. jar of copper-money , be bind for saint Juan de Puerto rico , to buy wine there . 
 the next day we take 2. small frigate more , but nothing of any value in they . 
 the 15. of April at night we sack a town in the say hand of Hispaniola call Ocoa , where be a ingenio , wherein we find sugar 8c poultry great store , but the people have discover our ship over night , and be flee into the mountain . this town stand a league from the seaside , consist of some forty or fifty house . they bring we much cattle , and two wain load of sugar , to ransom the town . while this action be perform , Robert free of Harwich , captain of the Margaret , take two frigate with certain Spaniards on the other side of the bay , which come to lade sugar there at a ingenio . 
 185 
 this town stand from the water side a league . 
 after we have here refresh our self , we stand along for cape Tiburon , where we water : and make no stay there , about the 23. of April we leave our ship in a fair roadstead under a hand not inhabit , and with our frigate which we have take before , wherein we ship all our strength which possible we can afford , leave only so few aboard our ship as can hardly if need have be , have wrought they ; we pass along by the say hand to the northwest part of Hispaniola , to a town call Yaguana ; where the 27. in the morning 2. hour before day we land ; but we be discover by mean of a frigate that lie lade with victual , bind for Carthagena , the man of which frigate recover on land before we , give a alarm to the town , who be present up in arm to the number of a hundred and fifty horse . we march notwithstanding along to the town , have a Spaniard for our guide , where by that time the day break , we be before the town , where upon a fair green make a stand , we be encounter by the horseman have no strength of foot , but certain few loose shot which lie in a low valley at the entry of the town . the horseman charge we very fierce , but see they can not prevail , bring in a drove before they of two hundred beast or more : and so forcible think to have break our array , it please God to cause their cattle to return back upon themselves : and thus their own device sort out to their own detriment . in this skirmish we slay their governor , a man very hardy , and of great valour . 
 in the end , by reason of the Spaniard brag which they give out , ( as by the life of their wife and child , etc that not one of we shall go aboard again ) a great doubt of intercept of we and of our boat be strike into our captain heart then need : and so for that time we retire to our boat not enter the town , and so pass with our boat to our ship again ; where the same night our captain determine to go up with our ship , but it fall so calm , that all the next day until 186 
 night we can not get up , and they have discover we , barricade up their way , and convey all that they have into the mountain , leave their house only bare and naked , notwithstanding we land , and with great difficulty we pass their barricado with the loss of two man at both conflict , enter their town and fire it , leave not a house unburnt , be a town of three street have about 150. household . 
 the same night we pass with our boat to a small village call Aguava , where we find excellent fruit of the country , which by reason of their cowardly brag we also set on fire . 
 be thus frustrate of our pretend voyage , we stand for the bay of Honduras , and about the nine of May we discover in the afternoon a sail thwart of the bay of Truxillo , with who we stand , and have a spanish flag out , they mistrust we not , until we have almost fetch they up : and then we go off with our boat , and take they within shot of the castle , and with our boat we go and fetch three or four frigate which T& ? thought ride afore the town , the castle play upon we with somefieete their ordinance .. 0 from^aine , 
 our captain have understanding by the Spaniard , fir so they that there be three ship more at Puerto de Cavallos , expect . stand along that night for that place , but it fall out to be so calm , that it be the fifteen day of may or ever we come there , the ship have peradventure discover we , steal alongst the shore towards Truxillo , so that be void of that hope , we land ; the inhabitant forsake the town , flee into the mountain . we remain in the town all night , and the next day till towards night : where we find 5. or 6. tun of quick silver , 16. tun of old sack , sheep , young kid , great store of poultry , some store of money , and good linen , silk , cotton-cloth , and such like ; we also take three bell out of their church , and destroy their image . 
 the town be of 200 house , and wealthy ; and that year there be four rich ship lade from thence : but we 187 
 spare it , because we find other contentment . and have take our pleasure of the town , as aforesaid , we return aboard our ship , stand back again for Truxillo , we discover one of the ship which be lade at Puerto de Cavallos : but they have espy we before , as it shall seem ; for they have convey away as much as possible they can ashore , and set their ship on fire ; which so soon as we have descry , we make to she with our boat , and quench the fire , and load up with hide the ship which we take at our first come ; for she have but a thousand hide in she , and certain jar of balsamum : which be accomplish , we sink the ship with the rest of the good , and so stand alongst again for Truxillo . it fall out to be so calm , that we be two and twenty day sail back that we have sail in six day , which be about forty league : so that when we come before Truxillo , which be about the six of June , we find another of the ship there , but close under the castle , her ruther unhanged , her sail take from the yard , etc notwithstanding we enter she , but they have place such a company of musketeer under a rampire , which they have make with hide and such like , that it be too hot for we to abide , and so betake we to our ship again , and stand out of the bay into the sea , we discover great store of shot entrench in those place where they suspect we will have land . that night there fall such a storm of rain , thunder , lighten and tempestuous weather , that our ship be disperse either from other . and have determine all of we to meet at a certain island , where we purpose to water and refresh our self ; by mean of the storm and other contagious weather which follow , we be frustrate of that hope . 
 we have lose our prize , and certain frigate with the man . two of our ship go to seek our prize and our man : and other two of we came homeward . and so we part , not hear either of other until we come into England . 
 188 
 our place of meeting shall have be at the tortuga's near unto the point of Florida , but the golden dragon and the prudence be put to leeward of this place : nevertheless we fall with certain island within the point of Florida , where the captain of the dragon m. Christopher Newport send his pinnace on shore with certain shot to seek for fresh water , where we find none ; but find the savage very courteous unto we , who come breast high into the sea , and bring we a line to hall in our boat on shore , and show we that up into the land northward be fresh water , and much gold . and one Michael bag of Ipswich boatswains mate of the dragon , have give he by one of the savage for a old rusty hatchet , a piece of gold wound hollow , and about the bigness and value of a english angel , which the savage ware hang about his knee , with two piece of fine silver plate , whereof one then say savage give John lock , master mate of the dragon , be fourteen groat in value , for a old knife : the other piece he give to one William Wright a sailer , for a old knife : which piece of silver be in form like unto the boss of a bridle . Theise Savages be far more civil than those of Dominica : for beside their courtesy , they cover their privity with a plait mat of green straw , about three handful deep , which come round about their waste , with the bush hang down behind . 
 the next day in the morning very early , there come a frigate of the island of Cuba of 30 ton , put in by weather , which be bind for Havana , wherein be fifty hog ; to which we give chase all that day , pass the gulf of Bahama , and about five of the clock in the afternoon , after a shot or two make at she , she yield unto we : we hoist out our boat , and go aboard , where we find some five Spaniard , five and fifty hog , and about some two hundred weight of excellent tobacco roll up in seyne . we lighten they of their hog and tobacco , and send the man away with their frigate . 
 in this voyage we take and sack four town , 189 
 seventeen frigate , and two ship , whereof eight be take in the bay of the Honduras ; of all which we bring but two into England : the rest we sink , burn , and one of they we send away with their man . and to make up the full number of twenty , the Spaniard themselves set one on fire in the bay of the Honduras , lest we shall be master of it . 
 we shape our course from Florida homeward by the isle of Flores one of the azore , where we water , find sir John Burgh there , who take we to be Spaniard , and make up unto we ; with who we join in the take the mighty Portugal carrack call Madre de Dios , and our captain m. Christopher Newport with diverse of we be place in she as captain by the general sir John Burgh to conduct she into England , where we arrive in Dartmouth the seven of September 1592. 
 . 