the well govern and prosperous voyage of m. James Lancaster , begin with three ship and a galley-frigat from London in October 1594 , and intend for Fernambuck , the port-town of Olinda in Brasil . in which voyage ( beside the take of nine and twenty ship and frigate ) he surprise the say port-town , be strong fortify and man ; and hold possession thereof thirty day together ( notwithstanding many bold assault of the enemy both by land and water ) and also provident defeat their dangerous and almost inevitable firework . here he find the cargazon or freight of a rich east indian carrack ; which together with great abundance of sugar , brasil-wood , and cotton he bring from thence ; lade therewith fifteen sail of tall ship and bark . 
 n September 1594 the worshipful m. John wat , aiderman , m. Paul Banning , aiderman , and other of worship in the city of London , victual three 
 good ship ; to wit , the consent , of the burden of 240 ton or thereabouts , the Salomon , of 170 ton , and the virgin , of 60 ton : and appoint for commander in this voyage , m. James Lancaster of London , 43 
 a ship with 80 ton of wine take . 
 another prize with 40 tun of wine take . 
 gentleman , admiral of the fleet , m. Edmund Barker of London , viceadmiral , and m. John aude of Poplar near London , rearadmiral , have in their say ship to the number of 275 man and boy .. 
 be full furnish with all needful provision , we depart from Blackwall in October follow , keep our own coast , until we come into the west country , where we meet with such gust and storm , that the Salomon spend her mast at the range of Dartmouth , put into harbour ; but by the earnest care and industry of the generail and other have charge , she be short again provide . which do , have a pleasant gale for our purpose , we put forth from Dartmouth the last of November follow . but contrary to our expectation , not fifty league from our own coast , we lose the Salomon and the virgin , by a storm of contrary wind that fall upon we : yet be alone , in hope to meet they about the canary or cape blank , we keep on our course to the canary , but can hear no tiding of our consort ; which great grieve we . 
 thence we go , bear for the isle of tenerif , where in the morning early we have sight of a sail , which be becalm under the shore , be tow with their boat a head , have one other at her stern . for this sail we man our boat , appoint our man well for fight , if need shall require . the Spaniard see our boat come , enter they , and leave the ship , seek to save themselves by flight : but our man pursue they so fast , that they board they , and bring they with their ship to our general . this ship be lade with 80 ton of canary-wine , which come not unto we before it be welcome . we keep and man it , ply that day , and the next night thereabouts . the very next morning we have sight of one other ; to who in like manner we send our boat : but their gunner make a shot at she , and strike off a proper young man arm ; yet we inforce she to yield , and find 40 ton of wine in she . the Spaniard have their free passage , and a 
 acquittance for the delivery of their wine , be all set on shore upon tenerif , make a quick return of their long voyage intend into the west Indies . 
 hence we depart towards cape blank ; and before we come thither , we meet again with the virgin our rear-admiral , who man tell we for very truth , that the Salomon be return for England : enforce so to do , by spend her mast the second time . which when our man understand , they be all in a maze , not know what to do , and say among themselves that their force be but small when all our strength be together , and now we have lose the one half of our strength , we be not able to perform the voyage : and therefore some of they come to the captain , ask he what he will now do , see the Salomon be lose , the one half of our strength , give he counsel ! to bear up for the west Indies , and prove there to make his voyage , because his first plat for want of strength be clean overthrow . the captain hear this new novelty , as not unacquainted with the variable pretence of mariner , make they this answer : sir , i make know to you all at my come out of England what i pretend , and that i mean to go for Fernambuck , and although at the present we want one of our ship , yet ( God will ) i mean to go forward , not doubt but to meet she at the appoint place , which be either at cape blank or the island of cape Verde : for i be assure that m. Barker the captain be so resolute to perform this voyage , that his mast be repair , he will not fail to meet we , and it be no wisdom for we to divert our course , till we have seek he at those place where our appoint meeting be : for the divert of course be the overthrow of most of our action . and i hope you will be all content herewith : for to go any other course than i have determine , ( by God help ) i will not be draw unto . with these reason and many other show , they rest all satisfy : and at our come to cape Blank ( God be praise ) we 
 four y twenty sail of ship y of caravel take by the Salomon . 
 Maio . 
 a gally-frigat carry out of England in piece . 
 the gally-frigat set up . 
 meet with the Salomon with no small joy to we all ; and there she have take of Spaniards and Portugal 24 sail of ship and caravel , fisherman , and have take out of they such necessary as she have need of . of these ship our captain take four along with he , with another that he have take himself , mean to employ they as occasion shall serve . at this place he understand of one of the pilot of those ship , that one of the carrack that come out of the east Indies , be cast away in the road of Fernambuc , and that all her good be lay upon the arrazife which be the low town . of these news we be all glad , and rejoice much ; for our hope be very good , see such a booty before we . 
 of this good company and happy success we be all joyful , and have great hope of the blessing of God in performance of our intend voyage , and so after some parley and make frolic for joy of our meeting one with the other ( praise God for all ) we ply for Maio : where come to anchor , our general 8c the rest of the captain go ashore to view the place where we may in best safety set our gally-frigat together ; which frame we bring from England of purpose to land man in the country of Brasil . here we discharge our great prize of wine , and set she on fire : but before our come thither , you shall understand we have sight of four sail , which be captain Venner in his ship the Peregrine , and a proper biskaine which he take at cape blank , the welcome of Plymmouth 8c her pinnace : all which stand with we . but they see our flag , not expect such good fellow as we , do bear from we all they may ; which our people take very unkind , that be all friend they will neither inquire , nor tell we any news of our friend , but without make any show of kindness will so depart . as before i have say , the choice be make for the place to build the gally-frigat , ashore it be bring , where the carpenter apply their work , still cheer 
 unto it by the general good gift bestow among they , and kind usage of the rest of the commander , not without great care of the captain for the safety of they all , by keep good watch : yet one negligent fellow , ’which have no knowledge of the country , stray from his company , be by the Portugal take , and very kind use , and bring again unto we : for which good the general reward they well with gift very acceptable , which they take as kind . while we be thus busy employ about the foresay galley , we descry at sea four sail , which we have good hope will have prove Indies man , or some to have bring we what we look for : but they prove captain Venner with his fleet , as aforesaid , who , see we at anchor , anchor also ; where spend some time , and be acquaint with our general determination for land , consort with we , and their bill , accord to the manner of the sea , be make and sign on either part , we to have three part , and he the four , of all that shall be take , whereby our strength be increase , to all our comfort . three week or thereabouts we stay in this place before the gay be finish ; which do , put man into she , and fit she with oar , have fourteen bank on a side , a mast and sail , the commandment of she be commit unto m. wat , a honest skilful mariner . 
 from thence we put again to sea , and go for the isle Brava , where we water : which do , we make no long stay after , but bend our course as direct as we can for the place , make our first fall with the land to the southward of cape S. Augustine ; from whence cape S. we ply still to our desire port of Fernambuck , and do so much , that about midnight we come before the 7^29 “ of harbour ; where some ply up and down , hold that march . the best policy , to forbear the enter till day may give they light , the harbour be hard , and therefore the more perilous . our ship be in safety well arrive , God be praise : and the generail in his boat 
 go from ship to ship , will they to make ready such man as they can spare , with musket , pike , bill , bow , arrow , and what weapon they have to follow he . himself , with 80 man from his own ship , embark himself in the gay , which carry in her prow a good sacar , and two murder piece . 
 our admiral spend all the night in give direction to every ship to have their man ready ship in their boat , for he intend to enter the harbour at the break of day , and to leave his ship without , till he have get the fort and the town : for he will not adventure the ship in , till the harbour be get . also he provide five ship , which he bring from cape blank , and put man in they as many as can convenient sail they , and no more , give they charge to enter the harbour with his boat : for at the entrance of the harbour ride three great holland ship , which our admiral doubt will impeach his go in ; and therefore he give order to the man of these five small ship , which be not above 60 ton a piece , if the Hollander do offer any resistance , to run aboard of they , and to set their own ship on fire , and escape in their boat , which they have for the same purpose , that by this mean they may not impeach our entrance . but when the morning be come , we be fall above half a mile down to the northward , below the harbour , which be a great inconvenience unto we : so that before we can get up again , the ebb be come upon we , and thereby we be force to hover before the harbour till two of the clock in the afternoon , in the sight of all the town . in this mean time , our ship ride before the fort without the harbour , about a demy-colvering shot off : in the which time pass many shot between the fort and the ship , and especial between the admiral ship and they : but no great harm be do on either part . all this while our admiral keep the man ready hover in the gay and the boat . the Hollander that ride in the 
 mouth of the harbour , see our resolution , lay out haulser , and wound themselves out of the way of we . our admiral be very joyful , and give great encouragement to all his man : for , to pass these three great Hollander , he hold it the great danger of all . about 12 of the clock the governor of the town send a Portugal aboard the admiral ship , to know what he will have , and wherefore he come . he return he this answer : that he want the carrack good , and for they he come , and they he will have , and that he shall short see . in this process of time , the townsman and inhabitant which see so much ship , and perceive we to be enemy , gather themselves together , three or four ensign of man , esteem to the number of some six hundred at the least . Theise come to the fort or platform lie over against the entry of the harbour , and there attend our land : but before our admiral set forward with his boat , he give express order to all that have charge of govern the boat or galley , to run they with such violence against the shore , that they shall be all cast away without recovery , and not one man to stay in they , whereby our man may have no manner of retreat to trust unto , but only to God and their weapon . 
 now be the time come of the flood , be about two of the clock in the afternoon , when our admiral set forward , and enter the harbour with the small galley , and all the rest of the boat follow he , the Hollander that ride in the mouth of the harbour , nothing impeach he : but now the fort begin to play with their ordinance upon the galley and the boat ; and one of their shot take away a great piece of our ensign out of the galley . but our sail be set , it be no time for we to make any stay , but with all the force we can we run the galley upon the shore right under the fort , within a coit cast of it , with such violence , that we break she back ; and she sink present : for there where we land , go a breach xi 49 penny 
 of the sea , which present cast she away . the boat come after do the like . at our arrival , those in the fort have lade all their ordinance , be seven piece of brass , to discharge they upon we at our land ; which indeed they do : for our admiral leap into the water , all the rest follow he , off come these piece of ordinance : but almighty God be praise , they in the fort , with fear to see we land in their face , have pike their ordinance so steep downward with their mouth , that they shoot all their shot in the sand , although , as i say before , it be not above a coit cast at the most between the place we land and the face of the fort : so that they only shoot off one of our man arm , without do any moor hurt ; which be to we a great blessing of God : for if those ordinance have be well level , a great number of we have lose our life at that instant . our admiral see this , cry out , encourage his man , upon they , upon they ; all ( by God help ) be we : and they therewith run to the fort with all violence . those four ensign of man that be set to defend our land , see this resolution , begin to go back , and retire into certain bush that be by the same fort ; and be follow , flee through a certain oaze which be dry , be then but the fin of the beginning of the tide : and so abandon the fort , 
 Fernambuck and leave it with their ordinance to we . this day of 
 take . our be ; va ] ] be their Good-friday , when by custom 
 they usual whip themselves : but God send we now 
 for a general scourge to they all , whereby that labour among they may be well spare . the fort be take with all their ordinance , the admiral wave to the ship , will they to weigh and come in ; which they do with all speed , himself take order in leave certain man in keep the say fort , and place the ordinance towards the high town , from whence he suspect the great danger ; and put his man in order , march towards the low town , which be about some fourteen score from the fort : in which town 
 lie all their merchandise and other good . approach to the town , he enter the same , the people embarking themselves in caravel and boat , with all the expedition they can . the base town , of above a hundred house , be thus take , we find in it great store of merchandize of all sort : as brasil-wood , sugar , calico-cloth , pepper , cynamon , clove , maze , nutmeg , with diverse other good thing , to the great comfort of we all . the admiral go up and down the town , and place at the south end of the same captain Venner and his company , himself and his company in the midst of the town , and captain Barker and captain Addy at the other end of the town , give great charge , that no man upon pain of great punishment and loss of his share , shall break up or enter into any warehouse , without order and direction from the admiral . and this commandment be as well keep as ever any be keep , where so great spoil and booty be find : for it be not know in all the time of our be there , that any disorder be commit , or any lodge or warehouse break open , or any spoil be make , or pillage of any thing ; which be a note much to be observe in such a action : for common mariner and soldier be much give to pillage and spoil , make great account of the same then of their share . 
 order be put in all thing , we keep a very sure watch this first night , and the morning be come , our admiral and captain Venner , with the rest of the captain , go about the town , and give order for the fortify of it with all expedition : so that within two day it be surround with post and plank , all that part of the town next the main land , at least nine foot high ; for ( God be thank ) we find provision in the town , sufficient store for it . now it be to be understand , that this town be environ on the one part by the sea , and on the backside by a river that run behind it ; so that to come to it by land , you must enter it by a small narrow passage not above 
 forty pace over at a high water . at this passage we build a fort , and plant in it five piece of ordinance , which we take out of the first fort we win at our come into the harbour . now we have the town in possession , our admiral send for the Hollander by his chyrurgian , which have be bring up in that country , a man know their condition , and sober and discreet of his own carriage . at his first come aboard of they , they seem to stand upon their own guard and defence , for they be three great and strong ship : but he use himself so , that they at the last will he to come into the great of their ship , which be above 450 ton . than he declare to they our intent of come thither , and that they shall be there as sure from any show of violence or injury offer they , as if they be in their own house , and if they shall think so good , his admiral will fraught they for England , if they will be content with fraught reasonable , and as they shall agree , and it shall be at their own choice whether to go or not , he will not force they , unless it be to their benefit and good like . although this people be somewhat stubborn at the first , as that nation be in these cause , yet be satisfy with good word and good deal they come aland , and after conference have with the admiral , they be so satisfy , that they go through with a fraught : and then we join with they , and they with we , and they serve we as true and as faithful as our own people do , both at watch and ward , by sea and all other service . within two day after our come in , about midnight , a great number of Portugal and Indians with they , come down upon we with a very great cry and noise ; but God be thank , we be ready for they : for our admiral suppose some such assault , have provide all our musket with hailshot , which do so gall both the Indians and the Portugal , that they make they present retreat . and this be to be note , that there 
 1595-was both the horse and his rider slay both with one of these shot . our man follow they some five or six score , but no further . we lose in this conflict but only one man , but have diverse hurt . what be lose of their part , we can not tell , for they have before day , after our retreat , carry away all their dead . 
 within three or four day after our come in appear before the harbour 3 ship and 2 pinnace , the pinnace be somewhat near , descry our flag , and one of they come in , which be a french pinnace , declare all the rest to be french bottom ; which our admiral will shall come in : and so they do . Theise be Frenchmen of war , and come thither for purchase . the captain come aland , and be welcome ; among who be one captain John Noyer of diepe , that the year before have take in our admiral at the hand of Mona in the west Indies , where his ship be cast away , come out of the east Indies . to this man our admiral offer great kindness , and perform it , and be not ungrateful for his former benefit show unto he . this captain desire of our admiral to bestow upon he his ship lade of fernambuc-wood , which fie grant he , and also his pinnace , and more , give he a caravel of about 50 tun , and bid he lade she with wood also ; which with other benefit he grateful receive . to the other two captain he grant their lading of wood , the one captain be of diepe , the other of rochel . the captain of diepe confess that he meet Abraham Cocke Abraham certain month before , and be distress for want of Goeke g / nng water , give he some , and go with he to a water ojpiate , meet place where he have water enough , and so depart from mthall he , say that his man be very weak . the come in of these ship do much strengthen we ; 
 for our admiral appoint both these french and the Fleming to keep watch upon the river by night with their boat , every boat have in her 12 man at the least , and the boat well provide . this be for fear 
 of fire ship or bark to come down , which our admiral have great care unto , and cause our ship to ride by cable and haulser , at all advantage to shun they , if by that mean they shall attempt to put we out of the harbour ; give commandment to we that watch in the town , that what fire soever we shall espy or see , not one man to start from his watch or quarter , unless we be by himself command to the contrary . now this order put in all thing , and have view all the good in the town , and think our self sufficient fortify , we begin to unlade our ship , which come as full lade in as they go forth , but not with so good merchandise . and this order be take about the unlade of they , and also the lade of good out of the town : our man be divide into half , and the one half wrought one day , and the other half the other day ; always those that wrought not keep the watch with their furniture in their hand and about they , and none step far off or wander from his colour , and those that wrought have all their weapon in good order set and place by they , so that at a instant every one know where to go to his furniture : and this be very careful look unto . 
 the three day after our come in , come down from the high town , which may be about four mile off upon a hill , three or four of the principali gentleman of the country , and say that from the bishop , themselves , and the rest , they will have some conference with our admiral . this news be bring to the admiral , he hang down his head for a small season ; and when he have muse a while , he answer , i must go aboard of the Fleming upon business that import i , and therefore let they stay if they will : and so he go and sit there with the Fleming from nine of the clock till two at the afternoon . in this space diverse messenger go to the admiral , to come away , for these gentleman stay . to who he give 54 
 this answer : be they not go yet ? and about two of the clock he come aland , and then they tell he they be depart . many of the better sort of our man marvel , and think much , because he will not vouchsafe to come and have conference with such man of account as they seem to be . but the admiral make they this answer , sir , i have be bring up among this people , i have live among they as a gentleman , serve with they as a soldier , and live among they as a merchant , so that i shall have some understanding of their demeanour and nature ; and i know when they can prevail with the sword by force , than they deal with their deceivable tongue ; for faith and truth they have none , neither will use any , unless it be to their own advantage . and this i give you warning , that if you give they parley , they will betray we ; and for my part , of all nation in the world , it will grieve i most to be overtake by this nation and the Spaniard : and i be glad it be my fortune to pay they with one of their own fetch , for i warrant you they understand i better than you think they do . and with this i pray you be satisfy ; i hope it be for all our good : for what shall we gain by parley , when ( by the help of God ) we have get already that we come for , shall we venture that we have get with our sword , to see if they can take it from we by word and policy ? there be no wisdom in so do . you know what it have cost we , and how many man lie wound that be not yet hole of this other night hurt : and therefore from henceforth i give this commission , that if any be take , he be send away with this order , although he come as a friend , that if either he or any other approach we from henceforth , he shall|be hang out of hand : and other course then this i will not take with they . which course be follow , for within 3 or 4 day after it be perform by two take in the night : and after that we be never trouble with 
 spy ; and although diverse slave come run from their man to we , by which we understand much of their work and pretence , yet the admiral will entertain few of they . 
 in this mean time that we begin to work , the Portugal with the country people be not idle , for see we so busy , about six night after our come in , they privy in the night cast up a trench in the 
 sand about a sacar shoot from our ship , mind 
 there to plant ordinance , which will have offend our ship great ; and they will not have be able 
 to have ride there to take in their lade , which now 
 begin to go aboard of they . the admiral hear - ing this , about 3 of the clock in ; then after noon marshal our man , and he and all the rest of the captain march towards they . the Portugal and Indians perceive our come , begin to withdraw themselves within the trench , mean ( as it shall appear ) to fight it out there : but we make no stand , neither do it behove we , but present approach the trench with our musket and pike , afore their trench be thorough finish : so that by god help we enter they . and the Portugal and Indians leave the place , and leave unto we 4 good piece of brass ordinance , with powder and shot and diverse other necessary , and among the rest 5 small cart of that country , which to we be more worth than all the rest we take , for the lade of our good from the town to the water side : for without they we can not have tell what to have do , much of our good being so heavy , that without cart , we be not able to weyld they : all these thing we bring away and destroy all those platform that they have make , and then we have rest with they for certain day , in which we go forward , divide our merchandise with captain Venner accord to our consort , and go daily lade they aboard , every ship company accord as their turn fall out , but only the three dutch ship : for the good be put into their 
 boat their own company jade themselves . and this far good chance or blessing of God we have to help we , that assoon as we have take our cart , the next morning come in a ship with some 60 negro , io PortugaU woman , and 40 Portugal : the woman and the negro we turn out of the town , but the Portugal our admiral keep to draw the cart when they be lade , which to we be a very great ease . for the country be very hot and ill for our nation to take any great travel in . 
 in this town there be no fresh water to be have , and therefore we be every 5 or 6 day compel to pass over the river into the main land to get fresh water , which after the first or second time the Portugal keep and will have defend our water , so that we be drive to water of force , and at several time some of our man be hurt , and only two or three slay , and with this danger we be force to get our water . 
 and as they molest we in our water , so they sleep not in other devise , but put in practice to burn our ship or remove they out of the harbour . for within some 20 day after our come in , they have prepare 5 caravel and fill they with such thing as will best take fire and burn : these they bring within a mile or little moor of our ship , and there set they on fire , for near they can not well come because of our watch of boat , for as be above say , the admiral have always 6 boat that keep watch above half a mile from the ship for fear of such exploit as these , which be the cause they can not fire they so near the ship as they will have do . but these fire caravel have the tide with they , and also the little wind that blow be in their favour ; which cause they to come down the stream the fast : which our boat perceive make to they with as much expedition as convenient they can , but the tide and wind both serve they , they approach towards the ship with great expedition . our man in the town begin to be in some fear of they , yet no man move or 
 57 
 ajx 
 1595 - 
 start from his quarter more then if there have be nothing to do . also the master and such as be aboard , be somewhat amaze to see 5 so great fire to be come down among their ship , but they prepare for to clear they of it , as well as they can , be provide afore hand and judge that some such stratagem will be there use , the river be very fit therefore . but ( God be thank ) who be always with we and our best defence in this voyage ; by who assistance we perform this so great a attempt with so small force . our company in the boat so play the man when they see the fire come near our ship , that cast grapnel with iron chain on they , as every boat have one for that purpose , some they tow aground , and some they bring to a bitter or anchor , where they ride till all their force be burn out , and so we be deliver by God help from this fearful danger . within some 6 night after this , which may be about the 26 day after our come in and abode there , about 11 of the clock at night , come drive down other 3 great raft burn with the huge fire that i have see . Theise be exceed dangerous , for when our man approach they think to clap their grapnel upon they , as they have do upon the caravel the night before , they be prevent : for there stook out of the raft many pole which keep they from the body of the raft , that they can not come to throw their grapnel into they : and yet they have this inconvenience worse than all the rest which most trouble we . there stook out among the pole certain hollow trunk fill with such provision of firework that they cease not still ( as the fire come down to those trunk to set they on fire ) to spout out such sparkle , that our boat have powder in they for our man use , dare not for fear of tire themselves with their own powder come near those sparkle of the raft , but see they to drive near and near our ship , they wet certain clothes and lay upon their flask and bandeler and so venture upon they , and with 58 
 their grapnel take hold of they , and so tow they on ground , where they stook fast and be not burn out the next day in the morning . diverse log and timber come drive along by our ship , and burn , but with our boat we easy defend they . and thus ( God be praise ) we escape the second fire . a three fire be prepare , as a negro give we to understand , but this we prevent by our departure . for this three fire be very great preparation ; and we be credible inform of certainty , that this fire shall be such as we shall never be able to prevent , and assure these fire be dangerous thing and not to be prevent upon the sudden , unless it be afore prepare for and foresee . for when it come upon the sudden and unlooked for , and unprovide for , it bring man into a great amazement and at their wit end . and therefore let all man ride in river in their enemy country be sure to look to be provide before hand , for against fire there be no resistance without preparation . 
 also it be a practice in these hot country , where there be such expert swimmer , to cut the cable of ship : and one night it be practise to cut the admiral cable , and yet the boat ride by the cable with two man in she to watch all the night , and the bwoy only be cut , but not the cable : but after that night , see then our good watch , they never after attempt it . 
 while all these thing pass , our ship ( God be thank ) through the industry of our governor , and diligent labour of our man , begin to be whole lade , and all the best merchandise convey aboard our ship , so that our admiral mean to depart that night , which be the 31 day after our entrance , or else on the next day at the far , and so warn be give to all man to make themselves ready . our admiral be aboard his ship you same morning , espy in the sand right against the place where the ship ride , that there be a small bank of sand new cast up , under which he perceive now and then some people to be : present he take his 
 59 
 A.D. 
 I595 « 
 boat and go to the town and call all the captain together , declare that the enemy be about some pretence right against the ship , consult whether it be best to sally out and see what they be do , or depart that evening accord to the former determination . the admiral be of opinion to depart that night , say it be but folly to seek war since we have no need to do it : other affirm , it be good to see what they do , lest the wind may be contrary and the ship not get out , and so our enemy may build upon we to our great disadvantage . well , say the admiral , the matter be not great , for there can be no danger in this sally , for where they work it be within falkonshot of the ship , and if any power shall come against you , the ship may play upon they with 40 piece of ordinance at the least , so that a bird can pass there but she must be slay . i be somewhat unwilling you shall go , for i have not be well these two day , and i be not strong to march upon those heavy sand : they answer all at once , you shall not need to trouble your self for this service , for you see it be nothing and of no danger , be so near the ship , doubt you not we will accomplish this service well enough , and return again within this hour . the admiral answer : the danger can be great , but yet you shall go out strong for fear of the worst . and so the admiral marshal they 275 man French and english , which be under the conduct of Edmund Barker , captain Barker of Plymouth , vice-admiral to captain Venner , captain Addy , and the three french captain all go out together , and they be to march upon a narrow piece of ground to the place whether they be send unto : in the brode part betwixt the sea and the water on the other side , it be not above a stone cast , for it be a bank of sand lie between the river and the sea , so they need not to fear any come on their back or on their side , and before they can not man come , but he must pass by all the ship which no company of man be able to do without present death . 
 the admiral command they at their departure to go no further than the place he send they to , and so he himself go aboard the ship and make ready all the ordinance for fear of the worst , not know what may ensue , although he see no danger may follow . thus we march quiet till we come to the place we be send unto , be right over against the ship : out of which place come some dozen shot , which see we come , discharge and run their way with such as be work within the say platform . so that we come into it and perceive they have begin to lay plank to plant ordinance upon . our admiral command , if there be any such thing , to burn the plank and return in again , which we may have do without hurt of any man finger : but our leader be not content to have perform the service commit they in charge , but will needs express and against their order march on further to fight with certain ensign almost a mile off - , clean out of the reach of the ordinance of all our ship , and where lie the strength of the whole country . when our man begin to draw near those ensign of man , the ensign seem to retire with great speed , which our man follow with such great haste that some outrunning other some , our order be break , and those ensign retire themselves into the force of the whole country , so that our foremost man be in the midst of their enemy year they be aware , which be slay year the rest can come to succour they . the enemy encourage by this , come also upon the rest , which present begin to retire , and the enemy follow they till they come within the reach of the ordinance of our ship , where they be beat off and leave their pursuit . in this conflict be slay captain Barker captain of the Salomon , captain Cotton the admiral lieutenant , captain John Noyer a french captain of diepe , and another french captain of rochel , with m. John Barker and other to the number 
 of 35 : for these be the foremost and hot in the pursuit of the ensign aforesaid , and by their forwardness come all to perish . at our return into the town the admiral come to we much bewail the death of so many good man as be lose , wonder what we mean to pass the express order that be give we . with this loss our man be much daunt , but our admiral begin again to encourage they , declare that the fortune of the war be sometime to win and sometime to loose . and therewithal ! he wish every man to prepare and make himself ready : for that night ( God will ) he will depart . for all our ship be ready and lade , and he will not stay any further fortune . the evening be come , the ship begin to weigh and go forth of the harbour , and God be thank of his goodness towards we who send we a fair wind to go forth withal , so that by two of the clock in the night we be all forth in safety . the enemy perceive our depart , plant a piece or two of ordinance , and shoot at we in the night , but do we no harm . we be at our come forth 15 sail , that be , 3 sail of Hollander , the one of 450 ton , the other of 350 ton , and the three of 300 ton , four sail of french and one ship which the admiral give the french captain , 3 sail of captain venner fleet of Plymouth , and 4 sail of our admiral fleet , all these be lade with marchan dize , and that of good worth . we stay in this harbour to pass all this business but only 31 day , and in this time we be occupy with skirmish and attempt of the enemy 11. time ; in all which skirmish we have the better , only this last except . to God be the honour and praise of all , etc the whole fleet be out in safety , the next day in the morning the admiral give order to the whole Peranjeu 40. fleet to sail towards peranjew a harbour lie some 40 league to the northward of Fernambucke , and there Fernambuck . to take in fresh water and to refresh themselves : and 62 
 to make provision for refresh , our admiral have send thither some 6 day before two french man in a small pinnace , which Frenchmen he have provide from diepe before his come out of England for that purpose . for both these two speak the indian language very perfect : for at this port of peranjew and a other call Potaju some 6 league to the northward the Frenchman have have trade for brasil-wood , and have lade from thence by the indian mean , who have fetch it for they some 20 league into the country upon their back , 3 or 4 ship every year . thus we all sail towards peranjew , at which place we arrive in the night , so that we be force to lie off and on with a stiff gale of wind , in which we lose the most part of our fleet , and they not know this coast put off to the sea , and so go direct for England . our admiral and some 4 sail more with he put into the harbour of peranjew , and there water and refresh himself very well , with hen , cony , hare and potatos , with other thing , which the two Frenchman have partly provide before his come : this be a very good harbour where Peranjeu a ship may ride and refresh very well . but , as i be give to understand since our come from thence , ’ the Portugal have attempt the place and do inhabit it , and have put the french from their accustom trade . here have water and refresh our self , we put to the sea , ply after the rest of our fleet which be go before , which we never hear of till our arrival in England at the down in the month of July , where we understand the rest of our consort to be pass up for London , captain Venner and his fleet to be at Plymouth , and the french ship to be safe arrive at diepe , which to we be very great comfort . at our set sail from the down , accord as the custom be , find the queen ship there , we salute they with certain ordinance . the gunner be careless , as they be many time of their powder , 
 in discharge certain piece in you gunner room , set a barrel of powder on fire , which take fire in you gunner room , blow up the admiral caben , slay the gunner with 2 other outright , and hurt 20 more , of which 4 or 5 die . this powder make such a smoke in the ship with the fire that burn in the gunner room among all the fire work , that no man at the first wit what to do : but recall back their fear , they begin to cast water into the gunner room in such abundance ( for the queen ship now and also the other ship that be in our company come present to our help ) that ( God be praise ) we put out the fire and save all , and no great harm be do to the good . by this may be see that there be no sure safety of thing in this world . for now we make account to be out of all danger , where behold a great come upon we , than we suffer all the whole voyage . but the almighty be praise for ever , which deliver we out of this and many other in this voyage . our fire be well put out , and we take in fresh man ( God be praise ) we come to black-wall in safety . 
 the king of Spain resolution to proceed in the discovery in conquest of Rio Grande . 
 . 