a speciali letter write from Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho the governor of Parajua in the most northern part of Brasil , 1597 , to fillip the second king of Spain , answer his desire touch the conquest of Rio Grande , with the relation of the besiege of the castle of Cabodelo by the Frenchman , and of the discovery of a rich silver mine and diverse other important matter . 
 receive your majesty letter bear date the nine of November 1596. whereby i understand that your majesty do determine to proceed in 
 the discovery and conquest of Rio Grande , accord to the relation which be send your majesty by don Francisco de Sousa , governor general of this realm of Brasilia : 
 together with a copy of a letter , which your majesty send unto we , bear date the two and twenty of march 1596. Moreover i receive another letter from your majesty bear date the 15 of march 1597. both which letter be to one effect . it may please your majesty to understand that there be diverse gentleman in these country of as good ability as my self , which seek to live at home only for their ease and pleasure , and be not wont to hazard nor venture their body , life , and good so often time in your majesty service as i have do and common do ; and can keep their good and riches , and not spend nor waste they as i have do , and daily do so wilful : yet nevertheless be spend in your majesty service , i be very glad thereof . for i and they be always ready at your majesty commandment . 
 and as concern your majesty commandment in command i that i shall put to my help hand in the conquest of Rio Grande : although this captainship of Parajua and country where i do thecaptaine-governe do want ability for that purpose , yet never - °f thelesse your majesty shall always find i ready to s^^h-tn do your majesty the best service i can : for it be six degr . 45 very well know how forward i have be always min. of and be in this conquest , and still do put to my s°u&erly lati-helping hand , as pardy your majesty do under - u e ' stand by a letter which i write to your majesty by my son , bear date the 19 of march 1596 wherein your majesty may understand what good service i have already do therein , and always will be ready to my power to do the like in further of the say enterprise . 
 it may please your majesty to understand that the three of July there be bring unto i a Frenchman a prisoner , who present himself unto i . and i examine of he , he tell i that he come run away from certain french ship man xi 65 e 
 of war , which come upon this coast : and he tell i that he have serve your majesty in the war of France . likewise he tell i that he leave i seven great ship Frenchmen of war ride at a anchor in Rio Grande , and that there be 13 french ship of war more , which have give battery to the the castle of castle of Cabodelo , and land 3 50 soldier all in 'u^b the w^xte armour > and the battery continue from Friday french . until the Monday follow both by sea and land , and great store of Frenchmen be slay , and two captain of the french . on our side the captain of the castle be slay , and other two Portugal » 
 hurt : other harm they have none . there be but twenty Portugal in the castle , and five piece of 
 ordinance . they mean to have keep the castle , and to have trade with the indian people . So see 
 they can not take the castle , they hoist sail , 
 and go from thence to Rio Grande : and be altogether they be in number 20 sail at a anchor in Rio Grande . and some of they determine after they be new trim and dress , and have take in fresh victual , and stay there until easter , than to depart from thence to the Honduras , and so to burn and spoil some town thereabouts . 
 i certify Manuel Mascarenhas of these information , by my letter , request he to send i with all expedi-the garrison cion those soldier which be in garrison in fernambuck of femam - to ayje i > and to defend this captainship from the ’ enemy . but the friar of the covent will not consent thereunto , nor suffer they to be send unto i . so i be force to make shift with those soldier only which i have in my government and take they with i , and march to the place where the enemy be entrench , and upon Whitsunday in the evening about the country three of the clock , have in my company a negro of ofpetig^ar country of Petiguar , which be our guide , he against the bring we where the enemy camp be ; and present Portugal . i do assault they , and slay great store of they , burn 66 
 t597-the village and country of those rebel , which do join with the Frenchman , and take many of they prisoner . 
 so they tell i that there be ten great french ship of war which be at a anchor in Rio Grande . 
 likewise i be inform , that there be a Frenchman call Daurmigas , which have discover and find great store of silver in a place call copaoba . the a rich silver 
 silver have be try and melt , it be very good and f : and at fine silver , and there be great quantity . the man which tell i of this have be in the i , and dayesjourney 
 have see it try and melt . and 1 have be my ofParajua . 
 self once in the place : it be but 6 day journey t111-717-1 
 from this captainship . 
 furthermore this Frenchman tell i that one Monsieur Mifa a french captain , and a kinsman of the governor and vice-admiral of diepe in Normandy , have one of his arm strike off at the siege of the castle of Cabodelo ; who be depart from Rio Grande , with determination to come back hither again the next year in the month of Januarie follow , and to inhabit in this country of Paraiba , which be 20 league from Fernambuck , because of the great store of silver , which they have already find here . 
 moreover i be inform that a noble man of France call the earl of Villa Dorca do intend to come upon this coast with a great fleet from rochel . it be good that your majesty will send into France to know the certainty thereof . 
 the Frenchman likewise tell i that all the cannibal all the cani-of Petiguar have join themselves in company with ball rfpett-certaine Frenchmen , which be cast away in two with Jt^ ship upon this coast . the one of these ship which Frenchmen be cast away be one rifole , and the other ship against they be this man . and those Frenchmen which come portusal - 
 upon this coast do join themselves with those cannibal which do rebel , and do divide themselves into two squadron . so i send present to Manuel 
 french ship lade with great store oj silver oar . 
 mascarenhas that he shall send i aid and munition . but he send i word again , that he have none to spare , and that he do purpose with all speed to go himself to Rio Grande ; and that he be not able to furnish himself so well as he can wish , nor to bring his soldier into the field , for lack of shot , powder , and other munition , which he do want . 
 hereupon once more the 29 of July i with my soldier march to the enemy camp , and there join battle with the indian rebel , which be join with the Frenchman that be their leader , i do set upon they , and slay great store of they , and take fourteen of they prisoner . they do report the very same news , which the other Frenchmen do tell i as touch the ship which be in the harbour of Rio Grande ; and how their pretence be to have come and have take we , and spoil the country . 
 but now be put to flight and have receive the overthrow , they can get no victual to victuali their ship : which have be the cause that they be mighty hinder in their intent , and dare not come any more to attempt we . and the Indians be so dismay , that in haste they will have no more help nor aid of the Frenchman . so by these mean of necessity the Indians must submit themselves unto we , consider they be quite spoil and overthrow for a long time . likewise they have inform i touch the silver mine which be find , that it be most true . for those french ship which be in Rio Grande have lade great store of the oar . wherefore i certify Manuel de Mascarenhas of the frenchmens news , and how every thing do stand ; wish he to make ready four ship and three hundred soldier , and so to take the harbour of Rio Grande , be now clear and void of the enemy : and to search out the situation of the place , and where be best to fortify and to build some fort for the defence of 
 this river , where need shall require . hereunto Mascarenhas send i word , that when he go himself , and find it true which have be report touch the silver mine , that than he will send both man and ship . therefore your majesty must give order , that the rest of the governor shall aid and assist i in these war : otherwise of my self i be not able to do more than i have already do in defend of this country against our enemy which be many . 
 it may please your majesty to be advertise , that from time to time i have write unto don Francisco de Sousa governor general of this realm , who be in Baia , as concern these Frenchmen of war : but he will not answer i to any purpose , because i do write unto he for such thing as i do want , which be shoot , powder , man , and munition requisite for your majesty service and safeguard of this captainship . for here be neither shot , powder , nor any thing else to defend we from our enemy ; nor any that will put to their help hand for the defence of this country , and the service of your majesty . and therefore it be needful that your majesty shall commit the charge and government into the hand of Diego Sierva , with express charge that all the captain and commander upon pain of death obey he and be ready at all time to aid and assist he in your service . otherwise this country can be keep and maintain , have so great war continual as we have , and be trouble withal . for this Diego Sierva be a very good soldier , and have good experience ; and be fit to govern this ; country . your highness be also to send he commission with express commandment to follow these war ; otherwise this country can be keep , but daily they will rebel . for here be none that will serve your majesty so just as he will do : who will have a great care in any thing which shall concern your majesty service touch the estate of this country . for the governor Sousa do 
 two fort to be build at Cabodelo . 
 the country 
 spend your majesty treasure in build his own ingenios or sugar-mill . 
 and those captain which your majesty intend to send hither must bring with they shoot , powder , and all kind of weapon , furniture , and munition for the defence and safeguard of this country , and for the conquest of Rio Grande . for there be no kind of munition in all this country to be have , if occasion shall serve . it be also good that your majesty shall send order for the build of a couple of fort or castle at Cabodelo , for they be very needful for the defence of the enemy , which daily do war against this captainship . for that man which shall govern this country , if he be no more fortunate than i have be hitherto , shall not miss one time or another , but he shall .. loose all the country . if don Francisco de Sousa have danger jday send i t^086 two hundred and fifty soldier which i to be lose . do send for , which be in garrison in the castle of 
 arrecife , which do nothing but spend your majesty victual and treasure , and have not send they to Baiha , the war where there be no need , these war of Petiguar have of etiguar . bene end long ago , and have save your majesty a great deal of charge which you have spend in follow of a new cap - this conquest of Rio Grande . i have choose one captain John de Matas Cardoso to be governor of Cabodelo , who be a very sufficient man . 
 a great con - furthermore , it may please your majesty to under-^cun6the stand > that the chief friar of this monastery of saint government of Antony have complain on i to the lord governor the indian general , and have cause great strife and debate between town . he anj i touch the government and rule of these indian town . for the friar will command and govern both the Indians and their town as well in ecclesiastical as Temporali cause , as touch the punishment of the body of such as be offender . but i have resist they in your majesty name , and have allege , that none but your majesty must rule and govern they and their country , and that the town appertain 70 
 to your majesty , and not unto the friar . but the governor have write a letter unto i , signify that he have pronounce a sentence against i in the friar behalf , which be this . the king our master have send a decree and certain statute touch the good government and order to be execute and keep in those indian town : and that upon sight hereof i shall present banish all the mamaluke and white man which dwell in any of those indian town with all speed , and that none of they from hence forward shall enter into the say village , without commandment and consent of the say friar . so this sentence be present unto i by the reverend father Custodio , prior of Sant Anton of Brasil , with a further postscript of the governor import these word ; i do likewise charge and command you the governor of Parajua , that present upon sight hereof you shall restore those village and house which you have burn and destroy in the last war , and likewise the town of thetowne of S. Augustine , and that you shall build they again at and au&ustine-your own proper cost and charge : for the friar allege that these town be give they , by a decree send they from pope pius quintus , that the say friar shall govern and rule they . 
 on the other side i have pronounce another sentence against the say friar , in your majesty name , and for your majesty , allege that those town , village , and subject appertain and belong unto your majesty , and that in temporali cause i be to punish those offender , which shall rebel against your majesty : and as touch ecclesiastical cause that the vicar of this cathedral church shall rule , govern and instruct they in the christian religion . so we both have appeal unto your majesty herein , and your majesty may peruse all our write , and then determine that which shall be best and most profitable for your majesty service and enlargement of your crown . for through these broil the inhabitant of this Parajua forsake their house 
 and dwell place , and so do some of the friar , because they can be suffer to rule and govern . 
 also the Indians have complain against i , because i have burn their village in this last rebellion . wherefore if your majesty do not send some order for this country and see into these case , it will breed great dissension and rebellion among we , and we shall be ready to cut one another throat before it be long . 
 thus i think good , accord to my humble bind duty , and for the service of your majesty and quietness of this realm , to certify your majesty the truth of the whole matter ; hope in short time that your majesty will send some good order to qualify these broil : for there be great hatred and malice among we . Jesus Christ preserve and keep the royal person of your majesty with long health , as it please he . from the captainship of Parajua this present 20 of August . 1597. 
 Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho . 
 . 