the admirable and prosperous voyage of the worshipful master Thomas candish of trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire , into the south sea , and from thence round about the circumference of the whole earth , begin in the year of our lord 1586 , and finish 1588. write by master Francis pretty late of ey in Suffolk , a gentleman employ in the same action . 
 ee depart out of Plymouth on Thursday the 21. of July 1586. with 3. sail , to wit , the desire a ship of 120. ton , the content of 60 tun , and the huge gallant a bark of 40. ton : in which small fleet be 123. person of all sort with all kind of furniture and 
 victual sufficient for the space of two year , at the charge of the worshipful master Thomas candish of Trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire , be our general . 
 290 
 on Tuesday the 26. of the same month , we be 
 45. league from cape finis terrae where we meet 
 with 5. sail of biskayne come from the Grande 3. greatbis-bay in newfoundland , as we suppose , which our , 
 admiral shoot at , and fight with they 3. hour , but m of we take none of they by reason the night grow on . 
 the first of August we come in sight of Forteven - August . tura , one of the isle of the canary , about ten of the clock in the morning . 
 on Sunday be the 7. of August , we be get 
 as high as Rio del oro on the coast of Barbary . Bio deal oro . 
 on Monday the 19 we fall with cape Blanco : but cape Blanco . 
 the wind blow so much at the north , that we can not get up where the canter do use to ride and fish : therefore we lie off 6. hour west Southwest , because of the sand which lie off the cape Southwest and by dangerous south . sand 
 the 15. day of the same month we be in the height of cape Verde by estimation 50. league off " the same . 
 the 18. Sierra leona do bear east off we , be 45. league from we : and the same day the wind shift to the northwest , so that by the 20. day of the say month we be in 6. degree to the northward , from the equinoctial line . 
 the 23. we put room for Sierra leona , and the 25. 
 day we fall with the point on the south side of Sierra Sierra leona . leona , which master Brewer know very well , and go in before with the content which be viceadmiral : and we have no less than 5. fathom water when we have least , and have for 14. league in Southwest all the way run into the harbour of Sierra leona 16. 14. 
 12. 10 and 8. fathom of water . 
 the 26. of the say month we put into the harbour , and in go in we have by the southermost point when we have least 5. fathom water fair by the rock as it lie at the say point , and after we come , 2 or 3. cable length within the say rock , we never have less than 10. fathom , until we come up to the 
 291 
 ride , which be about a league from the point , borrow always on the south side until you come up to the water place , in which bay be the best road ; but you must ride far into the bay , because there run marvellous great tide in the offin , and it flow into the road next of any thing at a southeast and by east moon . 
 it be out of England to this place 930. league : which we run from the 21. of July to the 26. of this month of August . 
 on Saturday be the 27. day there come 2. Negros aboard our admiral from the shore , and make sign unto our general that there be a Portugal ship up within the harbour ; so the huge gallant be the rear-admiral go up 3. or 4. league , but for want of a pilot they seek no far : for the harbour run 3. or 4. league up more , and be of a marvellous breadth and very dangerous , as we learn afterward by a Portugal . 
 on Sunday the 28. the general send some of his company on shore , and there as they play and dance all the forenoon among the negro , to the end to have hear some good news of the Portugal ship , a Portugal towards their come aboard they espy a Portugal take . which lie hide among the bush , who we take and bring away with we then same night : and he tell we it be very dangerous go up with our boat for to seek the ship that be at the town . whereupon we go not to seek she , because we know he tell we the truth : for we bind he and make he fast , and so examine he . also he tell we that his ship be there cast away , and that there be two more of his company among the negro : the Portugal name be Emmanuel , and be by his occupation a calker , belong to the port of Portugal . 
 on Monday morning be the 29. day , our general land with 70. man or thereabouts , and go up to their town , where we burn 2. or 3. house , and take what 
 292 
 spoil we will , which be but iide , but all the people flee : and in our retire aboard in a very little plain at their town end they shoot their arrow at we out of the wood , and hurt 3. or 4. of our man ; their arrow be poison poison , but yet none of our man miscarry at that time , arrowes-thanked be God . their town be marvelous artificial descrip-builded with mud wall , and build round , with their yard pale in and keep very clean as well in their ’ street as in their house . Theise negro use good obedience to their king , as one of our man say , which be with they in pawn for the negro which come first . 
 there be in their town by estimation about one hundred house . 
 the first of September there go many of our man on shore at the water place , and do wash shirt very quiet all the day : and the second day they go again , and the negro be in ambush round about the place : and the carpenter of the admiral go into the wood to do some speciali business , espy they by good fortune . but the negro rush out upon our man so sudden , that in retire to our boat , many of they be hurt : among who one William Pickman a soldier be shoot into the thigh , who pluck the arrow out , break it , and leave the head behind ; and he tell the chirurgeon that he pluck out all the arrow , because he will not have they lance his thigh : whereupon the poison wrought so that night , that he be marvelous swell , and all his belly and privy part be as black as ink , and the next morning he die , the piece of the arrow with the poison be pluck out of his thigh . 
 the three day of the say month , diverse of our fleet go up 4 mile within the harbour with our boat , and catch great store of fish , and go on shore and take Limmons from the tree , and come aboard again , see two Bufles . 
 the 6. day we depart from Sierra leona , and go out of the harbour , and stay one tide 3. league from the 
 September . 
 many of our man hurt by Negros . 
 William Pickman die of a poison arrow . 
 this poison be the juice of a herb . 
 2 buffet . their departure from Sierra leona . 
 293 
 A.D. 1586. point of the mouth of the harbour in 6. fathom , and it flow south Southwest . on Wednesday be the 7. of the same month 
 the isle of Madrabumba inhabit by ' Negros . we depart from one of the isle of cape Verde , alias the isle of Madrabumba , which be 10. league distant from the point of Sierra leona : and about five of the clock the same night we anchor 2. mile off the hand in 6. fathom water , and land the same night , and find plantan only upon the island . the 8. day one of our boat go out and sound round about the hand , 8c they pass through a sound at the west end of the hand , where they find 5. fathom round about the hand , until they come unto the very gut of the sound , and then for a cast or two they have but two fathom , and present after , 6. fathom , and so deep and deep . and at the east end of the hand 
 a town . there be a town , where negro do use at sometime , as we perceive by their provision . there be no fresh water on all the south side , as we can perceive , but on the north side three or four very 
 fresh water . good place of fresh water : and all the whole hand be a wood , save certain little place where their house stand , which be environ round about with plantan-tree , whereof the fruit be excellent meat . this place be subject marvelous much to thunder , rain , and lightning in this month . i think the reason be , because the sun ne be so near the line equinoctial . on Saturday the ten we depart from the say hand about 3. of the clock in the afternoon , the wind be at the southwest . 
 October . cape Frio in Brasil . the last of October run west Southwest about 24. league from cape Frio in Brasile , we fall with a great mountain which have a high round knop on the top of it stand from it like a town , with two little hand from it . 
 November . S. Sebastian hand . the first of November we go in between the hand of saint Sebastian and the main land , and have our thing on shore , and set up a forge , and have our 294 
 cask on shore : our cooper make hoop , and so we remain there until the 23. day of the same month : in which time we fit our thing , build our pinnace , and fill our fresh water . and while our pinnace be in building , there come a Canoa from the river of Jenero , the river of meaning to go to saint Vincent , wherein be six naked jenero-slave of the country people , which do row the Canoa , and one Portugal . and the Portugal know Christopher hare master of the admiral , for that master hare have be at saint Vincent in the minion of London in the year 1581. And think to have John whithal the Englishman which dwell at saint Vincent come unto we , which be twenty league from this harbour with some other , thereby to have have some fresh victual , we suffer the Portugal to go with a letter unto he , who promise to return or send some answer within ten day , for that we tell he we be merchant , and will traffic with they : but we never receive answer from he any more ; and see that he come not accord to appointment , our business be dispatch we weigh anchor , and set sail from saint Sebastian on the 
 23. of November . 
 the 16. day of December we fall with the coast of America in 47. degree the land bear west from we ®ecemter-about 6. league off : from which place we run along the shore , until we come into 48. degree . it be a steep 48 degree . beach all along . 
 the 17. day of December in the afternoon we enter into a harbour , where our admiral go in first : wherefore our general name the say harbour port port desire . desire : in which harbour be a hand or two , where there be wonderful great store of seal , and another hand 
 of bird which be grey gull . Theise seal be of a seal strange wonderful great bigness , huge , and monstrous of ™ d0 ? 6 antl shape , and for the forepart of their body can be come - * ' 
 pare to any thing better than to a lion : their head , and neck , and forepart of their body be full of rough hair : their foot be in manner of a fin , and in form like 
 295 
 unto a man hand : they breed and cast every month , give their young milk , yet continual get they their rmg seal live in the sea , and live altogether upon fish : their young be very good be marvelous good meat , and be boil or roast , ‘ be hardly to be know from lamb or mutton . the old one be of such bigness and force , that it be as much as 4. man be able to do to kill one of they with great cowl-stave : and he must be beat down with strike on the head of he : for his body be of that bigness that four man can never kill he , but only on the head . for be shot through the body withan harquebus or a musket , yet he will go his way into the sea , and never fowl breed - care for it at the present . also the fowl that be in there , be very good meat , and great store of they : 
 canted* encage they have burrow in the ground like cony , for they we call these can fly . they have nothing but down upon their fowl pen - pinion : they also fish and feed in the sea for their live , and breed on shore . 
 this harbour be a very good place to trim ship in , and to bring they on ground , and grave they in : for they grave there eb and flow much water : therefore we and trim gravecl and trim all our ship there . 
 t etr s tp . the of p ) ecem^er be Christmas even , a man and a boy of the rear-admiral go some forty score from our ship into a very fair green valley at the foot of the mountain , where be a little pit or well which our man have dig and make some 2. or 3. day before to get fresh water : for there be none in all the harbour ; and this be but brackish : therefore this man and boy come thither to wash their linen : and be in wash at the say well , there be great store of Indians which be come down , and find the say man and boy in wash . Theise Indians be divide on each side i man and a of the rock , shoot at they with their arrow and hurt ne ence^ they both , but they flee present , be about fifty or negigence . threescore , though our general follow they but with 16. or 20. man . the man name which be hurt be John Garge , the boy name be lutch : the man be shoot 296 
 clean through the knee , the boy into the shoulder : either of they have very sore wound . their arrow be make of little cane , and their head be of a flint stone , set into the cane very artificial : they seidome or never see any Christians : they be as wild as ever be a buck or any other wild beast : for we follow they , and they run from we as it have be the wild thing in the world . we take the measure of one of their foot , kind °f and it be 18. inch long . their use be when any of synthem dye , to bring he or they to the cliff by the seaside , and upon the top of they they bury they , and in their grave be bury with they their bow and arrow , and all their jewel which they have in their life time , which be fine shell which they find by the sea side , which they cut and square after a artificiali manner : and all be lay under their head . the grave be make all with great stone of great length and bigness , be set all along full of the dead man dart which he use when he be live . and they colour both their dart and their grave with a red colour which they use in colour of themselves . 
 the 28 of December we depart out of the port of their depardesire , and go to a hand which lie 3. league to the southward of it ; where we trim our save ’ penguin with salt for victual all that and the next day , and depart along the coast Southwest and by south . 
 the 30. day we fall with a rock which lie about 5. league from the land , much like unto Ediestone , which lie off the sound of Plymouth , and we sound , and have 8. fathom rocky ground , within a mile thereof : the rock bear west Southwest . we go coast along south Southwest , and find great store of seal all along the coast . this rock stand in 48. degree to the southward of the line . 
 the 2. day of Januarie we fall with a very fair white January cape , which stand in 51. degree , and have 7. fathom r587-water a league off the land . 
 297 
 they enter the strait the 6. rf Januarie . 
 a Spaniard take in the strait of Magellan . 
 the bark John Thomas one of sir Francis drake consort . 
 king fillip city leave desolate in the strait of Magellan , which our general call port famine . 
 the three day of the foresay month we fall with another great white cape , which stand in 52. degree and 4 5. minute : from which cape there run a low beach about a league to the southward , and this beach reach to the open of the dangerous straight of Magellan , which be in diverse place 5. or 6. league wide , and in two several place more narrow . under this cape we anchor and lose a anchor , for it be a great storm of foul weather , and last three day very dangerous . 
 the 6. day we put in for the strait . 
 the 7. day between the mouth of the strait and the narrow place thereof , we take a Spaniard who name be Hernando , who be there with 23 Spaniard more , which be all that remain of four hundred , which be leave there three year before in these strait of Magellan , all the rest be dead with famine . and the same day we pass through the narrow of the strait , where the aforesaid Spaniard show we the hull of a small bark , which we judge to be a bark call the John Thomas . it be from the mouth of the strait unto the narrow of the strait 14. league , and the course lie west and by north . the mouth of the strait stand in 52. degree . 
 from the narrow of the strait unto Pengwin hand be 10. league , and lie west Southwest somewhat to the southward , where we anchor the 8. day , and kill and salt great store of penguin for victual . 
 the nine day we depart from Pengwin island , and run south Southwest to king fillip city which the Spaniard have build : which town or ci tie have four fort , and every fort have in it one cast piece , which piece be bury in the ground , the carriage be stand in their place unbury : we dig for they and have they all . they have contrive their city very well , and seat it in the best place of the strait for wood and water : they have build up their church by themselves : they have law very severe among them-298 
 self , for they have erect a gibbet , whereon they have do execution upon some of their company . it seem unto we that their whole live for a great space be altogether upon muscle and lympit : for there be not any thing else to be have , except some deer which come out of the mountain down to the fresh river to drink . Theise Spaniards which be there , be only come to fortify the strait , to the end that no other nation shall have passage through into the south sea save only their own : but as it appear , it be not god will so to have it . for during the God enemy to time that they be there , which be two year at they the paniards-least , they can never-have any thing to grow or in any wise prosper . and on the other side the Indians oftentimes prey upon they , until their victual grow so short , ( their store be spend which they have bring with they out of Spain , and have no mean to renew the same ) that they die like dog in their house , and in their clothes , wherein we find they still at our come , until that in the end the town be wonderful taint with the smell and the savour of the dead people , the rest which remain alive be drive to bury such thing as they have there in their town either for provision or for furniture , and so to forsake the town , and to go along the seaside , and seek their victual to preserve they from starve , take nothing with they , but every man his harquebus and his furniture that be able to carry it ( for some be not able to carry they for weakness ) and so live for the space of a year and more with root , leaf , and sometime a foul which they may kill with their piece . to conclude , they be determine to have travail towards the river of plate , only be leave alive 23. person , whereof two be woman , which be the remainder of 4. hundred . in this place we water and wooded well and quiet . our general name this 
 town port famine : it stand in 53. degree by obser - port famine vation to the southward . tn degree . 
 299 
 the 14. day we depart from this place , and run south southwest , and from thence southwest unto cape cape froward froward 5. league west Southwest , which cape be the wonderful ^8 ™ ' southermost part of all the strait , and stand in the latitude of 54. degree . from which cape we run west and by north 5. league , and put into a bay or muscle Cove . Cove on the south side , which we call muscle-cove , because there be great store of they : we rid therein 6. day , the wind be still westerly . 
 the 21. day of Januarie we depart from muscle-cove , and go northwest and by west 10. league to a very fair sandy bay on the north side , which our Elizabeth general call Elizabeth bay , and as we rid there ba > that night , one of our man dye which go in the huge gallant , who name be grey , a carpenter by his occupation , and be bury there in that bay . 
 the 22. we depart from Elizabeth bay in the afternoon , and go about 2. league from that place , where there be a fresh water river , where our general go up with the ship-boat about three mile , which river have very good and pleasant ground about it , and it be low and champion soil , and so we see none other ground else in all the strait but that be craggy rock and monstrous high hill and mountain . in this river be great store of savage which we see , and have con-^ruti^h1 ference with they : they be men-eater , and feed savage that altogether upon raw flesh , and other filthy food : which ever be people have prey upon some of the Spaniard before 
 ten . speak of . for they have get knife and piece of 
 rapier to make dart of . they use all the mean they can possible to have allure we up far into the river , of purpose to have betray we , which be espy by our general , he cause we to shoot at they with our harquebuss , whereby we kill many of they . the chanel of so we sail from this river to the channel of saint saint Jerome . Jeromej which be 2 league off . 
 from the river of saint Jerome about three or four league , we run ne west unto a cape which be on the 300 
 north side : and from that cape unto the mouth of the strait the course lie northwest and by west , and northwest . between which place and the mouth of the strait to the southward we lay in harbour until the three and twenty of February , by reason of contrary wind and most vile and filthy foul weather , with such rain and vehement stormy wind which come down from the mountain and high hill , that they hazard the best cable and anchor that we have for to hold , which if they have fail , we have be in great danger to have be cast away , or at the least famish . for during this time , which be a full month , we feed almost altogether upon muscle and limpit , and bird , or such as we can get on shore , seek every day for they , as the fowl of the air do , where they can find food , in continual rainy weather . 
 there be at every mile or two mile end a harbour on both side of the land . and there be between the river of saint Jerome and the mouth of the strait go into the south sea about 34. league by estimation . so that the length of the whole strait be about 90. league . and the say mouth of the strait stand in the same height that the entrance stand in when we pass out of the north sea , which be about 52. degree and f to the southward of the line . 
 the 24. day of February we enter into the south sea : and on the south side of the go out of the strait be a fair high cape with a low point adjoin unto it : and on the north side be 4. or 5. Hands , which lie 6. league off the main , and much break and sink ground about they : by noon the same day we have bring these hand east of we 5. league off ; the wind be southerly . 
 the first of march a storm take we at north , which night the ship lose the company of the huge gallant , be in 49. i and 45. league from the land . this storm continue 3. or 4. day , and for that time we in the huge gallant be separate from the other 2. 
 301 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 February 1587. 
 the strait of Magellan be about 90 league long . the western mouth of the strait be in 52 degree and 2 terce . theirentrance into the south sea the 24 of February . Hands in the southseacalled LasAnegadas . 
 march 1. 
 extreme dan-gerofthehugh gallant by a great leak . 
 ship , look every hour to sink , our bark be so leak , and our self so dilver and weaken with free it of water , that we sleep not in three day and three night . 
 the 15. of march in the morning the huge gallant come in between the hand of S. marry and the main , where she meet with the admiral and the content , which the lie of have rid at the hand call la Mocha 2. day , which Mocha in and stand jn the southerly latitude of 38 degree : at subject to the which place some of our man go on shore with the Spaniard . viceadmiral boat , where the Indians fight with they with their bow and arrow , and be marvelous wary of their caliver . Theise Indians be enemy to the Spaniard , and belong to a great place call Arauco , and take we for Spaniards , as afterward we learn . 
 arauco be the this place which be call Arauco be wonderful rich , rich place m a ( j fuq of gold mine , and yet can it not be subdue for glide , and at any time by the Spaniard , but they always return be not subdue with the great loss of man . for these Indians be the marvelous desperate and careless of their life to live 
 Spaniard as at their own liberty and freedom . 
 ^et ' the 15. day aforesay in the afternoon we weigh 
 saint marie anchor , and run under the west side of saint marie 
 3 i , hand , where we rid very well in 6. fathom water , and terce , which be very fair ground all that night . 
 subdue to the the 16. day our general go on shore himself with 
 Spaniard . 70. or 80. man every one with his furniture : there come down to we certain Indians with two which be the principal of the hand to welcome we on shore , think we have be Spaniards , for it be subdue by they : who bring we up to a place where the Spaniard have erect 
 a church a church with cross and altar in it . and there be 
 ™ and altar ? a^out church 2. or 3. store house , which be full 
 ’ of wheat and barley ready thresh and make up in cade of straw to the quantity of a bushel of corn in every cade . the wheat and barley be as fair , as clean , and every way as good as any we have in England . there be also the like cade full of potato root , which be 
 302 
 very good to eat , ready make up in the store house for the Spaniard against they shall come for their tribute . this hand also yield many sort of fruit , hog , and hen . Theise Indians be hold in such slavery by they , that they dare not eat a hen or a hog themselves . but the Spaniard have make they all in that hand Christians . thus we fit our self here with corn ma^e asmuch as we will have , and as many hog as we have Christians . salt to powder they withal , and great store of hen , with a number of bag of potato root , and about 500 dry dogge-fish , and guinie wheat , which be call Maiz. and have take as much as we will have , yet we leave marvelous great store behind we . our general have the two principal of the hand aboard our ship , and provide great cheer for they , and make they merry with wine : and they in the end perceive we to be no Spaniards , make sign , as near as our general can perceive , that if we will go over unto the main land 
 unto arauco , that there be much gold , make we Arauco richin sign , that we shall have great store of riches . but e-because we can not understand they , our general make some haste , and within 2. or three day we furnish our self . 
 the 18. day in the morning we depart from this place , and run all that day Northnortheast about io . league , and at night lie with a short sail off and on the coast . 
 the 19 we run in east Northeast with the land , and bear in with a place call the conception , where the concep-wee anchor under a hand , and depart the next tion‘ morning without go on land . 
 the 20. we depart from the conception , and go into a little bay which be sandy , where we see fresh water and cattle , but we stay not there . 
 the 30. day we come into the bay of Quintero , Quintero which stand in 33. degree and 50 minute . stand m 
 the say day present after we be come unto a 50 anchor in the bay , there be a neteherd or one that keep cattle which lie upon the point of the hill asleep , 
 303 
 which when he awake and have espy three ship which be come into the bay , before we can get on shore , he have catch a horse which be feed by , and ride his way as fast as ever he may : and our general with 30. shot with he go on shore . he have not be on land one hour , but there come 3. horseman with bright sword towards we so hard as they may ride , until they come within some twenty or thirty score of we , and so stay , and will come no near unto we : so our general send unto they a couple of our man with their shot , and one Fernando , which be the Spaniard that we have take up at the mouth of the strait , which be one of the 400. that be starve there . but the Spaniard will not suffer our man to come near with their shot , but make sign that one of our man shall come alone unto they : so the say Fernando the Spaniard go unto they , and our two man stand not far from they . they have great conference , and in the end Fernando come back from they , and tell our general that he have parl with they for some victual , who have promise as much as we will have . our general send he back again with another message and another shot with he : and be come near unto they , they will not suffer any more than one to approach they , whereupon our man let the Spaniard go unto they alone himself : who be some good distance from they , they stay but a theperjurleof small time together , but that the say Fernando leap a Spaniard . up behind one of they and rid away with they , for all his deep and damnable oath which he have make continual to our general and all his company never to forsake he , but to die on his side before he will be false . our general see how he be deal withal , fill water all that day with good watch , and carry it aboard : and night be come , he determine the next day to send into the country to find their town , and to have take the spoil of it , and to have fire it if they can have find it . 
 304 
 the last of march captain Havers go up into the country with 50. or 60. man with their shot and furniture with they , and we travail 7. or 8. mile into the land : and as we be march along , we espy a number of herd of cattle , of cow and bullock which be wonderful wild : we see also great store of horse , mere and colt which be very wild and unhandled : there be also great store of hare and cony , and plenty of partridge and other wild fowl . the country be very fruitful with fair fresh river all along full of wild foul of all sort . have travail so far that we can go no further for the monstrous high mountain , we rest our self at a very fair fresh river run in and alongst fair low meadow at the foot of the mountain , where every man drink of the river , and refresh themselves . have so do , we return to our ship the like way that we think their town shall be : so we travail all the day long , not see any man , but we meet with many wild dog : yet there be two hundred horseman abroad that same day by mean of the Spaniard which they have take the day before from we , who have tell they that our force , be but small , and that we be wonderful weak ; who though they do espy we that day , yet dare they not give the onset upon we . for we march along in array , and observe good order , whereby we seem a great number more than we be , until we come unto our ship that night again . 
 the next day be the first of April 1587 , our man go on shore to fill water at a pit which be a quarter of a mile from the water side : and be early hard at their business be in no readiness . in which mean while there come pour down from the hill almost 200 horseman , and before our people can return to the rock from the water place , twelve of they be cut off , part kill , and part take prisoner , the rest be rescue by our soldier xi 305 u 
 A.D. 
 I587 . 
 our man march 7 or 8 mile into their enemy land . 
 which come from the rock to meet with they , who be but fifteen of we that have any weapon on shore , yet we make the enemy retire in the end with loss of Spaniards some four and twenty of their man , after we have > latne ’ skirmish with they a hour . 
 the name of our man that be slay be these . 
 kill out of the huge gallant . 
 Thomas Lucas of London , soldier . it Richard Wheeler of London . 
 Robert pitcher of Norffolke , soldier . out of the John Langston of Glocestershire . [ admiral . 
 William Kingman of Dorsetshire , soldier . 
 William hill of Cornwall . 
 1 William byet of Weymouth . 1 kill out of 
 2 Laurence Gamesby , of Newcastle . j the vice adm . 
 1 Henry blackenal of Weymouth . 
 2 William Stevens of Plymmouth , gunner . 3 William pit of shereborne in Dorsetshire . 4 Humphrey Derrick of London . 
 after the loss of these man , we rid in the road , and water in despite of they with good watch and ward , until the five of the say month . 
 the five day we depart out of this bay of Quintero : a little hand and off from the bay there lie a little hand about a full of pen - league distant , whereon there be great store of penguin 
 and other fowl ; whereof we take to serve our turn , and sail away north and north and by west : for so lie the coast along in this place . 
 Mom ' the fifteen we come thwart of a place which be call de^es’anda Morro moreno , which stand in 23 degree % , and be a i^e . 1 a excellent good harbour : and there be a island which make it a harbour : and a ship may go in at either end of the island : here we go with our general on shore to the number of 30 man : and at our go on shore upon our land , the Indians of the place come down from the rock to meet with we , with fresh water and wood on their back . they be in marvellous awe 306 
 of the Spaniard , and very simple people , and live marvellous savage : for they bring we to their biding about two mile from the harbour , where we see their woman and lodging , which be nothing but the skin of some beast lay upon the ground : and over they in stead of house , be nothing but five or six stick lay across , which stand upon two fork with stick on the ground and a few bough lay on it . their diet be raw fish , which stink most vile . and when any of they die , they bury their bow and arrow ‘ with they , with their canoa and all that they have : for we open one of their grave , and see the order of they . their canoas or boat be marvellous artificial make of two skin mostarti-like unto bladder , and be blow full at one end with butt . quill : they have two of these bladder blow full , which be sow together and make fast with a sinew of some wild beast ; which when they be in the water swell , so that they be as tight as may be . they go to sea in these boat , and catch very much fish with they , and pay much of it for tribute unto the Spaniard : but tribute pay they use it marvellous beastly . in fish . 
 the 23 in the morning we take a small bark which bark . come out of Arica ride , which we keep and call the George : the man rorsooke it , and go away with their 7^ George . boat . our admiral pinnace follow the boat , and the huge gallant boat take the bark : our admiral pinnace can not recover the boat before it get on shore , but go along into the road of Arica , and lay aboard a aricastand great ship of a hundred ton ride in the road in right afore the town , but all the man and good be take . go out of it , only the bare ship be leave alone . they make three or four very fair shot at the pinnace as she be come in , but miss she very narrow with a minion shoot which they have in the fort . whereupon we come into the road with the admiral and the huge gallant : but the content which be viceadmiral be behind out of sight : by mean whereof , and for want of her boat to land man withal we land not : otherwise 
 307 
 if we have be together , our general with the company will resolute have land to take the town , whatsoever have come of it . the cause why the content stay behind be , that she have find about 14 league to the southward of Arica , in a place where the Spaniard gnat store of have land , a whole ship lade of botija of wine of wine find . Castillia , whereof the say content take into she as many as she can convenient carry , and come after we into the road of Arica the same day . by this time we perceive that the town have gather all their power together , and also convey all their treasure away , and bury it before we be come near the town : for they have hear of Us. now because it be very populous with the aid of one or two place up in the land , our general see there be no land without loss of many man : wherefore he give over that enterprise . while we rid in the road they shoot at we , and our ship shoot at they again for every shot two . Moreover , our pinnace go in hard almost to the shore , and fetch out another bark another bark which ride there in despite of all their fort oad t > ie though they shoot still at the pinnace , which they can 
 ‘ never hit . after these thing our general send a boat on shore with a flag of truce to know if they will redeem their great ship or no ; but they will not : for they have receive speciali commandement from the viceroy from Lima , not to buy any ship , nor to ransom any man upon pain of death . our general do this in hope to have redeem some of our man , which be take prisoner on shore by the horseman at Quintero , otherwise he will have make they no offer of parley . 
 the four the 25 ride still in the say road , we spy a sail bark take . come from the southward , and our general send out his pinnace to meet she , with all our boat ; but the town make such sign from the hill with fire a watchhouse , and token out of the watchhouse , that before our pinnace can get to they , they run the bark on shore two mile to the southward of the town ; but they 308 
 have small leisure to carry any thing with they ; but all the man ; scape , among who there be certain friar : for we see they in their friar weed as they run on shore : many horseman come from the town to rescue they , and to carry they away , otherwise we have land and take or kill they . so we go aboard the bark as she lie sink , and fetch out the pillage : but there be nothing in it of any value , and come aboard our ship again the same night : and the next morning we set the great ship on fire in the road , and sink one of the bark , and carry the other along with we , and so depart from thence , and go away northwest . 
 the 27 day we take a small bark , which come from the first saint Iago near unto Quintero , where we lose our man b^en°^ad^se first . in this bark be one George a greek , a reason - ‘ able pilot for all the coast of Chili . they be send to the city of Lima with letter of adviso of we , and of the loss of our man . there be also in the say bark one Fleming and three Spaniards : and they be all swear and receive the sacrament before they come to sea by three or four friar , that if we shall chance to meet they , they shall throw those letter over board : which ( as we be give they chase with our pinnace ) before we can fetch they up , they have accord through wen away . yet our general wrought so with they , that they do confess it : but he be fain to cause they to be torment with their thumb in a wrinch , and to continue they at several time with extreme pain . also he make the old Fleming believe that he will hang he ; and the rope be about his neck he be pull up a little from the hatch , and yet he will not confess , choose rather a good mind if to die , than he will be perjure . in the end it be confess by one of the Spaniard , whereupon we burn s ' the bark , and carry the man with we . 
 the three of May we come into a bay where be three little town , which be call Paracca , Chincha , and 
 309 
 the Hugh gallant lose company of the fleet , and meet not until the seventeenth . 
 400 bag of meal find . 
 Pisca , where some of we land and take certain house , wherein be bread , wine , fig and hen : but the sea go so high , that we can not land at the best of the town without sink of our boat , and great hazard of we all . this place stand in thirteen degree and f to the southward of the line . 
 the five of May we depart from this harbour , leave the content our viceadmiral within at a island of seal , by which mean at that time we lose she company . 
 the nine we give chase to a sail , namely , our admiral , the huge gallant , and the George which we have take before come out of the road of Arica ; the content which be our viceadmiral be still lose : but we can not fetch it . the George make after it , but lose it that night . 
 the ten day the huge gallant ( in which bark i Francis pretty be ) lose company of our admiral . 
 the eleven we which be in the huge gallant put into a bay which stand in 12 degree f , in which bay we find a river of fresh water about eight of the clock at night ; and though we be but of small force , and no more but one bark and 18 man in it , yet we go on shore to fill water ; where have fill one boat lade , while our boat be in go aboard , two or three of our company which be on shore , as they be go a little from the water place with their furniture about they , espy where there be four or five hundred bag of meal on a heap cover with a few reed . so that night we fill water and take as much meal as we think good : which fall out well for we that be then lose and stand in need of victual : and by break of day in the morning we come aboard , and there stay and ride until the afternoon . in which mean time the town see we ride there still , bring down much cattle to the sea side to have entice we to come on shore : but we see their intent , and weigh anchor and depart the twelve day . 
 310 
 the 13 day at night we put into a bay which « 9-standeth in 9 degree and where we see horseman : and that night we land , namely , m. Bruer captain , my self Francis pretty , Arthur Warford , John way join way a preacher , John Newman , Andrew wight , William preacher-gargefield , and Henry Hilliard . and we 8 only , have every man his harquebus and his furniture about he , march three quarter of a mile along the sea side , where we find a boat of five or six ton hale up dry on the shore about a cable length from the water : and with extreme labour we launch the 
 bark ; when it be on float , captain Bruer and i go in , while the rest of our company be fetch their thing : but sudden it be ready to sink : and the captain and i stand up to the knee lade out water with our target ; but it sink down fast than we be able to free it , insomuch as in the end we have much ado to save our self from drown . when we be out , we stand in great fear that our own boat wherein we come on shore be sink : for we can not where see it . howbeit the captain command they to keep it off - , for fear of the great surge that go by the shore . yet in the end we spy it , and go aboard by two and two , and be drive to wade up to the armhole 60 pace into the sea before we can get into the boat , by reason of the shoaldnesse : and then depart the fourteen day in the morning . 
 the 16 we take with the huge gallant , be but sixteen man of we in it , a great ship which come from guaianil , which be call the Lewis , and be of the burden of three hundred tun , have four and twenty man in it , wherein be pilot one Gonsalvo de Ribas , who we carry along with we , and a negro call Emmanuel . the ship be lade with nothing but timber and victual : wherefore we leave she seven league from the land very leak and ready to sink in 7 degree to the southward of the line : we sink 
 a ship of 300 ton take after half a hour fight . 
 seven degree of southerly latitude . 
 they meet their fleet again . two rich ship take . 
 one ship worth 20000 pound . 
 the bay of Paita in 5 degree 4 min. 
 a new fort in building . 
 the town of Paita take and burn . 
 her boat and take away her foresail and certain victual . 
 the 17 of may we meet with our admiral again , and all the rest of our fleet . they have take two ship , the one lade with sugar , moloss , maiz , cor-dovan-skinne , montego de Porco , many pack of pintado , many indian coat , and some marmalade , and 1000 hen : and the other ship be lade with wheat-meal , and box of marmalade . one of these ship which have the chief merchandise in it , be worth twenty thousand pound , if it have be in England or in any other place of Christendom where we may have sell it . we fill all our ship with as much as we can bestow of these good : the rest we burn and the ship also ; and set the man and woman that be not kill on shore . 
 the 20 day in the morning we come into the road of Paita , and be at a anchor , our general land with sixty or seventie man , skirmish with they of the town , and drive they all to flight to the top of the hill which be over the town , except a few slave and some other which be of the mean sort , who be command by the governor to stay below in the town , at a place which be in build for a fort , have with they a bloody ensign , be in number about one hundred man . now as we be row between the ship and the shore , our gunner shoot off a great piece out of one of the bark , and the shot fall among they , and drive they to fly from the fort as fast as they may run , who get they up upon a hill , and from thence shoot among we with their small shot . after we be land and have take the town , we run upon they , and chase they so fierce up the hill for the space of a hour that we drive they in the end away perforce , and be get up the hill , we find where they have lay all their stufle which they have bring out of the town , and have hide it there upon the mountain . we also find the 
 312 
 quantity of 25 pound weight in silver in piece of eight rial , and abundance of household stuff and storehouse full of all kind of ware : but our general will not suffer any man to carry much cloth or apparel away , because they shall not cloy themselves with burden : for he know not whether our enemy be provide with furniture accord to the number of their man : for they be five man to one of we : and we have a english mile and a half to our ship . 
 thus we come down in safety to the town , which be 
 very well bud , and marvellous clean keep in every street , with a town-house or guild hall in the midst , and have to the number of two hundred house at the least in it . we set it on fire to the ground , and good to the value of five or six thousand pound : there be also a 
 bark ride in the road which we set on fire , and fire . 
 depart , direct our course to the hand of Puna . 
 the 25 day of may we arrive at the hand of Puna , where be a very good harbour , where we find a great ship of the burden of 250 ton ride at a anchor with all her furniture , which be ready to be hale on ground : for there be a speciali good place for that purpose . we sink it , and go on shore where the lord of the hand dwell , which be by the water side , who have a sumptuous house marvellous well contrive with very many singular good room and chamber in it : and out of every chamber be frame a gallery with a stately prospect into the sea on the one side , and into the hand on the other side , with a marvellous great hall below , and a very great storehouse at the one end of the hall , which be fill with botija of pitch and bash to make cable withal : for the most part of the cable in the south sea be make upon that hand . this great cacique do make all the Indians upon the hand to work and to drudge for he : and he himself be a indian bear , but be marry to a marvellous fair woman which be a Spaniard , by reason of his pleasant habitation and of his great wealth . 
 313 
 A.D. 
 1587. 25 pound weight in silver . 
 the town of Paitahad 200 house in it . 
 a bark set on 
 the hand of Puna within 1 degree the equinoctial to the south . a great ship burn . 
 great store of cable make in Puna . 
 this spanish woman his wife be honour as a queen in the island , and never go on the ground upon her foot : but hold it too base a thing for she : but when her pleasure be to take the air , or to go abroad , she be always carry in a shadow like unto a horselit upon four man shoulder , with a veil or canopy over she for the sun or the wind , have her gentlewoman still attend about she with a great troop of the best man of the hand with she . but both she and the lord of the island with all the Indians in the town be new flee out of the island before we can get to a anchor , by reason we be becalm before we can get in , and be go over unto the main land , have carry away with they to the sum of 100000 crown , which we know by a captain of the island a indian , which be leave there with some other upon the island under he , who we have take at sea as we be come into the road , be in a balsam or canoa for a spy to see what we be . 
 the 27 our general himself with certain shot and some targeteer go over into the main unto the place where this foresay Indian captain which we have take have tell we that the cacique , which be the lord of all the island , be go unto , and have carry all his treasure with he : but at our come to the place which we go to land at , we find new arrive there four or five great balsa , which be lade with plantan , bag of meal , and many other kind of victual . our general marvel what they be and what they mean , ask the indian guide and command he to speak the truth upon his life : be then bind fast , he answer be very much abash , as well as our company be , that he neither know from whence they shall come , nor who they shall be : for there be never a man in any one of the balsa : and because he have tell our general before , that it be a easy matter to take the say cacique and all his treasure , and that there be but three or four 
 314 
 ... 15871 house stand in a desert place and no resistance , and that if he find it not so , he shall hang he . 
 again be demand to speak upon his life what he think these Balsas shall be , he answer that he can not say from whence they shall come , except it be to bring 60 soldier , which he do hear be to go to a place call Guaiaquil , which of 
 be about 6 league from the say island , where two guaiaiu^-or three of the king ship be on the stock in building , where be continual a hundred soldier in garrison who have hear of we , and have send for sixty more for fear of burn of the ship and town . 
 our general not any whit discourage either at the sight of the balsa unlooked for , or for hear of the threescore soldier not until then speak of , with a brave courage animate his company in the exploit , go present forward , be in the night in a most desert path in the wood , until such time as he come to the place ; where , as it seem , they have keep watch either at the water side , or at the house , or else at both , and be new go out of the house , have so short warn , that they leave the meat both boil and rest at the fire and be flee with their treasure with they , or else bury it where it can not be find , be also in the night . our company take hen and such thing as we think good , and come away . 
 the 29 day of May our general go in the ship - a little island boat into a little island there by , whereas the say cacique np ™ a unt0 which be the lord of Puna , have cause all the hang - ’ ing of his chamber , which be of cordovan leather all guild over , and paint very fair and rich , with all his household stuff , and all the ship tackle which be ride in the road at our come in , with great store of nail , spike of iron , and very many other thing to be convey : all which we find , and bring away what our general think requisite for the ship business . 
 3*5 
 the I|will of Puna be almost as big as the lie of wight . 
 Cotton tree . 
 a excellent orchard . 
 this hand be very pleasant for all thing requisite , and fruitful : but there be no mine of gold nor silver in it . there be at the least 200 house in the town about the caciques palace , and as many in one or two town more upon the hand , which be almost as big as the he of wight in England . there be plant on the one side of the caciques house a fair garden , with all herb grow in it , and at the low end a well of fresh water , and round about it be trees'set , whereon bombasin cotton grow after this manner : the top of the tree grow full of cod , out of which the cotton grow , and in the cotton be a seed of the bigness of a pease , and in every codde there be seven or eight of these seed : and if the cotton be not gather when it be ripe , than these seed fall from it , and spring again . 
 there be also in this garden figtree which bear continual , also pompion , melon , cucumber , radish , rosemary and thyme , with many other herb and fruit . at the other end of the house there be also another orchard , where grow orange sweet and sour , limmons , pomegranate and lymes , with diverse other fruit . 
 there be very good pasture ground in this hand ; and withal many horse , ox , bullock , sheep very fat and fair , great store of goat which be very tame , and be use continual to be milk . they have moreover abundance of pigeon , turkey , and duck of a marvellous bigness . 
 there be also a very large and great church hard by the caciques house , whither he cause all the Indians in the hand to come and hear mass : for he himself be make a Christian when he be marry to the spanish woman before speak of , and upon his conversion he cause the rest of his subject to be christen . in this church be a high altar with a crucifix , and five bell hang in the nether end thereof . we burn the church and bring the bell away . 
 316 
 by this time we have hale on ground our admiral , and have make she clean , burn her keel , pitch and tar she , and have hale she on float again . and in the mean while continual keep watch and ward in the great house both night and day . 
 the second day of June in the morning , by and by after break of day , every one of the watch be go abroad to seek to fetch in victual , some one way , some another , some for hen , some for sheep , some for goat , upon the sudden there come down upon we a hundred spanish soldier with musket and a ensign , which be land on the other side of the hand that night , and all the Indians of the hand with they , every one with weapon and their baggage after they : which be by mean of a negro , who name be Emmanuel , which flee from we at our first land there . thus be take at advantage we have the worst : for our company be not pass sixteen or twenty ; whereof they have slay one or two before they be come to the house : yet we skirmish with they a hour and a half : ’ at the last be sore overcharge with multitude , we be drive down from the hill to the water side , and there keep they play a while , until in the end Zacharie Saxie , who with his halberd have keep the way of the hill , and slay a couple of they , as he breathe himself be somewhat tire , have a honourable death and a short : for a shot strike he to the heart : who feel himself mortal wound cry to God for mercy , and fall down present dead . but soon after the enemy be drive somewhat to retire from the bank side to the green : and in the end our boat come and carry as many of our man away as can go in she , which be in hazard of sink while they hasten into it : and one of our man who name be Robert Maddock be shoot through the head with his own piece , be a snaphance , as he be haste into the boat . but four of we be left behind which the boat can not carry : to wit , my self 
 317 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 the second grave of their shift . 
 the first skirmish with the Spaniard . 
 z . acharie saxie slay honorable . 
 Robert Maddock slay with his own piece . 
 Francis pretty , Thomas Andrew , Steven gunner , and Richard rise : which have our shot ready and retire our self unto a cliff , until the boat come again , which be present after they have carry the rest 46 Spaniard aboard . there be six and forty of the enemy ‘ slaine^0 ™ s^a^ne by we , whereof they have drag some into ane ' bush , and some into old house , which we find 
 afterward . we lose twelve man in manner follow . 
 1 Zacharie Saxie , 
 2 Neales Johnson , 
 3 William Geirgifield , 
 4 Nicolas Hendie , 
 5 Henry Cooper , 
 k slay by the enemy . 
 1 Robert Maddock , kill with his piece . 
 2 Henry mawd , burn . 
 1 Edward the gunner man , 1 drown 
 2 Ambrose the musician , i ' 
 1 Walter tilliard , 
 2 Edward Smith , > take prisoner . 
 3 Henry aselye , i 
 the self same day be the second of June , we go the second on shore again with seventie man , and have a fresh skir-skirmish with mjsh with the enemy , and drive they to retire , be a t e pamar shilling . hundred Spaniards serve with musket , and two hundred Indians with bow , arrow and dart . this do , the chief set fire on the town and burn it to the ground , tbw-ntnpuna have in it to the number of three hundred house : ‘ and short after make havoc of their field , orchard and garden , and burn four great ship more which be in building on the stock . 
 the three of June the content which be our viceadmiral be hale on ground , to grave at the same place in despite of the Spaniard : and also our pinnace t , . , which the Spaniard have burn , be new trim . etPmtk e five day of June we depart out of the road 25 of May . of Puna , where we have remain eleven day , and 318 
 turn up for a place which be call Rio dolce , where we water : at which place also we sink our rear-admiral call the huge gallant for want of man , the Hugh be a bark of forty ton . arkeofo 
 the ten day of the same month we set the indian on shore , which we have take before in a balsam as we be come into the road of Puna . 
 the eleven day we depart from the say Rio Rio dolce . dolce . 
 the twelve of June we double the equinoctial line , and continue our course northward all that month . 
 the first of Julie we have sight of the coast of Nueva Espanna , be four league distant from land in the latitude of ten degree to the northward of the line . 
 the nine of Julie we take a new ship of the burden of 120 ton , wherein be one Michael Sancius , who our general take to serve his turn to water along the coast : for he be one of the best coaster in the south sea . This Michael Sancius be a Pro - Michael vensal , bear in Marseils , and be the first man that Ancius a tell we news of the great ship call the Santa arst ian ' Anna , which we afterward take come from the philippinas . 
 there be six man more in this new ship : we a great new take her sail , her rope , and firewood , to serve our burn . turn , set she on fire , and keep the man . 
 the ten we take another bark which be go the second with advice of we and our ship all along the coast , barheofadvise as Michael Sancius tell we : but all the company that 1 ' be in the bark be flee on shore . none of both these ship have any good in they . for they come both from sonsonate in the province of Guatimala ; sonsonate in the new ship , for fear we shall have take she in the road , and the bark , to carry news of we along ' the coast ; which bark also we set on fire . abarkeburnt . 
 the 26 day of July we come to a anchor at 10 fathom in the river of Copalita , where we make account the river of to water . and the same night we depart with 30 
 319 
 Aguatulco in 15 degree and 40 minute northward . 
 a barkebumt . 
 anile . 
 cacoas . 
 Aguatulco a town of 100 house burn . 
 cacao go for money in Nueva Espanna . 
 our general enter two mile into the main land with 30 man . 
 man in the pinnace , and row to Aguatulco , which be but two league from the aforesaid river ; and stand in 15 degree 40 minute to the northward of the equinoctial line . 
 the 27 in the morning by the break of day we come into the road of Aguatulco , where we find a bark of 50 ton , which be come from sonsonate lade with cacaos and anile which they have there land : and the man be all flee on shore . we land there , and burn their town , with the church and customhouse which be very fair and large : in which house be 600 bag of anile to dye cloth ; every bag whereof be worth 40 crown , and 400 bag of cacaos : every bag whereof be worth ten crown . Theise cacaos go among they for meat and money . for 150 of they be in value one rial of plate in ready payment . they be very like unto a almond , but be nothing so pleasant in taste : they eat they , and make drink of they . This the owner of the ship tell we . i find in this town before we burn it , a flasket full of box of balm . after we have spoil and burn the town , wherein there be some hundred house , the owner of the ship come down out of the hill with a flag of truce unto we , which before with the rest of all the townsman be run away at our first come ; and at length come aboard our pinnace upon captain Havers word of safe return . we carry he to the river of Copalita where our ship ride : and when he come to our general , he cause he to be set on shore in safety the same night , because he come upon the captain word . 
 the 28 day we set sail from Copalita , because the sea be so great there , that we can not fill water , and run the same night into the road of Aguatulco . 
 the 29 our general land and go on shore with thirty man two mile into the wood , where we take a mestizo , who name be Michael the Truxillo , who be customer of that town , and we find with he two chamber full of his stufie : we bring he 
 320 
 and his stuff aboard . and whereas i say he be a Mestizo , it be to be understand that a mestizo be one which have a Spaniard to his father and a indian to his mother . 
 the second day of August , we have water , and examine the say Mestizo , and set he on shore again and depart from the port of Aguatulco the same night , which stand as i say before in 15 degree and 40 minute to the northward of the line . 
 here we overslip the haven of Acapulco , from whence the ship be set forth for the philippinas . 
 the four and twenty day of August , our general with 30 of we go with the pinnace unto a haven call Puerto de Natividad , where we have intelligence by Michael Sancius that there shall be a pinnace , but before we can get thither the say pinnace be go to fish for pearl 12 league far , as we be inform by certain Indians which we find there . we take a mullato in this place , in his bed , which be send with letter of advice concern we along the coast , of Nueva Galicia , who horse we kill , take his letter , leave he behind , set fire on the house , and burn two new ship of 200 ton the piece , which be in build there on the stock , and come aboard of our ship again . 
 the six and twenty day of August , we come into the bay of saint Iago , where we water at a fresh river , along which river many plantan be grow : here be great abundance of fresh fish . here also certain of our 
 ourdeparture from Aguatulco . 
 Puerto de Natividad in 19 degree . 
 thethirdposte of advice take . 
 Puerto de 
 Natividad burn . 
 two new ship burn . 
 the river of Sant Iago . 
 company drag for pearl and catch some quantity . pearl take . 
 the second of September we depart from Sant Iago at four of the clock in the evening . this bay of Sant Iago stand in nineteen degree and eighteen minute to the northward of the line . 
 the 3 of September we arrive in a little bay a league to the westward off port de Natividad call Malacca , and a3 °f which be a very good place to ride in : and the same day Malacca . about twelve of the clock our general land with 
 xi 
 321 
 the isle of Sant Andrew . 
 i guanos good meat . 
 Massatlan in 2 3 degree , and a half . 
 thirty man or there about , and go up to a town of Indians which be two league from the road , which town be call Acatlan : there be in it about 20 or 30 house and a church , which we deface and come aboard again the same night . all the people be flee out of the town at the sight of we . 
 the four of September , we depart from the road of Malacca , and sail along the coast . 
 the 8 we come to the road of Chaccalla , in which bay there be two little house by the water side . this bay be 18 league from the cape de los Corrientes . 
 the 9 in the morning our general send up captain Havers with forty man of we before day , and Michael Sancius be our guide , we go unto a place about two league up into the country in a most villainous desert path through the wood and wilderness : and in the end we come to a place where we take three householder with their wife and child and some Indians , one carpenter which be a Spaniard , and a Portugal , we bind they all and make they to come to the sea side with we . 
 our general make their wife to fetch we plantan , lemon , and orange , pineapple and other fruit whereof they have abundance , and so let their husband depart , except Sembrano the spanish carpenter , and Diego the Portugal ; and the ten day we depart the road . 
 the twelve day we arrive at a little island call the isle of Sant Andrew , on which there be great store of foul and wood : where we dry and salt as many of the fowl as we think good : we also kill there abundance of seal , and iguanos which be a kind of serpent , with four foot , and a long sharp tail , strange to they which have not see they ; but they be very good meat . we rid here until the seventeenth day , at which time we depart . 
 the 24 day we arrive in the road of Massatlan , which stand in 23 degree just under the Tropic 322 
 of Cancer : it be a very great river within , but it be bar at the mouth : and upon the north side of the bar without , be good fresh water : but there be very evil fill of it ; because at a low water it be shall half a mile off the shore . there be great store of fresh fish in that bay : and good fruit up into the country , whereof we have some , though not without danger . 
 the seven and twenty day of September , we depart from the road of Massatlan and run to a island be ! aneia which be a league to the northward the say Massatlan , n°rth-where we trim our ship and new build our Massatlan . pinnace : and there be a little island a quarter of a league from it , on which be seal : where a spanish prisoner , who name be Domingo , be send to wash shirt with one of our man to keep he , make a escape , and swim to the main , which be a english mile distant : at which place we have see 30 or 40 Spaniard and Indians , which be horseman , and keep watch there , which come from a town call Chiametla , which be 11 league up into the country , as Michael Sancius tell we . we find upon the island where we trim our pinnace , fresh water by the assistance of God in that our great need by dig two or three foot deep in the sand , where no water nor sign of water be before to be perceive . otherwise we have go back 20 or 30 league to water : which may have be occasion that we may have miss our prey we have long wait for . but God raise one Flores a Spaniard , which be also a prisoner with we , to make a motion to dig in the sand . now our general have have experience one before of the like , command to put his motion in practice , and in dig three foot deep we found very good and fresh water . so we water our ship , and may have fill a thousand ton more , if we have will . 
 we stay in this island until the 9 day of October , at which time we depart at night for the cape of saint Lucar , which be on the west side of the point of California . 
 323 
 the escape of one Domingo , a Spaniard . 
 fresh water at 2 or 3foote deep in the sand . 
 the cape of S. the 14 of October we fall with the cape of saint Lucar , 
 ucar on the which cape be very like the needle at the isle of wight ; 
 fimia , and within the say cape be a great bay call by the 
 Aguada Spaniards Aguada Segura : into which bay fall a fair 
 se&ira . fresh river , about which many Indians use to keep : 
 we water in the river and lay off and on from the say cape of saint Lucar until the four of November , and have the wind hang still westerly . 
 the 4 of November the desire and the content , wherein be the number of Englishman 
 only live , beat up and down upon the headland California inn of California , which stand in 23 degree and f to northward , between seven and 8 of the clock in ’ the morning one of the company of our admiral which be the trumpeter of the ship go up into the top espy a sail bear in from the sea with the cape , whereupon he cry out with no small joy to himself and the whole company , a sail , a sail , with which cheerful word the master of the ship and diverse other of the company go also up into the main top , who perceive the speech to be very true give information unto our general of these happy news , who be no less glad than the cause require : whereupon he give in charge present unto the whole company to put all thing in readiness , which be perform we give they chase some 3 or 4 hour , stand with the fight our best advantage and work for the wind . in the 
 reat " Anna afternoon we get up unto they , give they the broad ^andus . nm s^e our great ordinance and a volee of small shot , and present lay the ship aboard , whereof the king of Spain be owner , which be admiral of the south sea , call the saint Anna , and think to be 700 ton in burden . now as we be ready on their ship side to enter she , be not pass 50 or 60 man at the uttermost in our ship , we perceive that the captain of the say ship have make fight fore and after , and lay their sail close on their poop , their mid ship , with their fore castle , and have not one man to be see , stand 324 
 close under their fight , with lance , javelin , rapier , and target , and a innumerable sort of great stone , which they throw overboard upon our head and into our ship so fast and be so many of they , that they put we off the ship again , with the loss of 2 of our man which be slay , and with the hurt of 4 or 5. 
 but for all this we new trim our sail , and fit the second every man his furniture , and give they a fresh encounter encounter-with our great ordinance and also with our small shot , rake they through and through , to the kill and maim of many of their man . their captain still like a valiant man with his company stand very stout unto his close fight , not yield as yet : our general the three encourage his man a fresh with the whole noise of ennunter-trumpet give they the three encounter with our great ordinance and all our small shot to the great discomfort of our enemy rake they through in diverse place , kill and spoil many of their man . they be thus discomfort and spoil , and their ship be in hazard of sink by reason of the great shot which be make , whereof some be under water , within 
 5 or 6 hour fight set out a flag of truce and the great . parl for mercy , desire our general to save their life and to take their good , and that they will present yield . our general of his goodness promise they mercy , and will they to strike their sail , and to hoist out their boat and to come aboard : which news they be full glad to hear of , and present strike their sail , hoist their boat out , and one of their chief merchant come aboard unto our general : and fall down upon his knee , offer to have kiss our general foot , and crave mercy : our general most gracious pardon both he and the rest upon promise of their true deal with he and his company concern such riches as be in the ship : and send for the captain and their pilot , who at their come use the like duty and reverence as the former do . 
 the general of his great mercy and humanity , promise 
 325 
 one hundred and two and twenty thousand pezo of gold . 
 a pezo be 8x . 
 the merchandise in the great ship . 
 the 
 Spaniard set on shore to the number of 190. 
 mutiny against the general . 
 their live and good usage . the say captain and pilot present certify the general what good they have within board , to wit , a hundred and 22 thousand pezo of gold : and the rest of the riches that the ship be lade with , be in silk , satin , damask , with musk and diverse other merchandise , and great store of all manner of victual with the choice of many conserves of all sort for to eat , and of sundry sort of very good wine . Theise thing be make know to the general by the aforesaid captain and pilot , they be command to stay aboard the desire , and on the 6 day of November follow we go into a harbour which be call by the Spaniard , Aguada Segura , or Puerto seguro . 
 here the whole company of the Spaniard , both of man and woman to the number of 190 person be set on shore : where they have a fair river of fresh water , with great store of fresh fish , foul , and wood , and also many hare and cony upon the main land . our generail also give they great store of victual , of garuansos , peason , and some wine . also they have all the sail of their ship to make they tent on shore , with licence to take such store of plank as shall be sufficient to make they a bark . than we fall to hoist in of our good , share of the treasure , and allot to every man his portion . in division whereof the eight of this month , many of the company fall into a mutiny against our general , especial those which be in the content , which nevertheless be after a sort pacify for the time . 
 on the 17 day of November , which be the day of the happy coronation of her majesty , our general command all his ordinance to be shoot off , with the small shot both in his own ship where himself go , and also in the content , which be our viceadmiral . This be do , the same night we have many firework and more ordinance discharge , to the great admiration of all the Spaniard which be there : for the most part of they have never see the like before . 
 326 
 this end , our general discharge the captain , give he a royal reward , with provision for his defence against the Indians and his company , both of sword , target , piece , shoot and powder to his great contentment : but before his departure , he take out of this great ship two young lad bear in japon , which can both wright and read their own language , the old be about 20 year old be name Christopher , the other be call Cosmus , about 17 year of age , both of very good capacity . he take also with he out of their ship , 3 boy bear in the isle of manilla , the one about 15 , the other about 13 , and the young about 9 year old . the name of the elder be Alphonso , the second Anthony de dasi , the three remains with the right honourable the countess of Essex . he also take from they , one Nicholas Roderigo a Portugal , who have not only be in canton and other part of China , but also in the island of japon be a country most rich in silver mine , and have also be in the philippinas . 
 he take also from they a Spaniard who name be Thomas the Ersola , which be a very good pilot from Acapulco and the coast of Nueva Espanna unto the island of ladrone , where the Spaniard do put in to water , sail between Acapulco and the philippinas : in which isle of ladrone , they find fresh water , plantan , and potato root : howbeit the people be very rude and heathen . the 19 day of November aforesaid , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , our general cause the king ship to be set on fire , which have to the quantity of 500 ton of good in she we see burn unto the water , and then give they a piece of ordinance and set sail joyful homeward towards England with a fair wind , which by this time be come about to Eastnortheast : and night grow near , we leave the content a stern of we , which be not as yet come out of the road . and here think she will have overtake we , we lose she 
 327 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 two boy of Japan . 
 three boy of manilla . 
 Nicolas rod-erigp , a Portugal . 
 a spanish pilot . 
 Acapulco be the haven whence they set forth to the philippinas . 
 good water at the ladrone . 
 the wind at Eastnortheast . the content whereof Steven hare be master , leave behind in the road . 
 company and never see she after . we be say ling from this haven of Aguada Segura in California unto the isle of ladrone the rest of November , and all December , and so forth until the 3 of Januarie 1588 , with a fair wind for the space 45 day : and we esteem it to be between 17 and 18 hundred league . the 3 day of January by six of the clock in the morning we have sight of one of the island of ladrone the island of call the island of Guana , stand in 13 degree Ih^I^adrma towards north , and sail with a gentle gale before in 13 degree wmde , by i or 2 of the clock in the afternoon , andtwothird . vree be come up within 2 league of the island , where commodity we meet with 60 or 70 sail of canoas full of savage , adrone^ w^° come to sea unto we ’ and bring with they 
 ‘ in their boat plantan , cocos , potato root , and fresh 
 fish , which they have catch at sea , and hold they up unto we for to truck or exchange with we ; which when we perceive , we make fast little piece of old iron upon small cord and fish line , and so vex the iron unto their canoas , and they catch hold of they and take off the iron , and in exchange of it they will make fast unto the same line either a potato root , or a bundle of plantan , which we hale in : and thus our company exchange with they until they have satisfy themselves with as much as do content they : yet we can not be rid of they . for afterward they be so thick about the ship , that it stem and break 1 or 2 of their canoas : but the man save themselves be in every canoa 4 , 6 , or 8 person all naked and excellent the colour and swimmer and diverse . they be of a tawny colour and 5people of the marvellous fat , and big ordinary of stature than the 
 isle of la - most part of our man in England , wear their hair 
 drone . marvelous long ; yet some of they have it make up 
 and tie with a knot on the crown , and some with 2 ^ knot , much like unto their image which we see they etr image . carvej jn wood , anj stand in the head of their artificial boat like unto the image of the devil . their canoas 
 eamas - be as artificial make as any that ever we have see : 
 328 
 consider they be make and contrive without any edgetool . they be not above half a yard in breadth and in length some seven or eight yard , and their head and sterne be both alike , they be make out with raft of cane and reed on the starrebordside , with mast and sail : their sail be make of mat of sedge , square or triangle wise : and they sail as well right against the wind , as before the wind : these savage follow we so long , that we can not be rid of they : until in the end our general command some half dozen harquebusses to be make ready ; and himself strike one of they and the rest shoot at they : but they be so yare and nimble , that we can not discern whether they be kill or no , because they can fall backward into the sea and prevent we by dive . 
 the 14 day of January lie at hull with our ship all the middle watch , from 12 at night until four in the morning , by the break of day we fall with a headland of the isle of the philippinas , which be call Cabo deal Spirito Santo which be of very great bigness and length , high land in the midst of it , and very low land as the cape lie east and west , trending far into the sea to the westward . this cape or island be distant from the isle of Guana , one of the ladrone , 310 league . we be in sail of this course eleven day with scant wind and some foul weather , bear no sail two or three night . this island stand in 13 degree , and be a place much people with heathen people , and all woody through the whole land : and it be short of the chief island of the philippinas call manilla about 60 league . manilla be well plant and inhabit with Spaniards to the number of six or seven hundred person : which dwell in a town unwalled , which have 3 or 4 small block house , part make of wood , and part of stone be indeed of no great strength : they have one or two small galley belong to the town . it be a very rich place of gold and many other commodity ; and they have yearly traffic from Acapulco in Nueva 
 canoas sail right against the wind . 
 the nimbleness of the people of the ladrone . 
 Cabo del Spirito Santo , one of the isle of the philippinas inn 13 degree . 
 from Guana a isle of the ladrone to Cabo deal Spirito Santo be $10 league . 
 the description of the town of manilla . 
 trade from Acapulco to manilla . 
 329 
 silver exchange weight for weight for gold . 
 the island of Capul at which our man stay 9 day . 
 one of the chief governors of the island come aboard we . 
 Espanna , and also 20 or 30 ship from China and from the Sanguelos , which bring they many sort of merchandise . the merchant of China and the Sanguelos be part moor and part heathen people . they bring great store of gold with they , which they traffic and exchange for silver , and give weight for weight . Theise Sanguelos be man of marvelous capacity in devise and make all manner of thing , especial in all handy craft and science : and every one be so expert , perfect , and skilful in his faculty , as few or no christian be able to go beyond they in that which they take in hand . for draw and embroider upon satin , silck , or lawn , either beast , foul , fish or worm , for liveliness and perfectness , both in silk , silver , gold , and pearl , they excel . also the 14 day at night we enter the strait between the island of Luzon , and the island of Camlaia . 
 the fifteen of January we fall with a island call Capul , and have betwixt the say island and another island but a narrow passage , and a marvelous rippling of a very great tide with a ledge of rock lie off the point of the island of Capul : and no danger but water enough a fair breadth off : and within the point a fair bay and a very good harbour in four fathom water hard aboard the shore within a cable length . about 10 of the clock in the morning we come to a anchor . 
 our ship be no soon come to a anchor , but present there come a canoa row aboard we , wherein be one of the chief cacique of the island whereof there be seven , who suppose that we be Spaniard , bring we potato root , which they call camotas , and green coco , in exchange whereof we give his company piece of linen to the quantity of a yard for four coco , and as much linen for a basket of potato root of a quart in quantity ; which root be very good meat , and excellent sweet either roast or boil . 
 this caciques skin be carve and cut with sundry and many strike and devise all over his body . we 330 
 candish’s circumnavigation a.d. 1588. keep he still aboard and cause he to send those man which bring he aboard back to the island to cause the rest of the principal to come aboard : who be no soon go on shore , but present the people of the island come down with their coco and potato root , and the rest of the principal likewise come aboard and bring with they hen and hog : hen and and they use the same order with we which they do with the Spaniard . for they take for every hog ( which they call balboye ) eight rial of plate , and for every hen ne or cock one rial of plate . thus we ride at anchor all that day , do nothing but buy root , coco , hen , hog , and such thing as they bring , refresh our self marvellous well . 
 the same day at night be the fifteen of January 1588 , Nicolas Roderigo the Portugal , who we take out of the great Santa Anna at the cape of California , desire , to speak with our general in secret : which when our general understand , he send for he , and ask he what he have to say unto he . the Portugal make he this answer , that although he have offend his worship heretofore , yet now he have vow his faith and true service unto he , and in respect thereof he neither can nor will conceal such treason as be in work against he and his company : and that be this . that the Spaniard which be take out of the treason of the great sant anne for a pilot , who name be the spanish Thomas de Ersola , have write a letter , and secret seal it and lock it up in his chest , mean to the copy of convey it by the inhabitant of this island to manilla , the spanish the content whereof be : that there have be two pistes letter English ship along the coast of Chili , Peru , Nueva Espanna , and Nueva Galicia , and that they have take manilla , many ship and merchandise in they , and burn which be diverse town , and spoil all that ever they can come fiun^in unto , and that they have take the king ship which come from manilla and all his treasure , with all the Timothy shot-marchandize that be therein ; and have set all the tun . 
 331 
 people on shore , take himself away perforce . therefore he will they that they shall make strong their bulwark with their two galley , and all such provision as they can possible make . he far signify , Capul adjoin - that we be ride at a island call Capul , which be at the end of the island of manilla , be but manilla . one ship with small force in it , and that the other ship , as he suppose , be go for the northwest passage , stand in 55 degree : and that if they can use any mean to surprise we be there at a anchor , they shall dispatch it : for our force be but small , and our man but weak , and that the place where we the north - road be but 50 league from they . otherwise if west passage . jet we escape within few year they must make from manilla . account to have their town besiege and sack with a army of English . this information be give , our general call for he , and charge he with these thing , which at the first he utter deny : but in the end , the matter be make manifest and know of certainty by especial trial and proof , the next morn-the Spanish ing our general will that he shall be hang : ™ °*£ansf : d which be accord perform the 16 of January . treachery . we ride for the space of nine day about this island of Capul , where we have diverse kind of fresh victual , with excellent fresh water in every bay , and great store the manner of of wood . the people of this island go almost all naked the people of anj be tawny of colour . the man wear only a a ? u ‘ stroope about their waste , of some kind of linen of 
 their own weave , which be make of plantan leave , and another stroope come from their back under their twist , which cover their privy part , and be make fast to their girdle at their navel . 
 a strange these people use a strange kind of order among they , tjun& which be this . Every man and manchild among they have a nail of tin thrust quite through the head of his privy part , be split in the low end and rivet , and on the head of the nail be as it be a crown : which be drive through their privity when 332 
 they be young , and the place grow up again , without any great pain to the child : and they take this nail out and in , as occasion serve : and for the truth thereof we our self have take one of these nail from a son of one of the king which be of the age of 10 year , who do wear the same in his privy member . 
 this custom be grant at the request of the woman of the country , who find their man to be give to the foul sin of sodomy , desire some remedy against that mischief , and obtain this before name of the magistrate . Moreover all the male be circumcise , have the foreskin of their flesh cut away . Theise people whole worship the devil , and often time have conference with he , which appear unto they in most ugly and monstrous shape . 
 on the 23 day of January , our general m. Thomas Candish cause all the principal of this island , and of a hundred island more , which he have make to pay tribute unto he ( which tribute be in hog , hen , potato and coco , ) to appear before he , and make himself and his company know unto they , that they be english man , and enemy to the Spaniard : and thereupon spread his ensign and sound up the drum , which they much marvel at : to conclude , they promise both themselves and all the island thereabouts to aid he , whensoever he shall come again to overcome the Spaniard . also our general give they , in token that we be enemy to the Spaniard , money back again for all their tribute which they have pay : which they take marvelous friendly , and row about our ship to show we pleasure marvelous swift : at the last our generail cause a saker to be shoot offj whereat they wonder , and with great contentment take their leaf of we . 
 circumcision . 
 the inhabitant of Capul with all the island adjoin , promise to aid the english against the Spaniard . 
 the next day be the twenty four of Januarie , Our^P^tnre we set sail about six of the clock in the morning , j^d of and run along the coast of the island of manilla , shape Capul . 
 333 
 mark of shallow water . 
 a Balsa be a great canoa . 
 a Spaniard of manilla take . 
 our course northwest between the isle of manilla , and the isle of masbat . 
 the 28 day in the morning about 7 of the clock , ride at a anchor betwixt 2 island , we spy a frigate under her two corpse , come out between 2 other island , which as we imagine come from manilla , sail close aboard the shore along the main island of Panama : we chase this frigate along the shore , and get very fast upon it , until in the end we come so near that it stand in to the shore close by a wind , until she be becalm and be drive to strike her sail , and bank up with her oar : whereupon we come unto a anchor with our ship , a league and a half from the place where the frigate row in ; and man our boat with half a dozen shot and as many man with sword , which do row the boat : thus we make after the frigate which have hoist sail and run into a river , which we can not find . but as we row along the shore , our boat come into very shallow water , where many wear and stick be set up in diverse place in the sea , from whence 2 or 3 canoas come forth , whereof one make somewhat near unto we , with 3 or 4 Indians in it : we call unto they , but they will not come near unto we , but row from we : who we dare not follow too far from fear of bring our self to much to the leewarde of our ship . here , as we look about we , we espy another Balsa or canoa of a great bigness which they which be in she , do set along as we do usual set a barge with long staff or pole , which be build up with great cane , and below hard by the water make to row with oar ; wherein be about 5 or 6 Indians and one Spaniard : now as we be come almost at the Balsa , we run a ground with our boat ; but one or two of our man leap overboard and free it again present , and keep thwart her head , we lay she aboard and take in to we than Spaniard , but the indian leap into the sea and dive and rise far off again from we . present upon the take of this 
 334 
 candish’s circumnavigation canoa , there show upon the sand a band of soldier march with a ensign have a red cross like the flag of England , which be about 50 or 60 Spaniard , which be late come from manilla to that town which be call Ragaun in a bark to fetch a new ship of the king , which be build in a river within the bay , and stay there but for certain iron that do serve for the rudder of the say ship , which they look for every day . 
 this band of man shoot at we from the shore with their musket , but hit none of we , and we shoot at they again : they also man a frigate and send it out after our boat to have take we , but we with sail and oar go from they : and when they perceive that they can not fetch we , but that they must come within danger of the ordinance of our ship , they stand in with the shore again and land their man , and present send their frigate about the point , but whether we know not . so we come aboard with this one Spaniard , which be neither soldier nor sailor , but one that be come among the rest from manilla , and have be in the hospital there a long time before , and be a very simple soul , and such a one as can answer to very little that he be ask , concern the state of the country . here we ride at anchor all that night , and perceive that the Spaniard have disperse their band into 2 or 3 part , and keep great watch in several steed with fire and shoot off their piece . this island have much plain ground in it in many place , and many fair and straight tree do grow upon it , fit for to make excellent good mast for all sort of ship . there be also mine of very fine gold in it which be in the custody of the Indians . and to the southward of this place , there be another very great island , which be not subdue by the Spaniard , nor any other nation . the people which inhabit it be all negro ; and the island be call the island of negro : and be almost as big as England , stand in 9 degree : the most part of it seem to 335 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 50 or 60 Spaniard show themselves . 
 a new ship of the king in building . 
 they man out a frigate after we . 
 a hospitali in manilla . 
 mine ofvery fine gild in the island of Panama . 
 the island oj Negros in < ) degree . 
 their departure from the philippinas . 
 Batochina . 
 11 or 12 small island in 3 degree 10 min. to the southward . 
 island in 4 degree southward of the dine . 
 the death of eaptaine Havers . 
 . 
 be very low land , and by all likelihood be very fruitful . 
 the 29 day of January about six of the clock in the morning we set sail , send our boat before until it be two of the clock in the afternoon , pass all this time as it be through a straight betwixt the say 2 island of Panama , and the island of negro , and about 16 league off we espy a fair open , trending southwest and by south , at which time our boat come aboard , and our general send commendation to the spanish captain which we come from the evening before by the Spaniard which we take , and will he to provide good store of gold : for he mean for to see he with his company at manilla within few year , and that he do but want a big boat to have land his man , or else he will have see he then : and so cause he to be set on shore . 
 the 8 day of February by 8 of the clock in the morning we espy a island near Gilolo , call batochina , which stand in one degree from the equinoctial line northward . 
 the 14 day of February we fall with n or 12 very small island , lie very low and flat , full of tree , and pass by some island which be sink and have the dry sand lie in the main sea . Theise island near the malucoe , stand in 3 degree and 10 min. to the southward of the line . 
 on the 17 day , one John Gameford a Cooper die , which have be sick of a old disease a long time . the 20 day we fall with certain other island which have many small island among they , stand 4 degree to the southward of the line . on the 21 day of February , be Ash-wednesday captain Havers die of a most fervent and pestilent ague , which hold he furious some 7 or 8 day , to the no small grief of our general and of all the rest of the company , who cause two falcon and one Sacre to be shoot off , with all the small shot in the ship , who after he be shroud 336 
 in a sheet and a prayer say , be heve over board with great lamentation of we all . ' Moreover , present after his death my self with diverse other in the ship fall marvelous sick , and so continue in very great pain for the space of three week or a month by reason of the extreme heat and untemperatnesse of the climate . 
 the first day of March have pass through the strait of Java minor and Java major , we come to a anchor under the southwest part of Java major : where we espy certain of the people which be fish by the sea side in a bay which be under the island . than our general take into the shipboat certain of his company , and a negro which can speak the morisco tongue , which he have take out of the great saint Anna , make towards those fisher , which have espy our boat run on shore into the wood for fear of our man : but our general cause his negro to call unto they : who no soon hear he call , but present one of they come out to the shore side and make answer . our general by the negro inquire of he for fresh water , which they find , and cause the fisher to go to the king and to certify he of a ship that be come to have traffic for victual , and for diamond , pearl , or any other rich jewel that he have : for which he shall have either gold or other merchandise in exchange . the fisher answer that we shall have all manner of victual that we will request . thus the boat come aboard again . within a while after we go about to furnish our ship thorough with wood and water . 
 about the eight of march two or three canoas come from the town unto we with egg , hen , fresh fish , orange , and lymes , and bring word we shall have have victual more plentiful , but that they be so far to be bring to we where we rid . which when our general hear he weigh anchor and stand in near for the town : and as we be under sail we meet with one of the king canoas come toward we : whereupon we shake the ship in the wind and 
 xi 337 y 
 march 1588. 
 ourarrivalat Java major . 
 the morisco or , Arabian tongiie common in Java . 
 clove , pepper , sugar , and many other commodity in Java major . 
 stay for the canoa until it come aboard of we , and stand into the bay which be hard by and come to a anchor . in this canoa be the king secretary , who have on his head a piece of die linen cloth fold up like a Turk Tuliban : he be all naked save about his waste , his breast be carve with the broad arrow upon it : he go barefooted : he have a interpretor with he , which be a Mestizo , that be , half a indian and half a Portugal , who can speak very good portugese . this secretary signify unto our general that he have bring he a hog , hen , egg , fresh fish , sugar-cane and wine : ( which wine be as strong as any aquavitae , and as clear as any rock water : ) he tell he far that he will bring victual so sufficient for he , as he and his company will request , and that within the space of four day . our general use he singular well , banquet he most royal with the choice of many and sundry conserves , wine both sweet and other , and cause his musician to make he music . this do our general tell he that he and his company be Englishman ; and that we have be at China and have have traffic there with they , and that we be come thither to discover , and purpose to go to Malaca . the people of Java tell our general that there be certain Portugal in the island which lie there as factor continual to traffic with they , to buy negro , clove , pepper , sugar , and many other commodity . this secretary of the king with his interpretor lie one night aboard our ship . the same night , because they lie aboard , in the evening at the set of the watch , our general command every man in the ship to provide his harquebus and his shot , and so with shoot off 40. or 50. small shot and one Sacre , himself set the watch with they . this be no small marveile unto these heathen people , who have not common see any ship so furnish with man and ordinance . the next morning we dismiss the secretary and his interpretor with all humanity . 
 338 
 the four day after , which be the 12. of march , accord to their appointment come the king canoas ; but the wind be somewhat scant they can not get aboard that night , but put into a bay under the island until the next day , and present after the break of day there come to the number of 9 or 10. of the king nine or in . canoas so deep lade with victual as they can swim , °fthe with two great live ox , half a score of wonderful ' great and fat hog , a number of hen which be alive , drake , goose , egg , plantan , sugar cane , sugar in plate , coco , sweet orange and sour , lymes , great store of wine and aquavitae , salt to season victual withal , and almost all manner of victual else , with diverse of the king officer which be there . among all the rest of the people in one of these canoas come two Portugal , two portu-which be of middle stature , and man of marvelous in proper personage ; they be each of they in a loose jerkin , and hose , which come down from the waste to the ankle , because of the use of the country , and partly because it be lend , and a time for do of their penance , ( for they account it as a thing of great dislike among these heathen to wear either hose or shoe on their foot : ) they have on each of they a very fair and a white lawn shirt , with fall band on the same , very decent , only their bare leg except . these Portugal be no small joy unto our general and all the rest of our company : for we have not see any Christian that be our friend of a year and a half before . our general use and entreat they singular well , with banquet and music : they tell we that they be no less glad to see we , than we to see they , and inquire of the estate of their country , and what be become of don Antonio their king , and whether he be enquiry oj living or no : for that they have not of long time bene Antony . in Portugal ! , and that the Spaniard have always bring they word that he be dead . than our general satisfy they in every demand ; assure they , that their king be alive , and in England , and have honourable 
 339 
 the wife kill themselves after their husband death . 
 a strange order . 
 allowance of our queen , and that there be war between Spain and England , and that we be come under the king of Portugal into the south sea , and have war upon the Spaniard there , and have fire , spoil and sink all the ship along the coast that we can meet withal , to the number of eighteen or twenty sail . with this report they be sufficient satisfy . 
 on the other side they declare unto we the state of the island of Java . First the plentifulness and great choice and store of victual of all sort , and of all manner of fruit as before be set down : then the great and rich merchandise which be there to be have . than they describe the property and nature of the people as follow . the name of the king of that part of the island be Raja Bolamboam , who be a man have in great majesty and fear among they . the common people may not bargain , sell , or exchange any thing with any other nation without speciali licence from their king : and if any so do , it be present death for he . the king himself be a man of great year , and have a hundred wife , his son have fifty . the custom of the country be , that whensoever the king do die , they take the body so dead and burn it and preserve the ash of he , and within five day next after , the wife of the say king so dead , accord to the custom and use of their country , every one of they go together to a place appoint , and the chief of the woman , which be near unto he in account , have a ball in her hand , and throw it from she , and to the place where the ball rest , thither they go all , and turn their face to the eastward , and every one with a dagger in their hand , ( which dagger they call a Crise , and be as sharp as a razor ) stab themselves to the heart , and with their hand all to bee-bath themselves in their own blood , and fall grovel on their face so end their day . this thing be as true as it seem to any hearer to be strange . 
 the man of themselves be very politic and subtle , and singular valiant , be naked man , in any action 340 
 they undertake , and wonderful at commandment and fear of their king . for example : if their king command they to undertake any exploit , be it never so dangerous or desperate , they dare not nor will not refuse it , though they die every man in the execution of the same . for he will cut off the head of every one of they which return alive without bring of their purpose to pass : which be such a thing among they , as it make they the most valiant people in all the southeast part of the world : for they never fear any death . for be in fight with any nation , if any of they feel himself hurt with lance or sword , he will willing run himself upon the weapon quite through his body to procure his death the more speedy , and in this desperate sort end his day , or overcome his enemy . Moreover , although the man be tawny of colour and go continual naked , yet their woman be fair of complexion and go fare woman more apparel . in Java - 
 after they have thus describe the state of the island , and the order and fashion of the people ; they tell we far , that if their king don Antonio will come don Antonio unto they , they will warrant he to have all the Malucos at commandment , beside , China , Sangles , and - tn £ast * the isle of the philippinas , and that he may be indy . assure to have all the Indians on his side that be in the country . after we have full content these Portugal , and the people of Java which bring we victual in their canoas , they take their leaf of we with promise of all good entertainment at our return , and our general give they three great piece of ordinance at their depart . thus the next day be the 16. they depart of march we set sail towards the cape of good hope , call by the Portugal Cabo de bvena esperancza on c 
 the southermost coast of Africa . 
 the rest of march and all the month of April we spend in traverse that mighty and vast sea , between the isle of Java and the main of Africa , observe the heaven , the crosier or south-pole , the other star , the 
 341 
 fowl , which be mark unto the sea man of fair weather , foul weather , approach of land or island , the wind , the tempest , the rain and thunder , with the alteration of tide and current . 
 the 10. day of may we have a storm at the west , and it blow so hard that it be as much as the ship can stir close by under the wind : and the storm continue all that day and all that night . 
 the next day be the 11. of may in the morning one of the company go into the top , and espy land bear north , and north and by west off we , and about noon we espy land to bear west off we , which as we do imagine be the cape of buena esperanza , whereof indeed we be short some 40. or 50. league : and by reason of the skantnesse of the wind we stand along to the southeast until midnight ; at which time the wind come fair , and we hale along westward . 
 the 12. and 13. day we be becalm , and the sky be very hazy and thick until the 14. day at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the sky clear , and we espy the land again which be the cape Cabo Falso , call Cabo Falso , which be short of the cape de bvena esperanza 40 or 50 league . this cape be very easy to be know . for there be right over it three very high hill stand but a small way one off another , and the high stand in the midst , and the ground be much low by the seaside . the cape of good hope bear west and by south from the say Cabo Falso . 
 the 16. day of may about 4. of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up at east a very stiff gale , which hold until it be Saturday with as much wind as ever the ship can go before : at which time by six of the clock in the morning we espy the pro-they double montorie or headland , call the cape de buena esperanza , ' bo^^ which be a reasonable high land , and at the westermost point Speranza . a ^e off the main do show two hammock , the one upon the other , and three other hammock lie further off into the sea , yet low land between and adjoin unto the sea . 
 342 
 this cape of buena esperanza be set down and accounted for two thousand league from the island of Java in the Portugal sea cart : but it be not so much almost by a hundred and fifty league , as we find by the run of our ship . we be in run of these eighteen hundred and fifty league just nine week . 
 the eight day of June by break of day we fall in sight of the island of saint Helena , seven or eight league short of it , have but a small gale of wind , or almost none at all : insomuch as we can not get into it that day , but stand off and on all that night . 
 the next day be the 9 of June have a pretty easy gale of wind we stand in with the shore , our boat be send away before to make the harbour ; and about one of the clock in the afternoon we come unto a anchor in 12. fathom water two or three cable length from the shore , in a very fair and smooth bay under the northwest side of the island . 
 this island be very high land , and lie in the main sea stand as it be in the midst of the sea between the main land of Africa , and the main of Brasilia and the coast of Guinea : and be in 15. degree and 48. minute to the southward of the equinoctial line , and be distant from the cape of buena esperanza between 5. and 6. hundred league . 
 the same day about two or three of the clock in the afternoon we go on shore , where we find a marvelous fair and pleasant valley , wherein diverse handsome building and house be set up , and especial one which be a church , which be tile and white on the outside very fair , and make with a porch , and within the church at the upper end be set a altar , whereon stand a very large table set in a frame have in it the picture of our saviour Christ upon the cross and the image of our lady pray , with diverse other history curious paint in the same . the side of the church be all hang with stain clothes have many devise draw in they . 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 from Java to the cape of bona speranda it but 1850. league . 
 June 1588. 
 they anchor at the island of . Helena the t ) . of June . 
 8. Helena be in the latitude of 15. degree 48. min. to the southward . 
 343 
 there be two house adjoin to the church , on each side one , which serve for kitchen to dress meat in , with necessary room and house of office : the cover of the say house be make flat , whereon be plant a very fair vine , and through both the say house run a very good and wholesome stream of fresh water . 
 there be also right over against the say church a fair causey make up with stone reach unto a valley by the seaside , in which valley be plant a garden , wherein grow great store of pompion and melon : and upon the say causey be a frame erect whereon hang two bell wherewith they ring to mass ; and hard unto it be a cross set up , which be square , frame and make very artificial of free stone , whereon be carve in cipher what time it be build , which be in the year of our lord 1571. 
 this valley be the fair and large low plot in all the island , and it be marvelous sweet and pleasant , and plant in every place either with fruit tree , or with herb . there be fig tree , which bear fruit continual , and marvelous plentiful : for on every tree you shall have blossom , green fig , and ripe fig , all at one : and it be so all the year long : the reason be that the island Thegreatstore stand so near the sun . there be also great store of diverse of lemon tree , orange tree , pomegranate tree , pomecitron tree , date tree , which bear fruit as the fig tree do , and be plant careful and very artificial with very pleasant walk under and between they , and the say walk be overshadow with the leaf of the tree : and in every void place be plant parceley , sorel , basil , fennel , annis seed , mustard seed , radish , and many speciali good herb : and the fresh water brook run through diverse place of this orchard , and may with very small pain be make to water any one tree in the valley . 
 this fresh water stream come from the top of the mountain , and fall from the cliff into the valley 344 
 the height of a cable , and have many arm out of it , which refresh the whole island , and almost every tree in it . the island be altogether high mountain and steep valley , except it be in the top of some hill , and down below in some of the valley , where marvelous store of all these kind of fruit before speak of do grow : there be great store grow in the top of the mountain then below in the valley : but it be wonderful laboursome and also dangerous travel up unto they and down again , by reason of the height and steepen esse of the hill . 
 there be also upon this island great store of partridge , abundance of which be very tame , not make any great haste to fly in 
 away though one come very near they , but only to run away , and get up into the steep cliff : we kill some of they with a fowl piece . they differ very much from our partridge which be in England both in bigness and also in colour . for they be within a little as big as a hen , and be of a ash colour , and live in covy twelve , sixteen , and twenty together : you can go ten or twelve score but you shall see or spring one or two covy at the least . 
 there be likewise no less store of fesant in the island , great store of which be also marvelous big and fat , surpass those fesants-which be in our country in bigness and in number of a company . they differ not very much in colour from the partridge before speak of . 
 we find moreover in this place great store of guinie turkle in cock , which we call turkey , of colour black and white , ereatluant^t-with red head : they be much about the same bigness which we be off in England : their egg be white , and as big as a Turkey egg . 
 there be in this island thousand of goat , which the exceed Spaniards call cabritos , which be very wild : you shall number of see one or two hundred of they together , and sometime s°ati ' you may behold they go in a flock almost a mile long . some of they , ( whether it be the nature of the breed of they , or of the country i wot not ) be as big as 
 345 
 a ass , with a main like a horse and a beard hang down to the very ground : they will climb up the cliff which be so steep that a man will think it a thing unpossible for any live thing to go there . we take and kill many of they for all their swiftness : for there be thousand of they upon the mountain . 
 here be in like manner great store of swine which be very wild and very fat , and of a marvelous bigness : they keep altogether upon the mountain , and will very seidome abide any man to come near they , except it be by mere chance when they be find asleep , or otherwise , accord to their kind , be take lay in the mire . 
 we find in the house at our come 3. slave which be negro , and one which be bear in the island of Java , which tell we that the east indian fleet , which be in number 5. sail , the least whereof be in burden 8. or 900. ton , all lade with spice and calicut cloth , with store of treasure and very rich stone and pearl , be go from the say island of saint Helena but 20. day before we come thither . 
 this island have be find of long time by the por-tugals , and have be altogether plant by they , for their refresh as they come from the east Indies . and when they come they have all thing plentiful for their relief , by reason that they suffer none to inhabit there that may spend up the fruit of the island , except some very few sick person in their company , which they stand in doubt will not live until they come home , who they leave there to refresh themselves , and take away the year follow the other fleet if they live so long . they touch here rather in their come home from the east Indies , then at their go thither , because they be thorough furnish with corn when they set out of Portugal , but be but mean victual at their come from the Indies , where there grow little corn . 
 the 20. day of June have take in wood and water and refresh our self with such thing as we find there , 346 
 1588. and make clean our ship , we set sail about 8. of the clock in the night towards England . at our set sail we have the wind at southeast , and we hale away northwest and by west . the wind be common off the shore at this island of saint Helena . 
 on Wednesday be the third day of July we go July 1588. away northwest the wind be still at southeast ; at which time we be in 1. degree and 48 minute to the southward of the equinoctial line . 
 the twelve day of the say month of July it be very little wind , and towards night it be calm and blow no wind at all , and so continue until it be Monday , be the 15. day of July . 
 on Wednesday the 17. day of the abovesaid month we have the wind scant at west northwest . we find the wind continual to blow at east , and Northeast , and eastnortheast after we be in 3. or 4. degree to the northward ; and it alter not until we come between 30. and 40. degree to the northward of the equinoctial line . 
 on Wednesday the 21. day of August the wind come up at Southwest a fair gale : by which day at noon we be in 38. degree of northerly latitude . 
 on Friday in the morning be the 23. day of August , at four of the clock we hale east , and east and by south for the northermost island of the azore . 
 on Saturday the 24. day of the say month by 5. of the clock in the morning we fall in sight of the two island of Flores and Corvo stand in 39 degree and Corvo and flo-and sail away Northeast . reptwoyland 
 the three of September we meet with a flemish hulk e zores ' which come from Lisbon , and declare unto we the overthrow of the spanish fleet , to the singular rejoice and comfort of we all . 
 the 9 of September , after a terrible tempest which carry away most part of our sail , by the merciful favour of the almighty we recover our long wish port of Plymouth in England , from whence we set forth at the begin of our voyage . 
 . 