The offer of the discovery of the West Indies by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seventh in the year 1488 the 13 of February : with the kings acceptation of the offer , & the cause whereupon he was deprived of the same : recorded in the thirteenth chapter of the history of DONE Fernand Columbus of the life and deeds of his father Christopher Columbus . 
 Hristophoro Colon temendo , se parimente i Re di Castiglia non assentissero alia sua impresa , non gli bisognasse proporla di nuovo a qualche altro principe , & cosi in cio passasse lungo tempo ; mando in Inghilterra un suo fratello , che haveva appresso di se , chiamato Bartholomeo 
 Colon : il qual , quantunque non havesse lettere Latin , era perd huomo prattico , & giudicioso nelle cose del mare , & sapea molto bene far cart da navigare , & sphere , & altri instrumenti di quella profession , come 135 
 dal suo fratello era instrutto . Partito adunque Bartholomeo Colon per Inghilterra , voile la sua sort , i desk in man di cor sali , i quali lo spogliarono insieme con gli altri della sua nave . Per la qual cosa , & per la sua poverti & infirmity , i in cosi diverse terre lo assalirono crudelmente , prolungo per gran tempo la sua ambasciata , fin che , aquistata un poco di faculta con le cart , changed ’ ei fabricava , comincio a far pratiche counterfeit ’ il Re Enrico settimo , padre de Enrico ottavo , i all present regna : a cui appresento un mappamondo , nel quale erano scritti question versi , i from le sue scripture Io trovai , & da me saranno qui posti piu tosto per 1 ’ antichita , che per la loro eleganza . 
 Terrarum quicunque cupis foeliciter oras Noscere , cuncta decens docte pictura docebit , Quam Strabo affirmat , Ptolomaeus , Plinius , atque Isidorus : non una tamen sententia cuique . 
 Pingitur hic etiam nuper sulcata carinis Hispanis Zona illa , prius incognita genti Torrida , quae tandem nunc est notissima multis . 
 Et piu di sotto diceva . 
 Pro Authore sive Pictore . 
 Janua cui patriae est nomen , cui Bartholomaeus Columbus de Terra Rubra , opus edidit istud , Londoniis anno Domini 1480 atque insuper anno Octavo , decimaque die cum tertia mensis Februarii . Laudes Christo cantentur abunde . 
 Et , percioche awertira alcuno , i dice Columbus de Terra Rubra , dico , che medesimamente Io viddi alcune sotto scritioni dell ’ Ammiraglio , primo i acquistasse lo stato , ou ’ egli si sotto scriveva , Columbus de Terra Rubra . Ma , tornando all Re worser ’ Inghilterra , dico , che , da lui il mappamondo veduto , & cio i 1 ’ Ammiraglio gli offeriva , con allegro volto accetto la sua offerta , & mandolo a chiamare . Ma , percioche Dio 1 ’ haveva per Castiglia serbata , gia 1 ’ Ammiraglio in quel tempo era 136 
 andato , & tomato con la vittoria della sua impresa , secondo che per ordine si raccontera . Lasciard hora di raccontar cid , i Bartolomeo Colon haveva negociato in Inghilterra , & tornaro all ’ Ammiraglio , etc. 
 The same in English . 
 / " ^Hristopher Columbus fearing lest if the king of V-U Castile in like manner ( as the king of Portugall had done ) should not condescend unto his enterprise , he should be enforced to offer the same again to some other prince , 8c so much time should be spent therein , sent into England a certain brother of his which he had with him , whose name was Bartholomew Columbus , who , albeit he had not the Latin tongue , yet nevertheless was a man of experience and skilful in Sea causes , and could very well make sea cards & globes , and other instruments belonging to that profession , as he was instructed by his brother . Wherefore after that Bartholomew Columbus was departed for England , his luck was to fallen into the hands of pirates , which spoiled him with the rest of them which were in the ship which he went in . Upon which occasion , and by reason of his poverty and sickness which cruelly assaulted him in a country so far distant from his friends , he deferred his am-bassage for a long while , until such time as he had 
 got somewhat handsome about him with making of Sea fir England . cards . At length he began to deal with king Henry the seventh the father of Henry the eight , which reigneth at this present : unto whom he presented a map of the world , wherein these verses were written , which I found among his papers : and I will here set them down , rather for their antiquity then for their goodness . 
 Thou which desirest easily the coasts of lands to know , This comely map right learnedly the same to thee will show : 
 Which Strabo , Plinie , Ptolomew and Isodore maintain : Yet for all that they do not all in one accord remain . 
 137 
 . 
 The occasion why the West Indies were not discovered 
 King Henry the seventh his acceptation of Columbus offer . 
 Here also is set down the late discovered burning Zone 
 By Portingals , unto the world which whilom was unknown , 
 Whereof the knowledge now at length thorough all the world is blown ; 
 And a little under he added : 
 For the Author or the Drawer . 
 He , whose deer native soil hight stately Genua , Even he whose name is Bartholomew Colon de Terra 
 Rubra , 
 The year of Grace a thousand and foure hundred and fourescore 
 And eight , and on the thirteenth day of February more , 
 In London published this work . To Christ all laud therefore . 
 And because some peradventure may observe that he calls himself Columbus de Terra Rubra , I say , that in like manner I have seen some subscriptions of my father Christopher Columbus , before he had the degree of Admiral , wherein he signed his name thus , Columbus de Terra Rubra . But to return to the king of England , I say , that after he had seen the map , and that which my father Christopher Columbus offered unto him , he accepted the offer with joyful countenance , and sent to call him into England . But because God had reserved the said offer for Castile , Columbus was gone in the mean space , and also returned with the performance of his enterprise , as hereafter in order shall be rehearsed . Now will I leave off from making any farther mention of that which Bartholomew Colon had negotiated in England , and I will return unto the Admiral , etc. 
 