The Letters patents of King Henry the seventh granted unto John Cabot and his three sons , Lewis , Sebastian , and Sancius for the dis — coverie of new and unknown lands . 
 Enricus Dei gratia rex Angliae , & Franciae , & Dominus Hiberniae , omnibus , ad quos praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint , salutem . 
 Notum fit & manifestum , quod dedimus & concessimus , ac per praesentes damus & concedimus pro nobis & 
 haeredibus nostris , dilectis nobis Joanni Caboto civi Venetiarum , Lodovico , Sebastiano , & Sancio , filiis dicti Joannis , & eorum ac cujuslibet eorum haeredibus & deputatis , plenam ac liberam authoritatem , facultatem & potestatem navigandi ad omnes parts , regiones , & sinus maris orientalis , occidentalis , & septentrionalis , sub ban-neris , vexillis , & insigniis nostris , cum quinque navibus sive navigiis , cujuscilnque portiturae & qualitatis existant , & cum tot & tantis nautis & hominibus , quot & quantos in dictis navibus secum ducere voluerint , suis & eorum propriis sumptibus & expensis , ad inveniendum , discooperiendum , & investigandum quascunque insulas , patrias , regiones sive provincias gentilium & infidelium quorumcunque , in quacunque parte mundi positas , quae Christianis omnibus ante haec tempora fuerint incognitae . 
 141 
 Concessimus etiam eisdem & eorum cuilibet , eorumque & cujuslibet eorum haeredibus & deputatis , ac licentiam dedimus ad affigendum praedictas banneras nostras & insignia in quacunque villam , oppido , castro , insula seu terra firma a se noviter inventis . Et quod praenominatus Joannes , & filii ejusdem , seu haeredes & eorum deputati , quascunque hujusmodi villas , castra , oppida , & insulas a se inventas , quae subjugari , occupari , possideri possint , subjugare , occupare , possidere valeant tanquam vasalli nostri , & gubernatores , locatenentes , & deputati eorundem , dominium , titulum & jurisdictionem earundem villarum , castrorum , oppidorum , insularum , ac terrae firmae sic inventorum nobis acquirendo . Ita tamen , ut ex omnibus fructibus , proficuis , emolumentis , commodis , lucris , & obventionibus ex hujusmodi navigation provenientibus , praefatus Johannes , & filii ac haeredes , & eorum deputati , teneantur & sint obligati nobis pro omni viagio suo , toties quoties and portum nostrum Bristolliae applicuerint ( ad quem omnino applicare teneantur & sint astricti ) deductis omnibus sumptibus & impensis necessariis per eosdem factis , quintam partem capitalis lucri facti , sive in mercibus , sive in pecuniis persolvere : Dantes nos & concedentes eisdem suisque haeredibus & deputatis , ut ab omni solution custumarum omnium & singulorum bonorum & mercium , quas secum re-portarint ab illis locis sic noviter inventis , liberi sint & immunes . Et insuper dedimus & concessimus eisdem ac suis haeredibus & deputatis , quod terra omnes firmae , insulae , villae , oppida , castra , & loca quaecunque a se [ III . 5. J inventa , quotquot ab eis inveniri contigerit , non possint ab aliis quibusvis nostris subditis frequentari seu visitari , absque licentia praedictorum Joannis & ejus filiorum , suoriimque deputatorum , sub poena amissionis tam navium quam bonorum omnium quorumciinque ad ea loca sic inventa navigare praesumentium . Volentes & strictissime mandantes omnibus & singulis nostris subditis , tam in terra quam in mari constitutis , ut praefato Joanni , & ejus filiis ac deputatis , bonam assistentiam 
 142 
 faciant , & tam in armandis navibus seu navigiis , quam in provision commeatus & victualium pro sua pecunia emendorum , atque aliarum omnium rerum sibi providendarum pro dicta navigation sumenda suos omnes favores & auxilia impertiant . In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes . Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium quinto die Martii anno regni nostri undecimo . 
 The same in English . 
 HEnry by the grace of God , king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , to all to whom these presents shall come , Greeting . 
 Be it known that we have given and granted , and by these presents do give and grant for us and our heirs , to our well-beloved John Cabot citizen of Venice , to Lewis , Sebastian , and Santius , sons of the said John , and to the heirs of them , and every of them , and their deputies , full and free authority , leave , and power to sail to all parts , countries' , and seas of the East , of the West , and of the North , under our banners and ensigns , with five ships of what burden or quantity soever they be , and as many mariners or men as they will have with them in the said ships , upon their own proper costs and charges , to seek out , discover , and find whatsoever isles , countries' , regions or provinces of the heathen and infidels whatsoever they be , and in what part of the world soever they be , which before this time have be unknown to all Christians : we have granted to them , and also to every of them , the heirs of them , and every of them , and their deputies , and have given them licence to set up our banners and ensigns in every village , town , castle , isle , or main land of them newly found . And that the aforesaid John and his sons , or their heirs and assigns may subdue , occupy and possess all such towns , cities , castles and isles of them found , which they can subdue , occupy and possess , as our vassals , and lieutenants , getting unto us the rule , title , and jurisdic - 
 M3 
 Ann. Dom. 
 1495 - 
 Bristol thought the meetest port for Westerns discoveries . 
 Freedoms from custom . 
 cion of the same villages , towns , castles , & firm land so found . Yet so that the aforesaid John , and his sons and heirs , and their deputies , be held and bounden of all the fruits , profits , gains , and commodities growing of such navigation , for every their voyage , as often as they shall arrive at our port of Bristoll ( at the which port they shall be bound and held only to arrive ) all manner of necessary costs and charges by them made , being deducted , to pay unto us in wares or money the fift part of the capital ! gain so got . We giving and granting unto them and to their heirs and deputies , that they shall be free from all paying of customs of all and singular such merchandise as they shall bring with them from those places so newly found . And moreover , we have given and granted to them , their heirs and deputies , that all the firm lands , isles , villages , towns , castles and places whatsoever they be that they shall chance to find , may not of any other of our subject's be frequented or visited without the licence of the foresaid John and his sons , and their deputies , under pain of forfeiture aswell of their ships as of all and singular goods of all them that shall presume to sail to those places so found . Willing , and most straightly commanding all and singular our subject's aswell on land as on sea , to give good assistance to the aforesaid John and his sons and deputies , and that as well in arming and furnishing their ships or vessels , as in provision of food , and in buying of victuals for their money , and all other things by them to be provided necessary for the said navigation , they do give them all their help and favour . In witness whereof we have caused to be made these our Letters patents . Witness our self at Westminster the fift day of March , in the eleventh year of our reign . 
 