The third and last voyage unto Meta Incognita , made by M. Martin Frobisher , in the year 1578. Written by Thomas Ellis . 
 Hese are to let you know , that upon the 25. of May , the Thomas Allen being Viceadmiral whose Captain was M. Yorke , M. Gibbes Master , Christopher Hall Pilot , accompanied with the Rear-admiral nam the Hopewel , whose Captain was M. Henrie Carewe , the 
 M. Andrewe Dier , and certain other ships came to Gravesend , where we anchored and abided the coming of certain of our Fleet which were not yet come . 
 The 27. of the same month our Fleet being now come together , and all things pressed in a readiness , the wind favouring , and tide serving , we being of sails in number eight , weighed anchors and hoist our sails towards Harwich to meet with our Admiral , and the residue which then and there abided our arrival : where we safely arrived the 28. thereof , finding there our Admiral , whom we with the discharge of certain pieces saluted , according to order and duty , and were welcomed with the like courtesy : which being finished we landed : where our general continued mustering his soldiers and Miners , and setting things in order appertaining to the voyage until the last of the said month of May , which day we hoist our sails , and committing our selves to the conducting of Almighty God , we set forward towards the west Country in such lucky wise and good success , that by the fift of June we passed the Dursies , being the utmost part of Ireland to the Westward . 
 And here it were not much amiss nor far from our purpose , if I should a little discourse and speak of our adventures and chances by the way , as our landing at Plimmouth , as also the meeting certain poor men , which were robbed and spoiled of all that they had by 
 231 
 Master forks . Christopher Hall . 
 The Hopewel . Captain Carew . 
 Andrew Dier . 
 [ III . +o . J 
 Harwich . 
 Dursies . 
 Ireland . 
 Plimmouth . 
 Pirates and Rovers : among whom was a man of Briitote . Bristow , on whom our general used his liberality , and sent him away with letters into England . 
 But because such things are impertinent to the matter , I will return ( without any more mentioning of the same ) to that from the which I have digressed and swerved , I mean our ships now sailing on the surging seas , sometime passing at pleasure with a wished Eastern wind , sometime hindered of our course again by the Western blasts , until the 20. day of the foresaid month of June , Frizeland . on which day in the morning we fell with Frizeland , which is a very high and cragged land and was almost clean covered with snow , so that we might see nought but craggy rocks and the tops of high and huge hills , sometime ( and for the most part ) all covered with foggy mists . There might we also perceive the great Isles of ice lying on the seas , like mountains , some small , some big , of sundry kinds of shapes , and such a number of them , that we could not come near the shore for them . 
 Thus sailing alongst the coast , at the last we saw a place somewhat void of ice , where our general ( accompanied with certain other ) went a shore , where they saw certain tents made of beasts skins , and boats much the like unto theirs of Meta Incognita . The tents were furnished with flesh , fish , skins , and other trifles : among the which was found a box of nails : whereby we did conjecture , that they had either Artificers among them , or else a traffic with some other nation . The men ran away , so that we could have no conference or communication with them . Our general ( because he would have them no more to flee , but rather encouraged The courtesy of to stay through his courteous dealing ) gave commaunde-our general . meant that his men should take nothing away with them , saving only a couple of white dogs , for the which he left pins , points , knives , and other trifling things , and departed without taking or hurting any thing , and so came aboard , and hoised sails , and passed forward . 
 232 
 But being scarce out of the sighed thereof , there fell such a fog and hideous missed that we could not see one another : whereupon we stroke our drums , and sounded our trumpets , to the end we might keep together : and so continued all that day and night till the next day that the missed brake up : so that we might easily perceive all the ships thus sailing together all that day , until the next day , being the 22. of the same : on which day we saw and infinite number of ice , from the which we cast about to shun the danger thereof . 
 But one of our small Barks nam the Michael , whose Master Captain was Master Kinderslie , the Master Bartholomew Bull , lost our company , insomuch that we could not ° mew ■ obtain the sighed of her many days after , of whom 1 mean to speak further anon when occasion shall be ministered , and opportunity serve . Thus we continued in our course until ! the second of July , on which day we fell with the Queens foreland , where we saw so much ice , that we thought it unpossible to get into the Straights : yet at the last we gave the adventure and entered the ice . 
 Being among it we saw the Michael , of whom I Michael . spoke before , accompanied with the Judith , whose Captain was Master Fenton , the Master Charles Jackman , Charles bearing into the foresaid ice , far distant from us , who Jackman . in a storm that fell that present night , ( whereof I will at large God willing , discourse hereafter ) were severed from us , and being in , wandered up and down the Straights among the ice many days in great peril , till at the last , ( by the providence of God ) they came safely to harbour in their wished Port. In the Countess Countess of Warwicks found , the 20. of July aforesaid , tenne days before any of the other ships : who going on ' shore found where the people of the Country had be , and had hid their provision in great heaps of stones being both of flesh and fish , which they had killed ; 
 whereof we also found great store in other places after [ III . 41 . j our arrival . They found also diverse engines , as bows , 
 233 
 Narrow shifts fir safety . 
 slings , and darts . They found likewise certain pieces of the Pinnace which our general left there the year before , which Pinnace he had sunk , minding to have it again the next year . 
 Now seeing I have entreated so much of the Judith and the Michael : I will return to the rest of the other ships , and will speak a little of the storm which fell , with the mishaps that we had , the night that we put into the ice : whereof I made mention before . 
 At the first entering into the ice in the mouth of the Straights , our passage was very narrow , and difficult but being once got in , we had a fair open place without any ice for the most part , being a league in compass , the ice being round about us and enclosing us , as it were , within the pales of a park . In which place , ( because it was almost night ) we minded to take in our sails , and lie a hull all that night . But the storm so increased , and the waves began to mount aloft , which brought the ice so near us , and coming on so fast upon us , that we were feign to bear in and out , where we might espy and open place . Thus the ice coming on us so fast , we were in great danger , looking every hour for death . And thus passed we on in that great danger , seeing both our selves and the rest of our ships so troubled and tossed among the ice , that it would make the strongest heart to relent . 
 At the last the Bark Dionyse being but a weak ship , and bruised afore among the ice , being so leak that no longer she could tarry above the water , sank without saving any of the goods which were within her : which sighed so abashed the whole Fleet , that we thought verily we should have tasted of the same sauce . But nevertheless we seeing them in such danger , manned our boats and saved all the men in such wise , that not one perished : God be thanked . 
 The storm still increased and the ice enclosed us , so that we were feign to take down top and top masts : for the ice had so environed us , that we could see neither 234 
 i578-land nor sea , as far as we could ken : so that we were feign to cut our cables to hang over board for fenders , somewhat to ease the ships sides from the great and driry strokes of the ice : some with Capstan bars , some fending ofF with oars , some with planks of two inches thick , which were broken immediately with the force of the ice , some going out upon the ice to bear it off with their shoulders from the ships . But the rigorousness of the tempest was such , and the force of the ice so great , that not only they burst and spoiled the foresaid provision , but likewise so rased the sides of the ships , that it was pitiful to behold , and caused the hearts of many to faint . 
 Thus we continued all that dismal and lamentable night plunged in this perplexity , looking for instant death : but our God ( who never leaveth them destitute Godsprwi-which faithfully call upon him , although he often punisheth dence ' for amendments sake ) in the morning caused the winds to cease , and the fog which all that night lay on the face of the water to clear : so that we might perceive about a mile from us , a certain place clear from any ice , to the which with and easy breath of wind which our God sent us , we bent our selves . And furthermore , he provided better for us then we deserved or hoped for : for when we were in the foresaid clear place , he sent us a fresh gale at West or at West Southwest , which set us clear without all the ice . And further he added more : for he sent us so pleasant a day as the like we had not of a long time before , as after punishment consolation . 
 Thus we joyful wights being at liberty , took in all our sails and lay a hull , praising God for our deliverance , and stayed to gather together our Fleet : which once being done , we seeing that none of them had any great hurt , neither any of them wanted , saving only they of whom I spoke before and the ship which was lost , then at the last we hoist our sails , and lay bulting off and on , till such time as it would please God to take away the ice that we might get into the Straights . 
 235 
 1578. A mountain of ice appearing in sundry figures . And as we thus lay off and on we came by a marvellous huge mountain of ice , which surpassed all the rest that ever we saw : for we judged it to be near fourescore fathoms above water , and we thought it to be a ground for any thing that we could perceive , being there nine score fathoms deep , and of compass about half a mile . 
 A fog of long continuance . Also the fift of July there fell a hideous fog and missed , that continued till the nineteenth of the same : so that one ship could not see another . Therefore we were feign to bear a small sail and to observe the time : 
 A current to the'Northwest . but there ran such a current of a tide , that it set us to the Northwest of the Queens foreland the backside of all the Straights : where ( through the contagious fog having no sighed either of Sun or Star ) we scarce knew where we were . In this fog the tenth of July we lost the company of the Viceadmiral , the Anne Francis , the Buss of Bridgewater , and the Francis of Foy . The 16. day one of our small Barks nam the 
 The Gabriel . Gabriel was sent by our general to bear in with the land to descry it , where being on land , they met with 
 The people offer to traffic with us . the people of the Country , which seemed very humane and civil , and offered to traffic with our men , proffering them fowls and skins for knives , and other trifles : whose courtesy caused us to think , that they had small conversation with other of the Straights . Then we bore back again to go with the Queens foreland : and the eighteenth day we came by two Islands whereon we went on shore , and found where the people had be : but we saw none of them . This day we were again in the ice , and like to be in as great peril as we were at the first . For through the darkness and obscurity of the foggy missed , we were almost run on rocks and Islands before we saw them : But God ( even miraculously ) provided for us , opening the fogs that we might see clearly , both where and in what danger we presently were , and also the way to escape : or else without fade we had ruinously run upon the rocks . 236 
 When we knew perfectly our instant case , we cast about to get again on Seaboard , which ( God be thanked ) by night we obtained and praised God . The clear continued scarce and hour , but the fog fell again as thick as ever it was . 
 Then the Rearadmiral and the Bear god themselves clear without danger of ice and rocks , struck their sails and lay a hull , staying to have the rest of the Fleet come forth : which as yet had not found the right way to clear themselves from the danger of rocks and ice , until the next morning , at what time the Rearadmiral discharged certain warning pieces to give notice that she Warning had escaped , and that the rest ( by following of her ) might set themselves free , which they did that day . charnd * 
 Then having gathered our selves together we proceeded on our purposed voyage , bearing off , and keeping our selves distant from the coast till the 19. day of July : at which time the fogs brake up and dispersed , so that we might plainly and clearly behold the pleasant air , which so long had be taken from us , by the obscurity of the foggy mists : and after that time we were not much encumbered therewith until we had left the con 
 fines of the Country . 
 Then we espying a fair found , supposed it to go A fair found into the Straights between the Queens foreland and between the Jackmans found , which proved as we imagined . For our general sent forth again the Gabriel to discover it , who jackmans passed through with much difficulty : for there ran such found . and extreme current of a tide , with such a horrible gulf , that with a fresh gale of wind they were scarce able to stem it : yet at the length with great travail they passed it , and came to the Straights , where they met with the Thomas Allen , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the Buss of Bridgewater : who altogether adventured to bear into the ice again , to see if they could obtain their wished Port. But they were so encumbered that with much difficulty they were able to get out again , yet at the last they escaping , the Thomas Allen , and the Gabriel 
 237 
 The time of our setting forward , etc. 
 bore in with the Western shore , where they found harbour , and there moared their ships until the fourth of August , at which time they came to us in the Countess of Warwicks found . The Thomas of Ipswich caught a great leak which caused her to cast again to Seabord and so was mended . 
 We sailed along still by the coast until we came to the Queens foreland , at the point whereof we met with part of the gulf aforesaid , which place or gulf ( as some of our Master's do credibly report ) doth flow nine hours , and ebbs but three . At that point we discovered certain lands Southward , which neither time nor opportunity would serve to search . Then being come to the mouth of the Straights we met with the Anne Francis , who had lain bulting up and down ever since her departure alone , never finding any of her company . We met then also the Francis of Foy , with whom again we intended to venture and get in : but the ice was yet so thick , that we were compelled again to retire and get us on Seaboard . 
 There fell also the same day being the 26. of July , such and horrible snow , that it lay a foot thick upon the hatches which froze as it fell . 
 We had also at other times diverse cruel storms both of snow and hail , which manifestly declared the dis-temperature of the Country : yet for all that we were so many times repulsed and put back from our purpose , knowing that lingering delay was not profitable for us , but hurtful to our voyage , we mutually consented to our valiant general once again , to give the onset . 
 The 28. day therefore of the same July we assayed , and with little trouble ( God be praised ) we passed the dangers by day light . Then night falling on the face of the earth , we hulled in the clear , till the cheerful light of the day had chased away the noisome darkness of the night : at which time we set forward towards our wished Port : by the 30. day we obtained our expected desire , where we found the Judith , and the Michael : 
 238 
 which brought no small joy unto the General , and great consolation to the heavy hearts of those wearied wights . 
 The 30. day of July we brought our ships into the Countess of Warwicks found , and moared them , namely these ships , The Admiral , the Rearadmiral , the Francis of Foy , the Bear Armenel , the Salomon , and the Buss of Bridgewater : which being done , our general commanded us all to come a shore upon the Countesses Hand , where he set his Miners to work upon the Mine , giving charge with expedition to dispatch with their lading . 
 Our general himself , accompanied with his Gentlemen , diverse times made roads into sundry parts of the Country , as well to find new Mines , as also to find out and see the people of the Country . He found out one Mine upon and Island by Bears found , and nam it the Countess of Sussex Island . One other was found in Countess Winter's Furnace , with diverse others , to which the ships °f^sJex were sent sunderly to be laden . In the same rodes winter's he met with diverse of the people of the Country at Furnace . sundry times , as once at a place called Davids found : who Davids Found . shot at our men , and very desperately gave them the onset , being not above three or foure in number , there being of our Country men above a dosen : but seeing themselves not able to prevail , they took themselves to flight : whom our men pursued , but being not used to such craggy cliffs , they soon lost the sighed of them , and so in vain returned . 
 We also saw of them at Bears found , both by Sea The politic of and land in great companies : but they would at all times the people fir keep the water between them and us . And if any of our ships chanced to be in the found ( as they came diverse times , because the Harbour was not very good ) the ship jaded , and departed again : then so long as any ships were in sighed , the people would not be seen . 
 But when as they perceived the ships to be gone , they would not only show themselves standing upon high clifles , and call us to come over unto them : but also 
 239 
 would come in their Boats very near to us , as it were to brag at us : whereof our general having advertisement , sent for the Captains and Gentlemen of the Ships , to accompany and attend upon him , with the Captain also of the Anne Francis , who was but the night before come unto us . For they , and the Fleebote having lost us the 26. day in the great snow , put into and harbour in the Queens foreland , where they found good Oar , wherewith they jaded themselves , and came to seek the general : so that now we had all our Ships , saving one Bark , which was lost , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who ( compelled by what fury I know not ) forsook our company , and returned home without lading . 
 Our general accompanied with his Gentlemen , ( of whom I spoke ) came all together to the Countess of Sussex Island , near to Bears found : where he manned out certain Pinnisses , and went over to the people : who perceiving his arrival , fled away with all speed , and in haste left certain darts and other engines behind them , which we found : but the people we could not find . 
 The next morning our general perceiving certain of them in boats upon the Sea , gave chase to them in a Pinnace under sail , with a fresh gale of wind , but could by no means come near unto them : for the longer he sailed , the further off he was from them : which well showed their cunning and activity . Thus time wearing away , and the day of our departure approaching , our general commanded us to lade with all expedition , that we might be again on Seaboard with our ships : for whilst we were in the Country , we were in continual danger of freezing in : for often snow and hail often falling , the water was so much frozen and congealed in the night , that in the morning we could scarce row our boats or Pinnaces , especially in Dyers found , which is a calm and still water : which caused our general to make the more haste , so that by the 30. day of August we were all laden , and made all things ready to depart . 
 240 
 But before I proceed any further herein , to show what Gentlemen fortune befell at our departure , I will turn my pen a little to M. Captain Fenton , and those Gentlemen which ' c^^gy* ' should have inhabited all the year in those Countries , whose valiant minds were much to be commended : For doubtless they had done as they intended , if luck had not withstood their willingness . 
 For the Bark Dionise which was lost , had in her much of their house which was prepared and should have be built for them , with many other implements . Also the Thomas of Ipswich which had most of their provision in her , came not into the Straights at all : neither did we see her since the day we were separated in the great snow , of which I spoke before . For these causes , having not their house , nor yet provision , they were disappointed of their pretence to tarry , and therefore jaded their ships , and so came away with us . 
 But before we took shipping , we built a little house And house in the Countess of Warwicks Island , and garnished it tricked and with many kinds of trifles , as Pins , Points , Laces , iverstrin^s Glasses , Kombes , Babes on horseback and on foot , with innumerable other such fancies and toys : thereby to allure and entice the people to some familiarity against other years . 
 Thus having finished all things we departed the [ III . 44. J Country , as I said before : but because the Buss had not lading enough in her , she put into Bears found to take in a little more . In the mean while the Admiral , and the rest without at Sea stayed for her . 
 And that night fell such and outrageous tempest , beating And outragwus on our ships with such vehement rigor , that anchor and temfest-cable availed nought : for we were driven on rocks and Islands of ice , insomuch that ( had not the great goodness of God be miraculously showed to us ) we had be cast away every man . This danger was more doubtful and terrible , then any that preceded or went before : for there was not any one ship ( I think ) that escaped without damage . Some lost anchor and 
 vn 241 Q 
 Our entering the coasts dangerous . 
 also cables , some boats , some Pinnisses : some anchor , cables , boats and Pinnisses . 
 This boisterous storm so severed us from one another , that one ship knew not what was become of another . The Admiral knew not where to find the Viceadmiral or Rearadmiral , or any other ship of our company . Our general being on land in Bears found could not come to his Ship , but was compelled to go aboard the Gabriel where he continued all the way homeward : for the boisterous blasts continued so extremely and so long a time , that they sent us homeward ( which was Gods favour towards us ) will we , nill we , in such haste , as not any one of us were able to keep in company with other , but were separated . And if by chance any one Ship did overtake other , by swiftness of sail , or met , as they often did : yet was the rigour of the wind so hideous , that they could not continue company together the space of one whole night . 
 Thus our journey outward was not so pleasant , but our coming thither , entering the coasts and country , by narrow Straights , perilous ice , and swift tides , our times of abode there in snow and storms , and our departure from thence the 31. of August with dangerous blustering winds and tempests , which that night arose , was as uncomfortable : separating us so as we sailed , that not any of us met together , until the 28. of September , which day we fell on the English coasts , between Sylley and the lands end , and passed the channel , until our arrival in the river of Thames . 
 242 
 The report of Thomas Wiars passenger in the Emanuel , otherwise called the Buss of Bridgewater , wherein James Leech was Master , one of the ships in the last Voyage of Master Martin Frobisher 1578. concerning the discovery of a great Island in their way homeward the 12. of September . 
 He Buss of Bridgewater was left in Bears found at Meta incognita , the second day of September behind the Fleet in some distress , through much wind , riding near the Lee shore , and forced there to ride it out upon the hazard of her cables and anchors , which 
 were all aground but two . The third of September being fair weather , and the wind North northwest she set sail , and departed thence , and fell with Frisland on the 8. day of September at sixe of the clock at night , and then they set off from the Southwest point of Frisland , the wind being at East , and East Southeast , but that night the wind veared Southerly , and shifted oftentimes that night : but on the tenth day in the morning , the wind at West northwest fair weather , they steered Southeast , and by south , and continued that course until the 12. day of September , when about 11. a clock before noon , they descried a land , which was from them about five leagues , and the Southermost part of it was Southeast by East from them , and the Northermost next , North Northeast , or Northeast . The master accounted that the Southeast point of Frisland was from him at that instant when he first descried this new Island , Northwest by North , 50. leagues . They account this Island to be 25. leagues long , and the longest way of it Southeast , and Northwest . The Southern part of it is in the latitude of 57. degrees and 1. second part , or there about . They continued in sighed of it , from the 12. day at a 11. of the clock , till the 243 
 The Island in length z 5. leagues . 
 This Hand is in the latitude of^ . degrees and 1 second pars . 
 13. day three of the clock in the after noon , when they left it : and the last part they saw of it , bore from them Northwest by North . There appeared two Harboroughs upon that coast : the greatest of them seven leagues to the Northwards of the Southermost point , the other but foure leagues . There was very much ice near the same land , and also twentie or thirty leagues from it , for they were not clear of ice , till the 15. day of September after noon . They plied their Voyage homeward , and fell with the West part of Ireland about Galway , and had first sighed of it on the 25. day of September . 
 Notes framed by M. Richard Hakluyt of the middle Temple Esquire , given to certain Gentlemen that went with M. Frobisher in his Northwest discovery , for their directions : And not unfit to be committed to print , considering the same may stir up considerations of these and of such other things , not unmeet in such new voyages as may be attempted hereafter . 
 Hat the first Seat be chosen on the seaside , so as ( if it may be ) you may have your own Navy within Bay , river or lake , within your Seat safe from the enemy : and so as the enemy shall forced to lie in open road abroad without , to be dispersed with all winds and 
 tempests that shall arise . Thus seated you shall be least subject to annoy of the enemy , so may you by your Navy within pass out to all parts of the world , and so may the Ships of England have access to you to supply all wants , so may your commodities be carried away also . This seat is to be chosen in a temperate Climate , in sweet air , where you may possess always sweet water , wood , seacoles or turf , with 244 
 fish , flesh , grain , fruits , herbs and roots , or so many of those as may suffice very necessity for the life of such as shall plant there . And for the possessing of mines of gold , of silver , copper , quicksilver , or of any such precious thing , the wants of those needful things may be supplied from some other place by sea , etc. 
 Stone to make Lime of , ' Slate stone to tile withal , or such clay as makes tile , Stone to wall withal , if 
 Brycke may not be made , Timber for building easily to * be conveyed to the place , Reed to cover houses or such like , if tile or slate be not . 
 are to be looked for as things without which no City may be made nor people in civil sort be kept together . 
 The people there to plant and to continue are either to live without traffic , or by traffic and by trade of merchandise . If they shall live without sea traffic , at the first they become naked by want of linen and woollen , and very miserable by infinite wants that will otherwise ensue , and so will they be forced of themselves to depart , or else easily they will be consumed by the Spanyards , by the Frenchmen , or by the natural inhabitants of the country , and so the enterprise becomes reproachful to our Nation , and a let to many other good purposes that may be taken in hand . 
 And by trade of merchandise they can not live , except the Sea or the Land there may yield commodity . And therefore you ought to have most speciali regard of that point , and so to plant , that the natural commodities of the place and seat may draw to you access of Navigation for the same , or that by your own Navigation you may carry the same out , and fetch home the supply of the wants of the seat . 
 Such Navigation so to be employed shall , beside the supply of wants , be able to encounter with foreign force . 
 245 
 And for that in the ample vent of such things as are brought to you out of England by Sea , stands a matter of great consequence , it behooveth that all humanity and courtesy and much forbearing of revenge to the Inland people be used : so shall you have firm amity with your neighbours , so shall you have their inland commodities to maintain traffic , and so shall you wax rich and strong in force . Diverse and several commodities of the inland are not in great plenty to be brought to your hands , without the aid of some portable or Navigable river , or ample lake , and therefore to have the help of such a one is most requisite : And so is it of effect for the dispersing of your own commodities in exchange into the inlands . 
 Nothing is more to be endeavoured with the Inland people then familiarity . For so may you best discover all the natural commodities of their country , & also all their wants , all their strengths , all their weakness , and with whom they are in war , and with whom confederate in peace and amity , etc. which known you may work many great effects of greatest consequence . 
 And in your planting the consideration of the climate and of the soil be matters that are to be respected . For if it be so that you may let in the salt sea water , not mixed with the fresh into flats , where the sun is of the heat that it is at Rochel , in the Bay of Portugal , or in Spaine , then may you procure a man of skill , and so you have won one noble commodity for the fishing , and for trade of merchandise by making 
 Or if the soil and climate be such as may yield you the Grape as good as that at Burdeaux , as that in Portugal , or as that about Sivil in Spaine , or that in the Islands of the Canaries , then there rests but a workman to put in execution to make Wines , and to dress Resigns of the sun and other , etc. 
 Or if you find a soil of the temperature of the South part of Spaine or Barbarie in the which you 246 
 find the Olive tree to grow : Then you may be assured of a noble merchandise for this Realm , considering that our great trade of clothing doth require oil , and weighin how deer of late it is become by the vent they have of that commodity in the West Indies , and if you find the wild Olive there it may be graffed . 
 Or if you can find the berry of Cochenile with which we colour Stammelles , or any Root , Berry , Fruit , wood or earth fit for dying , you win a notable thing fit for our state of clothing . This Cochenile is natural in the West Indies on that firm . 
 Or if you have Hides of beasts fit for sole Leather , etc. It will be a merchandise right good , and the Savages there yet can not tanne Leather after our kind , yet excellently after their own manner . 
 Or if the soil shall yield Figs , Almonds , Sugar Canes , Quinces , Oranges , Lemonds , Potatos , etc. there may arise some trade and traffic by Figs , Almonds , Sugar , Marmelade , Sucket , etc. 
 Or if great woods be found , if they be of Cypress , chests may be made , if they be of some kind of trees , Pitch and Tar may be made , if they be of some other , then they may yield Rosin , Turpentine , etc. and all for trade and traffic , and Casks for wine and oil may be made , likewise ships and houses , etc. 
 And because traffic is a thing so materiali , I wish that great observation be taken what every soil yields naturally , in what commodity soever , and what it may be made to yield by endeavour , and to send us notice home , that thereupon we may devise what means may be thought of to raise trades . 
 Now admit that we might not be suffered by the Savages to enjoy any whole country or any more then the scope of a city , yet if we might enjoy traffic , and be assured of the same , we might be much enriched , our Navy might be increased , and a place of safety might there be found , if change of religion or civil 
 247 
 wars should happen in this realm , which are things of great benefit . But if we may enjoy any large territory of apt soil , we might so use the matter , as we should not depend upon Spaine for oils , sacks , resignes , oranges , lemonds , Spanish skins , etc. Nor upon France for woad , baysalt , and Gascoyne wines , nor on Eastland for flax , pitch , tar , masts , etc. So we should not so exhaust our treasure , and so exceedingly enrich our doubtful friends , as we do , but should purchase the commodities that we want for half the treasure that now we do : and should by our own industries and the benefits of the soil there cheaply purchase oils , wines , salt , fruits , pitch , tar , flax , hemp , masts , boards , fish , gold , silver , copper , tallow , hides and many commodities : beside if there be no flats to make salt on , if you have plenty of wood you may make it in sufficient quantity for common uses at home there . 
 If you can keep a safe Haven , although you have not the friendship of the near neighbours , yet you may have traffic by sea upon one shore or other , upon that firm in time to come , if not present . 
 If you find great plenty of timber on the shore side or upon any portable river , you were best to cut down of the same the first winter , to be seasoned for ships , barks , boats and houses ; 
 And if near such wood there be any river or brook upon the which a sawing mill may be placed , it would do great service , and therefore consideration would be had of such places . 
 And if such port & chosen place of settling were in possession and after fortified by art , although by the land side our Englishmen were kept in , and might not enjoy any traffic with the next neighbours , nor any victuals : yet might they victuali themselves of fish to serve very necessity , and enter into amity with the enemies of their next neighbours , and so have vent of their merchandise of England & also have victual , or by means hereupon to be used , to force the next neigh-248 
 hours to amity . And keeping a navy at the settling place , they should find out along the tract of the land to have traffic , and at diverse Islands also . And so this first seat might in time become a stapling place of the commodities of many countries' and territories , and in time this place might become of all the provinces round about the only governor . And if the place first chosen should not so well please our people , as some other more lately found out : There might be and easy remove , and that might be rased , or rather kept for others of our nation to avoid and ill neighbour . 
 If the soils adjoining to such convenient Haven and settling places be found marshy and boggy , then men skilful in draining are to be carried thither . For art may work wondered effects therein , and make the soil rich for many uses . 
 To plant upon and Island in the mouth of some notable river , or upon the point of the land entering into the river , if no such Island be , were to great end . For if such river were navigable or portable far into the land , then would arise great hope of planting in fertile soils , and traffic on the one or on the other side of the river , or on both , or the linking in amity with one or other petty king contending there for dominion . 
 Such rivers found , both Barges and Boats may be made for the safe passage of such as shall pierce the same . These are to be covered with doubles of course linen artificially wrought , to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from the rower . 
 Since every soil of the world by art may be made to yield things to feed and to cloth man , bring in your return a perfect note of the soil without and within , and we shall devise if need require to amend the Same , and to draw it to more perfection . And if you find not fruits in your planting place to your liking , we shall in five drifats furnish you with such kinds of plants to be carried thither the winter after your planting , as shall the very next summer following yield you some fruit , and 
 249 
 the year next following , as much as shall suffice a town as big as Calice , and that shortly after shall be able to yield you great store of strong durable good sider to drink , and these trees shall be able to increase you within less then seven years as many trees presently to bear , as may suffice the people of diverse parishes , which at the first settling may stand you in great stead , if the soil have not the commodity of fruits of goodness already . And because you ought greedily to hunt after things that yield present relief , without trouble of carriage thither , therefore I make mention of these thus specially , to the end you may have it specially in mind . 
 