A generail and brief description of the Country , and condition of the people , which are found in Meta Incognita . 
 Aving now sufficiently and truly set forth the whole circumstance , and particular handling of every occurrent in the 3. voyages of our worthy general , Captain Frobisher , it shall not be from the purpose to speak somewhat in general of the nature of this Country called Meta 
 Incognita , and the condition of the savages there inhabiting . 
 First therefore touching the Topographical description of the place , It is now found in the last voyage , that Queen Elizabeths Cape being situate in latitude at 61. 
 367 
 A Topographical description of Meta Incognita . 
 The people of Meta Incognita like unto Samoeds . 
 Their native colour . 
 degrees and a half , which before was supposed to be part of the firm land of America , and also all the rest of the South side of Frobishers straits , are all several Islands and broken land , and likewise so will all the North side of the said straits fallen out to be as I think . And some of our company being entered above 60. leagues within the mistaken straits in the third voyage mentioned , thought certainly that they had descried the firm land of America towards the South , which I think will fallen out so to be . 
 These broken lands and Islands being very many in number , do seem to make there and Archipelagus , which as they all differ in greatness , form , and fashion one from another ; so are they in goodness , colour , arid soil much unlike . They all are very high lands , mountains , and in most parts covered with snow even all the Summer long . The Norther lands have less store of snow , more grass , and are more plain Countries' : the cause whereof may be , for that the Souther Hands receive all the snow , that the cold winds and piercing air bring out of the North . And contrarily , the North parts receive more warm blasts of milder air from the South , whereupon may grow the cause why the people covet to inhabit more upon the North parts then the South , as far as we can yet by our experience perceive they do . These people I judge to be a kind of Tartar , or rather a kind of Samoed , of the same sort and condition of life that the Samoeds be to the Northeastwards beyond Moscovy , who are called Samoeds , which is as much to say in the Moscovy tongue as eaters of themselves , and so the Russians their borderers do name them . And by late conference with a friend of mine ( with whom I did sometime travel in the parts of Moscovy ) who hath great experience of those Samoeds and people of the Northeast , I find that in all their manner of living , those people of the Northeast , and these of thee Northwest are like . They are of the colour of a ripe Olive , which how it may come to pass , being born 368 
 DESCRIPTION OF META INCOGNITA a.d. 
 in so cold a climate I refer to the judgement of others , for they are naturally born children of the same colour and complexion that all the Americans are , which dwell under the Equinoctial line . 
 They are men very active and nimble . They are a strong people and very warlike , for in our sighed upon the tops of the hills they would often muster themselves , and after the manner of a skirmish trace their ground very nimbly , and manage their bows and darts with great dexterity . They go clad in coats made of Theirapparel . the skins of beasts , as of Seals , Dear , Bears , Foxes , and Hares . They have also some garments of feathers , being made of the cases of Fowls , finely sowed and compact together . Of all which sorts we brought home some with us into England , which we found in their tents . In Summer they use to wear the hairy side of their coats outward , and sometime go naked for too much heat . And in Winter ( as by signs they have declared ) they wear foure or five fold upon their bodies with the hair ( for warmth ) turned inward . Hereby it appears , that the air there is not indifferent , but either it is fervent hight , or else extreme cold , & far more excessive in both qualities , then the reason of the climate should yield . For there it is colder , being under 62. degrees in latitude , then it is at Wardhouse in the voyage to Saint Nicholas in Moscovie , being at above 72. degrees in latitude . The reason hereof perhaps acdden-may be , that this Meta Incognita is much frequented taUcauserjftlie and vexed with Eastern and Northeastern winds , which Metalncog-from the sea and ice brings often and intolerable cold nita . air , which was also the cause that this year our straits were so long shut up with so great store of ice . But there is great hope and likelihood , that further within the Straights it will be more constant and temperate weather . 
 These people are in nature very subtle and sharp witted , ready to conceive our meaning by signs , and to make answer well to be understood again . And if un 369 2 A 
 they have not seen the thing whereof you ask them , they will wink , or cover their eyes with their hands , as who would say , it hath be hid from their sighed . If they understand you not whereof you ask them , they will stop their ears . They will teach us the names of each thing in their language which we desire to learn , and are apt to learn any thing of us . They The Savages delight in Music above measure , and will keep time dehghtin anj stroke to any tune which you shall sing , both with 
 ustc e ' their voice , head , hand and feet , and will sing the 
 same tune aptly after you . They will row with our Oars in our boats , and keep a true stroke with our Mariners , and seem to take great delight therein . Hard kind of They live in Caves of the earth , and hunt for their living . dinners or pray , even as the bear or other wild beasts 
 do . They eat raw flesh and fish , and refuse no meat howsoever it be stinking . They are desperate in their fight , sullen of nature , and ravenous in their manner of feeding . 
 Their sullen & desperate nature does herein manifestly appear , that a company of them being environed by our men on the top of a high cliff , so that they could by no means escape our hands , finding themselves in this case distressed , chosen rather to cast themselves headlong down the rocks into the sea , and so be bruised and drowned , rather then to yield themselves to our men's mercies . 
 Their wea - For their weapons to offend their enemies or kill tO " ™ - their prey withal , they have darts , slings , bows , and arrows headed with sharp stones , bones , and some with iron . They are exceeding friendly and kind hearted one to the other , and mourn greatly at the loss or harm of their fellows , and express their grief of mind , when they part one from another with a Their chastity , mournful song , and Dirges . They are very shamefast in bewraying the secrets of nature , and very chaste in the manner of their living : for when the man , which we brought from thence into England the last voyage , 370 
 DESCRIPTION OF META INCOGNITA a.d. 
 ... T578 - 
 should put off his coat or discover his whole body for change , he would not suffer the woman to be present , but put her forth of his Cabin . And in all the space of two or three months , while the man lived in company of the woman , there was never any thing seen or perceived between them , more then might have passed between brother and sister : but the woman was in all things very serviceable for the man , attending him carefully when he was sick , and he likewise in all the meats which they did eat together , would carve unto her of the sweetest , fattest , and best morsels they had . They wondered much at all our things , and were afraid of our horses and other beasts out of measure . They began to grow more civil , familiar , pleasant , and docible among us in very short time . 
 They have boats made of leather , and covered clean Their boats . over saving one place in the middle to fit in , planked within with timber , and they use to row therein with one Over , more swiftly a great deal , then we in our boats can do with twentie . They have one sort of greater boats wherein they can carry above twentie persons , and have a Mast with a sail thereon , which sail is made of thin skins or bladders , sowed together with the sinews of fish . 
 They are good Fishermen , and in their small Boats being disguised with their coats of Seals skins , they deceive the fish , who take them rather for their fellow Seals , then for deceiving men . 
 They are good marke-men . With their dart or arrow they will commonly kill a Duck , or any other foul in the head , and commonly in the eye . 
 When they shoot at a great fish with any of their darts , they use to tie a bladder thereunto , whereby they may the better find them again , and the fish not able to carry it so easily away ( for that the bladder does boy the dart ) will at length be weary , and die therewith . 
 They use to traffic and exchange their commodities Sna^ with some other people , of whom they have such things known . 
 371 
 How they make fire . 
 Their kettles and pans . 
 The people eat grass and shrubs . 
 as their miserable Country , and ignorance of Art to make , denieth them to have , as bars of iron , heads of iron for their darts , needles made foure square , certain buttons of copper , which they use to wear upon their forehads for ornament , as our Ladies in the Court of England do use great pearl . 
 Also they have made signs unto us , that they have seen gold , and such bright plataeae of metals , which are used for ornaments among some people with whom they have conference . 
 We found also in their tents a Guiny Bean of red colour , the which does usually grow in they hight Countries' : whereby it appears they trade with other nations which dwell far off , or else themselves are great travellers . 
 They have nothing in use among them to make fire withal , saving a kind of Heath and Moss which grows there . 
 And they kindle their fire with continual rubbing and fretting one stick against another , as we do with flints . They draw with dogs in sleads upon the ice , and remove their tents therewithal ! wherein they dwell in Summer , when they go a hunting for their pray and provision against Winter . They do sometime parboil their meat a little and sees the same in kettles made of beasts skins : they have also pans cut and made of stone very artificially ; they use pretty begins wherewith they take foul . The women carry their sucking children at their backs , and do feed them with raw flesh , which first they do a little chaw in their own mouths . The women have their faces marked or painted over with small blew spots : they have black and long hair on their heads , and trim the same in a decent order . The men have but little hair on their faces , and very thin beards . For their common drink , they eat ice to quench their thirst withal . Their earth yields no grain or fruit of sustenance for man , or almost for beast to live upon : and the people will eat grass and shrubs 
 372 
 DESCRIPTION OF META INCOGNITA a.d. 
 J578 - 
 of the ground , even as our kine do . They have no wood growing in their Country thereabouts , and yet we find they have some timber among them , which we think does grow far off to the Southwards of this place , about Canada , or some other part of New found land : for there belike , the trees standing on the cliffs of the sea side , by the weight of ice and snow in Winter overcharging them with weight , when the Summers thaw comes above , and also the Sea underfretting them beneath , which wins daily of the land , they are undermined and fallen down from those cliffs into the Sea , and with the tides and currents are driven to and from upon the coasts further off , and by conjecture are taken up here by these Country people , to serve them to plank and strengthen their boats withal , and to make darts , bows , and arrows , and such other things necessary for their use . And of this kind of drift wood we find all the Seas over great store , which being cut or sawed asunder , by reason of long driving in the Sea is eaten of worms , and full of holes , of which sort theirs is found to be . 
 We have not yet found any venomous Serpent or A strange land other hurtful thing in these parts , but there is a kind of °f small fly or gnat that stingeth and offends sorely , leaving many read spots in the face , and other places where she stingeth . They have snow and hail in the best time of their Summer , and the ground frozen three fathom deep . 
 These people are great enchanters , and use many Enchanters . charms of witchcraft : for when their heads do ache , they tie a great stone with a string unto a stick , and with certain prayers and words done to the stick , they lift up the stone from ground , which sometime with all a men force they cannot stir , and sometime again they lift as easily as a feather , and hope thereby with certain ceremonious words to have ease and help . 
 And they made us by signs to understand , lying groveling with their faces upon the ground , and making 
 373 
 The beasts and fowls of the Country . 
 Ihe length of their day . 
 a noise downward , that they worship the devil under them . 
 They have great store of Dear , Bears , Hares , Foxes , and innumerable numbers of sundry sorts of wild foul , as Seawmewes , Guiles , Wilmotes , Ducks , etc. whereof our men killed in one day fifteene hundred . 
 They have also store of hawks , as Falcons , Tassels , etc. whereof two alighted upon one of our ships at their return , and were brought into England , which some think will prove very good . 
 There are also great store of ravens , larks , and partridges , whereof the Country people feed . 
 All these fowls are far thicker clothed with down and feathers , and have thicker skins then any in England have : for as that country is colder , so nature hath provided a remedy thereunto . 
 Our men have eaten of the Bears , Hares , Partridges , Larks , and of their wild foul , and find them reasonable good meat , but not so delectable as ours . 
 Their wild foul must be all fleine , their skins are so thick : and they taste best fried in pans . 
 The Country seems to be much subject to Earthquakes . 
 The air is very subtle , piercing and searching , so that if any corrupted or infected body , especially with the disease called Morbus Gallicus come there , it will presently break forth and show it self , and cannot there by any kind of salve or medicine be cured . 
 Their longest Summers day is of great length , without any dark night , so that in July all the night long , we might perfidy and easily write and read whatsoever had pleased us , which lightsome nights were very beneficial unto us , being so distressed with abundance of ice as we were . 
 The Sun sets to them in the Evening at a quarter of and hour after tenne of the clock , and riseth again in the morning at three quarters of and hour after one of the clock , so that in Summer their Sun shines to 
 374 
 them twenty hours and a half , and in the night is absent three hours and a half . And although the Sun be absent these 3. hours and a half , yet it is not dark that time , for that the Sun is never above three or foure degrees under the edge of their Horizon : the cause is , that the Tropicke of Cancer does cut their Horizon at very uneven and oblique Angles . But the Moon at any time of the year being in Cancer , having North latitude , does make a full revolution above their Horizon , so that sometime they see the Moon above 24. hours together . Some of our company of the more ignorant sort , thought we might continually have seen the Sun and the Moon , had it not be for two or three high mountains . 
 The people are now become so wary , and so circumspect , by reason of their former losses , that by no means we can apprehend any of them , although we attempted often in this last voyage . But to say truth , we could not bestow any great time in pursuing them , because of our great business in lading , and other things . 
 A.D. 
 158 ? . 
 A full revolution of the Moon above their Horizon . 
 