The first voyage of M. John Davis , undertaken in June 1585. for the discovery of thee Northwest passage , Written by M. John Janes Merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful Master William Sanderson . 
 Ertaine Honourable personages and worthy Gentlemen of the Court & Country , with diverse worshipful Merchants of London and of the West Country , moved with desire to advance Gods glory and to seek the good of their native Country , consulting together of 
 the likelihood of the Discovery of thee Northwest passage , which heretofore had be attempted , but unhappily given over by accidents unlooked for , which turned the enterprisers from their principali purpose , resolved after good deliberation , to put down their adventures to provide for necessary shipping , and a fit man to be chief Conductor of this so hard and enterprise . The setting forth of this Actium was committed by the adventurers , especially to the care of M. William Sanderson Merchant of London , who was so forward therein , that beside his travail which was not small , he became the greatest adventurer with his purse , and commended unto the rest of the company one M. John Davis , a man very well grounded in the principles of the Art of Navigation , for Captain and chief Pilot of this exploit . 
 Thus therefore all things being put in a readiness , we departed from Dartmouth the seventh of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid Northwest passage , with two Barks , the one being of 50. tons , 381 
 nam the Sunshine of London , and the other being 35. tons , nam the Moonshine of Dartmouth . In the Sunshine we had 23. persons , whose names are these following , M. John Davis Captain , William Eston Master , Richard Pope Master's mate , John Jane Merchant , Henry Davie gunner , William Cross boatswain , John Bag , Walter Arthur , Lycia Adams , Robert Coxworthie , John Ellis , John Kelley , Edward Helman , Musicians . William Dicke , Andrew Maddocke , Thomas Hill , Robert Wats Carpenter , William Russell , Christopher Gorney boy : James Coal , Francis Ridley , John Russell , Robert Cornish Musicians . 
 The Moonshine had 19. persons , William Bruton Captain , John Ellis Master , the rest Mariners . 
 The 7. of June the Captain and the Master drew out a proportion for the continuance of our victuals . 
 The 8. day the wind being at Southwest and West southwest , we put in for Falmouth , where we remained until the 13. 
 The 13. the wind blew at North , and being fair weather we departed . 
 The 14. with contrary wind we were forced to put into Silley . 
 The 15. we departed thence , having the wind North and by East moderate and fair weather . 
 The 16. we were driven back again , and were constrained to arrive at new Grymsby in Silley : here the wind remained contrary 12. days , and in that space the Captain , the Master and I went about all the Hands , and the Captain did plate out and describe the situation of all the Hands , rocks and harboroughs to the exact use of Navigation , with lines and scale thereunto convenient . 
 They depart The 28. in Gods name we departed the wind being from Silley . Easterly but calm . 
 July . The first of July we saw great store of Porposes ; 
 The Master called for and harping iron , and shot twice or thrice : sometime he missed , and at last shot one 382 
 and struck him in the side , and wound him into the ship ; when we had him aboard , the Master said it was a Darlie head . 
 The 2. we had some of the fish sodden , and it did eat as sweet as any mutton . 
 The 3. we had more in sighed , and the Master went to shoot at them , but they were so great , that they burst our irons , and we lost both fish , irons , pastime and all : yet nevertheless the Master shot at them with a pike , and had wellnigh got one , but he was so strong that he burst off the bars of the pike and went away : then he took the boathook , and hit one with that , but all would not prevail , so at length we let them alone . 
 The 6. we saw a very great Whale , and every day we saw whale's continually . 
 The 16. 17. and 18. we saw great store of Whale's . Great store of 
 The 19. of July we fell into a great whirling and us . brustling of a tIED , setting to the Northwards : and sailing about half a league we came into a very calm Sea , which bent to the Southsouthwest . Here we herd a mighty great roaring of the Sea , as if it had be the breach of some shore , the air being so foggy and full of thick missed , that we could not see the one ship from the other , being a very small distance asunder : so the Captain and the Master being in distrust how the tIED might set them , caused the Moonshine to hoist out her boat and to found , but they could not find ground in 300. fathoms and better . Then the Captain , Master , and I went towards the breach , to see what it should be , giving charge to our gunners that at every glass they should shoot off a musketshot , to the intent we might keep our selves from losing them . Then coming never to the breach , we met many Hands of ice doting , which had quickly compassed us about : then we went upon some of them , and did perceive that all the roaring which we herd , was caused only by the rolling of this ice together : Our company seeing us not to return 383 
 The routing if the ice together made a great roaring . 
 according to our appointment , left off shooting muskets , and began to shoot falkonets , for they feared some mishap had befallen us , but before night we came aboard again with our boat laden with ice , which made very good fresh water . Then we bent our course towards the North , hoping by that means to double the land . 
 The 20. as we sailed along the coast the fog brake up , and we discovered the land , which was the most deformed rocky and mountainous land that ever we saw : The first sighed whereof did show as if it had be in form of a sugarloaf , standing to our sighed above the clouds , for that it did show over the fog like a white list in the sky , the tops altogether covered with snow , and the shore beset with ice a league off into the Sea , making such irksome noise as that it seemed to be the true pattern of desolation , and after the same our Captain nam it , The land of Desolation . 
 The 21. the wind came Northerly and overblew , so that we were constrained to bend our course South again , for we perceived that we were run into a very deep Bay , where we were almost compassed with ice , for we saw very much towards the Northnortheast , West , and Southwest : and this day and this night we cleared our selves of the ice , running Southsouthwest along the shore . 
 Upon Thursday being the 22. of this month , about three of the clock in the morning , we hoised out our boat , and the Captain with sixe sailors went towards the shore , thinking to find a landing place , for the night before we did perceive the coast to be void of ice to our judgement , and the same night we were all persuaded that we had seen a Canoa rowing along the shore , but afterwards we fell in some doubt of it , but we had no great reason so to do . The Captain rowing towards the shore , willed the Master to bear in with the land after him , and before he came near the shore by the space of a league , or about two miles , he found so much ice , that he could not get to land by any 384 
 means . Here our mariners put to their lines to see if they could get any fish , because there were so many seals upon the coast , and the birds did beat upon the water , but all was in vain : The water about this place was very black and thick like to a filthy standing pool , we sounded and had ground in 120. fathoms . While the Captain was rowing to the shore , our men saw woods upon the rocks like to the rocks of Newfoundland , but I could not discern them , yet it might be so very well : for we had wood floating upon the coast every day , and the Moonshine took up a tree at Sea not far from the coast being sixtie foot of length and foureteene handfuls about , having the root upon it : After this the Captain came aboard , the weather being very calm and fair we bent our course towards the South , with intent to double the land . 
 The 23. we coasted the land which did lie Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . 
 The 24. the wind being very fair at East , we coasted the land which did lie East and West , not being able to come near the shore by reason of the great quantity of ice . At this place , because the weather was somewhat cold by reason of the ice , and the better to encourage our men , their allowance was increased : the captain and the master , took order that every mess , being five persons , should have half a pound of bred and a kan of beer every morning to breakfast . The weather was not very cold , but the air was moderate like to our April-weather in England : when the wind came from the land , or the ice , it was some what cold , but when it came off the sea it was very hight . 
 The 25 of this month we departed from sighed of this land at sixe of the clock in the morning , directing our course to the Northwestward , hoping in Gods mercy to find our desired passage , and so continued above foure days . 
 The 29 of July we discovered land in 64 degrees 15 minutes of latitude , bearing Northeast from us . The vn 385 2 B 
 Very black water . 
 Floating wood . 
 Coldebyreason ofyce . 
 They sail Northwestward above foure days . 
 Land in 64 degrees 15 min. 
 The found where our ships did ride was called Gilberts found . 
 Musicians . 
 The people of the country came and conferred with men . 
 wind being contrary to go to the Northwestwards , we bore in with this land to take some view of it , being utterly void of the pester of ice and very temperate . Coming near the coast , we found many fair sounds and good roads for shipping , and many great inlets into the land , whereby we judged this land to be a great number of Islands standing together . Here having mored our bark in good order , we went on shore upon a small Island to seek for water and wood . Upon this Island we did perceive that there had be people : for we found a small shoo and pieces of leather sowed with sinews , and a piece of fur , and wool like to Bever . Then we went upon another Island on the other side of our ships : and the Captain , the Master , and I , being god up to the top of and high rock , the people of the country having espied us , made a lamentable noise , as we thought , with great outcries and skreechings : we hearing them , thought it had be the howling of wolves . At last I hallowed again , and they likewise cried . Then we perceiving where they stood , some on the shore , and one rowing in a Canoa about a small Island fast by them , we made a great noise , partly to allure them to us , and partly to warn our company of them . Whereupon M. Bruton and the Master of his ship , with others of their company , made great haste towards us , and brought our Musicians with them from our ship , purposing either by force to rescue us , if need should so require , or with courtesy to allure the people . When they came unto us , we caused our Musicians to play , our selves dancing , and making many signs of friendship . At length there came tenne Canoas from the other Islands , and two of them came so near the shore where we were , that they talked with us , the other being in their boats a pretty way off . Their pronunciation was very hollow thorough the throat , and their speech such as we could not understand : only we allured them by friendly embracings and signs of courtesy . At length one of them pointing up to the Sun with his hand , would presently strike his breast so 
 386 
 .. I585 ' hard that we might hear the blow . This he did many times before he would any way trust us . Then John Ellis the Master of the Moonshine was appointed to use his best policy to gain their friendship ; who struck his breast , and pointed to the Sun after their order : which when he had diverse times done , they began to trust him , and one of them came on shore , to whom we threw our caps , stockings and gloves , and such other things as then we had about us , playing with our music , and making signs of joy , and dancing . So the night coming , we bade them farewell , and went aboard our barks . 
 The next morning being the 30 of July there came 37 Thirty seven Canoas rowing by our ships , calling to us to come on CanMS-shoare : we not making any great haste unto them , one of them went up to the top of the rock , and leapt and danced as they had done the day before , showing us a seals skin , and another thing made like a timbrel , which he did beatrice upon with a stick , making a noise Their music . like a small drum . Whereupon we manned our boats and came to them , they all staying in their Canoas : we came to the water side were they were : and after we had sworn by the Sun after their fashion , they did trust us . So I shook hands with one of them , and he kissed my hand , and we were very familiar with them . 
 We were in so great credit with them upon this single Great famill-acquaintance , that we could have any thing they had . wlth the We bought five Canoas of them : we bought their clothes from their backs , which were all made of seals skins & birds skins ; their buskin's , their hose , their gloves , all being commonly sowed and well dressed : so that we were fully persuaded that they have diverse artificers among them . We had a pair of buskin's of them full of fine wool like beaver . Their apparel for heat was made of birds skins with their feathers on them . We saw among them leather dressed like Glovers leather , and thick thongs like white leather of a good length . We had of their darts and oars , and found in them that 
 387 
 They may •make much train , if they had means how to use it . 
 Moscovie glass . 
 A fruit like corinths . 
 they would by no means displease us , but would give us whatsoever we asked of them , and would be satisfied with whatsoever we gave them . They took great care one of another : for when we had bought their boats , then two other would come and carry him away between them that had sold us his . They are very tractable people , void of craft or double dealing , and easy to be brought to any civility or good order : but we judge them to be idolaters and to worship the Sun . 
 During the time of our abided among these Islands we found reasonable quantity of wood , both fir , spruse and juniper ; which whither it came floating any great distance to these places where we found it , or whither it grew in some great Islands near the same place by us not yet discovered , we know not ; but we judge that it grows there further into the land then we were , because the people had great store of darts and oars which they made none account of , but gave them to us for small trifles , as points and pieces of paper . We saw about this coast marvelous great abundance of seals skulling together like skulls of small fish . We found no fresh water among these Islands , but only snow water , whereof we found great pools . The cliflfes were all of such oar as M. Frobisher brought from Meta incognita . We had diverse shows of Study or Muscovy glass shining not altogether unlike to Crystal . We found and herb growing upon the rocks , whose fruit was sweet , full of read juice , and the ripe ones were like corinths . We found also birch and willow growing like shrubs low to the ground . These people have great store of furs as we judge . They made shows unto us the 30 of this present , which was the second time of our being with them , after they perceived we would have skins and furs , that they would go into the country and come again the next day with such things as they had : but this night the wind coming fair , the captain and the master would by no means detract the purpose of our discovery . And so the last of this month about foure 388 
 of the clock in the morning in Gods name we set sail , and were all that day becalmed upon the coast . 
 The first of August we had a fair wind , and so pro - August . ceeded towards the Northwest for our discovery . 
 The sixt of August we discovered land in 66 degrees Land in 66 40 minutes of latitude , altogether void from the pester of degrees +° ice : we anchored in a very fair road under a brave ' mount , the cliflfes whereof were as orient as gold . This mount was nam Mount Raleigh . The road where our ships lay at anchor was called Totnes road . The found which did compass the mount was nam Exeter found . The foreland towards the North was called Dyers cape . The foreland towards the South was nam Cape Walsingham . So soon as we were come to and anchor in Totnes road under Mount Raleigh , we espied foure white Foure white bears at the foot of the mount : we supposing them to eares-be goats or wolves , manned our boats and went towards them : but when we came near the shore , we found them to be white bears of a monstrous bigness : we being desirous of fresh victuali and the sport , began to assault them , and I being on land , one of them came down the hill right against me : my piece was charged with hailshot & a bullet : I discharged my piece and shot him in the neck ; he roared a little , and took the water straight , making small account of his hurt . Then we followed him with our boat , and killed him with boar-spears , & two more that night . We found nothing in their maws ; but we judged by their dung that they fed upon grass , because it appeared in all respects like the dung of and horse , wherein we might very plainly see the very straws . 
 The 7 we went on shore to another bear which lay all night upon the top of and Island under Mount Raleigh , and when we came up to him he lay fast asleep . I leveled at his head , and the stone of my piece gave no fire : with that he looked up , and laid down his head huge white 
 again : then I shot being charged with two bullets , and struck him in the head : he being but amazed fell 
 389 
 backwards : whereupon we ran all upon him with boar-spears , and thrust him in the body : yet for all that he gripped away our boar-spears , and went towards the water ; and as he was going down , he came back again . Then our Master shot his boar-spear , and struck him in the head , and made him to take the water , and swim into a cove fast by , where we killed him , and brought him aboard . The breadth of his forefoot from one side to the other was foureteene inches over . They were very fat , so as we were constrained to cast the fat away . We saw a raven upon Mount Raleigh . We found withies also growing like low shrubs & flowers like Primroses in the said place . The coast is very mountainous , altogether without wood , grass , or earth , and is only huge mountains of stone ; but the bravest stone that ever we saw . The air was very moderate in this country . 
 The 8 we departed from Mount Raleigh , coasting along the shore , which lies Southsouthwest , and Eastnortheast . 
 The 9 our men fell in dislike of their allowance , because it was too small as they thought : whereupon we made a new proportion ; every mess being five to a mess should have foure pound of bred a day , twelve wine quarts of beer , six Newland fish ; and the flesh days a gill of peas more : so we restrained them from their butter and cheese . 
 The 11 we came to the most Southerly cape of this land , which we nam The Cape of Gods mercy , as being the place of our first entrance for the discovery . The weather being very foggy we coasted this North land ; at length when it brake up , we perceived that we were shot into a very fair entrance or passage , being in some places twenty leagues broad , and in some thirty , altogether void of any pester of ice , the weather very tolerable , and the water of the very colour , nature and quality of the main ocean , which gave us the greater hope of our passage . Having sailed Northwest sixty leagues in this entrance 
 39° 
 we discovered certain Islands standing in the midst thereof , having open passage on both sides . Whereupon our ships divided themselves , the one sailing on the North side , the other on the South side of the said Isles , where we stayed five days , having the wind at Southeast , very foggy and foul weather . 
 The 14 we went on shore and found signs of people , for we found stones laid up together like a wall , and saw the skull of a man or a woman . 
 The 15 we herd dogs houle on the shore , which we thought had be wolves , and therefore we went on shore to kill them . When we came on land the dogs came presently to our boat very gently , yet we thought they came to pray upon us , and therefore we shot at them , and killed two : and about the neck of one of them we found a leathern collar , whereupon we thought them to be tame dogs . There were twenty dogs like mastiffs with pricked ears and long bush tails : we found a bone in the pizels of their dogs . Then we went farther , and found two sleads made like ours in England : the one was made of fir , spruse and oaken boards sawen Timber like inch boards : the other was made all of whale bone , sawen-& there hung on the tops of the sleads three heads of beasts which they had killed . We saw here larks , ravens , Foul . and partridges . 
 The 17 we went on shore , and in a little thing made like and oven with stones I found many small trifles , as a small canoa made of wood , a piece of wood made like and image , a bird made of bone , beads having small holes And image . in one end of them to hang about their necks , & other small things . The coast was very barren without wood or grass : the rocks were very fair like marble , full of veins of diverse colours . We found a seal which was killed not long before , being flean , and hid under stones . 
 Our Captain and Master searched still for proba - Probabilities bilities of the passage , and first found , II that this place fi^the passage . was all Islands , with great sounds passing between them . 
 391 
 we never came into any bay before or after , but the waters colour was altered very blackish . 
 Secondly , the water remained of one colour with the main ocean without altering . 
 Thirdly , we saw to the West of those Isles three or foure whale's in a skull , which they judged to come from a Westerly sea , because to the Eastward we saw not any whale . 
 Also as we were rowing into a very great found lying Southwest , from whence these whale's came , upon the sudden there came a violent countercheck of a tide from the Southwest against the flood which we came with , not knowing from whence it was maintained . 
 Fiftly , in sailing twenty leagues within the mouth of this entrance we had sounding in 90 fathoms , fair gray osie sand , and the further we ran into the Westwards the deeper was the water ; so that hard aboard the shore among these Isles we could not have ground in 330 fathoms . 
 Lastly , it did ebb and flow sixe or seven fathom up and down , the flood coming from diverse parts , so as we could not perceive the chief maintenance thereof . 
 The 18 and 19 our Captain and Master determined what was best to do , both for the safeguard of their credits , and satisfying of the adventurers , and resolved , if the weather brake up , to make further search . 
 The 20 the wind came directly against us : so they altered their purpose , and reasoned both for proceeding and returning . 
 The 21 the wind being Northwest , we departed from these Islands ; and as we coasted the South shore we saw many fair sounds , whereby we were persuaded that it was no firm land but Islands . 
 The 23 of this month the wind came Southeast , with very stormy and foul weather : so we were constrained to seek harbour upon the South coast of this entrance , where we fell into a very fair found , & anchored in 25 fathoms green osie sand . Here we went on shore , where we had manifest signs of people where they had made their fire , and laid stones like a wall . In this place we 
 392 
 LETTER FROM JOHN DAVIS TO WALSINGHAM , 3RD OCTOBER , 1585 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this Downioarnmwsy / ^ LWon « sgm^ to 
 1585. saw foure very fair falcons ; and M. Bruton took Faukens . from one of them his prey , which we judged by the wings and legs to be a snite , for the head was eaten off . 
 The 24 in the afternoon , the wind coming somewhat fair , we departed from this road , purposing by Gods grace to return for England . 
 The 26 we departed from sighed of the North land of Their return . this entrance , directing our course homeward until the tenth of the next month . 
 The 10. of September we fell with The land of desola - September . cion , thinking to go on shore , but we could get never IO3'J a good harbour . That night we put to sea again thinking to search it the next day : but this night arose a very great storm , and separated our ships , so that we lost the sighed of the Moonshine . 
 The 13. about noon ( having tried all the night before with a goose wing ) we set sail , & within two hours after we had sighed of the Moonshine again : this day England in we departed from this land . 14. days . 
 The 27. of this month we fell with sighed of England . This night we had a marvelous storm and lost the Moonshine . 
 The 30. of September we came into Dartmouth , where we found the Moonshine being come in not two hours before . 
 