Articles and order to be observed for the Fleet , set down by Captain Frobisher general , and delivered in writing to every Captain , as well for keeping company , as for the course , the 31 of May . 
 1 TNprimis , to banish swearing , dice , and card-playing , 1. and filthy conmunication , and to serve God twice a day , with the ordinary service usual in Churches of 
 322 
 England , and to clear the glass , according to the old order of England . 
 2 The Admiral shall carry the light , & after his light be once put out , no man to go a head of him , but every man to fit his sails to follow as near as they may , without endangering one another . 
 3 That no man shall by day or by night depart further from the Admiral then the distance of one English mile , and as near as they may , without danger one of another . 
 4 If it chance to grow thick , and the wind contrary , either by day or by night , that the Admiral be forced to cast about , before her casting about she shall give warning , by shooting ofF a piece , and to her shall answer the Viceadmiral and the Rearadmiral each of them with a piece , if it be by night , or in a fog ; and that the Viceadmiral shall answer first , and the Rearadmiral last . 
 5 That no man in the Fleet descrying any sail or sails , give upon any occasion any chase before he have spoken with the Admiral . 
 6 That every evening all the Fleet come up and speak with the Admiral , at seven of the Clock , or between that and eight , and if the weather will not serve them all to speak with the Admiral , then some shall come to the Viceadmiral , and receive the order of their course of Master Hall chief Pilot of the Fleet , as he shall direct them . 
 7 If to any man in the Fleet there happen any mischance , they shall presently shoot off two pieces by day , and if it be by night , two pieces , and show two lights . 
 8 If any man in the Fleet come up in the night , & hale his fellow knowing him not , he shall give him this watchword , Before the world was God . The other shall answer him ( if he be one of our Fleet ) After God came Christ his Son . So that if any be found among us , not of our own company , he that first describeth any such sail or sails , shall give warning to the 
 323 
 Admiral by himself or any other that he can speak to , that sails better then he , being nearest unto him . 
 9 That every ship in the fleet in the time of fogs , which continually happen with little winds , and most part calms , shall keep a reasonable noise with trumpet , drum , or otherwise , to keep themselves clear one of another . 
 io If it fallen out so thick or misty that we lay it to hull , the Admiral shall give warning with a piece , and putting out three lights one over another , to the end that every man may take in his sails , and at his setting of sails again do the like , if it be not clear . 
 11 If any man discover land by night , that he give the like warning , that he does for mischances , two lights , and two pieces , if it be by day one piece , and put out his flag , and strike all his sails he hath aboard . 
 12 If any ship shall happen to loose company by force of weather , then any such ship or ships shall get her into the latitude of , and so keep that latitude until they get Frisland . And after they be passed the West parts of Frisland , they shall get them into the latitude of , and , and not to the Northward of ; and being once entered within the Streites , all such ships shall every watch shoot off a good piece , and look out well for smoke and fire which those that get in first shall make every night , until all the fleet be come together . 
 13 That upon the sighed of and Ensign in the mast of the Admiral ( a piece being shot off ) the whole fleet shall repair e to the Admiral , to understand such conference as the general is to have with them . 
 14 If we chance to meet with any enemies , that foure ships shall attend upon the Admiral , viz. the Francis of Foy , the Moon , the Bark Dennis , and the Gabriel : and foure upon my Lieutenant general in the Judith , viz. the Hopewel , the Armenal , the Bear , and the Salomon : and the other foure upon the Vizadmirall , the 
 324 
 Anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , the Emmanuel , and the Michael . 
 15 If there happen any disordered person in the Fleet , that he be taken and kept in safe custody until he may conveniently be brought aboard the Admiral , and there to receive such punishment as his or their offences 
 shall deserve . 
 By me Martin Frobisher . 
 Our departure from England . 
 HAving received these articles of direction we departed from Harwich the one and thirtieth of May . And sailing along the South part of England Westward , we at length came by the coast of Ireland at Cape Clear Cape Clear the sixth of June , and gave chase there to a small bark which was supposed to be a Pirate , or Rover on the ’ Seas , but it fell out indeed that they were poor men of Bristow , who had met with such company of Frenchmen as had spoiled and slain many of them , and left the rest so soar wounded that they were like to perish in the sea , having neither hand nor foot hold to help themselves with , nor victuals to sustain their hungry bodies . Our general , who well understood the office of a Soldier and and Englishman , and knew well what the necessity of the sea means , pitying much the misery charitable of the poor men , relieved them with Surgery and salves to heal their hurts , and with meat and drink to comfort their pining hearts ; some of them having neither eaten nor drunk more then olives and stinking water in many days before , as they reported . And after this good deed done , having a large wind , we kept our course upon our said voyage without staying for the taking in of fresh water , or any other provision , whereof many of the fleet were not thoroughly furnished : and sailing towards the Northwest parts from Ireland , we met with a great current from out of the Southwest , Mark this which carried us ( by our reckoning ) one point to the currentNortheastwards of our said course , which current seemed 
 325 
 to us to continue it self towards Norway , and other the Northeast parts of the world , whereby we may be induced to believe , that this is the same which the Portugals meet at Capo de buona Speranza , where striking over from thence to the Stfeites of Magellan , and finding no passage there for the narrowness of the said Streites , runneth along into the great Bay of Mexico , where also having a let of land , it is forced to strike back again towards the Northeast , as we not only here , but in another place also , further to the Northwards , by good experience this year have found , as shall hereafter in his place more at large declared . 
 Now had we sailed about foureteene days , without sighed of any land , or any other living thing , except certain fowls , as Wilmots , Nodies , Guiles , etc. which there seem only to live by sea . 
 The twentieth of June , at two of the clock in the morning , the General descried land , & found it to be West Frisland , now nam west England . Here the general , & other Gentlemen went ashore , being the first known Christians that we have true notice of , that ever set foot upon that ground : and therefore the general took possession thereof to the use of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty , and discovered here a goodly harbour for the ships , where were also certain little boats of that country . And being there landed , they espied certain tents and people of that country , which were ( as they judge ) in all sorts , very like those of Meta Incognita , as by their apparel , and other things which we found in their tents , appeared . 
 The Savage and simple people so soon as they perceived our men coming towards them ( supposing there had be no other world but theirs ) fled fearfully away , as men much amazed at so strange a sighed , and creatures of humane shape , so far in apparel , complexion , and other things different from themselves . They left in their tents all their furniture for haste behind them , where among other things were found a box of small 326 
 i578-nailes , and certain e read Herrings , boards of Fir tree well cut , with diverse other things artificially wrought : whereby it appears , that they have trade with some civil people , or else are indeed themselves artificiali workmen . 
 Our men brought away with them only two of their dogs , leaving in recompense belles , looking-glasses , and diverse of our country toys behind them . 
 This country , no doubt , promises good hope of great commodity and riches , if it may be well discovered . The description whereof you shall find more at large in the second voyage . 
 Some are of opinion , that this West England is firm Frlsland supland with the Northeast parts of Meta Incognita , or else with Greenland . And their reason is , because the people , Qroenian^ apparel , boats , and other things are so like to theirs : and another reason is , the multitude of Islands of ice , which lay between it and Meta Incognita , does argue , that on the North side there is a bay , which cannot be but by conjoining of the two lands together . 
 And having a fair and large wind we departed from thence towards Frobishers Streites , the three and twentieth 2 3 °f 
 of June . But first we gave name to a high clifFe in June ' West England , the last that was in our sighed , and for a certain similitude we called it Charing cross . Then Charing we bore Southerly towards the Sea , because to the cnue ' Northwards of this coast we met with much driving ice , which by reason of the thick mists and weather might have be some trouble unto us . 
 On Munday the last of June , we met with many great Whale's , as they had be Porposes . 
 This same day the Salamander being under both her Whale corpses and bonnets , happened to strike a great Whale with stn , > ke a s ! 1^-her full stem , with such a blow that the ship stood still , and stirred neither forward nor backward . The Whale thereat made a great and ugly noise , and cast up his body and tail , and so went under water , and within two days after , there was found a great Whale dead 
 327 
 swimming above water , which we supposed was that which the Salamander struck . 
 The second day of July early in the morning we had sighed of the Queens Foreland , and bore in with the land all the day , and passing thorough great quantity of ice , by night were entered somewhat within the Streites , perceiving no way to pass further in , the whole place being frozen over from the one side to the other , and as it Frobishers were with many walls , mountains , and bulwarks of ice , Streites Mud choked Up the passage , and denied us entrance . And up wn ice . joe j not nthat passage or Sea hereabout is frozen over at any time of the year : albeit it seemed so unto us by the abundance of ice gathered together , which occupied the whole place . But I do rather suppose these ice to be bred in the hollow sounds and freshets thereabouts : which by the heat of the summers Sun , being loosed , do empty themselves with the ebbs into the sea , and so gather in great abundance there together . 
 And to speak somewhat here of the ancient opinion of the frozen sea in these parts : I do think it to be rather a bore conjecture of men , then that ever any man hath made experience of any such sea . And that which they speak of Mare glacial , may be truly thought to be spoken of these parts : for this may well be called indeed the ycie sea , but not the frozen sea , for no sea consisting of salt water can be frozen , as I have more at large herein showed my opinion in my second voyage , for Saltwatercan - it seems impossible for any sea to be frozen , which not freeze . hath his course of ebbing and flowing , especially in those 
 places where the tides do ebb and flow above ten fathom . And also all these aforesaid ice , which we sometime met a hundreth mile from land , being gathered out of the salt Sea , are in taste fresh , and being dissolved , become sweet and wholesome water . 
 And the cause why this year we have be more cumbered with ice then at other times before , may be by reason of the Easterly & Southerly winds , which 328 
 brought us more timely thither now then we looked for . Which blowing from the sea directly upon the place of our Streites , hath kept in the ice , and not suffered them to be carried out by the ebb to the main sea , where they would in more short time have be dissolved . And all these fleeting ice are not only so dangerous in that they wind and gather so near together , that a man may pass sometime tenne or twelve miles as it were upon one firm Island of ice : but also for that they open and shut together again in such sort with the tides and sea-gate , that whilst one ship follows the other with full sails , the ice which was open unto the foremost will join and close together before the latter can come to follow the first , whereby many times our ships were brought into great danger , as being not able so suddenly to take in our sails , or stay the swift way of our ships . 
 We were forced many times to stem and strike great rocks of ice , and so as it were make way through mighty mountains . By which means some of the fleet , where they found the ice to open , entered in , and passed so far within the danger thereof , with continual desire to recover their port , that it was the greatest wonder of the world that they ever escaped safe , or were ever herd of again . For even at this present we missed two of the fleet , that is , the Judith , wherein was the Lieutenant general Captain Fenton ; and the Michael , whom both we supposed had be utterly lost , having not herd any tidings of them in more then 20 days before . 
 And one of our fleet nam the Bark Dennis , being B^ke Dennis of and hundreth tun burden , seeking way in among these ice , received such a blow with a rock of ice that she sunk down therewith in the sighed of the whole fleet . 
 Howbeit having signified her danger by shooting ofF a piece of great Ordinance , new succour of other ships came so readily unto them , that the men were all saved with boats . 
 329 
 A.D. 1578. Part of the house lost . 
 Within this ship that was drowned there was parcel of our house which was to be erected for them that should stay all the winter in Meta Incognita . 
 This was a more fearful spectacle for the Fleet to behold , for that the outrageous storm which presently followed , threatened them the like fortune and danger . For the Fleet being thus compassed ( as aforesaid ) on every side with ice , having left much behind them , thorough which they passed , and finding more before them , thorough which it was not possible to pass , there arose a sudden terrible tempest at the Southeast , which blowing from the main sea , directly upon the place of the Streites , brought together all the ice a seaboard of us upon our backs , and thereby debarred us of turning back to recover sea-room again : so that being thus compassed with danger on every side , sundry men with sundry devises sought the best way to save themselves . Some of the ships , where they could find a place more clear of ice , and get a little birth of sea room , did take in their sails , and there lay a drift . Other some fastened & mored Anchor upon a great Island of ice , and road under the Lee thereof , supposing to be better guarded thereby from the outrageous winds , and the danger of the lesser fleeting ice . And again some where so fast shut up , and compassed in among and infinite number of great countries' and Islands of ice , that they were feign to submit themselves and their ships to the mercy of the unmerciful ice , and strengthened the sides of their ships with junckes of cables , beds , Masts , planks and such like , which being hanged over board on the sides of their ships , might the better defend them from the outrageous sway and strokes of the said ice . But as in greatest distress , men of best valour are best to be discerned , so it is greatly worthy commendation and noting with what invincible mind every Captain encouraged his company , and with what incredible labour the painful Mariners and poor Miners ( unacquainted with such extremities ) to the ever - 
 330 
 • .. I578 , lasting renown of our nation , did overcome the brunt of these so great and extreme dangers : for some , even without board upon the ice , and some within board upon the sides of their ships , having poles , pikes , pieces of timber , and Ores in their hands , stood almost day and night without any rest , bearing off the force , and breaking the sway of the ice with such incredible pain and peril , that it was wonderful to behold , which otherwise no doubt had stricken quite through and through the sides of their ships , notwithstanding our former provision : for planks of timber of more then three inches thick , and other things of greater force and bigness , by the surging of the sea and billow , with the ice were shivered and cut in sunder , at the sides of our ships , so that it will seem more then credible to be reported of . And yet ( that which is more ) it is faithfully and plainly to , be proved , and that by many substantiali witnesses , that our ships , even those of greatest burdens , with the meeting of contrary waves of the sea , were heaved up between Islands of ice , a foot wellnear out of the sea above their watermark , having their knees and timbers within board [ HIM . 79. J both bowed and broken therewith . 
 And amid these extremes , whilst some laboured for defence of the ships , and sought to save their bodies , other some of more milder spirit sought to save the soul by devout prayer and meditation to the Almighty , thinking indeed by no other means possible then by a divine Miracle to have their deliverance : so that there was none that were either idle , or not well occupied , and he that held himself in best security had ( God knoweth ) but only bore hope remaining for his best safety . 
 Thus all the gallant Fleet and miserable men without hope of ever getting forth again , distressed with these extremities remained here all the whole night and part of the next day , excepting foure ships , that is , the Anne Francis , the Moon , the Francis of Foy , and the Gabrieli , which being somewhat a Seaboord of the Fleet , and 
 331 
 being fist ships by a wind , having a more scope of clear , tried it out all the time of the storm under sail , being hardly able to bear a coast of each . 
 And albeit , by reason of the fleeting ice , which were dispersed here almost the whole sea over , they were brought many times to the extremest point of peril , mountains of ice tenne thousand times escaping them scarce one ynch , which to have stricken had be their present destruction , considering the swift course and way of the ships , and the unwieldiness of them to stay and turn as a man would wish : yet they esteemed it their better safety , with such peril to seek Sea-room , than without hope of ever getting liberty to lie striving against the stream , and beating among the Isie mountains , whose hugeness and monstrous greatness was such , that no man would credit , but such as to their pains saw and felt it . And these foure ships by the next day at noon god out to Sea , and were first clear of the ice , who now enjoying their own liberty , began a new to sorrow and fear for their fellows safeties . And devoutly kneeling about their main Mast , they gave unto God humble thanks , not only for themselves , but besought him likewise highly for their friends deliverance . And even now whitest amidst these extremities this gallant Fleet and valiant men were altogether overlaboured and forewatched , with the long and fearful continuance of the foresaid dangers , it pleased God with his eyes of mercy to look down from heaven to send them help in good time , giving them the next day a more favourable wind at the West Northwest , which did not only disperse and drive forth the ice before them , but also gave them liberty of more scope and Sea-room , and they were by night of the same day following perceived of the other foure ships , where ( to their greatest comfort ) they enjoyed again the fellowship one of another . Some in mending the sides of their ships , some in setting up their top Masts , and mending their sails and tacklings ; Again , 
 332 
 some complaining of their false Stem born away , some in stopping their leaks , some in recounting their dangers past , spent no small time & labour . So that I dare well avouch , there were never men more dangerously distressed , nor more mercifully by Gods providence delivered . And. hereof both the torn ships , and the forwearied bodies of the men arrived do bear most evident mark and witness . And now the whole Fleet plied off to Seaward , resolving there to abide until the Sun might consume , or the force of wind disperse these ice from the place of their passage : and being a good birth off the shore , they took in their sails , and lay adrift . 
 The seventh of July as men nothing yet dismayed , we Another as-cast about towards the inward , and had sighed of land , salt ' which rose in form like the Northerland of the straights , which some of the Fleet , and those not the worst Mariners , judged to be the North Foreland : howbeit other some were of contrary opinion . But the matter was not well to be discerned by reason of the thick fog which a long time hung upon the coast , & the Fog , snow , new falling snow which yearly altereth the shape of the land , and takes away oftentimes the Mariners iners marks . marks . And by reason of the dark mists which continued by the space of twentie days together , this doubt grew the greater and the longer perilous . For whereas indeed we thought our selves to be upon the Northeast side of Frobishers straights , we were now carried to the South westwards of the Queens Foreland , and being deceived by a swift current coming from the Northeast , A swift eur-were brought to the Southwestwards of our said course many miles more then we did think possible could come ’ to pass . The cause whereof we have since found , and it shall be at large hereafter declared . 
 Here we made a point of land which some mistook for a place in the straights called Mount Warwicke : but how we should be so far shot up so suddenly within the said straights the expertest Mariners began to 
 333 
 James Bear a good Mariner . : 
 Christopher Hall chief Pilot . 
 marvel , thinking it a thing impossible that they could be so far overtaken in their accounts , or that any current could deceive them here which they had not by former experience proved and found out . Howbeit many confessed that they found a swifter course of flood then before time they had observed . And truly it was wonderful to hear and see the rushing and noise that the tides do make in this place with so violent a force that our ships lying a hull were turned sometime round about even in a moment after the manner of a whirlpool , and the noise of the stream no less to be herd afar ofF , then the waterfall of London Bridge . 
 But whilst the Fleet lay thus doubtful among great store of ice in a place they knew not without sighed of Sun , whereby to take the height , and so to know the true elevation of the pole , and without any clear of light to make perfect the coast , the general with the Captains & Master's of his ships , began doubtfully to question of the matter , and sent his Pinnace aboard to hear each men opinion , and specially of James Bear , Master of the Anne Francis , who was known to be a sufficient and skilful Mariner , and having be there the year before , had well observed the place , and drawn out Cards of the coast . But the rather this matter grew the more doubtful , for that Christopher Hall chief Pilot of the voyage , delivered a plain and public opinion in the hearing of the whole Fleet , that he had never seen the foresaid coast before , and that he could not make it for any place of Frobishers Streits , as some of the Fleet supposed , and yet the lands do lie and trend so like , that the best Mariners therein may be deceived . 
 The tenth of July , the weather still continuing thick and dark , some of the ships in the fog lost sighed of the Admiral and the rest of the fleet , and wandering to and from , with doubtful opinion whither it were best to seek back again to seaward through great store of ice , or to follow on a doubtful course in a Sea , Bay , or Streites they knew not , or along a coast , whereof by reason of the 334 
 1578. dark mists they could not discern the dangers , if by chance any rock or broken ground should lie of the place , as commonly in these parts it does . 
 The Viceadmiral Captain Yorke considering the foresaid opinion of the Pilot Hall , who was with him in the Thomas Allen , having lost sighed of the Fleet , turned back to sea again , having two other ships in company with him . 
 Also the Captain of the Anne Francis having likewise lost company of the Fleet , and being all alone , held it for best to turn it out to sea again , until they might have clear weather to take the Suns altitude , and with incredible pain and peril god out of the doubtful place , into the open Sea again , being so narrowly distressed by the way , by means of continual fog and ice , that they were many times ready to leap upon and Hand of ice to avoid the present danger , and so hoping to prolong life awhile meant rather to die a pining death . 
 Some hoped to save themselves on chests , and some Hard shifts to determined to tie the Hatches of the ships together , and men's to bind themselves with their furniture fast thereunto , wet ' and so to be towed with the ship-boat ashore , which otherwise could not receive half of the company , by which means if happily they had arrived , they should either have perished for lack of food to eat , or else should themselves have been eaten of those ravenous , bloody , and Men-eating people . 
 The rest of the Fleet following the course of the The coast along general which led them the way , passed up above sixtie leagues within the said doubtful and supposed straights , ieagU ™ having always a fair continent upon their starreboorde side , and a continuance still of and open Sea before them . 
 The general albeit with the first perchance he found Mistaken out the error , and that this was not the old straights , yet tf^ghttwhich he persuaded the Fleet always that they were in their n° 
 right course , and known straights . Howbeit I suppose he rather dissembled his opinion therein then otherwise , 
 335 
 1578. meaning by that policy ( being himself led with and honourable desire of further discovery ) to induce the Fleet to follow him , to see a further proof of that place . And as some of the company reported , he hath since confessed that if it had not be for the charge and care he had of the Fleet and fraughted ships , he 
 Frobisher could have passed to Cataia . both would and could have gone through to the South Sea , called Mar deal Sur , and dissolved the long doubt of the passage which we seek to find to the rich country of Cataya . 1 Of which mistaken straights , considering the circumstance , we have great cause to confirm our opinion , to like and hope well of the passage in this place . For 
 Fair open may . Reasons to prove a passage here . the foresaid Bay or Sea , the further we sailed therein , the wider we found it , with great likelihood of endless continuance . And where in other places we were much troubled with ice , as in the entrance of the same , so after we had sailed fiftie or sixtie leagues therein we had no let of ice , or other thing at all , as in other places we found . 
 Great indrafts . 2 Also this place seems to have a marvellous great indraft , and draws unto it most of the drift ice , and other things which do fleet in the Sea , either to the North or Eastwards of the same , as by good experience we have found . 3 For here also we met with boards , lathes , and diverse other things driving in the Sea , which was of the wrack of the ship called the Bark Dennis , which 
 A current to the West . perished among the ice as beforesaid , being lost at the first attempt of the entrance overthwart the Queens foreland in the mouth of Frobishers straights , which could by no means have be so brought thither , neither by wind nor tIED , being lost so many leagues off , if by force of the said current the same had not be violently brought . For if the same had be brought thither by tide of flood , look how far the said flood had carried it , the ebb would have recarried it as far back again , and by the wind it could not so come to 336 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv of this book , by clicking on ' Resources Available ' . 
 .. 15781 pass , because it was then sometime calm , and most times contrary . 
 And some Mariners do affirm that they have diligently observed , that there runneth in this place nine Nine hours hours flood to three ebb , which may thus come to t0 pass by force of the said current : for whereas the Sea in most places of the world , does more or less ordinarily ebb and flow once every twelve hours with sixe hours ebb , and sixe hours flood , so also would it do there , were it not for the violence of this hastening current , which forceth the flood to make appearance to begin before his ordinary time one hour and a half , and also to continue longer than his natural course by and other hour and a half , until the force of the ebb be so great that it will no longer be resisted : according to the saying , Naturam expellas furca licet , usque recurrit . Although nature and natural courses be forced and resisted never so much , yet at last they will have their own sway again . 
 Moreover it is not possible that so great course of floods and current , so high swelling tides with continuance of so deep waters , can be digested here without unburdening themselves into some open Sea beyond this place , which argue the more likelihood of the passage to be hereabout . Also we suppose these great indrafts do grow and are made by the reverberation and reflection of that same current , which at our coming by Ireland , met and crossed us , of which in the first part of this discourse I spoke , which coming from the bay of Mexico , passing by and washing the Southwest parts of Ireland , reboundeth over to the Northeast parts of the world , as Norway , Island , etc. where not finding any passage to and open Sea , but rather being there increased by a new access , and another current meeting with it from the Scythian Sea , passing the bay of Saint Nicholas Westward , it does once again rebound back , by the coasts of Greenland , and from thence upon Frobishers straights being to the Southwestwardes of the same . 
 vii 337 y 
 The sea moves from East to West continually . 
 Authority . 
 Hard but yet possible turning back again . 
 Tsaffique . 
 5 And if that principle of Philosophy be true , that Inferiora corpora reguntur a superioribus , that is , if inferior bodies be governed , ruled , and carried after the manner and course of the superiors , then the water being and inferior Element , must needs be governed after the superior heaven , and so follow the course of Primum mobile from East to West . 
 6 But every man that hath written or considered any thing of this passage , hath more doubted the return by the same way by reason of a great downfall of water , which they imagine to be thereabouts ( which we also by experience partly find ) than any mistrust they have of the same passage at all . For we find ( as it were ) a great downfall in this place , but yet not such but that we may return , although with much ado . For we were easilier carried in one hour then we could get forth again in three . Also by another experience at another time , we found this current to deceive us in this sort : That whereas we supposed it to be 15 leagues off , and lying a hull , we were brought within two leagues of the shore contrary to all expectation . 
 Our men that sailed furthest in the same mistaken straights ( having the main land upon their starboard side ) affirm that they met with the outlet or passage of water which comes thorough Frobishers straights , and follows as all one into this passage . 
 Some of our company also affirm that they had sighed of a continent upon their larboard-side being 60 leagues within the supposed straights : howbeit except certain Hands in the entrance hereof we could make no part perfect thereof . All the foresaid tract of land seems to be more fruitful and better stored of Grass , Dear , Wild foul , as Partridges , Larks , Seamewes , Gulls , Wilmots , Falcons and Tassel gen tils , Ravens , Bears , Hares , Foxes , and other things , than any other part we have yet discovered , and is more populous . And here Lycia Ward , a Gentleman of the company , traded merchandise , and did exchange knives , bells , looking glasses , etc. with 338 
 those country people , who brought him foul , fish , bears skins , and such like , as their country yields for the same . Here also they saw of those greater boats of the country , with twentie persons in a piece . 
 Now after the general had bestowed these many days here , not without many dangers , he returned back again . And by the way sailing alongst this coast ( being the backside of the supposed continent of America ) and the Queens Foreland , he perceived a great found to go thorough into Frobishers straights . Whereupon he sent the Gabriel the one and twentieth of July , to prove whither they might go thorough and meet again with him in the straights , which they did : and as we imagined before , so the Queens foreland proved and Hand , as I think most of these supposed continents will . And so he departed towards the straights , thinking it were high time now to recover his Port , and to provide the Fleet of their lading , whereof he was not a little careful , as shall by the process and his resolute attempts appear . And in his return with the rest of the fleet he was so entangled by reason of the dark fog among a number of Hands and broken ground that lie ofF this coast , that many of the ships came over the top of rocks , which presently after they might perceive to lie dry , having not half a foot water more then some of their ships did draw . And by reason they could not with a small gale of wind stem the force of the flood , whereby to go clear ofF the rocks , they were feign to let and anchor fallen with two bent of Cable together , at and hundred and odd fathom depth , where otherwise they had be by the force of the tides carried upon the rocks again , and perished : so that if God in these fortune's ( as a merciful guide , beyond the expectation of man ) had not carried us thorough , we had surely perished amid these dangers . For being many times driven hard aboard the shore without any sighed of land , until we were ready to make shipwreck thereon , being forced commonly with our boats to found before our ships , lest we might light 
 Return out of the mistaken straights . 
 Great dangers . 
 339 
 Anae Francis met with some of the fleet . 
 thereon before we could discern the same ; it pleased God to give us a clear of Sun and light for a short time to see and avoid thereby the danger , having be continually dark before , and presently after . Many times also by means of fog and currents being driven near upon the coast , God lent us even at the very pinch one prosperous breath of wind or other , whereby to double the land , and avoid the peril , and when that we were all without hope of help , every man recommending himself to death , and crying out , Lord now help or never , now Lord look down from heaven and save us sinners , or else our safety comes too late : even then the mighty maker of heaven , and our merciful God did deliver us : so that they who have be partakers of these dangers do even in their souls confess , that God even by miracle hath sought to save them , whose name be praised evermore . 
 Long time now the Anne Francis had lain beating off and on all alone before the Queens foreland , not being able to recover their Port for ice , albeit many times they dangerously attempted it , for yet the ice choked up the passage , and would not suffer them to enter . And having never seen any of the fleet since twenty days past , when by reason of the thick mists they were severed in the mistaken straights , they did now this present 23 of July overthwart a place in the straights called Hattons Hedland , where they met with seven ships of you Fleet again , which good hap did not only rejoice them for themselves , in respect of the comfort which they received by such good company , but especially that by this means they were put out of doubt of their deer friends , whose safeties long time they did not a little suspect and fear . 
 At their meeting they haled the Admiral after the manner of the Sea , and with great joy welcomed one another with a thundering volley of shot . And now every man declared at large the fortune's and dangers which they had passed . 
 34° 
 The foure and twentieth of July we met with the Francis of Foy , who with much ado sought way back FrandsefF^ . again , through the ice from out of the mistaken straights , where ( to their great peril ) they proved to recover their Port. They brought the first news of the Vizadmirall Captain Yorke , who many days with themselves , and the Buss of Bridgewater was missing . Bridgwater They reported that they left the Viceadmiral reasonably s^ ' clear of the ice , but the other ship they greatly feared , whom they could not come to help , being themselves so hardly distressed as never men more . Also they told us of the Gabriel , who having god thorough from the backside , and Western point of the Queens foreland , into Frobishers straights , fell into their company about the cape of Good hope . 
 And upon the seven and twentieth of July , the ship of Bridgewater god out of the ice and met with the Fleet which lay ofF and on under Hattons Hedland . They reported of their marvellous accidents and dangers , declaring their ship to be so leak that they must of necessity seek harbour , having their stem so beaten within their huddings , that they had much ado to keep themselves above water . They had ( as they say ) five hundreth strokes at the pump in less then half a watch , being scarce two hours ; their men being so overwearied therewith , and with the former dangers that they desired help of men from the other ships . Moreover they declared that there was nothing but ice and danger where they had be , and that the straights within were frozen up , and that it was the most impossible thing of The Streits the world , to pass up unto the Countess of Warwicks over found , which was the place of our Port. 
 The report of these dangers by these ships thus published among the fleet , with the remembrance of the perils past , and those present before their face , brought no small fear and terror into the hearts of many considerate men . So that some began privily to murmur against the general for this wilful manner of 
 341 
 proceeding . Some desired to discover some harbour thereabouts to refresh themselves and reform their broken vessels for a while , until the North and Northwest winds might disperse the ice , and make the place more free to pass . Other some forgetting themselves , spoke more undutifully in this behalf , saying : that they had as leave be hanged when they came home , as without hope of safety to seek to pass , and so to perish among the ice . 
 The general not opening his ears to the peevish passion of any private person , but chiefly respecting the accomplishment of the cause he had undertaken ( wherein the chief reputation and fame of a general and Captain consisteth ) and calling to his remembrance the short time he had in hand to provide so great number of ships their loading , determined with this resolution to pass and recover his Port , or else there to bury himself with his attempt . 
 Notwithstanding somewhat to appease the feeble passion of the fearefuller sort , and the better to entertain time for a season , whilst the ice might the better be dissolved , he haled on the Fleet with belief that he would put them into harbour : thereupon whilst the ships lay off " and on under Hattons Hedland , he sought to go in with his Pinnaces among the Islands there , as though he meant to search for harborowe , where indeed he meant nothing less , but rather sought if any Over might be found in that place , as by the sequel appeared . 
 In the mean time whilst the Fleet lay thus doubtful without any certain resolution what to do , being hard aboard the lee-shore , there arose a sudden and terrible tempest at the Southsoutheast , whereby the ice began marvellously to gather about us . 
 Whereupon every man , as in such case of extremity he thought best , sought the wisest way for his own safety . The most part of the Fleet which were further shot up within the straights , and so far to the leeward , as that they could not double the land , following the 342 
 course of the general , who led them the way , took in their Sails , and laid it a hull among the ice , and so passed over the storm , and had no extremity at all , but for a short time in the same place . 
 Howbeit the other ships which plied out to Seaward , had and extreme storm for a longer season . And the nature of the place is such , that it is subject diversely to diverse winds , according to the sundry situation of the great Alps and mountains there , every mountain causing a several blast , and pirrie , after the manner of a Levant . 
 In this storm being the sixe and twentieth of July , there fell so much snow , with such bitter cold air , that we could not scarce see one another for the same , nor open our eyes to handle our ropes and sails , the snow Snow in July . being above half a foot deep upon the hatches of our ship , which did so wet thorough our poor Mariners clothes , that he that had five or sixe shifts of apparel had scarce one dry thread to his back , which kind of wet and coldness , together with the overlabouring of the poor men amidst the ice , bred no small sickness among the fleet , which somewhat discouraged some of the poor men , who had not experience of the like before , every man persuading himself that the winter there must needs be extreme , where they found Extreme win-so unseasonable a Summer . ter ' 
 And yet notwithstanding this cold air , the Sun Great heattn many times hath a marvellous force of heat among M . etam 1 ™ % - , J , .... ° mta . 
 those mountains , insomuch that when there is no breath of wind to bring the cold air from the dispersed ice upon us , we shall be weary of the blooming heat and then suddenly with a perry of wind which inconstant comes down from the hollowness of the hills , we weather-shall have such a breath of heat brought upon our faces as though we were entered within some bathstove or hothouse , and when the first of the pirry and blast is past , we shall have the wind suddenly a new blow cold again . 
 343 
 The general recavere th his port . 
 In this storm the Anne Francis , the Moon , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who found themselves able to hold it up with a sail , and could double about the Cape of the Queens foreland , plied out to the Seaward , holding it for better policy and safety to seek Sea room , then to hazard the continuance of the storm , the danger of the ice , and the leeshoare . 
 And being uncertain at this time of the Generals private determinations , the weather being so dark that they could not discern one another , nor perceive which way he wrought , betook themselves to this course for best and safest . 
 The General , notwithstanding the great storm , following his own former resolution , sought by all means possible , by a shorter way to recover his Port , and where he saw the ice never so little open , he gate in at one gap and out at another , and so himself valiantly led the way thorough before to induce the Fleet to follow after , and with incredible pain and peril at length got through the ice , and upon the one and thirtieth of July recovered his long wished Port after many attempts and sundry times being put back , and came to anchor in the Countess of Warwicks found , in the entrance whereof , when he thought all peril past , he encountered a great Hand of ice which gave the Aid such a blow , having a little before weighed her anchor a cock bill , that it stroke the anchor flouke through the ships bows under the water , which caused so great a leak , that with much ado they preserved the ship from sinking . 
 At their arrival here they perceived two ships at anchor within the harbour , whereat they began much to marvel and greatly to rejoice , for those they knew to be the Michael , wherein was the Lieutenant general Captain Fenton , and the small Bark called the Gabriel , who so long time were missing , and never herd of before , whom every man made the last reckoning , never to hear of again . 
 Here every man greatly rejoiced of their happy meet - 
 344 
 ing , and welcomed one another after the Sea manner with their great Ordinance , and when each party had ripped up their sundry fortune's and perils past , they highly praised God , and altogether upon their knees gave him due , humble and hearty thanks , and Master Master Wilf-Wolfall a learned man , appointed by her Majesties a^Preachei-Councell to be their Minister and Preacher made unto them a godly sermon , exhorting them especially to be thankful to God for their strange and miraculous deliverance in those so dangerous places , and putting them in mind of the uncertainty of men life , willed them to make themselves always ready as resolute men to enjoy and accept thankfully whatsoever adventure his divine Providence should appoint . This master Wolfall being well seated and settled at home in his own Country , with a good and large living , having a good honest woman to wife and very towardly children , being of good reputation among the best , refused not to take in hand this painful voyage , for the only care he had to save souls , and to reform those Infidels if it were possible to Christianitie : and also partly for the great desire he had that this notable voyage so well begun , might be brought to perfection : and therefore he was contented to stay there the whole year if occasion had served , being in every necessary actium as forward as the resolutest men of all . Wherefore in this behalf he may rightly be called a true Pastor and minister of Gods word , which for the profit of his flock spared not to venture his own life . 
 But to return again to Captain Fentons company , The adven-and to speak somewhat of their dangers ( albeit they be more then by writing can be expressed ) they reported CBm _ that from the night of the first storm which was about panie . the first day of July until seven days before the Generals arrival , which was the sixe and twentith of the same , they* never saw any one day or hour , wherein they were not troubled with continual danger and fear of death , and were twentie days almost together fast 
 345 
 Extremity causeth men to devise nevi arts and remedies . 
 Hard shifts . 
 Strange wonders . 
 among the ice . They had their ship stricken through and through on both sides , their false stem born quite away , and could go from their ships in some places upon the ice very many miles , and might easily have passed from one Hand of ice to another even to the shore , and if God had not wonderfully provided for them and their necessity , and time had not made them more cunning and wise to seek strange remedies for strange kinds of dangers , it had be impossible for them ever to have escaped : for among other devises , wheresoever they found any Hand of ice of greater bigness then the rest ( as there be some of more then half a mile compass about , and almost forty fathom high ) they commonly coveted to recover the same , and thereof to make a bulwark for their defence , whereon having mored anchor , they road under the lee thereof for a time , being thereby guarded from the danger of the lesser driving ice . But when they must needs forgo this new found fort by means of other ice , which at length would undermine and compass them round about , and when that by heaving of the billow they were therewith like to be bruised in pieces , they used to make fast the ship unto the most firm and broad piece of ice they could find , and binding her nose fast thereunto , would fill all their sails whereon the wind having great power , would force forward the ship , and so the ship bearing before her the ice , & so one ice driving forward another , should at length get scope & searoom e . And having by this means at length put their enemies to flight , they ocupied the clear place for a pretty season among sundry mountains and Alpes of ice . One there was found by measure to be 65 fathom above water , which for a kind of similitude , was called Salomons porch . Some think those Hands eight times so much under water as they are above , because of their monstrous weight . But now I remember I saw very strange wonders , men walking , running , leaping and shooting upon the main seas 40. miles from any land , without 346 
 any Ship or other vessel under them . Also I saw fresh Rivers running amid the salt Sea a hundred mile from land , which if any man will not believe , let him know that many of our company leapt out of their Ship upon Islands of ice , and running there up and down , did shoot at Buts upon the ice , and with their Calivers did kill great Seals , which use to lie and sleep upon the ice , and this ice melting above at the top by reflection of the Sun , came down in sundry streams , which uniting together , made a pretty Brook able to drive a Mill. 
 The said Captain Fenton recovered his Port tenne days before any man , and spent good time in searching for Mine , and he found good store thereof . He also discovered about tenne Miles up into the Country , where he perceived neither Town , Village , nor likelihood of habitation , but it seems ( as he sayeth ) barren , as the other parts which as yet we have entered upon : but their victuals and provision went so scant with them , that they had determined to return homeward within seven days after , if the Fleet had not then arrived . 
 The general after his arrival in the Countesses found , spent no time in vain , but immediately at his first landing called the chief Captains of his Council together , and consulted with them for the speedier execution of such things as then they had in hand . As first , for searching and finding out good Minerail for the Miners to be ocupied on . Then to give good Order to be observed of the whole company on shore . And lastly , to consider for the erecting up of the Fort and House for the use of them which were to abide there the whole year . For the better handling of these , and all other like important causes in this service , it was ordained from her Majesty and the Council , that the general should call unto him certain of the chief Captains and Gentlemen in Council , to confer , consult and determine of all occurrents in this service , whose names are as here they follow . 
 347 
 Captain Fenton . 1 ICaptaine Carew . 
 Captain Yorke . > < 
 Captain Best . J ^Captaine Philpot. 
 And in Sea causes to have as assistants , Christopher Hall and Charles Jackman , being both very good Pilots , and sufficient Mariners , whereof the one was chief Pilot of the Voyage , and the other for the discovery . From the place of our habitation Westward , Master Selman was appointed Notary , to register the whole manner of proceeding in these affairs , that true relation thereof might be made , if it pleased her Majesty to require it . 
 The first of August every Captain by order , from the general and his council , was commanded to bring ashore unto the Countesses Hand all such Gentlemen , soldiers , and Miners , as were under their charge , with such provision as they had of victuals , tents , and things necessary for the speedy getting together of Mine , and fraught for the ships . 
 The Muster of the men being taken , and the victuals with all pther things viewed and considered , every man was set to his charge , as his place and office required . The Miners were appointed where to work , arid the Mariners discharged their ships . 
 Upon the second of August were published and proclaimed upon the Countess of Warwicks Hand with found of Trumpet , certain Order by the general and his council , appointed to be observed of the company during the time of their abiding there . 
 In the mean time , whilst the Mariners plied their work , the Captains sought out new Mines , the Goldfiners made trial of the Over , the Mariners discharged their ships , the Gentlemen for example sake laboured heartily , and honestly encouraged the inferior sort to work . So that the small time of that little leisure that was left to tarry , was spent in vain . 
 The second of August the Gabriel arrived , who came from the Viceadmiral , and being distressed soar with Ice , put into Harbour near unto Mount Oxford . 
 348 
 And now was the whole Fleet arrived safely at their Port , excepting foure , beside the Ship that was lost : that is , the Thomas Allen , the Anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the Moon , whose absence was some let unto the works and other proceedings , aswell for that these Ships were furnished with the better sort of Miners , as with other provision for the habitation . 
 The ninth of August the general with the Captains of his counsel assembled together , and began to consider and take order for the erecting up of the house or Fort for them that were to inhabit there the whole year , and that presently the Masons and Carpenters might go in hand therewith . First therefore they perused Consulta tun the Bills of lading , what every man received into his Ship , and found that there was arrived only the East - n‘t “ side , and the Southside of the house , and yet not that perfect and entire : for many pieces thereof were used for fenders in many Ships , and so broken in pieces whilst they were distressed in the ice . Also after due examination had , and true account taken , there was found want of drink and fuel to serve one hundreth men , which was And hundred the number appointed first to inhabit there , because their greatest store was in the Ships which were not ' yet arrived . Then Captain Fenton seeing the scarcity of the necessary things aforesaid , was contented , and ofired himself to inhabit there with sixtie men . Where - habitatu » upon they caused the Carpenters and Masons to come ® , Jun-before them , and demanded in what time they would take upon them to erect up a less house for sixtie men . They required eight or nine weeks , if there were Timber sufficient , whereas now they had but sixe and twentie days in all to remain in that Country . Wherefore it was fully agreed upon , and resolved by the general and his counsel , that no habitation should be there this year . And therefore they willed Master Selman the Register to set down this decree with all their consents , for the better satisfying of her Majesty , the Lords of the Counsel , and the Adventurers . 
 349 
 The Anne Francis , since she was parted from the Fleet , in the last storm before spoken of , could never recover above five leagues within the straights , the wind being sometime contrary , and most times the Ice compassing them round about . And from that time , being about the seven and twentieth of July , they could neither hear nor have sighed of any of the Fleet , until the 3. of August , when they descried a sail near unto Mount Oxford , with whom when they had spoken , they could understand no news of any of the Fleet at all . And this was the Thomas of Ipswich , who had lain beating off and on at Sea with very fowl weather , and contrary winds , ever since that foresaid storm , without sighed of any man . They kept company not long together , but were forced to lose one another again , the Moon being consort always with the Anne Francis , and keeping very good company plied up together into the straights , with great desire to recover their long wished Port : and they attempted as often , and passed as far as possible the wind , weather , & ice gave them leave , which commonly they found very contrary . For when the weather was clear and without fog , then commonly the wind was contrary . And when it was either Easterly or Southerly , which would serve their turns , then had they so great a fog and dark mist therewith , that either they could not discern way thorough the ice , or else the ice lay so thick together , that it was impossible for them to pass . And on the other side , when it was calm , the Tides had force to bring the ice so suddenly about them , that commonly then they were most therewith distressed , having no Wind to carry them from the danger thereof . 
 And by the sixt of August being with much ado god up as high as Leicester point , they had good hope to find the Souther shore clear , and so to pass up towards their Port. But being there becalmed and lying a hull openly upon the great Bay which comes out of the mistaken straights before spoken of , they were 35° 
 so suddenly compassed with ice round about by means of the swift Tides which run in that place , that they were never afore so hardly beset as now . And in seeking to avoid these dangers in the dark weather , the Anne Francis lost sighed of the other two Ships , who being likewise hardly distressed , signified their danger , as they since reported , by shooting ofF their ordinance , which the other could not hear , nor if they had herd , could have given them any remedy , being so busily occupied to wind themselves out of their own troubles . 
 The Fleeboate called the Moon , was here heaved The Moon . above the water with the force of the ice , and received a great leak thereby . Likewise the Thomas of Ipswich , and the Anne Francis were soar bruised at that instant , having their false stems born away , and their ship sides stroken quite through . 
 Now considering the conti nuall dangers and contraries , and the little leisure that they had left to tarry in these parts , beside that every night the ropes of their Ships were so frozen , that a man could not handle them without cutting his hands , together with the great doubt they had of the Fleets safety , thinking it and impossibility for them to pass unto their Port , as well for that they saw themselves , as for that they herd by the former report of the Ships which had proved before , who affirmed that the straights were all frozen over within : They thought it now very high time to consider of their estates and safeties that were yet left together . And hereupon the Captains and master's of these Ships , desired the Captain of the Anne Francis to enter into The Anne consideration with them of these matters . Wherefore Captain Tanfield of the Thomas of Ipswich , with his Pilot Richard Cox , and Captain Upcote of the Moon , the Moon c < m-with his master John Lakes came aboard the Anne ™ lt . Francis the eight of August to consult of these causes . P11 , 87 - ] And being assembled together in the Captains Cabin , sundry doubts were there alleged . For the fearefuller sort of Mariners being overtyred with the continual 
 351 
 labour of the former dangers , coveted to return homeward , saying that they would not again tempt God so much , who had given them so many warnings , and delivered them from so wonderful dangers : that they rather desired to loose wages , fraught , and all , then to continue and follow such desperate fortune's . Again , their Ships were so leak , and the men so weary , that to amend the one , and refresh the other , they must of necessity seek into harbour . 
 But on the other side it was argued again to the contrary , that to seek into harbour thereabouts , was but to subject themselves to double dangers : if happily they escaped the dangers of Rocks in their entering , yet being in , they were nevertheless subject there to the danger of the Ice , which with the swift tides and currents is carried in and out in most harboroughs thereabouts , and may thereby gaul their Cables asunder , drive them upon the shore , and bring them to much trouble . Also the coast is so much subject to broken ground and rocks , especially in the mouth and entrance of every Harbour , that albeit the Channel be sounded over and over again , yet are you never the nearer to discern the dangers . For the bottom of the Sea holding like shape and form as the Land , being full of hills , dales , and ragged Rocks , suffers you not by your soundings to know and keep a true guess of the depth . For you shall found upon the side or hollowness of one Hill or Rock under water , and have a hundreth , fiftie , or fourtie fathom depth : and before the next cast , year you shall be able to heave your led again , you shall be upon the top thereof , and come aground to your utter confusion . 
 Another reason against going to harbour was , that the cold air did threaten a sudden freezing up of the sounds , seeing that every night there was new congealed ice , even of that water which remained within their ships . And therefore it should seem to be more safe to lie ofF and on at Sea , then for lack of wind to bring 352 
 them forth of harbour , to hazard by sudden frosts to be shut up the whole year . 
 After many such dangers and reasons alleged , and large debating of these causes on both sides , the Captain of the Anne Francis delivered his opinion unto the company to this effect . First concerning the question of returning home , he thought it so much dishonourable , as not to grow in any farther question : and again to return home at length ( as at length they must needs ) and not to be able to bring a certain report of the Fleet , whither they were living or lost , or whither any of them had recovered their Port or not , in the Countesses found , ( as it was to be thought the most part would if they were living ) he said that it would be so great and argument either of want of courage or discretion in them , as he resolved rather to fallen into any danger , then so shamefully to consent to return home , protesting that it should never be spoken of him , that he would ever return without doing his endeavour to find the Fleet , and know the certainty of the Generals safety . He put his company in remembrance of a Pinnisse of five tun burden , which he had within his Ship , which was carried in pieces , and unmade up for the use of those which should inhabit there the whole year , the which , if they could find means to join together , he offered himself to prove before therewith , whither it were possible for any Boat to pass for ice , whereby the Ship might be brought in after , and might also thereby give true notice , if any of the Fleet were arrived at their Port or not . 
 Captain Bests resolution . 
 A Pinnisse for the inhabiters . 
 But notwithstanding , for that he well perceived that the most part of his company were addicted to put into harbour , he was willing the rather for these causes somewhat to incline thereunto . At first , to search alongst the same coast , and the sounds thereabouts , he thought it to be to good purpose , for that it was likely to find some of the Fleet there , which being leak , and soar bruised with the ice , were the rather thought likely to be vii 353 z 
 put into and ill harbour , being distressed with foul weather in the last storm , then to hazard their uncertain safeties among the ice : for about this place they lost them , and left the Fleet then doubtfully questioning of harbour . 
 It was likely , also , that they might find some fit harbour thereabouts , which might be behooveful for them against another time . It was not likewise impossible to find some Over or Mine thereabouts wherewithal ! to fraught their Ships , which would be more commodious in this place , for the nearness to Seaward , and for a better outlet , then farther within the straights , being likely here always to load in a shorter time , howsoever the straight should be pestered with ice within , so that if it might come to pass that thereby they might either find the Fleet , Mine , or convenient harbour , any of these three would serve their present turns , and give some hope and comfort unto their companies , which now were altogether comfortless . But if that all fortune should fallen out so contrary , that they could neither recover their Port , nor any of these aforesaid helps , that yet they would not depart the Coast , as long as it was possible for them to tarry there , but would lie off and on at Sea athwart the place . Therefore his final ! conclusion was set down thus , First , that the Thomas of Ipswich and the Moon should consort and keep company together carefully with the Anne Francis , as near as they could , and as true Englishmen and faithful friends , should supply one another's want in all fortune's and dangers . In the morning following , every Ship to send off his Boat with a sufficient Pilot , to search out and found the harboroughs for the safe bringing in of their Ships . And being arrived in harbour , where they might find convenient place for the purpose , they resolved forthwith to join and set together the Pinnace , wherewithal ! the Captain of the Anne Francis might , according to his former determination , discover up into the straights . 
 354 
 After these determinations thus set down , the Thomas of Ipswich the night following lost company of the other Ships , and afterwards shaped a contrary course homeward , which fell out as it manifestly appeared , very much against their Captain Master Tanfields mind , as by due examination before the Lords of her Majesties most honourable privy Counsel it hath since be proved , to the great discredit of the Pilot Cox , who specially persuaded his company against the opinion of his said Captain , to return home . 
 And as the Captain of the Anne Francis doth witness , even at their conference together , Captain Tanfield told him , that he did not a little suspect the said Pilot Cox , saying that he had opinion in the man neither of honest duty , manhood , nor constancy . Notwithstanding the said Ships departure , the Captain of the Anne Francis being desirous to put in execution his former resolutions , went with his Ship boat ( being accompanied also with the Moons Skiff ) to prove among the Hands which lie under Hattons Hedland , if any convenient harbour , or any knowledge of the Fleet , or any good Over were there to be found . The Ships lying off and on at Sea the while under Sail , searching through many sounds , they saw them all full of many dangers and broken ground : yet one there was , which seemed and indifferent place to harbour in , and which they did very diligently found over , and searched again . 
 Here the said Captain found a great black Hand , whereunto he had good liking , and certifying the company thereof , they were somewhat comforted , and with the good hope of his words rowed cheerfully unto the place : where when they arrived , they found such plenty of black Over of the same sort which was brought into England this last year , that if the goodness might answer the great plenty thereof , it was to be thought that it might reasonably suffice all the gold-gluttons of the world . This Hand the Captain for cause of his good 
 355 
 Bestes bless - hap , called after his own name , Bestes blessing , and with these good tidings returning aboard his Ship the ninth of August about tenne of the clock at night , he was joyfully welcomed of his company , who before were discomforted , and greatly expected some better fortune at his hands . 
 The next day being the tenth of August , the weather reasonably fair , they put into the foresaid Harbour , having their Boat for their better security sounding before their Ship . But for all the care and diligence that could be taken in sounding the Channel Anne Francis over and over again , the Anne Francis came aground in danger . UpOn a sunken Rock within the Harbour , and lay thereon more then half dry until the next flood , when by Gods Almighty providence , contrary almost to all expectation , they came afloat again , being forced all that time to underset their Ship with their main Yard , which otherwise was likely to overset and put thereby in danger the whole company . They had above two thousand strokes together at the Pump , before they could make their Ship free of the water again , so soar The Moon in she was bruised by lying upon the Rocks . The Moon harbour . came safely , and road at anchor by the Anne Francis , whose help in their necessity they could not well have missed . 
 Now whilst the Mariners were rummaging their Ships , and mending that which was amiss , the Miners followed their labour for getting together of sufficient quantity of Over , and the Carpenters endeavoured to do their best for the making up of the Boat or Pinnace : which to bring to pass , they wanted two speciali and most necessary things , that is , certain principali timbers that are called Knees , which are the chiefest strength of any Boat , and also nails , wherewithal ! to join the planks together . Whereupon having by chance a Smyth among them , ( and yet unfurnished of his necessary tools to work and make nails withal ) they were feign of a gun chamber to make and Anvil to work upon , and to use a pickax 356 
 in stead of a sledge to beat withal , and also to occupy two small bellows in stead of one pair of greater Smiths bellows . And for lack of small Iron for the 
 easier making of the nails , they were forced to break their tongue's , grydiron , and fireshovell in pieces . 
 The eleventh of August the Captain of the Anne Francis taking the Master of his Ship with him , went up to the top of Hattons Hedland , which is the highest land of all the straights , to the end to descry the situation of the Country underneath , and to take a true plot of the place , whereby also to see what store of Ice was yet left in the straights , as also to search what Mineral matter or fruit that soil might yield : And the rather for the honour the said Captain doth owe to that Honourable name which himself gave thereunto the last year , in the highest part of this Hedland he caused his company to make a Column or Cross of stone , in token of Christian possession . In this place there is plenty of Black Over , and diverse pretty stones . 
 The seventeenth of August the Captains with their companies chased and killed a great white Bear , which adventured and gave a fierce assault upon twentie men being weaponed . And he served them for good meat many days . 
 The eighteenth of August the Pinnace with much ado being set together , the said Captain Best determined to depart up the straights , to prove and make trial , as before was pretended , some of his company greatly persuading him to the contrary , and specially the Carpenter that set the same together , who said that he would not adventure himself therein for five hundreth 
 Hattons Hedland . 
 Pretty stones . A mighty white Bear . 
 A Pinnace there built . 
 pounds , for that the boat hung together but only by the strength of the nails , and lacked some of her principali knees and timbers . 
 These words somewhat discouraged some of the company which should have gone therein . Whereupon the Captain , as one not altogether addicted to his own self-will , but somewhat foreseeing how it might be 
 357 
 They adventure by the straight in a weak Pinnace . 
 afterwards spoken , if contrary fortune should happen him ( Lo he hath followed his own opinion and desperate resolutions , and so thereafter it is befallen him ) calling the Master and Mariners of best judgement together , declared unto them how much the cause imported him in his credit to seek out the general , as well to confer with him of some causes of weight , as otherwise to make due examination and trial of the goodness of the Over , whereof they had no assurance but by guess of the eye , and it was well like the other : which so to carry home , not knowing the goodness thereof , might be as much as if they should bring so many stones . And therefore he desired them to deliver their plain and honest opinion , whither the Pinnace were sufficient for him so to adventure in or no . It was answered , that by careful heed taking thereunto among the ice , and the foul weather , the Pinnace might suffice . And hereupon the Master's mate of the Anne Francis called John Grey , manfully and honestly offering himself unto his Captain in this adventure and service , gave cause to others of his Mariners to follow the attempt . 
 And upon the nineteenth of August the said Captain being accompanied with Captain Upcote of the Moon , and eighteene persons in the small Pinnace , having convenient portion of victuals and things necessary , departed upon the said pretended Voyage , leaving their ship at anchor in a good readiness for the taking in of their fraught . And having little wind to sail withal , they plied alongst the Souther shore , and passed above 30. leagues , having the only help of men labour with Oars , and so intending to keep that shore aboard until they were god up to the farthest and narrowest of the straights , minded there to cross over , and to search likewise alongst the Northerland unto the Countesses found , and from thence to pass all that coast along , whereby if any of the Fleet had be distressed by wreck of rock or ice , by that means they might be perceived of them , and so they thereby to give them such 358 
 help and relief as they could . They did greatly fear , and ever suspect that some of the Fleet were surely cast away , and driven to seek sour salads among the cold cliffs . 
 And being shot up about fortie leagues within the +° - leagues Straights , they put over towards the Norther shore , which was not a little dangerous for their small boats . * ’ And by means of a sudden flaw were dry ven , and feign to seek harbour in the night among all the rocks and broken ground of Gabriels Hands , a place so nam Gabriels within the straights above the Countess of Warwicks adds . found : And by the way where they landed , they did find certain great stones set up by the Country people as it seemed , for marks , where they also made many Crosses of stone , in token that Christians had be there . 
 The 22. of August they had sighed of the Countesses found , and made the place perfect from the top of a hill , and keeping along the Norther shore , perceived the smoke of a fire under a hills side : whereof they diversely deemed . When they came near the place , they perceived people which wafted unto them , as it seemed , with a flag or ensign . And because the Country people had used to do the like , when they perceived any of our boats to pass by , they suspected them to be the same . 
 And coming somewhat nearer , they might perceive certain tents , and discern this ensign to be of mingled colours , black and white , after the English fashion . But because they could see no Ship , nor likelihood of harbour within five or sixe leagues about , and knew that none of our men were wont to frequent those parts , they could not tell what to judge thereof , but imagined that some of the ships being carried so high with the storm and mists , had made shipwreck among the ice or the broken Islands there , and were spoiled by the country people , who might use the sundry coloured flag for a policy , to bring them likewise within their danger . Whereupon the said Captain with his companies , resolved to recover the same ensign , if it 
 359 
 were so , from those base people , or else to loose their lives , and all together . In the end they discerned them to be their countrymen , and then they deemed them to have lost their Ships , and so to be gathered together for their better strength . On the other side , the company ashore feared that the Captain having lost his Ship , came to seek forth the Fleet for his relief in his poor Pinnisse , so that their extremities caused eke part to suspect the worst . 
 The Captain now with his Pinnisse being come near the shore , commanded his Boat carefully to be kept aflote , lest in their necessity they might win the same from him , and seek first to save themselves : for every 
 Proximus sum man in that case is next himself . They haled one ogomet mihi . another according to the manner of the Sea , and de - 
 manded what cheer ? and either party answered the other , that all was well : whereupon there was a sudden and joyful outshoot , with great flinging up of caps , and a brave voly of shot to welcome one another . And truly it was a most strange case to see how joyful and glad every party was to see themselves meet in safety again , after so strange and incredible dangers : 
 Yet to be short , as their dangers were great , so their 
 God was greater . 
 And here the company were working upon new Mines , 
 CaptainYorke which Captain Yorke being here arrived not long 
 before , had found out in this place , and it is nam the Countess of Sussex Mine . 
 After some conference with our friends here , the Captain of the Anne Francis departed towards the Countess of Warwicks found , to speak with the general , and to have trial made of such mettle as he had brought thither , by the Goldfiners . And so he determined to dispatch again towards his ship . And having spoken with the General , he received order for all causes , and direction as well for the bringing up of his Ship to the Countesses found , as also to fraught his Ship with the same Oar which he himself had 
 360 
 found , which upon trial made , was supposed to be very good . 
 The 23. of August , the said Captain met together with the other Captains ( Commissioners in counsel with the general ) aboard the Aid , where they considered and consulted of sundry causes , which being particularly registered by the Notary , were appointed where and how to be done against another year . 
 The 24. of August , the general with two Pinnisses and good numbers of men went to Bears found , commanding the said Captain with his Pinnace to attend the service , to see if he could encounter or apprehend any of the people : for sundry times they showed themselves busy thereabouts , sometime with seven or eyght Boats in one company , as though they minded to encounter with our company which were working there at the Mines , in no great numbers . But when they perceived any of our Ships to ride in that road ( being belike more amazed at the countenance of a Ship , and a more number of men ) they did never show themselves again there at all . Wherefore our men sought with their Pinnisses to compass about the Hand where they did use , supposing there suddenly to intercept some of them . But before our men could come near , having belike some watch in the top of the mountains , they conveyed themselves privily away , and left ( as it should seem ) one of their great darts behind them for haste , which we found near to a place of their caves and housing . Therefore , though our general were very desirous to have taken some of them to have brought into England , they being now grown more wary by their former losses , would not at any time come within our dangers . About midnight of the same day , the captain of the Anne Francis departed thence and set his course over the straights towards Hattons Hedland , being about 15. leagues over , and returned aboard his Ship the 25. of August , to the great comfort of his company , who long expected his coming , where he found his 361 
 None of the people will be taken . 
 M. Wolfall a godly Preacher . 
 Ships ready rigged and laden . Wherefore he departed from thence again the next morning towards the Countesses found , where he arrived the 28. of the same . By the way he set his Miners ashore at Bears found , for the better dispatch and gathering the Over together : for that some of the ships were behind hand with their fraught , the time of the year passing suddenly away . 
 The thirtith of August the Anne Francis was brought aground , and had 8. great leaks mended which she had received by means of the rocks and ice . This day the Masons finished a house which Captain Fenton caused to be made of lime and stone upon the Countess of Warwickes Island , to the end we might prove against the next year , whither the snow could overwhelm it , the frost break it up , or the people dismember the same . And the better to allure those brutish and uncivil people to courtesy against other times of our coming , we left therein diverse of our Country toys , as bells , and knives , wherein they specially delight , one for the necessary use , and the other for the great pleasure thereof . Also pictures of men and women in led , men on horseback , looking glasses , whistles , and pipes . Also in the house was made and Oven , and bred left baked therein for them to see and taste . 
 We buried the timber of our pretended fort . Also here we sowed peas , corn , and other grain , to prove the fruitfulness of the soil against the next year . 
 Master Wolfall on Winter's Furnace preached a godly sermon , which being ended , he celebrated also a Communion upon the land , at the partaking whereof was the Captain of the Anne Francis , and many other Gentlemen and Soldiers , Mariners , and Miners with him . The celebration of - the divine mystery was the first sign , seal , and confirmation of Christs name , death , and passion ever known in these quarters . The said M. Wolfall made sermons , and celebrated the Communion at sundry other times , in several and sundry ships , because the whole company could never meet together at any one 362 
 place . The Fleet now being in some good readiness for their lading , the general calling together the Gentlemen and Captains to consult , told them that he was very desirous that some further discovery should be attempted , and that he would not only by Gods help bring home his Ships laden with Over , but also meant to bring some certificate of a further discovery of the Country , which thing to bring to pass ( having sometime therein consulted ) they found very hard , and almost invincible . 
 And considering that already they had spent sometime in Consultation searching out the trending and fashion of the mistaken afurtlier straits , therefore it could not be said , but that by this voyage they have notice of a further discovery , and that the hope of the passage thereby is much furthered and increased , as appeared before in the discourse thereof . 
 Yet notwithstanding if any means might be further devised , the Captains were contented and willing , as the general should appoint and command , to take any enterprise in hand . Which after long debating was found a thing very impossible , and that rather consultation was to be had of returning homeward , especially for these causes following . First the dark foggy mists , the continual falling snow and stormy weather which they commonly were vexed with , and now daily ever more and more increased , have no small argument of the Winter's drawing near . And also the frost every night was so hard congealed within the found , that if by evil hap they should be long kept in with contrary winds , it was greatly to be feared , that they should be shut up there fast the whole year , which being utterly unprovided , would be their utter destruction . Again , drink was so scant throughout all the Fleet by means of the great leakage , that not only the provision which was laid in for the habitation was wanting and wasted , but also each ships several provision spent and lost , which many of our company to their great grief found in their return since , for all the way homeward they drank nothing but water . And the great cause of this leakage 3^3 
 and wasting was , for that the great timber and seacole , which lay so weighty upon the barrels , brake , bruised , and rotted the hoops insunder . Yet notwithstanding these reasons alleged the general himself ( willing the rest of the Gentlemen and Captains every man to look to his several charge and lading , that against a day appointed , they should be all in a readiness to set homeward ) went in a Pinnace and discovered further Northward in the straights , and found that by Bears found and Halls Island , the land was not firm , as it was Broken Hands first supposed , but all broken Islands in manner of and mma ” er°fan Archipelagus , and so with other secret intelligence to rc tpe agus . returnec [ to the Fleet. Where presently 
 upon his arrival at the Countesses found , he began to take order for their returning homeward , and first caused certain Articles to be proclaimed , for the better keeping of order and courses in their return , which Articles were delivered to every Captain . 
 The Fleets returning homeward . 
 HAving now received Articles and directions for our return homeward , all other things being in forwardness and in good order , the last day of August the whole Fleet departed from the Countesses found , excepting the Judith , and the Anne Francis , who stayed for the taking in of fresh water , and came the next day and met the Fleet lying ofF and on , athwart Bears found , who stayed for the general , which then was gone Return home - ashore to dispatch the two Barks and the Buss of ward - Bridgewater , for their loading , whereby to get the companies and other things aboard . The Captain of the Anne Francis having most part of his company ashore , the first of September went also to Bears found in his Pinnace to fetch his men aboard , but the wind grew so great immediately upon their landing , that the ships at Sea were in great danger , and some of them forcibly put from their anchors , and greatly feared to be utterly lost , as the Hopewell , wherein was Captain Carew and 364 
 others , who could not tell on which side their danger was most : for having mighty rocks threatening on the one side , and driving Islands of cutting ice on the other side , they greatly feared to make shipwreck , the ice driving so near them that it touched their bolt-sprit . And by means of the Sea that was grown so high , they were not able to put to sea with their small Pinnaces to recover their ships . And again , the ships were not able to tarry or lie athwart for them , by means of the outrageous winds and swelling seas . The general willed the Captain of the Anne Francis with his company , for that night to lodge aboard the Buss of Bridgewater , and went himself with the rest of his men aboard the Barks . But their numbers were so great , and the provision of the Barks so scant , that they pestered one another exceedingly . They had great hope that the next morning the weather would be fair , whereby they might recover their ships . But in the morning following it was much worse , for the storm continued greater , the Sea being more swollen , and the Fleet gone quite out of sighed . So that now their doubts began to grow great : for the ship of Bridgewater which was of greatest receipt , and whereof they had best hope and made most account , road so far to leeward of the harborowes mouth , that they were not able for the rocks ( that lay between the wind and them ) to led it out to Sea with a sail . And the Barks were already so pestered with men , and so slenderly furnished with provision , that they had scarce meat for sixe days for such numbers . 
 The general in the morning departed to Sea in the Gabriel to seek the Fleet , leaving the Buss of Bridgewater , and the Michael behind in Bears found . The Buss set sail , and thought by turning in the narrow channel within the harbour to get to windward : but being put to leeward more , by that means was feign to come to anchor for her better safety , among a number of rocks , and there left in great danger of ever getting 365 
 forth again . The Michael set sail to follow the general , and could give the Buss no relief , although they earnestly desired the same . And the Captain of the Anne Francis was left in hard election of two evils : either to abide his fortune with the Buss of Bridgewater , which was doubtful of ever getting forth , or else to be towed in his small Pinnace at the stern of the Michael thorough the raging Seas , for that the Bark was not able to receive or relieve half his company , wherein his danger was not a little perilous . 
 So after he resolved to commit himself with all his company unto that fortune of God and Sea , and was dangerously towed at the stern of the Bark for many miles , until at length they espied the Anne Francis under sail , hard under their Lee , which was no small comfort unto them . For no doubt , both those and a great number more had perished for lack of victuals , and convenient room in the Barks without the help of the said Ship. But the honest care that the Master of the Anne Francis had of his Captain , and the good regard of duty towards his general , suffered him not to depart , but honesdy abided to hazard a dangerous road all the night long , notwithstanding all the stormy weather , when all the Fleet beside departed . And the Pinnace came no sooner aboard the ship , and the men entered , but she presently shivered and fell in pieces and sunk at the ships stern , with all the poor men's furniture : so weak was the boat with towing , and so forcible was the sea to bruise her in pieces . But ( as God would ) the men were all saved . 
 At this present in this storm many of the Fleet were dangerously distressed , and were severed almost all asunder . Yet , thanks be to God , all the Fleet arrived safely in England about the first of October , some in one place and some in another . But among other , it was most marvelous how the Buss of Bridgewater god away , who being left behind the Fleet in great danger of never getting forth , was forced to seek a way North-366 
 ward thorough and unknown channel full of rocks , upon the back side of Bears found , and there by good hap found out a way into the North sea , a very dangerous attempt : save that necessity , which hath no law , forced them to try masteries . This aforesaid North sea is the same which lies upon the back side of Frobishers straits , where first the general himself in his Pinnaces , 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 And unknown channel into the Northeast , discovered by the Buss of Bridgewater . 
 and after some other of our company have discovered ( as they affirm ) a great foreland , where they would have also a great likelihood of the greatest passage towards the South sea , or Mar deal Sur. 
 The Buss of Bridgewater , as she came homeward , to A fruitful the Southeastward of Friseland , discovered a great Island in the latitude of 57 degrees and and half , which was ‘ never yet found before , and sailed three days alongst the coast , the land seeming to be fruitful , full of woods , and a champion Country . 
 There died in the whole Fleet in all this voyage not above forty persons , which number is not great , considering how many ships were in the Fleet , and how strange fortune's we passed . 
 