A brief relation of the New found land , and the commodities thereof . 
 Menappointed to make search . 
 Hat which we do call the Newfound land , and the Frenchmen Bacalaos , is and Hand , or rather ( after the opinion of some ) it consisteth of sundry Hands and broken lands , situate in the North regions of America , upon the gulf and entrance of the great river called S. Laurence in 
 New found land is all Islands or broken lands 
 Canada . Into the which , navigation may be made both on the South and North side of this Hand . The land 
 lies South and North , containing in length between three & 400 miles , accounting from cape Raze ( which is in 46 degrees 25 minutes ) unto the Grand bay in 52 degrees of Septentrionali latitude . The Hand round Goodly roads about hath very many goodly bays and harbors , safe and harbours . roajs for ships , the like not to be found in any part of the known world . 
 The common opinion that is had of intemperature & extreme cold that should be in this country , as of some part it may be verified , namely the North , where I grant Newfound ft is mOre cold then in countries of Europe , which are land is habit - unjer g same elevation : even so it cannot stand with ’ reason and nature of the climb , that the South parts should be so intemperate as the brutus hath gone . For as the same do lie under the climates of Briton , Anjou , Poictou in France , between 46 and 49 degrees , so can they not so much differ from the temperature of those countries : unless upon the outcoast lying open unto the Ocean and sharp winds , it must in deed be subject to more cold , then further within the land , where the mountains are interposed , as walks and bulwarks , to defend and to resist the asperity and rigor of the sea and weather . Some hold opinion , that the Newfound land might be the more subject to cold , by how much it lies high and near unto the middle region . I grant that not in Newfound land alone , but in Germany , Italy and Afrike , even under the Equinoctial line , the mountains are extreme cold , and seldom uncovered of snow , in their culme and highest tops , which comes to pass by the same reason that they are extended towards the middle region : yet in the countries lying beneath them , it is found quite contrary . Even so all hills having their descents , the valleis also and low grounds must be likewise hight or temperate , as the climb doth Cold by aai - give in Newfound land : though I am of opinion that the dental means . guns reflection is much cooled , and cannot be so forcible in the Newfound land , nor generally throughout America , as in Europe or Afrike : by how much the 
 Sun in his diurnal course from East to West , passes over ( for the most part ) dry land and sandy countries , before he arriveth at the West of Europe or Afrike , whereby his motion increases heat , with little or no qualification by moist vapours . Where , on the contrary fie passes from Europe and Afrike unto America over the Ocean , from whence it draws and carrieth with him abundance of moist vapours , which do qualify and enfeeble greatly the Suns reverberation upon this country chiefly of Newfound land , being so much to the Northward . Nevertheless ( as I said before ) the cold cannot be so intolerable under the latitude of 46 47 and 48 ( especial within land ) that it should be unhabitable , as some do suppose , seeing also there are very many people more to the North by a great deal . And in these South parts there be certain beasts , Ounces or Leopards , and birds in like manner which in the Summer we have seen , not herd of in countries of extreme and vehement coldness . Beside , as in the months of June , July , August and September , the heat is somewhat more then in England at those seasons : so men remaining upon the South parts near unto Cape Rece , until after Hollandtide , have not found the cold so extreme , nor much differing from the temperature of England . Those which have arrived there after November and December , have found the snow exceeding deep , whereat no marvel , considering the ground upon the coast , is rough and uneven , and the snow is driven into the places most declining as the like is to be seen with us . The like depth of snow happily shall not be found within land upon the plainer countries , which also are defended by tfie mountains , breaking off the violence of winds and weather . But admitting extraordinary cold in those South parts , above that with us here : it can not be so great as in Swedland , much less in Moscovia or Russia : yet • are the same countries very populous , and the rigor of cold is dispensed with by the commodity of Stoves , warm clothing , meats and drinks : Commodities . 
 all which need not to be wanting in the Newfound land , if we had intent there to inhabit . 
 In the South parts we found no inhabitants , which by all likelihood have abandoned those coasts , the same being so much frequented by Christians : But in the North are savages altogether harmless . Touching the commodities of this country , serving either for sustenta-tion of inhabitants , or for maintenance of traffic , there are & may be made diverse : so ill it seems Nature hath recompensed that only defect and incommodity of some sharp cold , by many benefits : viz. With incredible Fish of sea quantity , and no less variety of kinds of fish in the sea and fresh anj fresh waters , as Trouts , Salmons and other fish to ’ us unknown : Also Cod , which alone draws many nations thither , and is become the most famous fishing of the world . Abundance of Whale's , for which also is a very great trade in the bays of Placentia & the Grand bay , where is made Train oils of the Whale : Herring the largest that have be herd of , and exceeding the Malstrond herring of Norway : but hitherto was never benefit taken of the herring fishing . There are sundry other fish very delicate , namely the Bonito , Lobsters , Turbut , with others infinite not sought after : Oysters having pearl but not orient in colour : I took it by reason they were not gathered in season . 
 Concerning the inland commodities , aswell to be drawn from this land , as from the exceeding large countries adjoining : there is nothing which our East and Northerly countries of Europe do yield , but the like also may be made in them as plentifully by time and industry : Namely , rosen , pitch , tar , sopeashes , deal-boord , masts for ships , hides , furs , flax , hemp , corn , cables , cordage , linen-cloth , metals and many more . All which the countries will afford , and the soil is apt to yield . 
 The trees for the most in those South parts , are Firtrees , Pine and Cypress , all yielding Gum and Turpentine . 
 Cherry trees bearing fruit no bigger than a small peas . Also pear trees , but fruitless . Other trees of some sorts to us unknown . 
 The soil along the coast is not deep of earth , bringing forth abundantly peason small , yet good feeding for cattle . Roses passing sweet , like unto our musk roses in form , raspases , a berry which we call Hurts , good and wholesome to eat . The grass and herb does fat sheep in very short space , proved by English merchants which have carried sheep thither for fresh victuali and had them raised exceeding fat in less then three weeks . Peason which our countrymen have sown in the time of May , have come up fair , and be gathered in the beginning of August , of which our general had a present acceptable for the rareness , being the first fruits coming up by art and industry in that desolate and dishabited land . 
 Lake's or pools of fresh water , both on the tops of mountains and in the valleys . In which are said to be muscles not unlike to have pearl , which I had put in trial , if by mischance falling unto me , I had not be letted from that and other good experiments I was minded to make . 
 Foul both of water and land in great plenty and diversity . All kind of green foul : Others as big as Bustards , yet not the same . A great white foul called of some a Gaunt . 
 Upon the land diverse sorts of hawks , as falcons , and others by report : Partridges most plentiful larger then ours , grey and white of colour , and rough footed like doves , which our men after one flight did kill with cudgels , they were so fat and unable to fly . Birds some like blackbirds , linnets , canary birds , and other very small . Beasts of sundry kinds , read deer , buffles or a beast , as it seems by the tract & foot very large in manner of and ox . Bears , ounces or leopards , some greater & some lesser , wolves , foxes , which to the Northward a little further are black , whose fur is esteemed in some Countries of Europe very rich . Otters , bevers , marterns : 
 Newfound land does minister commodities abundantly for art y industry . 
 Silver Over brought unto the general . 
 And in the opinion of most men that saw it , the general had brought unto him a Sable alive , which he sent unto his brother sir John Gilbert knight of Devonshire : but it was never delivered , as after I understood . We could not observe the hundreth part of creatures in those unhabited lands : but these mentioned may induce us to glorify the magnificent God , who hath superabundantly replenished the earth with creatures serving for the use of man , though man hath not used a fift part of the same , which the more does aggravate the fault and foolish sloth in many of our nation , choosing rather to live indirectly , and very miserably to live & die within this realm pestered with inhabitants , then to adventure as becomes men , to obtain and habitation in those remote lands , in which Nature very prodigally does minister unto men's endeavours , and for art to work upon . 
 For beside these already recounted and infinite more , the mountains generally make show of minerail substance : Iron very common , led , and somewhere copper . I will not aver of richer metals : albeit by the circumstances following , more then hope may be conceived thereof . 
 For among other charges given to inquire out the singularities of this country , the general was most curious in the search of metals , commanding the minerali man and refiner , especially to be diligent . The same was a Saxon born , honest and religious , nam Daniel . Who after search brought at first some sort of Over , seeming rather to be iron then other mettle . The next time he found Over , which with no small show of contentment he delivered unto the General , using protestation , that if silver were the thing which might satisfy the general & his followers , there it was , advising him to seek no further : the peril whereof he undertook upon his life ( as deer unto him as the Crown of England unto her Majesty , that I may use his own words ) if it fell not out accordingly . 
 My self at this instant liker to die then to live , by a mischance , could not follow this confident opinion of our refiner to my own satisfaction : but afterwards demanding our Generals opinion therein , and to have some part of the Over , he replied : Content your self , I have seen enough , and were it but to satisfy my private humour , I would proceed no further . The promise unto my friends , and necessity to bring also the South countries within compass of my Patent near expired , as we have already done these North parts , do only persuade me Reasons why further . And touching the Over , I have sent it aboard , whereof I would have no speech to be made so long as ma^efor we remain within harbour : here being both Portugals , silver mine . Biscains and Frenchmen not far off " , from whom must be kept any bruit or muttering of such matter . When we are at sea proof shall made : if it be to our desire , we may return the sooner hither again . Whose answer I judged reasonable , and contenting me well : wherewith I will conclude this narration and description of the Newfound land , and proceed to the rest of our voyage , which ended tragically . 
 WHile the better sort of us were seriously occupied in repairing our wants , and contriving of matters for the commodity of our voyage : others of another sort Misdemeanour 8c disposition were plotting of mischief . Some casting ** °ur come to steal away our shipping by night , watching opor - ? ante ' tunitie by the Generals and Captains lying on the shore : whose conspiracies discovered , they were prevented . 
 Others drew together in company , and carried away out of the harbors adjoining , a ship laden with fish , setting the poor men on shore . A great many more of our people stole into the woods to hide themselves , attending time and means to return home by such shipping as daily departed from the coast . Some were sick of fluxes , and many dead : and in brief , by one means or other our company was diminished , and many by the general licensed to return home . Insomuch as after 
 God brought together these men into the ship ordained to perish , who before had committed such outrage . 
 Why sir Humf. Gilbert went in the Frigate . 
 Liberalise of the Portugals . 
 August 20 
 S. Johns in 47 deg . 40 min. 
 Cape Raze in 46 degrees z 5 minutes . 
 we had reviewed our people , resolved to see and end of our voyage , we grew scant of men to furnish all our shipping : it seemed good therefore unto the general to leave the Swallow with such provision as might be spared for transporting home the sick people . 
 The Captain of the Delight or Admiral returned into England , in whose stead was appointed Captain Maurice brown , before Captain of the Swallow : who also brought with him into the Delight all his men of the Swallow , which before have be noted of outrage perpetrated and committed upon fishermen there met at sea . 
 The general made choice to go in his frigate the Squirrel ( whereof the Captain also was among them that returned into England ) the same Frigate being most convenient to discover upon the coast , and to search into every harbour or creek , which a great ship could not do . Therefore the Frigate was prepared with her nettings & fights , and overcharged with bases and such small Ordinance , more to give a show , then with judgement to foresee unto the safety of her and the men , which afterwards was and occasion also of their overthrow . 
 Now having made ready our shipping , that is to say , the Delight , the golden Hind , and the Squirrel , and put aboard our provision , which was wines , bred or rusk , fish wet and dry , sweet oils : beside many other , as marmalades , figs , lymmons barrelled , and such like : Also we had other necessary provisions for trimming our ships , nets and lines to fish withal , boats or pinnaces fit for discovery . In brief , we were supplied of our wants commodiously , as if we had be in a Country or some City populous and plentiful ! of all things . 
 We departed from this harbour of S. Johns upon Tuesday the twentieth of August , which we found by exact observation to be in 47 degrees 40 minutes . And the next day by night we were at Cape Raze , 25 leagues from the same harbour . 
 This Cape lies South Southwest from S. Johns : it is a low land , being off from the Cape about half a league : 62 
 within the sea riseth up a rock against the point of the Cape , which thereby is easily known : It is in latitude 46 degrees 25 minutes . 
 Under this Cape we were becalmed a small time , during which we laid out hooks and lines to take Codde , and drew in less then two hours , fish so large Fish large and and in such abundance , that many days after we fed entiful1-upon not other provision . 
 From hence we shaped our course unto the Island of Sablon , if conveniently it would so fallen out , also directly to Cape Briton . 
 Sablon lies to the seaward of Cape Briton about Mattel in the 25 leagues , whither we were determined to go upon intelligence we had of a Portugal , ( during our abided in S. Johns ) who was himself present , when the Portugals ( above thirty years passed ) did put into the same Island both Neat and Swine to breed , which were since exceedingly multiplied . This seemed unto us very happy tidings , to have in and Island lying so near unto the main , which we intended to plant upon , such store of cattle , whereby we might at all times conveniently be relieved of victuali , and served of store for breed . 
 In this course we trended along the coast , which from Cape Raze stretcheth into the Northwest , making a bay which some called Trepassa . Then it goes out again towards the West , and makes a point , which with Cape Raze lies in manner East and West . But this point inclineth to the North : to the West of which goes in the bay of Placentia . We sent men on land to take view of the soil along this coast , whereof they made good Good soil . report , and some of them had will to be planted there . They saw Pease growing in great abundance every where . 
 The distance between Cape Raze and Cape Briton is 87 leagues . In which Navigation we spent 8 days , having many times the wind indifferent good : yet could we never attain sighed of any land all that time , seeing we were hindered by the current . At last we fell into such flats and dangers , that hardly any of us escaped : where 
 nevertheless we lost our Admiral with all the men and provision , not knowing certainly the place . Yet for inducing men of skill to make conjecture , by our course and way we held from Cape Raze thither ( that thereby the flats and dangers may be inserted in sea Cards , for warning to others that may follow the same course hereafter ) I have set down the best reckonings that were kept by expert men , William Cox Master of the Hind , and John Paul his mate , both of Limehouse . 
 