Articles set down by the Committees appointed in the behalf of the Company of Moscovian Merchants , to confer with M. Carlile , upon his intended discovery and attempt into the hithermost parts of America . 
 The names of the Committees . 
 Master Aiderman Hart. 
 Master Aiderman Spencer . 
 Master Hoddesden . 
 Master William Burrough . 
 Master Slany . 
 ' Master Towerson . Master Staper . 
 < Master John Castelin . Master Leake . 
 Irst the Committees are well persuaded , that the Country whereunto this actium is intended , is very fruitful , inhabited with savage people of a mild and tractable disposition . And that of all other places which are unfrequented at this day , it is the only most fit and 
 most commodious for us to intermeddle withal . 
 The convenientest manner of attempting this enterprise is thought to be thus : That there should be one hundreth men conveyed thither to remain there one whole year : who with friendly intreaty of the people , 147 
 may enter into better knowledge of the particular estate of the Country , and thereby gather what commodity may be hereafter , or presently looked for . 
 The famish - The charge to transport these hundreth men , to victuali them , and to furnish them of munition and other neede-one year will things , will not be less then foure thousand pounds : cost 4000. U. whereof hath be very readily offered by the City of Bristoll one thousand pounds , the residue being three thousande pounds , remains to be furnished by this City of London , or any others who will adventure their money in this first preparation . 
 The Committees think it convenient that a Privilege should be procured by Master Carlile from her Majesty , by virtue whereof these conditions and Articles following may be effectually provided for . 
 First , that they who shall disburse their money for the first preparation , shall be nam Adventurers , and shall have the one half of all such lands , territories , towns , mines of gold and silver , and other metals whatsoever , as shall be found , got , obtained , as conquered by this discovery : yielding to her Majesty the fift part of all such gold and silver , as shall happen to be had out of any mines that so shall be found . 
 That those parties which do employ themselves personally in the present discovery , shall be nam Enterprisers , and shall have the other half of all the Lands , Territories , Towns , Mines of Gold and Silver , and other metals , yielding to her Majesty the fift part of the Gold and Silver , as the Adventurers do : The same to be distributed by the general , with the consent of the greatest part of twelve discreet persons to be chosen out of the whole number of the Enterprisers . 
 Also , that all trade of Merchandise which shall be used to and from those parts , which by this discovery shall be found out , shall appertain only to the Adventurers which first shall disburse their money for this discovery , with prohibition to all other her Majesties subject's , and other Merchants to deal in the said parts , 148 
 without the consent of the first Adventurers , upon loss of ship and goods , and punishment of their persons , that so shall adventure in trade of merchandise : or otherwise by imprisonment at the Companies pleasure . 
 That no person shall hereafter adventure in this discovery as Adventurers for the profits mentioned in the first Articles , but such only as do disburse their money in this first preparation : and they shall not adventure hereafter any greater sum , then ratably according to their proportion of this their first adventure . 
 Also , the profit which by this discovery shall be attained unto , either by land which may be conquered , or otherwise got : as also such profit which by this discovery shall be obtained by mines , or otherwise got , that eke one shall have his part rate and rate like , according to the proportion of their first adventure , and not otherwise . 
 The Adventurers in this first preparation shall , at their own free will and liberty , choose whither they will supply hereafter any further charge or not : if there do fallen out any such occasion to require the same . And yet withal shall for ever hold to them the freedom of the trade which shall grow in any of these parts : notwithstanding their said refusal to bear any further charge . 
 That in the Patent which is to be obtained , be granted , that all her Majesties subject's may transport themselves thither that shall be contented to go . And that the Patentee or his assigns may ship thither from time to time , so many and such persons , men , women , and children , as they shall think meet . And the same persons to inhabit or remain there at their pleasure , any law to the contrary notwithstanding , with express prohibition , as is mentioned in the third article , against all others , which shall go thither without the licence of the patentee or his assigns first obtained . 
 That it shall not be lawful for any of her Majesties subject's , or any other to inhabit or traffic within 149 
 A.D. 
 1583. 
 [ III . 189. J 
 one hundred leagues any way of the place , where the general shall have settled his chiefest being or residence . 
 IJ9I . 
 The fieete of Canada . 
 Cape Raze . 
 The Isles of S. Peter . 
 Cape de Rey. 
 The Isles of Aponas . 
 