A true Report of the late discoveries , and possession taken in the right of the Crown of England of the Newfound Lands , By that valiant and worthy Gentleman , Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight . 
 Wherein is also briefly set down , her highness lawful Title thereunto , and the great and manifold commodities , that are likely to grow thereby , to the whole Realm in general , and to the Adventurers in particular : Together with the easiness and shortness of the Voyage . 
 Written by Sir George Peckham Knight , the chief adventurer , and furtherer of Sir Humfrey Gilberts voyage to Newfound Land. 
 The first Chapter , wherein the Argument of the Book is contained . 
 TO was my fortune ( good Reader ) not Master Ed-many days passed , to meet with a right ward honest and discreet Gentleman , who accompanied that valiant and worthy Knight Sir Humfrey Gilbert , in this last journey for the Western discoveries , and is owner and Captain of the only 
 vessel which is as yet returned from thence . 
 By him I understand that Sir Humfrey departed the coast of England the eleventh of June last passed , with five sail of Ships , from Caushen bay near Plymouth , whereof one of the best forsook his company , the thirteenth day of the same month , and returned into England . 
 The other foure ( through the assistance of Almighty God ) did arrive at Saint Johns Haven , in Newfound 89 
 Sir Humfrey land , the 3. of August last . Upon whose arrival all Gilbert did Masters and chief Mariners of the English Fleet , Saint Johns w^ich were in the said Haven before , endeavouring to Haven in freight themselves with fish , repaired unto Sir Humfrey , Newfound whom he made acquainted with the effect of his Com-land , the 3. of mission : which being done , he promised to entreat them ^ » 1583 and eir goods well and honourably as did become her 
 ' Majesties Lieutenant . They did all welcome him in the best sort that they could , and showed him and his all such courtesies as the place could afford or yield . 
 Then he went to view the Country , being well accompanied with most of his Captains and soldiers . They found the same very temperate , but somewhat warmer then England at that season of the year , replenished with Among these Beasts and great store of Foul of diverse kinds : And there was of sunjry SOrtes , both in the salt water , and in the 
 of a beast of rresh , in so great plenty as might suffice to victuali and 7 inches and Army , and they are very easily taken . What sundry ahalfeover . other commodities for this Realm right necessary , the same doth yield , you shall understand in this treatise hereafter , in place more convenient . 
 On Munday being the fift of August , the general caused his tent to be set upon the side of and hill , in the view of all the Fleet of English men and strangers , which were in number between thirtie and fourtie sail : then being accompanied with all his Captains , Master's , Gentlemen and other soldiers , he caused all the Master's , and principali Officers of the ships , aswell Englishmen as Spanyards , Portugales , and of other nations , to repair unto his tent : And then and there , in the presence of them all , he did cause his Commission under the great Seal of England to be openly and solemnly read unto them , Sir Humfrey whereby were granted unto him , his heirs , and assigns , tookepossession by the Queens most excellent Majesty , many great and of the New - [ arge royalties , liberties , and privileges . The effect whereof being signified unto the strangers by and Inter-Crowne of preter , he took possession of the said land in the right 
 England . of the Crown of England by digging of a Turf and 
 receiving the same with and Hasell wand , delivered unto him , after the manner of the law and custom of England . 
 Then he signified unto the company both strangers and others , that from thenceforth , they were to live in that land , as the Territories aPPERTAINING to the Crown of England , and to be governed by such Laws as by good advice should be set down , which in all points ( so near as might be ) should be agreeable to the Laws of England : And for to put the same in execution , presently he ordained and established three Laws . 
 First , that Religion publicly exercised , should be such , and none other , then is used in the Church of England . 
 The second , that if any person should be lawfully convicted of any practice against her Majesty , her Crown and dignity , to be adjudged as traitors according to the Laws of England . 
 The third , if any should speak dishonourably of her Majesty , the party so offending , to lose his ears , his ship and goods , to be confiscate to the use of the general . 
 All men did very willingly submit themselves to these Laws . Then he caused the Queens Majesties Arms to be engraved , set up , and erected with great solemnity . After this , diverse Englishmen made suit unto Sir Hum 
 Three laws established there by Sir Humfrey . 
 Sundry persons became Tenants to Sir Humfrey , and do maintain 
 frey to have of him by inheritance , their accustomed possession for stages , standings & drying places , in sundry places of in ivers that land for their fish , as a thing that they do make ? * ete‘ 
 great account of , which he granted unto them in fee farm . And by this means he hath possession maintained for him , in many parts of that Country . To be brief , he did let , set , give and dispose of many things , as absolute Governor there , by virtue of her Majesties letters 
 patents . 
 And after their ships were repaired , whereof one he was driven to leave behind , both for want of men sufficient to furnish her , as also to carry home such sick persons as were not able to proceed any further : He departed from thence the 20. of August , with the other three , namely , 91 
 the Delight , wherein was appointed Captain in M. William Winter's place , ( that thence returned immediately for England ) M. Maurice Browne : the Golden Hind , in which was Captain and owner , M. Edward Hays : and the little Frigate where the general himself did go , seeming to him most fit to discover and approach the shore . 
 The 21. day they came to Cape Raze , towards the South parts whereof , lying a while becalmed , they took Cod in largeness and quantity , exceeding the other parts of Newfound land , where any of them had be . And from thence , trending the coast West , towards the Bay of Placentia , the general sent certain men a shore , to view the Country , which to them as they sailed along , seemed pleasant . Whereof his men at their return gave great commendation , liking so well of the place , as they would willingly have stayed and wintered there . But having the wind fair and good , they proceeded on their course towards the firm of America , which by reason of continual fogs , at that time of the year especially , they could never see , till Cox Master of the Golden Hind did discern land , and presently lost sighed thereof again , at what time they were all upon a breach in a great and outrageous storm , having under 3. fathom water . But God delivered the Frigate and the Golden Hind , from this great danger . And the Delight in the presence of them all was lost , to their unspeakable grief , with all their chief victuali , munition , and other necessary provisions , and other things of valve not fit here to be nam . Whereupon , by reason also that Winter was come upon them , and foul weather increased with fogs and mists that so covered the land , as without danger of perishing they could not approach it : Sir Humfrey Gilbert and M. Hays were compelled much against their wills to retire homeward : And being 300. leagues on their way , were after by tempestuous weather separated the one from the other , the ninth of September last , since which time M. Hays with his Bark is safely arrived , but of Sir Humfrey as yet they hear no certain news . 
 Upon this report ( together with my former intent , to write some brief discourse in the commendation of this so noble and worthy and enterprise ) I did call to my remembrance , the Historic of Themystocles the Grecian , who ( being a right noble and valiant Captain ) signified unto his Countrymen the Citizens of Athens , that he had invented a devise for their common wealth very profitable : but it was of such importance and secrecy , that it ought not to be revealed , before private conference had with some particular prudent person of their choice . 
 The Athenians knowing Aristides the Philosopher , to be a man endued with singular wisdom and virtue , made choice of him to have conference with Themystcles , and thereupon to yield his opinion to the Citizens concerning the said devise : which was , that they might set on fire the Navy of their enemies , with great facility , as he had laid the plot : Aristides made relation to the Citizens , that the stratagem devised by Themystocles was a profitable practice for the common wealth but it was dishonest . The Athenians ( without further demand what the same was ) did by common consent reject and condemn it , preferring honesty and upright dealing before profit . 
 By occasion of this Historic , I drew my self into a more deep consideration of this late undertaken Voyage , whither it were as well pleasing to almighty God , as profitable to men : as lawful , as it seemed honourable : as well grateful to the Savages , as gainful to the Christians . And upon mature deliberation I found the actium to be honest and profitable , and therefore allowable by the opinion of Aristides if he were now alive : which being by me herein sufficiently proved , ( as by Gods grace I purpose to do ) I doubt not but that all good minds will endeavour themselves to be assistants to this so commendable and enterprise , by the valiant and worthy Gentlemen our Country men already attempted and undertaken . 
 Now whereas I do understand that Sir Humfrey Gilbert his adherents , associates and friends do mean 
 93 
 A.D. 
 I583 - 
 Plutarch . 
 | | Englishmen . Master John Hawkins . 
 Sir Francis Drake . 
 M. William Winter . 
 M. John Chester . 
 M. Martin Frobisher . 
 Anthony Parkhurst . 
 William Battes . 
 John Lovel . David Ingram . Strangers . French . 
 John Ribault . Jaques Cartier . 
 Andrew Thevet . 
 Monsieur Gourgues . Monsieur Laudonniere . Italians . 
 Christopher Columbus . 
 John VeraiMnus . 
 with a convenient supply ( with as much speed as may be ) to maintain , pursue and follow this intended voyage already in part performed , and ( by the assistance of almighty God ) to plant themselves and their people in the continent of the hither part of America , between the degrees of 30. and 60. of septentrionali latitude : Within which degrees by computation Astronomical and Cosmographical are doubtless to be found all things that be necessary , profitable , or delectable for men life : The climate mild and temperate , neither too hight nor too cold , so that under the cope of heaven there is not any where to be found a more convenient place to plant and inhabit in : which many notable Gentlemen , both | | of our own nation and strangers , ( who have be travelers ) can testify : and that those Countries are at this day inhabited with Savages ( who have no knowledge of God : ) Is it not therefore ( I say ) to be lamented , that these poor Pagans , so long living in ignorance and idolatry , and in sort thirsting after Christianitie , ( as may appear by the relation of such as have travailed in those parts ) that our hearts are so hardened , that few or none can be found which will put to their helping hands , and apply themselves to the relieving of the miserable and wretched estate of these silly souls ? 
 Whose Country doth ( as it were with arms advanced ) above the climates both of Spaine and France , stretch out it self towards England only : In manner praying our aid and help , as it is not only set forth in Mercators general Map , but it is also found to be true by the discovery of our nation , and other strangers , who have oftentimes travailed upon the same coasts . 
 Christopher Columbus of famous memory , the first instrument to manifest the great glory and mercy of Almighty God in planting the Christian faith , in those so long unknown regions , having in purpose to acquaint ( as he did ) that renowned Prince , the Queens Majesties grandfather King Henry the seventh , with his intended voyage for the Western discoveries , was not only 
 derided and mocked generally , even here in England , but afterwards became a laughing stock to the Spaniards themselves , who at this day ( of all other people ) are most bounden to laud and praise God , who first stirred up the man to that enterprise . 
 And while he was attending there to acquaint the King of Castile ( that then was ) with his intended purpose , by how many ways and means was he derided ? Some scorned the pildnesse of his garments , some took occasion to jest at his simple and silly looks , others asked if this were he that lowts so low , which did take upon him to bring men into a Country that aboundeth with Gold , Pearl , and Precious stones ? If he were any such man ( said they ) he would carry another manner of countenance with him , and look somewhat loftier . Thus some judged him by his garments , and others by his look and countenance , but none entered into the consideration of the inward man . 
 A.D. 
 1583. 
 God doth not always begin hit greatest works by the greatest persons . 
 His custom was to bow himself very low in making of courtesy . 
 In the end , what success his Voyage had , who list to read the Decades , the Historic of the West Indies , the conquest of Hernando Cortes about Mexico , and those Hernando of Francisco Pizarro in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco , may know more particularly . All which their p^^ discoveries , travails and conquests are extant to be had in the English tongue . This devise was then accounted a fantastical imagination , and a drowsy dream . 
 But the sequel thereof hath since awaked out of dreams thousands of souls to know their Creator , being thereof before that time altogether ignorant : And hath since made sufficient proof , neither to be fantastic nor vainly imagined . 
 Withal , how mightily it hath enlarged the dominions of the Crown of Spaine , and greatly enriched the subject's of the same , let all men consider . Beside , it is well known , that since the time of Columbus his first discovery , through the planting , possessing , and inhabiting those parts , there hath be transported and brought home into Europe greater store of Gold , Silver , Pearl , 
 and Precious stones , then heretofore hath be in all ages since the creation of the world . 
 I do therefore heartily wish , that seeing it hath pleased almighty God of his infinite mercy , at the length to awake some of our worthy Country men out of that drowsy dream , wherein we have so long slumbered : 
 That we may now not suffer that to quail for want of maintenance , which by these valiant Gentlemen our Countrymen is so nobly begun & enterprised . For which purpose , I have taken upon me to write this simple short Treatise , hoping that it shall be able to persuade such as have be , and yet do continue detractors and hinderers of this journey , ( by reason perhaps that they have not deliberately and advisedly entered into the judgement of the matter ) that yet now upon better consideration they will become favourable furtherers of the same . And that such as are already well affected there-A reasonable unto , will continue their good disposition : And withal , I request . most humbly pray all such as are no niggards of their purses in buying of costly and rich apparel , and liberali Contributors in setting forth of games , pastimes , feastings and banquets , ( whereof the charge being passed , there is no hope of public profit or commodity ) that henceforth they will bestow and employ their liberality ( heretofore that way expended ) to the furtherance of these so commendable purposed proceedings . 
 And to this end have I taken pen in hand , as in conscience thereunto moved , desiring much rather , that of the great multitude which this Realm doth nourish , far better able to handle this matter then I my self am , it would have pleased some one of them to have undertaken the same . But seeing they are silent , and that it falls to my lot to put pen to the paper , I will endeavour my self , and do stand in good hope ( though my skill and knowledge be simple , yet through the The argument assistance of almighty God ) to prove that the Voyage of the books . jate | y enterprised for trade , traffic , and planting in America , is and actium tending to the lawful enlargement 96 
 of her Majesties Dominions , commodious to the whole Realm in generail , profitable to the adventurers in particular , beneficial to the Savages , and a matter to be attained without any great danger or difficulty . 
 And lastly , ( which is most of all ) A thing likewise tending to the honour and glory of Almighty God . And for that the lawfulness to plant in those Countries in some men's judgements seems very doubtful , I will begin the proof of the lawfulness of trade , traffic , and planting . 
 The second Chapter shows , that it is lawful and necessary to trade and traffic with the Savages : And to plant in their Countries : And divides planting into two sorts . 
 A Nd first for traffic , I say that the Christians may lawfully travel into those Countries and abide there : whom the Savages may not justly impugn and forbid in respect of the mutual society and fellowship between man and man prescribed by the Law of Nations . 
 For from the first beginning of the creation of the world , and from the renewing of the same after Noes flood , all men have agreed , that no violence should be offered to Ambassadors : That the Sea with his Havens should be common : That such as should fortune to be taken in war , should be servants or slaves : And that strangers should not be driven away from the place or Country whereunto they do come . 
 If it were so then , I demand in what age , and by what Law is the same forbidden or denied since ? For who doubteth but that it is lawful for Christians to use trade and traffic with Infidels or Savages , carrying thither such commodities as they want , and bringing from thence some part of their plenty ? 
 A thing so commonly and generally practised , both in these our days , and in times past , beyond the memory of man , both by Christians and Infidels , that it needs no further proof . 
 vni 97 g 
 The principali causes why this voyage is undertaken . 
 And forasmuch as the use of trade and traffic ( be it never so profitable ) ought not to be preferred before the planting of Christian faith : I will therefore somewhat entreat of planting , ( without which , Christian Religion can take no root , be the Preachers never so careful and diligent ) which I mean to divide into two sorts . 
 The first , when Christians by the good liking and willing assent of the Savages , are admitted by them to quiet possession . 
 The second , when Christians being unjustly repulsed , do seek to attain and maintain the right for which they do come . 
 And though in regard of the establishment of Christian Religion , either of both may be lawfully and justly exercised : ( Whereof many examples may be found , as well in the time of Moyses and Josua , and other rulers before the birth of Christ , as of many virtuous Emperors and Kings since his incarnation : ) yet do I wish , that before the second be put in practice , a proof may be made of the first , saving that for their safety as well against the Savages , as all other foreign enemies , they should first well and strongly fortify themselves : which being done , then by all fair speeches , and every other good means of persuasion to seek to take away all occasions of offence . 
 As letting them to understand , how they came not to their hurt , but for their good , and to no other end , but to dwell peaceably among them , and to trade and traffic with them for their own commodity , without molesting or grieving them any way : which must not be done by words only but also by deeds . 
 For albeit , to maintain right and repel injury , be a just cause of war : yet must there hereof be heedful care had , that whereas the Savages be fearful by nature , and found otherwise , the Christians should do their best endeavour to take away such fear as may grow unto them by reason of their strange apparel , Armour , and weapon , or such like , by quiet and peaceable conversation , 98 
 and letting them live in security , and keeping a measure of blameless defence , with as little discommodity to the Savages as may be : for this kind of war would be only defensive and not offensive . 
 And questionless there is great hope and likelihood , that by this kind of means we should bring to pass all effects to our desired purposes : Considering that all creatures , by constitution of nature , are rendered more tractable and easier won for all assays , by courtesy and mildness , then by cruelty or roughness : and therefore being a principle taught us by natural reason , it is first to be put in ure . 
 For albeit as yet the Christians are not so thoroughly furnished with the perfectness of their language , either to express their minds to them , or again to conceive the Savages intent : Yet for the present opportunity , such policy may be used by friendly signs , and courteous tokens towards them , as the Savages may easily perceive ( were their senses never so gross ) and assured friendship to be offered them , and that they are encountered with such a nation , as brings them benefit , commodity , peace , tranquillity and safety . To further this , and to accomplish it in deeds , there must be presented unto them gratis , some kinds of our petty merchandizes and trifles : As looking glasses , Bells , Beads , Bracelets , Chains , or collers of Bewgle , Crystal , Amber , Jet , or Glass etc. For such be the things , though to us of small valve , yet accounted by them of high price and estimation : and soonest will induce their Barbarous nature's to a liking and a mutual society with us . 
 Moreover , it shall be requisite either by speech , if it be possible , either by some other certain means , to signify unto them , that once league of friendship with all loving conversation being admitted between the Christians and them : that then the Christians from thenceforth will always be ready with force of Arms to assist and defend them in their just quarrels , from all invasions , spoils and oppressions offered them by any Tyrants , 
 The seconde kind of plant mg. 
 Adversaries , or their next borderers : and a benefit is so much the more to be esteemed , by how much the person upon whom it is bestowed stands in need thereof . 
 For it appears by the relation of a Countryman of ours , namely David Ingram , ( who traveled in those countries xi . Months and more ) That the Savages generally for the most part , are at continual wars with their next adjoining neighbours , and especially the Cannibals , being a cruel kind of people , whose food is men flesh , and have teeth like dogs , and do pursue them with ravenous minds to eat their flesh , and devour them . 
 And it is not to be doubted , but that the Christians may in this case justly and lawfully aid the Savages against the Cannibals . So that it is very likely , that by this means we shall not only mightily stir and inflame their rude minds gladly to embrace the loving company of the Christians , proffering unto them both commodities , succour , and kindness : But also by their frank consents shall easily enjoy such competent quantity of Land , as every way shall be correspondent to the Christians expectation and contentation , considering the great abundance that they have of Land , and how small account they make thereof , taking no other fruits thereby then such as the ground of it self doth naturally yield . And thus much concerning the first sort of planting , which as I assuredly hope , so I most heartily pray may take effect and place . 
 But if after these good and fair means used , the Savages nevertheless will not be herewithal satisfied , but barbarously will go about to practise violence either in repelling the Christians from their Ports & safelandings , or in withstanding them afterwards to enjoy the rights for which both painfully and lawfully they have adventured themselves thither : 
 Then in such a case I hold it no breach of equity for the Christians to defend themselves , to pursue revenge with force , and to do whatsoever is necessary for the attaining of their safety : For it is allowable by all Laws in such distresses , to resist violence with violence : And 
 100 
 for their more security to increase their strength by building of Forts for avoiding the extremity of injurious dealing . 
 Wherein if also they shall not be suffered in reasonable quietness to continue , there is no bar ( as I judge ) but that in stout assemblies the Christians may issue out , and by strong hand pursue their enemies , subdue them , take possession of their Towns , Cities , or Villages , and ( in avoiding murderous tyrannic ) to use the Law of Arms , as in like case among all Nations at this day is used : and most especially to the end they may with security hold their lawful possession , lest happily after the departure of the Christians , such Savages as have be converted , should afterwards through compulsion and enforcement of their wicked Rulers , return to their horrible idolatry ( as did the children of Israel , after the decease of Joshua ) and continue their wicked custom of most unnatural sacrificing of humane creatures . 
 And in so doing , doubtless the Christians shall no whit at all transgress the bonds of equity or civility , forasmuch as in former ages , ( yea , before the incarnation of Christ ) the like hath be done by sundry Kings and Princes , Governors of the children of Israel : chiefly in respect to begin their planting , for the establishment of Gods word : as also since the Nativity of Christ , mighty and puissant Emperors and Kings have performed the like , I say to plant , possess , and subdue . For proof whereof , I will allege you examples of both kinds . 
 we read in the old Testament , how that after Noes flood was ceased , restauration of mankind began only of those few of Noes children and family as were by God preelected to be saved in the Ark with him , whose seed in process of time , was multiplied to infinite numbers of Nations , which in diverse sorts divided themselves to sundry quarters of the earth . And forasmuch as all their posterity being mightily increased , followed not the perfect life of Noe their predecessor , God chosen out of the multitude a peculiar people to himself , to whom after - 
 IOI 
 wards being under the government of Moyses in Mount Sinay , he made a grant to inherit the Land of Canaan , called the Land of promise , with all the other rich and fertile Countries next adjoining thereunto . Nevertheless , before they came to possession thereof , having be afflicted with many grievous punishments and plagues for their sins , they fell in despair to enjoy the same . 
 But being encouraged and comforted by their Rulers , ( men of God ) they proceeded , arming themselves with all patience , to suffer whatsoever it should please God to send : and at last attaining to the Land , they were encountered with great numbers of strong people , and mighty Kings . 
 Josua 4. Notwithstanding , Josua their Leader replenished with the Spirit of God , being assured of the justness of his quarrel , gathered the chief strength of the children of Israel together , to the number of 40000. with whom he safely passed the huge river Jordan , and having before Josua 6. sent privy spies for the discovery of the famous city Jerico , to understand the certainty of the Citizens estate , he forthwith came thither , and environed it round about with his whole power the space of seven days . 
 In which respite , perceiving none of the Gentiles disposed to yield or call for mercy , he then commanded ( as God before had appointed ) that both the city Jerico should be burned , yea , and all the inhabitants , as well old as young , with all their cattle should be destroyed , only excepted Rahab , her kindred and family , because she before had hid secretly the messengers of Josua , that were sent thither as spies . As for all their gold , silver , precious stones , or vessels of brass , they were reserved and consecrated to the Lords treasury . 
 Josua 8. In like manner he burned the city Hay , slew the inhabitants thereof , and hanged up their King . But for so much as the Gebionites ( fearing the like event ) sent Josua 9. Ambassadors unto Josua to entreat for grace , favour , and peace : he commanded that all their lives should be saved , and that they should be admitted to the come - 
 102 
 pany of the children of Israel . Yet understanding afterwards they wrought this by a policy , he used them as drudges to hew wood and to carry water , and other necessaries for his people . Thus began this valiant Captain his conquest , which he pursued and never left till he had subdued all the Hethites , Amorites , Cananites , Judg. 11.13 . Peresites , H evites , and Jebusites , with all their princes and Kings , being thirtie and one in number , & diverse other strange nations , beside whose lands & dominions he wholly divided among Gods people . 
 After that Josua was deceased , Juda was constituted Lord over the army , who receiving like charge from God , pursued the proceedings of the holy captain Josua , and utterly vanquished many Gentiles , Idolaters , and adversaries to the children of Israel , with all such Rulers or Kings as withstood him , and namely Adonibezek the Judg. 1. most cruel tyrant : whose thumbs and great toes he caused to be cut off , for so much as he had done the like before unto seventie Kings , whom being his prisoners , he forced to gather up their victuals underneath his table . In this God showed his justice to revenge tyrannic . We read likewise , that Gedeon a most puissant and noble warrior so behaved himself in following the worthy acts of Josua and Juda , that in short time he not only delivered the children of Israel from the hands of the multitude of the fierce Madianites , but also subdued them and their Tyrants , whose lands he caused Gods people to possess and inherit . 
 I could recite diverse other places out of the Scripture , which aptly may be applied hereunto , were it not I do endeavour my self by all means to be brief . Now in like manner will I allege some few Inductions out of the authentical writings of the Ecclesiastical Historiographers , all tending to the like argument . And first to begin withal , we do read : That after our Saviour Jesus Christ had suffered his passion , the Apostles being inspired with the holy Ghost , and the knowledge of all strange languages , did immediately disperse themselves to 
 103 
 A gpodnotefinal Conquerors to be mercifiull . Judg. 6. 7. 
 ad . 
 1583 - 
 sundry parts of the world , to the preaching of the Gospel . Yet not in so general a manner , but that there remained some far remote Countries unvisited by them , among the which it is reported that India the great , called the uttermost India , as yet had received no light of the word . Ruffinuslib . i . But it came to pass , that one Metrodorus a very learned ca ? ' 9 - and wise Philosopher in that age , being desirous to search out unknown lands , did first discover the same , finding it wonderful populous and rich , which upon his return being published , and for certain understood , there was another grave Philosopher of Tyrus called Meropius , being a Christian , who did resolve himself ( following the example of Metrodorus ) to travail thither , and in a short time assisted but with a few , in a small Vessel arrived there , having in his company two young youths , Edesius and Frumentius , whom ( being his scholars ) he had thoroughly instructed both in liberali Sciences , and Christian Religion . Now after that Meropius somewhile staying there , had ( as he thought ) sufficient understanding of the Indians whole estate : He determined to depart , and to bring notice thereof unto the Emperor , whom he meant to exhort to the conquest of the same . 
 But by misfortune he was prevented , for being in the midst of his course on the Sea homeward , a soar tempest arose , and perforce drove him back again , to and unknown Port of the said land : where he by the Meropius most cruel barbarous Indians on the sudden was slain 
 slain . with all his company , except the two young scholars 
 aforesaid , whom the barbarous Indians , by reason they were of comely stature and beautiful personages , took , Edesius and and forthwith presented them to their King and Queen : frumentius which both being very well liked of , the King courteously entreated , and ordained Edesius to be his Butler , and the Indians . „ : , . „ ... r ’ - 
 Frumentius his becretarie , and in rew years by reason or their learning and civil government , they were had in great favour , honour , and estimation with the Princes . But the King departing this life , left the Queen his 
 104 
 wife with her young son to govern , and gave free scope and liberty to the two Christians , at their best pleasure to pass to their native soils , allowing them all necessaries for the same . Yet the Queen who highly favoured them was very sorrowful they should depart , and therefore most earnestly entreated them to tarry and assist her in the government of her people , till such time as her young son grew to ripe years , which request they fulfilled . 
 And Frumentius excelling Edesius far in all wisdom , ruled both the Queen and her subject's at his discretion , whereby he took occasion to put in practise privily , that the foundation of Christian religion might be planted in the hearts of such as with whom he thought his persuasion might best prevail , and that soonest would give ear unto him : which being brought to pass accordingly , he then with his fellow Edesius took leave of the Queen to return to his native country . And so soon as he was arrived there , he revealed to the Emperor Constantine , the effect of all those events : who both commending his deeds and wholly allowing thereof , by the advice and good liking of Athanasius then Bishop of Alexandria , did arm and set forth a convenient power for the aid of Frumentius , in this his so godly a purpose . And by this means came the 
 Emperor afterwards by fair promises , and by force of histone , testi-armes together , unto the possession of all the Indians fieth how that country . The author of this story Ruffinus received C°nstantl ™ the truth hereof from the very mouth of Edesius come - eniarge his panion to Frumentius . dominions by 
 Moreover Eusebius in his Historic Ecclesiastical ! in subduing of Infidels and Idolatrous nations . 
 Eusebius 
 deavoured by all means to subject all such remote hib . i . de vita Barbarous and Heathen nations , as then inhabited the C^‘ foure quarters of the world . For ( as it is written ) the eod . Emperor thoroughly aided with a puissant army of lib . cap . 39. 
 Frumentius in great favour with you Queen of the Indians . 
 And other great work of God begun by a man ofmeane birth . 
 Ruffinus the Author of this story . 
 Euseb. in his Ecclesiastical 
 precise terms , and in diverse places makes mention how Constantine the great not only enlarged his Empire bv the subduing of his next neighbours , but also en - 
 105 
 valiant soldiers whom he had before persuaded to Christian religion , in proper person himself came even unto this our country of England , then called the Island of Britaines , bending from him full West , which he wholly conquered , made tributary , and settled therein Christian faith , and left behind him such Rulers thereof , as to his wisdom seemed best . From thence he turned his force towards the North coast of the world , and there utterly subdued the rude and cruel Nation of the Scythians , whereof part by friendly persuasions , part by main strength , he reduced the whole to Christian faith . Afterwards he determined with himself to search out what strange people inhabited in the uttermost parts of the South . And with great hazard and labour , making his journey thither , at last became victor over them all , even to the country of the Blemmyans , and the remote . / Ethiopians , that now are the people of Presbyter John , who yet till this day continue and bear the name of Christians . 
 In the East likewise , what Nation soever at that time he could have notice of , he easily won and brought in subjection to the Empire . So that to conclude , there was no region in any part of the world , the inhabitants whereof being Gentiles , though unknown unto him , but in time he overcame and vanquished . 
 This worthy beginning of Constantine , both his sons succeeding his room , and also diverse other Emperors afterwards to their uttermost endeavour followed and continued , which all the books of Eusebius more Theodoret. in at large set forth . Theodoretus likewise in his Eccle-eccle . lib . 5. siasticall historic makes mention how Theodosius the caf . 20. virtuous Emperor employed earnestly all his time , as well in conquering the Gentiles to the knowledge of the holy Gospel , utterly subverting their profane Temples and abominable Idolatry , as also in extinguishing of such Theodoretus usurP^nS tyrants as with Paganism withstood the plant-cap°^e . eodern king of Christian religion . After ’ whose decease his lib . sons Honorius and Arcadius were created Emperors , 
 106 
 1583. the one of the East , the other of the West , who with all stout godliness most carefully imitated the foresteps of their Father , either in enlarging their territories , or increasing the Christian flock . 
 Moreover , it is reported by the said author , that Theodosius junior the Emperor , no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above nam Princes , with great study and zeal pursued and prosecuted the Gentiles , subdued their tyrants and countries , and utterly destroyed all their idolatry , converting their souls to acknowledge their only Messias and Creator , and their Countries to the enlargement of the Empire . To be brief , who so lists to read Eusebius Pamphilus , Socrates Scholasticus , Theodoritus , Hermia , Sozomen , and Euagrius Scholasticus , which all were most sage Ecclesiastical ! writers , shall find great store of examples of the worthy lives of sundry Emperors , tending all to the confirmation of my former speeches . 
 And for like examples of later time , ( yea even in the memory of man ) I shall not need to recite any other then the conquest made of the West and East Indies by the Kings of Spaine and Portugal ! , whereof there is particular mention made in the last Chapter of this book . Herein have I used more copy of examples then otherwise I would have done , saving that I have be in pl^ce , where this manner of planting the Christian faith hath be thought of some to be scarce lawful , yea , such as do take upon them to be more then meanly learned . To these examples could 1 join many more , but whosoever is not satisfied with these few , may satisfy himself in reading at large the Authors last above recited . Thus have I ( as I trust ) proved that we may justly trade and traffic with the Savages , and lawfully plant and inhabit their Countries . 
 [ The third 
 107 
 The third Chapter doth show the lawful title which the Queens most excellent Majesty hath unto those Countries , which through the aid of Almighty God are meant to be inhabited . 
 1170. Owen Gwyneth was then Prince of Northwales , Nullum tempus occurrit Regi . 
 This Island was discovered by Sir Humfrey and his company , in this his last journey . 
 Mutezuma his Oration to his subject's in presence of Hernando Cortes , which Oration was made about the year 1520. 
 A Nd it is very evident that the planting there shall in time right amply enlarge her Majesties Territories and Dominions , or ( I might rather say ) restore to her Highness ancient right and interest in those Countries , into the which a noble and worthy personage , lineally descended from the blood royal , born in Wales , nam Madock ap Owen Gwyneth , departing from the coast of England , about the year of our Lord God 1170. arrived and there planted himself and his Colonies , and afterwards returned himself into England , leaving certain of his people there , as appears in and ancient Welsh Chronicle , where he then gave to certain Hands , beasts , and fowls sundry Welsh ' names , as the Hand of Pengwin , which yet to this day bears the same . 
 There is likewise a foul in the said countries' called by the same name at this day , and is as much to say in English , as Whitehead , and in truth the said fowls have white heads . There is also in those countries a fruit called Gwynethes which is likewise a Welsh word . Moreover , there are diverse other Welsh words at this day in use , as David Ingram aforesaid reporteth in his relations . All which most strongly argue , the said prince with his people to have inhabited there . And the same in effect is confirmed by Mutezuma that mighty Emperor of Mexico , who in and Oration unto his subject's for the better pacifying of them , made in the presence of Hernando Cortes used these speeches following . 
 MY kinsmen , friends , and servants , you do well know that eighteene years I have be your King , as my father's and grandfathers were , and always I have-bene unto you a loving Prince , and you unto me good 108 
 and obedient subject's , and so I hope you will remain unto me all the days of my life . You ought to have in remembrance , that either you have herd of your father's , or else our divines have instructed you , that we are not naturally of this country , nor yet our kingdom is durable , because our forefathers came from a far country , and their King and Captain , who brought them hither , returned again to his natural Country , saying that he would send such as should rule and govern us , if by chance he himself returned not , etc. 
 These be the very words of Mutezuma set down in the Spanish Chronicles , the which being thoroughly considered , because they have relation to some strange noble person , who long before had possessed those countries' , do all sufficiently argue the undoubted title of her Majesty : forasmuch as no other Nation can truly by any Chronicles they can find , make prescription of time for themselves , before the time of this Prince Madoc . Beside all this , for further proof of her highness title since the arrival of this noble Briton into those parts ( that is to say ) in the time of the Queens grandfather of worthy memory , King Henry the seventh , Letters patents were by his Majesty granted to John Cabota and Italian , to Lewis , Sebastian and Sancius , his three sons , to discover remote , barbarous and heathen Countries' , which discovery was afterwards executed to the use of the Crown of England , in the said Kings time , by Sebastian and Sancius his sons , who were born here in England : in true testimony whereof there is a fair haven in Newfoundland , known , and called until this day by the name of Sancius haven , which proves that they first discovered upon that coast from the height of 63 unto the cape of Florida , as appears in the Decades . 
 And this may stand for another title to her Majesty : but any of the foresaid titles is as much or more then any other Christian Prince can pretend to the Indies , before such time as they had actuali possession thereof , 109 
 M. Oliver Dalbony . 
 M. Edward Reow . 
 M. R. H. 
 M. I A. 
 obtained by the discovery of Christopher Columbus , and the conquest of Vasques Nuns de Balboa , Hernando Cortes , Francisco Pizarro , and others . And therefore I think it needless to write any more touching the lawfulness of her Majesties title . 
 The fourth chapter shows how that the trade , traffic , and planting in those countries' , is likely to prove very profitable to the whole realm in general . 
 NOw to show how the same is likely to prove very profitable and beneficial generally to the whole realm : it is very certain , that the greatest jewel of this realm , and the chiefest strength and force of the same , for defence or offence in marshal matter and manner , is the multitude of ships , master's and mariners , ready to assist the most stately and royal navy of her Majesty , which by reason of this voyage shall have both increase and maintenance . And it is well known that in sundry Cox the places of this realm ships have been built and set forth master . of jate jayeS } for the trade of fishing only : yet notwithstanding the fish which is taken and brought into England by the English navy of fishermen , will not suffice for the expense of this realm foure months , if there were none else brought of strangers . And the chiefest cause why our English men do not go so far Westerly as the especial fishing places do lie , both for plenty and greatness of fish , is for that they have no succour and known safe harbour in those parts . But if our nation were once planted there , or near thereabouts ; whereas they now fish but for two months in the year , they might then fish so long as pleased themselves , or rather at their coming find such plenty of fish ready taken , salted , and dried , as might be sufficient to fraught them home without long delay ( God granting that salt may be found there ) whereof David Ingram ( who traveled in those countries' as aforesaid ) say that there is great plenty : and withal the climate does give great hope , that though there were none no 
 naturally growing , yet it might as well be made there by art , as it is both at Rochel and Bayon , or elsewhere . Which being brought to pass , shall increase the number of our ships and mariners , were it but in respect of fishing only : but much more in regard of the sundry merchandizes and commodities which are there found , and had in great abundance . 
 Moreover , it is well known that all Savages , aswell those that dwell in the South , as those that dwell in the North , so soon as they shall begin but a little to taste of civility , will take marvelous delight in any garment , be it never so simple ; as a shirt , a blue , yellow , read , or green cotton cassock , a cap , or such like , and will take incredible pains for such a trifle . 
 For I my self have herd this report made sundry Clothiers , times by diverse of our countrymen , who have dwelled Wwlmen . in the Southerly parts of the West Indies , some twelve years together , and some of less time ; that the people Weavers . in those parts are easily reduced to civility both in manners Fullers . and garments . Which being so , what vent for our Steermen . English clothes will thereby ensue , and how great benefit to all such persons and artificers , whose names are quoted Cappers . in the margin , I do leave to the judgement of such as Hatters , are discreet . an man3 te - 
 And questionless , hereby it will also come to pass , cayedt ™ nes that all such towns and villages as both have been , ’ and now are utterly decayed and ruinated ( the poor people thereof being not set on work , by reason of the transportation of raw wool of late days more excessively then in times past ) shall by this means be restored to their pristinate wealth and estate : all which do likewise tend to the enlargement of our navy , and maintenance of our navigation . 
 To what end need I endeavour my self by arguments to prove that by this voyage our navy and navigation shall enlarged , when as there needs none other reason then the manifest & late example of the near neighbours to this realm , the kings of Spaine and Portugall , who m 
 The idle persons of this realm shall by occasion of thisjourneybee well employed y set on work . 
 Hemp doth grow near S. Laurence river naturally . 
 Read the beginning of the bookeintituled , Diverse voyages touching the discovery of America . 
 since the first discovery of the Indies , have not only mightily enlarged their dominions , greatly enriched themselves and their subject's : but have also by just account trebled the number of their ships , master's and mariners , a matter of no small moment and importance ? 
 Beside this , it will prove a general ! benefit unto our country , that through this occasion , not only a great number of men which do now live idly at home , and are burdenous , chargeable , & unprofitable to this realm , shall hereby be set on work , but also children of twelve or fourteene years of age , or under , may be kept from idleness , in making of a thousand kinds of trifling things , which will be good merchandise for that country . And moreover , our idle women ( which the Realm may well spare ) shall also be employed on plucking , drying , and sorting of feathers , in pulling , beating , and working of hemp , and in gathering of cotton , and diverse things right necessary for dying . All which things are to be found in those countries' most plentifully . And the men may employ themselves in dragging for pearl , working for mines , and in matters of husbandry , and likewise in hunting the Whale for Trane , and making casks to put the same in : beside in fishing for cod , salmon , and herring , drying salting and barreling the same , and felling of trees , hewing and sawing of them , and such like work , meet for those persons that are no men of Art or science . 
 Many other things may be found to the great relief and good employments of no small number of the natural Subject's of this Realm , which do now live here idly to the common annoy of the whole state . Neither may I here omit the great hope and likelihood of a passage beyond the Grand Bay into the South Seas , confirmed by sundry authors to be found leading to Cataia , the Moluccas and Spiceries , whereby may ensue as general a benefit to the Realm , or greater then yet hath be spoken of , without either such charges , or other inconveniences , as by the tedious tract of time and 
 112 
 peril , which the ordinary passage to those parts at this day doth minister . 
 And to conclude this argument withal , it is well known to all men of found judgement , that this voyage is of greater importance , and will be found more beneficial to our country , then all other voyages at this day in use and trade among us . 
 The fift chapter shows , that the trading and planting in those countries is likely to prove to the particular profit of all adventurers . 
 Must now according to my promise show forth some probable reasons that the adventurers in this journey are to take particular profit by the same . It is therefore convenient that I do divide the adventurers into two sorts : the noblemen and gentlemen by themselves , and the 
 Merchant's by themselves . For , as I do hear , it is meant that there shall be one society of the Noblemen and Gentlemen , and another society of the merchant's . And yet not so divided , but that eke society may freely and frankly trade and traffic one with the other . 
 And first to bend my speech to the noblemen and gentlemen , who do chiefly seek a temperate climate , wholesome air , fertile soil , and a strong place by nature whereupon they may fortify , and there either plant themselves , or such other persons as they shall think good to send to be lords of that place and country : to them I say , that all these things are very easy to be found within the degrees of 30 and 60 aforesaid , either by South or ■ North , both in the Continent , and in Islands thereunto adjoining at their choice : but the degree certain of the elevation of the pole , and the very climate where these places of force and fertility are to be found , I omit to make public , for such regard as the wiser sort can easily conjecture : the rather because I do certainly understand , that some of those which have the managing of this vni i13 h 
 Hides sold for forty shillings a piece . 
 Great grapes . Wine of the Palm trees . 
 matter , know it as well or better then I my self , and do mean to reveal the same , when cause shall require , to such persons whom it shall concern , and to no other : so that they may seat & settle themselves in such climate as shall best agree with their own nature , disposition , and good liking : and in the whole tract of that land , by the description of as many as have be there , great plenty of minerail matter of all sorts , and in very many places , both stones of price , pearl and crystal , and great store of beasts , birds , and fowls both for pleasure and necessary use of man are to be found . 
 And for such as take delight in hunting , there are Stags , Wild boars , Foxes , Hares , Cunnies , Badgers , Otters , and diverse other such like for pleasure . Also for such as have delight in hawking , there are hawks of sundry kinds , and great store of game , both for land and river , as Fezants , Partridges , Cranes , Heronshawes , Ducks , Mallards , and such like . There is also a kind of beast much bigger then and Ox , whose hide is more then eighteene foot long , of which sort a countryman of ours , one Walker a sea man , who was upon that coast , did for a truth report in the presence of diverse honourable and worshipful persons , that he and his company did find in one cottage above two hundred and fortie hides , which they brought away and sold in France for fortie shillings and hide ; and with this agreeth David Ingram , and describeth that beast at large , supposing it to be a certain kind of BufFe ; there are likewise beasts and fowls of diverse kinds , which I omit for brevities sake , great store of fish both in the salt water and in the fresh , plenty of grapes as big as a men thumb , and the most delicate wine of the Palm tree , of which wine there be diverse of good credit in this realm that have tasted : and there is also a kind of grain called Maiz , Potato roots , and sundry other fruits naturally growing there : so that after such time as they are once settled , they shall need to take no great care for victuali . 
 And now for the better contentation and satisfaction 
 114 
 of such worshipful , honest minded , and well disposed Merchant's , as have a desire to the furtherance of every good and commendable actium , I will first say unto them , as I have done before to the Noblemen and Gentlemen , that within the degrees abovesaid , is doubtless to be found the most wholesome and best temperature of air , fertility of soil , and every other commodity or merchandise , for the which , with no small peril we do travel into Barbary , Spaine , Portugall , France , Italie , Moscovie and Eastland . All which may be either presently had , or at the least wise in very short time procured from thence with less danger then now we have them . And yet to the end my argument shall not altogether stand upon likelihoods and presumptions , I say that such persons as have discovered and traveled those parts , do testify that they have found in those countries all these things following , namely : 
 ' Of beasts for furs . 
 Marterns . 
 Beavers . 
 Foxes , black and white . 
 Leopards . 
 Of worms . 
 Silk worms great & large . 
 < Of Birds . 
 Hawks . 
 Bitters . 
 Curlewes . 
 Herons . 
 Partridges . 
 Cranes . 
 Mallards . 
 Wild geese . 
 Stock doves . 
 And sundry other strange 
 Margaus . 
 Black birds . 
 Parrots . 
 Pengwins . 
 Of Fish . 
 Codde . 
 Salmon . 
 Seals . 
 Herrings . 
 Of Trees . 
 Palm trees yielding sweet wines . 
 Cedars . 
 Firres . 
 Sassafras . 
 Oak . 
 Eime . 
 Popler . 
 Trees to us unknown . 
 TI5 
 Of fruits . 
 Grapes very large . Muskemellons . 
 Limons . 
 Dates great . 
 Oranges . 
 Figs . 
 Prunes . 
 Raisins great and small . 
 Pepper . 
 Almonds . 
 Citrons . 
 Of Metals . ' 
 Gold . 
 Silver . 
 Copper . 
 Led . 
 Tin . 
 Of Stones . 
 Turkeis . 
 Rubies . 
 Pearls great & fair . 
 Marble , of diverse kinds . 
 Jasper . 
 Crystal . 
 Sundry other commodities of all sorts . 
 ' Rosen . 
 Pitch . 
 Tar . Turpentine . Frankincense . Honey . Wax . 
 Rubarbe . 
 Oil Olive . Train oil . Musk codde . 
 X. 
 Salt . ' 
 Tallow . 
 Hides . 
 Hemp . 
 Flax . 
 Cochenello & die of diverse sorts . 
 Feathers of sundry sorts , as for pleasure and filling of Featherbeds . 
 And seeing that for small costs , the truth of these things may be understood ( whereof this intended supply will give us more certain assurance ) I do find no cause to the contrary , but that all well minded persons should be willing to adventure some competent portion for the furtherance of so good and enterprise . 
 Now for the trial hereof , considering that in the articles of the society of the adventurers in this voyage , there is provision made , that no adventurer shall be bound to any further charge then his first adventure : and yet notwithstanding keep still to himself his children , his 
 116 
 apprentices and servants , his and their freedom for trade and traffic , which is a privilege that adventurers in other voyages have not : and in the said articles it is likewise provided , that none other then such as have adventured in the first voyage , or shall become adventurers in this supply , at any time hereafter are to be admitted in the said society , but as redemptionaries , which will be very chargeable : therefore generally I say unto all such according to the old proverb , Nothing venture , nothing have . For if it do so fallen out , according to the great hope and expectation had , ( as by Gods grace it will ) the gain which now they reap by traffic into other far countries , shall by this trade return with less charge , greater gain , and more safety : Less charge , I say , by reason of the ample and large deep rivers at the very bank , whereof there are many , whereby both easily and quietly they may transport from the innermost parts of the main land , all kind of merchandise , yea in vessels of great burden , and that three times , or twice in the year at the least . But let us omit all presumptions how vehement soever , and dwell upon the certainty of such commodities as were discovered by S. Humfrey Gilbert , & his assistants in Newfound land in August last . For . there may be very easily made Pitch , Tar , Rosen , Soap 4*^1 last ashes in great plenty , yea , as it is thought , enough to serve the whole realm of every of these kinds : And of Train oil such quantity , as if I should set down the valve that they do esteem it at , which have be there , it would seem incredible . 
 It is hereby intended , that these commodities in this abundant manner , are not to be gathered from thence , without planting and settling there . And as for other things of more valve , and that of more sorts and kinds then one or two ( which were likewise discovered there ) I do hold them for some respects , more meet for a time to be concealed then uttered . 
 Of the fishing I do speak nothing , because it is generally known : and it is not to be forgotten , what trifles 
 117 
 they be that the Savages do require in exchange of these commodities : yea , for pearl , gold , silver , and precious stones . All which are matters in trade and traffic of great moment . But admit that it should so fallen out , that the above specified commodities shall not happily be found out within this first year : Yet it is very clear that such and so many may be found out as shall minister just occasion to think all cost and labour well bestowed . For it is very certain , that there is one seat fit for fortification , of great safety , wherein these commodities following , especially are to be had , that is to say , Grapes for wine , Whale's for oil , Hemp for cordage , and other necessary things , and fish of far greater size and plenty , then that of Newfound land , and of all these so great store , as may suffice to serve our whole realm . 
 Beside all this , if credit may be given to the inhabitants of the same soil , a certain river does thereunto adjoin , which leads to a place abounding with rich substance : I do not hereby mean the passage to the Molucca's , whereof before I made mention . 
 And it is not to be omitted , how that about two years past , certain merchant's of S. Malo in France , did hire a ship out of the Island of Jersey , to the end that they would keep that trade secret from their Countrymen , and they would admit no mariner , other then the ship boy belonging to the said ship , to go with them , which ship was about 70. tun . I do know the ship and the boy very well , and am familiarly acquainted with the owner , which voyage proved very beneficial . 
 To conclude , this which is already said , may suffice any man of reasonable disposition to serve for a taste , until such time as it shall please almighty God through our own industry , to send us better tidings . In the mean season , if any man well affected to this journey , shall stand in doubt of any matter of importance touching the same , he may satisfy himself with the judgement and liking of such of good calling and credit , as are principali dealers herein . For it is not necessary in this 118 
 THE WESTERN PLANTING treatise , publicly to set forth the whole secrets of the voyage . 
 The sixt Chapter shows that the traffic and planting in those countries , shall be unto the Savages themselves very beneficial and gainful . 
 NOw to the end it may appear that this voyage is not undertaken altogether for the peculiar commodity of our selves and our country ( as generally other trades and journeis be ) it shall fallen out in proof , that the Savages shall hereby have just cause to bless the hour when this enterprise was undertaken . 
 First and chiefly , in respect of the most happy and gladsome tidings of the most glorious Gospel of our Saviour Jesus Christ , whereby they may be brought from falsehood to truth , from darkness to light , from the high way of death to the path of life , from superstitious idolatry to sincere Christianity , from the devil to Christ , from hell to heaven . And if in respect of all the commodities they can yield us ( were they many more ) that they should but receive this only benefit of Christianity , they were more then fully recompensed . 
 But hereunto it may be objected , that the Gospel must be freely preached , for such was the example of the Apostles : unto whom although the authorities and examples before alleged of Emperor's , Kings and Princes , aswell before Christs time as since , might sufficiently satisfy : yet for further answer , we may say with S. Paul , If we have sown unto you heavenly things , do you think it much that we should reap your carnali things ? And withal , The workman is worthy of his hire . These heavenly tidings which those labourers our countrymen ( as messengers of Gods great goodness and mercy ) will voluntarily present unto them , do far exceed their earthly riches . Moreover , if the other inferiouT worldly and temporali things which they shall receive from us , be weighed in equal balance , I assure my self , that by equal judgement of any indiffer - ” 9 
 Corinth . 9. 
 This bargen cannot be unjust , where both parties are gainers . 
 ent person , the benefits which they then receive , shall tar surmount those which they shall depart withal unto us . And admit that they had ( as they have not ) the knowledge to put their land to some use : yet being brought from brutish ignorance to civility and knowledge , and made then to understand how the tenth part of their Land may be so manured and employed , as it may yield more commodities to the necessary use of men life , then the whole now doth : What just cause of complaint may they have ? And in my private opinion , I do verily think that God did create land , to the end that it should by culture and husbandry yield things necessary for men life . 
 But this is not all the benefit which they shall receive by the Christians : for , over and beside the knowledge how to till and dress their grounds , they ' shall be reduced from unseemly customs to honest manners , from disordered riotous routs and companies to a well governed common wealth , and withal , shall taught mechanical occupations , arts , and liberali sciences : and which stands them most upon , they shall defended from the cruelty of their tyrannical ! and blood sucking neighbours the Canibals , whereby infinite number of their lives shall preserved . And lastly , by this means many of their poor innocent children shall be preserved from the bloody knife of the sacrificer , a most horrible and detestable custom in the sighed of God and man , now and ever heretofore used among them . Many other things could I here allege to this purpose , were it not that I do fear lest I have already more then half tired the reader . 
 The seventh Chapter shows that the planting there , is not a matter of such charge or difficulty , as many would make it seem to be . 
 NOw therefore for proof , that the planting in these parts is a thing that may be done without the aid of the Princes power and purse , contrary to the allega-120 
 cion of many malicious persons , who will neither be actors in any good actium themselves , nor so much as afford a good word to the setting forward thereof : and that worse is , they will take upon them to make molehills seem mountains , and flies elephants , to the end they may discourage others , that be very well or indifferently affected to the matter , being like unto Esops dog , which neither would eat Hay himself , nor suffer the poor hungry ass to feed thereon : 
 I say and affirm that God hath provided such means for the furtherance of this enterprise , as do stand us in stead of great treasure : for first by reason that it hath pleased God of his great goodness , of long time to hold his merciful hand over this realm , in preserving the people of the same , both from slaughter by the sword , and great death by plague , pestilence , or otherwise , there are at this day great numbers ( God he knoweth ) which live in such penury & want , as they could be contented to hazard their lives , and to serve one year for meat , drink and apparel only , without wages , in hope thereby to amend their estates : which is a matter in such like journeys , of no small charge to the prince . Moreover , things in the like journeys of greatest price and cost as victuali ( whereof there is great plenty to be had in that country without money ) and powder , great artillery , or corselets are not needful in so plentiful and chargeable manner , as the show of such a journey may present : for a small quantity of all these , to furnish the Fort only , will suffice until such time as diverse commodities may be found out in those parts , which may be thought well worthy a greater charge . Also the peculiar benefit of archers which God hath blessed this land withal before all other nations , will stand us in great stead among those naked people . 
 Another help we have also , which in such like cases is a matter of marvellous cost , and will be in this journey procured very easily ( that is to say ) To transport yearly 121 
 [ III . i78 . J 
 aswell our people , as all other necessaries needful for them into those parts by the fleet of merchant's , that yearly venture for fish in Newfoundland , being not far distant from the country meant to be inhabited , who commonly go with empty vessels in effect , saving some little fraught with salt . And thus it appears that the soldiers wages , and the transportation may be defrayed for far less sums of money then the detractors of this enterprise have given out . Again , this intended voyage for conquest , hath in like manner many other singular privileges wherewith God hath , as it were , with his holy hand blessed the same before all others . For after once we are departed the coast of England , we may pass straightway thither , without danger of being driven into any the countries of our enemies , or doubtful friends : for commonly one wind serves to bring us thither , which seidome faileth from the middle of Januarie to the middle of May , a benefit which the mariners make great account of , for it is a pleasure that they have in a few or none of other journeys . Also the passage is short , for we may go thither in thirtie or fortie days at the most , having but and indifferent wind , and return continually in twenty or foure and twentie days at the most . And in the same our journey , by reason it is in the Ocean , and quite out of the way from the intercourse of other countries , we may safely trade and traffic without peril of piracy : neither shall our ships , people , or goods there , be subject to arrest or molestation of any Pagan potentate , Turkish tyrant , yea , or Christian prince , which heretofore sometime upon slender occasion in other parts have stayed our ships and merchandizes , whereby great numbers of our countrymen have be utterly undone , diverse put to ransom , yea , and some lost their lives : a thing so fresh in memory as it needs no proof , and is well worthy of consideration . 
 Beside , in this voyage we do not cross the burned line , whereby commonly both beverage and victuali are 122 
 corrupted , and men's health very much impaired , neither do we pass the frozen seas , which yield sundry extreme dangers : but have a temperate climate at all times of the year , to serve our turns . And lastly , there need no delays by the way for taking in of fresh water and fuel , ( a thing usually done in long journeys ) because , as I said above , the voyage is not long , and the fresh waters taken in there , our men here in England at their return home have found so wholesome and sweet , that they have made choice to drink it before our beer and ale . 
 Behold here , good countrymen , the manifold benefits , commodities and pleasures heretofore unknown , by Gods especial blessing not only revealed unto us , but also as it were infused into our bosoms , who though hitherto like dormice have slumbered in ignorance thereof , being like the cats that are loath for their prey to wet their feet : yet if now therefore at the last we would awake , and with willing minds ( setting frivolous imaginations aside ) become industrious instruments to our selves , questio nlesse we should not only hereby set forth the glory of our heavenly father , but also easily attain to the end of all good purposes that may be wished or desired . 
 And may it not much encourage us to hope for good success in the country of these Savages , being a naked kind of people , void of the knowledge of the discipline of war , seeing that a noble man , being but a subject in this realm ( in the time of our king Henry the second ) by name Strangbow , then earl of Chepstow in South Wales , by himself and his allies and assistants , at their own proper charges passed over into Ireland , and there made conquest of the now country , and then kingdom of Lynester , at which time it was very populous and strong , which History our own chronicles do witness ? And why should we be dismayed more then were the Spanyards , who have be able within these few years to conquer , possess and enjoy so large a 
 123 
 2. Decad. lib . ^ . fol . 77. of the West Indies , in English . 
 Canon a is a kind of boat . 
 3. Decad. lib . 1. fol. 97. About the year of our Lord 1511. 
 Conquest of the West Indies , fol. 43. and 45. English . 
 tract of the earth , in the West Indies , as is between the two tropics of Cancer and Capricorne , not only in the main firm land of America , which is 47. degrees in latitude from South to North , and does contain 2820. English miles at the least , that the king of Spaine hath there in actuali possession , beside many goodly and rich Islands , as Hispaniola , now called S. Domingo , Cuba , Jamaica , and diverse other , which are both beautiful and full of treasure , not speaking any whit at all , how large the said land is from East to West , which in some places is accounted to be 1500. English miles at the least from East to West , between the one Sea and the other . 
 Or why should our noble nation be dismayed , more then was Vasques Nuns de Valboa , a private gentleman of Spaine , who with the number of 70. Spaniards at Tichiri , gave and overthrow unto that mighty king Chemaccus , having and army of and hundred Canoas and 5000. men , and the said Vasques Nuns not long after , with his small number , did put to flight king Chiapes his whole army . 
 Likewise Hernando Cortes , being also but a private gentleman of Spaine , after his departure from the Islands of Cuba and Acuzamil , and entering into the firm of America , had many most victorious & triumphant conquests , as that at Cyntla , where being accompanied with less then 500. Spanish footmen , thirteene horsemen and sixe pieces of Ordinance only , he overthrew 40000. Indians . The same Cortes with his said number of Spanyards , took prisoner that mighty Emperor Mutezuma in his most chief and famous city of Mexico , which at that instant had in it above the number of 50000. Indians at the least , and in short time after obtained not only the quiet possession of the said city , but also of his whole Empire . 
 And in like manner in the Country of Peru , which the king of Spaine hath now in actuali possession , Francisco Pysarro , with the only aid of Diego de Almagro , 124 
 and Hernando Luche , being all three but private gentlemen , was the principali person that first attempted discovery and conquest of the large and rich country of Peru , which through the aid of the almighty , he brought to pass and achieved in the Tambo of Caxa-malca , ( which is a large place of ground , enclosed with walls ) in which place he took the great and mighty prince Atabalipa prisoner , amid the number of 60000. Indians his subject's , which were ever before that day accounted to be a warlike kind of people , which his great victory it pleased God to grant unto him in the marvellous year of our Lord God 1533. he not having in his victorie-company above the number of 210. Spanyards , whereof there were not passed threescore horsemen in all : after the taking of which prince Atabalipa , he offered unto Pyzarro for his ransom , to fill a great large hall full of gold and silver , and such gold and silver vessels as they then used , even as high as a man might reach with his arm . And the said prince caused the same hall to be marked round about at the said height , which ransom Pyzarro granted to accept . And after , when as this mighty prince had sent to his vassals & subject's to bring in gold and silver for the filling of the hall , as aforesaid , as namely to the cities or towns of Quito , Paciacama and Cusco , as also to the Calao of Lima , in which town , as their own writers do affirm , they found a large and fair house , all slated and covered with gold : and when as the said hall was not yet a quarter full , a mutiny arose among the Spanyards , in which it was commonly given out , that the said prince had politicly offered this great ransom under pretence to raise a much more mighty power , whereby the Spanyards should be taken , slain and overthrown : whereupon they grew to this resolution , to put the said prince to death , and to make partition of the gold and silver already brought in , which they presently put in execution . And coming to make perfect Inventory of the same , as well for the Emperor then king of 
 125 
 Spaine , his fift part , as otherwise , there was found to be already brought in into the said hall , the number of 132425. pound weight of silver , and in gold the number of 1828125. pezos , which was a riches never before that nor since seen of any man together , of which there did appertain to the Emperor for his fift part of gold 365625. pezos , and for his fift part of silver 26485. pound weight , and to every horseman eight thousand pezos of gold , and 67. pound weight of silver . Every soldier had 4550. pezos of gold and 280. pound weight of silver . Every Captain had some 30000. some 20000. pezos of gold and silver , proportionally answerable to their degrees and calling , according to the rate agreed upon among them . 
 Francis Pizarro as their general , according to his decree and calling proportionally , had more then any of the rest , over and beside the massy table of gold which Atabalipa had in his Litter , which weighed 25000. pezos of gold : never were there before that day soldiers so rich in so small a time , and with so little danger . And in this journey for want of iron , they did shoe their horses , some with gold , and some with silver . This is to be seen in the general historic of the West Indies , where as the doings of Pizarro , and the conquest of Peru is more at large set forth . 
 To this may I add the great discoveries and conquests which the princes of Portugall have made round about the West , the South , and the East parts of Africa , and also at Callicut , and in the East Indies , and in America , at Brasile and elsewhere in sundry Islands , in fortifying , peopling and planting all along the said coasts and Islands , ever as they discovered : which being rightly weighed and considered , does minister just cause of encouragement to our Countrymen , not to account it so hard and difficult a thing for the subject's of this noble realm of England , to discover , people , plant and possess the like goodly lands and rich countries' not far from us , but near adjoining 8c offering themselves unto us 126 
 ( as is aforesaid ) which have never yet heretofore be in the actuali possession of any other Christian prince , then the princes of this Realm . All which ( as I think ) should not a little animate and encourage us to look out and adventure abroad , understanding what large Countries' and Islands the Portugals with their small number have within these few years discovered , peopled and planted , some part whereof I have thought it not amiss , briefly in particular to name both the Towns , Countries' & Islands , so near as I could upon the sudden call them to remembrance : for the rest I do refer the Reader to the histories , where more at large the same is to be seen . First , they did win and conquer from the princes of Barbary the Island of Geisera & town of Arzila , not passed and 140. mile distant from their Metropolitan & chief city of Fesse : and after that they won also from the said princes the towns of Tanger , Ceuta , Mazigam , Azamor , and Azaffi , all alongst the Sea coasts . And in the year of our Lord , 1455. Alouis de Cadomosta a Gentleman Venetian , was he that first discovered for their use Cape Verd , with the Islands adjoining , of which he then peopled and planted those of Bonavista and Sant Iago discovering also the river Senega , otherwise called Niger , and Cape Roxo & Sierra Leone , and in a few years after they did discover the coast of Guinea , and there peopled and built the castle of Mina : then discovered they further to the countries' of Melegettes , Benin , and Congo , with the Hands of Principe , da Nobon , S. Matthewe , and S. Thomas under the Equinoctial line , which they peopled , and built in the said Island of S. Thomas the haven town or port of Pavosan . After that , about the year of our Lord , 1494. one Bartholomew Dias was sent forth , who was the first man that discovered and doubled that great and large Cape called de Bon Esperanze , 8c passing the currents that run upon the said coast , on the Southeast part of Africa , between the said main land 8c the Island of S. Laurence , otherwise called of the ancients , Madam - 
 127 
 Ceffala accomted to be the place where the noble and wise king Salomon did fetch his gold . 
 gascar , he discovered to you harbour nam the River of the Infant . After that since the year of our Lord God , 1497. and before the full accomplishment of the year of Christ , 1510. through the travails and discoveries of Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , Thomas Lopes , Andrew Corsale , John de Empoli , Peter Sintra , Sancho de Toar , and that noble and worthy gentleman Alonzo de Albuquerque , they did discover , people , and plant at Ceffala , being upon the East side of Africa , in the twenty degrees of latitude of the south Pole , and direct West from the Hand of S. Laurence ( at which port of Ceffala , diverse do affirm that king Salomon did fetch his gold ) as also upon the said East side of Africa , they did afterwards discover , people , and plant at Mozambique , Quiola , Monbaza , and Melinde , two degrees of Southerly latitude , and so up to the straight of Babel-Mandell at the entering of the read sea , all upon the East coast of Africa , from whence they put off - at the Cape of Guarda Fu , and passed the great gulf of Arabia , and the Indian Sea East to Sinus Persicus , and the Island of Ormus , and so passing the large and great river Indus , where he hath his fallen into the main Ocean , in 23. degrees and and half , under the tropic of Cancer , of Septentrionali latitude , they made their course again directly towards the South , and began to discover , people , and plant upon the West side of the hither India at Goa , Mangalor , Cananor , Calecut and Cochin , and the Island of Zeilarn . 
 And here I think good to remember to you , that after their planting upon this coast , their forces grew so great that they were able to compel all the Moors , the subjects of the mighty Emperor of the Turkes to pay tribute unto them , ever as they passed the gulf of Arabia , from the port of Mecca in Arabia Fcelix , where Mahomet lies buried , or any of the other ports of the said land , ever as they passed to and from the havens of Cochin , Calecut and Cananor , and by their martial manner of discipline practised in those parts , the great 128 
 and mighty prince the Sophy Emperor of the Persians , and professed enemy to the Turke , came to the knowledge and use of the Caliver shot , and to interlace and join footmen with his horsemen , si thence which time the Persians have grown to that strength and force , that they have given many mighty and great overthrows to the Turke , to the great quiet of all Christendome . 
 And from the Island of Zeilarn aforesaid , they also discovered more East in passing the gulf of Bengala , and so passed the notable and famous river of Ganges , where he hath his fallen into the main Ocean , under the tropic of Cancer , and to the Cape of Malaca , and unto the great and large Islands of Sumatra , Java major , Java minor , Mindanao , Palobane , Celebes , Gilolo , Tidore , Mathin , Borneo , Machian , Terenate , and all other the Islands of Molucques and Spiceries , and so East alongst the coasts of Cathaia , to the ports of China , These are the Zaiton and Quinsay , and to the Island of Zipango and Japan , situate in the East , in 37. degrees of Septentrionali from England . latitude and in 195. of longitude . These are their At these noble and worthy discoveries . Here also is not to be Islands hath forgotten , that in the year of our Lord , 1501. that famous and worthy gentleman Americus Vespucius did the ’ discover , people , and plant to their use the holds and fame of the forts which they have in Brasill , of whom ( he being Queens most but a private gentleman ) the whole country or firm efce^ent Maland of the West Indies , is commonly called and known ™ by the name of America . 
 I do greatly doubt lest I seem over tedious in the recital of the particular discoveries and conquests of the East and West Indies , wherein I was the more bold to urge the patience of the Reader , to the end it might most manifestly and at large appear , to all such as are not acquainted with the histories , how the king of Portugall , whose Country for popularity and number of people , is scarce comparable to some three shires of England , and the king of Spaine likewise , whose natural Country does not greatly abound with people , both vin 129 i 
 which princes by means of their discoveries within less then 90. years past , have as it appears both mightily and marvellously enlarged their territories and dominions through their own industry by the assistance of the omnipotent , whose aid we shall not need to doubt , seeing the cause and quarrel which we take in hand tendeth to his honour and glory , by the enlargement of the Christian faith . 
 To conclude , since by Christian duty we stand bound chiefly to further all such acts as do tend to the increasing the true flock of Christ by reducing into the right way those lost sheep which are yet astray : And that we shall therein follow the example of our right virtuous predecessors of renowned memory , and leave unto our posterity a divine memoriali of so godly and enterprise : Let us I say for the considerations alleged , enter into judgement with our selves , whither this actium may belong to us or not , the rather for that this voyage through the mighty assistance of the omnipotent God , shall take our desired effect ( whereof there is no just cause of doubt . ) Then shall her Majesties dominions be enlarged , her highness ancient titles justly confirmed , all odious idleness from this our Realm utterly banished , diverse decayed towns repaired , and many poor and needy persons relieved , and estates of such as now live in want shall be embettered , the ignorant and barbarous idolaters taught to know Christ , the innocent defended from their bloody tyrannical neighbours , the diabolical custom of sacrificing humane creatures abolished . 
 All which ( no man doubteth ) are things grateful in the sighed of our Saviour Christ , and tending to the honour and glory of the Trinitie . Bee of good cheer therefore , for he that cannot err hath said : That before the end of the world , his word shall be preached to all nations , Which good work I trust is reserved for our nation to accomplish in these parts : Wherefore my deer countrymen , be not dismayed : 
 13° 
 for the power of God is nothing diminished , nor the love that he hath to the preaching and planting of the Gospel any whit abated . Shall we then doubt he will be less ready most mightily and miraculously to assist our nation in this quarrel , which is chiefly and principally undertaken for the enlargement of the Christian faith abroad , and the banishment of idleness at home , then he was to Columbus , Vasques , Nuns , Hernando Cortes , and Francis Pizarro in the West : and Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , & Alonso de Albuquerque in the East ? Let us therefore with cheerful minds and courageous hearts , give the attempt , and leave the sequel to almighty God : for if he be on our part , what forceth it who bee against us ? Thus leaving the correction and reformation unto the gentle Reader , whatsoever is in this treatise too much or too little , otherwise unperfect , I take leave , and so end . 
 