The Voyage of John Francis de la Roche , knight , Lord of Roberval , to the Countries of Canada , Saguenai , and Hochelaga , with three tall Ships , and two hundred persons , both men , women , and children , begun in April , 1542. In which parts he remained . the same summer , and all the next winter . 
 Ir John Francis de la Roche knight , lord of Roberval , appointed by the king as his Lieutenant general in the countries of Canada , Saguenay , and Hochelaga , furnished 3. tall Ships , chiefly at the kings cost : And having in his fleet 200. persons , aswell men as women , 
 accompanied with diverse gentlemen of quality , as namely with Monsieur Saineterre his lieutenant , l’Espiney his Ensign , captain Guinecourt , Monsieur Noire fontaine , Dieu lamont , Frote , la Brosse , Francis de Mire , la Salle , and Roieze , and John Alfonse of Xanctoigne and excellent pilot , set sail from Rochel the 16. of April 1542. The same day about noon we came athwart of Chief the boys , where we were inforced to stay the night following . On Munday the seventeenth of the said Month we departed from Chief de-boys . The wind served us notably for a time : but within few days it came quite contrary , 283 
 Jacques Cartier stole away . 
 which hindered our journey for a long space : For we were suddenly inforced to turn back , and to seek Harbour in Belle Isle , on the coast of Bretaigne , where we stayed so long , and had such contrary weather by the way , that we could not reach Newfound land , until the seventh of June . The eight of this Month we entered into the Road of Saint John , where we found seventeene Ships of fishers . While we made somewhat long abided here , Jaques Cartier and his company returning from Canada , whither he was sent with five sails the year before , arrived in the very same Harbour . Who , after he had done his duty to our general , told him that he had brought certain Diamonts , and a quantity of Gold over , which was found in the Country . Which over the Sunday next ensuing was tried in a Furnace , and found to be good . 
 Furthermore , he informed the general that he could not with his small company withstand the Savages , which went about daily to annoy him : and that this was the cause of his return into France . Nevertheless , he and his company commended the Country to be very rich and fruitful ! . But when our general being furnished with sufficient forces , commanded him to go back again with him , he and his company , moved as it seems with ambition , because they would have all the glory of the discovery of those parts themselves , stole privily away the next night from us , and without taking their leaves departed home for Bretaigne . 
 we spent the greatest part of June in this Harbour of Saint John , partly in furnishing ourselves with fresh water , whereof we stood in very great need by the way , and partly in composing and taking up of a quarrel between some of our Countrymen , and certain Portugals . At length , about the last of the aforesaid Month , we departed hence , and entered into the Grand Bay , and passed by the Isle of Ascension : and finally arrived foure leagues Westward of the Isle of Orleans . In this place we found a convenient Harbour for our shipping , where we cast 284 
 1542. anchor , went a shore with our people , and chosen out a convenient place to fortify ourselves in , fit to command the main River , and of strong situation against all invasion of enemies . Thus toward the end of July , we July . brought our victuals and other munitions and provisions on shore , and began to travail in fortifying of our selves . 
 Of the Fort of France-Roy , and that which was done there . 
 HAving described the beginning , the midst , and the end of the Voyage made by Monsieur Roberval in the Countries of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and other Countries in the West parts : He sailed so far , ( as it is declared in other books ) that he arrived in the said Country , accompanied with two hundred persons , soldiers , mariners , and common people , , with all furniture necessary for a Fleet . The said general at his first arrival built a fair Fort , near and somewhat Westward above Canada , which is very beautiful to behold , and of great force , situated upon and high mountain , wherein there were two courts of buildings , a great Tower , and another of fortie or fiftie foot long : wherein there were diverse Chambers , and Hall , a Kitchine , houses of office , Sellers high and low , and near unto it were and Oven and Mills , and a stoove to warm men in , and a Well before the house . And the building was situated upon the great River of Canada , called France prime , by Mon - France prime . sieur Roberval . There was also at the foot of the mountain another lodging , part whereof was a great Tower of two stories high , two courts of good building , where at the first all our victuals , and whatsoever was brought with us was sent to be kept : and near unto that Tower there is another small river . In these two places above and beneath , all the meaner sort was lodged . 
 And in the Month of August , and in the beginning of Autist 1542. September every man was occupied in such work as eke one was able to do . But the fourteenth of Septem - September 14. ber , our aforesaid general sent back into France two 
 285 
 Ships which had brought his furniture , and he appointed for Admiral Monsieur de Saineterre , and the other captain was Monsieur Guinecourt , to carry news unto the King , and to come back again unto him the year next ensuing , furnished with victuals and other things , as it should please the King : and also to bring news out of France how the King accepted certain Diamonds which were sent him , and were found in this country . 
 After these two Ships were departed , consideration was had how they should do , and how they might pass out the Winter in this place . First they took a view of the victuals , and it was found that they fell out short : 
 The proportion and they were scantled so , that in eke mess they had 
 but two loaves weighing a pound a piece , and half a pound of biefe . They ate Bacon at dinner with half a pound of butter : and Biefe at supper , and about two handfuls of Beans without butter . 
 On the Wednesday , Friday , and Saturday they did eat dry Cod , and sometime they did eat it green at dinner with butter , and they ate of Porposes and beans at supper . 
 About that time the Savages brought us great store of Aloses , which is a fish somewhat red like a Salmon , to get knives and other small trifles for them . 
 In the end many of our people fell sick of a certain disease in their legs , reins , and stomach , so that they seemed to be deprived of all their limbs , and there died thereof about fiftie . 
 The length of Note that the ice began to break up in April . 
 Monsieur Roberval used very good justice , and punished every man according to his offence . One whose name was Michael Gaillon , was hanged for his theft . John of Nantes was laid in irons , and kept prisoner for his offence , and others also were put in irons , and diverse were 
 They had whipped , as well men as women : by which means they women with lived in jet . 
 them . 
 