The third voyage made by a ship sent in the year 1586 , to the relief of the Colony planted in Virginia , at the sole charges of Sir Walter Ralegh . 
 N the year of our Lord 1586 Sir Walter Ralegh at his own charge prepared a ship of and hundred tun , freighted with all manner of things in most plentiful manner , for the supply and relief of his Colony then remaining in Virginia : but before they set sail from England it 
 was after Easter , so that our Colony half despaired of the coming of any supply : wherefore every man prepared for himself , determining resolutely to spend the residue of their life time in that country . And for the better performance of this their determination , they sowed , planted , and set such things as were necessary for their relief in so plentiful a manner as might have sufficed them two years without any further labour . Thus trusting to their own harvest , they passed the Summer till the tenth of June : at which time their corn which they had sowed was within one fortnight of reaping : but then it happened that Sir Francis Drake in his prosperous return from the sacking of Sant Domingo , Cartagena , and Saint Augustine , determined in his way homeward to visit his countrymen the English Colony then remaining in Virginia . So passing along the coasts of Florida , he fell with the parts where our English Colony inhabited : and having espied some of that company , there he anchored and went aland , where he conferred with them of their state and welfare , and how things had passed with them . They answered him that they lived all ; but hitherto in some scarcity : and as yet could hear of no supply out of England : therefore they requested him that he would leave with them some two or three ships , that if in some reasonable time they herd not out of 346 
 England , they might then return themselves . Which he agreed to . Whilst some were then writing their letters to send into England , and some others making reports of the accidents of their travels each to other , some on land , some on board , a great storm arose , and drove the most of their fleet from their anchors to Sea , in which ships at that instant were the chiefest of the English Colony : the rest on land perceiving this , hasted to those three sails which were appointed to be left there ; and for fear they should be left behind they left all things confusedly , as if they had be chased from thence by a mighty army : and no doubt so they were ; for the hand of God came upon them for the cruelty and outrages committed by some of them against the native inhabitants of that country . 
 Immediately after the departing of our English Colony out of this paradise of the world , the ship abovementioned sent and set forth at the charges of Sir Walter Ralegh and his direction , arrived at Hatorask ; who after some time spent in seeking our Colony up in the country , and not finding them , returned with all the aforesaid provision into England . 
 About foureteene or fifteene days after the departure of the aforesaid ship , Sir Richard Grinvile general of Virginia , accompanied with three ships well appointed for the same voyage , arrived there ; who not finding the aforesaid ship according to his expectation , nor hearing any news of our English Colony there seated , and left by him anno 1585 , himself traveling up into diverse places of the country , aswell to see if he could hear any news of the Colony left there by him the year before , under the charge of Master Lane his deputy , as also to discover some places of the country : but after some time spent therein , not hearing any news of them , and finding the places which they inhabited desolate , yet unwilling to lose the possession of the country which Englishmen had so long held : after good deliberation , he determined to leave some men behind to retain 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 This ship arrived in Virginia . 
 Sir Richard Grinvils third voyage . 
 347 
 Fifteene men possession of the Country : whereupon he landed more left tn fifteene men e of Roanoak , furnished plentifully ‘ with all manner of provision for two years , and so departed for England . 
 Not long after he fell with the Isles of Azores , on some of which Islands he landed , and spoiled the towns of all such things as were worth carriage , where also he took diverse Spanyards . With these and many other exploits done by him in this voyage , aswell outward as homeward , he returned into England . 
 