The fourth voyage made to Virginia with three ships , in the year 1587. Wherein was transported the second Colony . 
 the year of our Lord 1587. Sir Walter Ralegh intending to persevere in the planting of his Country of Virginia , prepared a new Colony of one hundred and fiftie men to be sent thither , under the charge of John White , whom he appointed Governor , and also appointed unto him twelve Assistants , unto whom he gave a Charter , and incorporated them by the name of Governor and Assistants of the City of Ralegh in Virginia . 
 April . 
 OUr Fleet being in number three sail , viz. the Admiral a ship of one hundred and twentie Tons , a Flyboat , and a Pinnace , departed the sixe and twentieth of April from Portesmouth , and the same day came to and anchor at the Cows in the Isle of Wight , where we stayed eight days . 
 386 
 THE FOURTH VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA a.d. 
 1587. 
 May . 
 THe fift of May , at nine of the clock at night we came to Plimmouth , where we remained the space of two days . 
 The 8 we weighed anchor at Plimmouth , and departed thence for Virginia . 
 The 16 Simon Ferdinando , Master of our Admiral , lewdly forsook our Flyboat , leaving her distressed in the Bay of Portugal . 
 June . 
 THe 19 we fell with “ Dominica , and the same evening we sailed between it , and Guadalupe : the 21 the Flyboat also fell with Dominica . 
 The 22 we came to and anchor at and Island called Santa Cruz , where all the planters were set on land , staying there till the 25 of the same month . At our first landing on this Island , some of our women , and men , by eating a small fruit like green Apples , were fearfully troubled with a sudden burning in their mouths , and swelling of their tongues so big , that some of them could not speak . Also a child by sucking one of those women's breasts , had at that instant his mouth set on such a burning , that it was strange to see how the infant was tormented for the time : but after 24 hours , it beware away of it self . 
 Also the first night of our being on this Island , we took five great Torteses , some of them of such bigness , that sixteene of our strongest men were tired with carrying of one of them but from the sea side to our cabins . In this Island we found no watering place , but a standing pond , the water whereof was so evil , that many of our company fell sick with drinking thereof : and as many as did but wash their faces with that water , in the morning before the Sun had drawn away the corruption , their faces did so burn and swell , that their eyes were shut up , and could not see in five or sixe days , or longer . 
 387 
 “ One of the Isles of the Indies inhabited with Savages . 
 Circumspection to be used in strange places . 
 The second day of our abided there , we sent forth some of our men to search the Island for fresh water , three one way , and two another way . The Governor also , with sixe others , went up to the top of and high hill , to view the Island , but could perceive no sign of any men , or beasts , nor any goodness , but Parots , and trees of Guiacum . Returning back to our cabins another way , he found in the dissent of a hill , certain potsherds of savage making , made of the earth of that Island : whereupon it was judged , that this Island was inhabited with Savages , though Fernando had told us for certain the contrary . The same day at night , the rest of our company very late returned to the Governor . The one company affirmed , that they had scene in a valley eleven Savages , and diverse houses half a mile distant from the steep , or top of the hill where they stayed . The other company had found running out of a high rock a very fair spring of water , whereof they brought three bottles to the company : for before that time , we drank the stinking water of the pond . 
 The same second day at night Captain Stafford , with the Pinnace , departed from our fleet , riding at Santa Cruz , to and Island , called Beak , lying near S. John , being so directed by Ferdinando , who assured him he should there find great plenty of sheep . The next day at night , our planters left Santa Cruz , and came all aboard , and the next morning after , being the 25 of June we weighed anchor , and departed from Santa Cruz. 
 The seven and twentieth we came to anchor at Cottea , where we found the Pinnace riding at our coming . 
 The 28 we weighed anchor at Cottea , and presently came to anchor at S. Johns in Musketos Bay , where we spent three days unprofitable in taking in fresh water , spending in the mean time more beer then the quantity of the water came unto . 
 388 
 THE FOURTH VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA a.d. 
 1587. 
 Julie . 
 THe first day we weighed anchor at “ Musketoes Bay , “ Musketos where were left behind two Irish men of our come - 
 pany , Darbie Glaven , and Denice Carrell , bearing along fa soot ] i the coast of S. Johns till evening , at which time we fell ofS . Johns with Rosse Bay. At this place Ferdinando had promised Island , where we should take in salt , and had caused us before , to TO % e ™ make and provide as many sacks for that purpose , as J we could . The Governor also , for that he understood there was a Town in the bottom of the Bay , not far from the salt hills , appointed thirty shot , tenne pikes , and ten targets , to man the Pinnace , and to go aland for salt . Ferdinando perceiving them in a readiness , sent to the Governor , using great persuasions with him , not to take in salt there , saying that he knew not well whither 
 the same were the place or not : also , that if the Pinnace went into the Bay , she could not without great danger come back , till the next day at night , and that if in the mean time any storm should rise , the Admiral were in danger to be cast away . Whilst he was thus persuading , he caused the led to be cast , and having craftily brought the ship in three fathom and a half water , he suddenly began to swear , and tear God in pieces , dissembling great danger , crying to him at the helm , bear up hard , bear up hard : so we went off , and were disappointed of our salt , by his means . 
 The next day sailing along the West end of S. John , the Governor determined to go aland in S. Germanes “ Bay , to gather young plants of Oranges , Pines , Mameas , and Plantanos , to set at Virginia , which we knew might easily be had , for that they grow near the shore , and the places where they grew , well known to the Governor , and some of the planters : but our Simon denied it , saying : he would come to and anchor at Hispaniola , & there land the Governor , and some other of the Assistants , with the pinnace , to see if he could speak with his friend Alanson , of whom he hoped to be furnished both 
 “ A pleasant andfruitfull country , lying on the west end of 8. Johns Island , where grows plenty of Oranges , Limons , Plantans , y Pines . 
 of cattle , and all such things as we would have taken in at S. John : but he meant nothing less , as it plainly did appear to us afterwards . 
 The next day after , being the third of July , we saw Hispaniola , and bore with the coast all that day , looking still when the pinnace should be prepared to go for the place where Ferdinando his friend Alanson was : but that day passed , and we saw no preparation for landing in Hispaniola . 
 The 4 of July , sailing along the coast of Hispaniola , until the next day at noon , and no preparation yet seen for the staying there , we having knowledge that we were passed the place where Alanson dwelled , and were come with Isabella : hereupon Ferdinando was asked by the Governor , whither he meant to speak with Alanson , for the taking in of cattle , and other things , according to his promise , or not : but he answered that he was now past the place , and that Sir Walter Ralegh told him , the French Ambassador certified him , that the king of Spaine had sent for Alanson into Spaine : wherefore he thought him dead , and that it was to no purpose to touch there in any place , at this voyage . 
 The next day we left sighed of Hispaniola , and haled oflf for Virginia , about foure of the clock in the afternoon . 
 The sixt of July we came to the Island Caycos , wherein Ferdinando said were two salt ponds , assuring us if they were dry , we might find salt to shift with , until the next supply : but it proved as true as finding of sheep at Baque . In this Island , whilst Ferdinando solaced himself ashore , with one of the company , in part of the Island , others spent the latter part of that day in other parts of the Island , some to seek the salt ponds , some fowling , some hunting Swans , whereof we caught many . The next day early in the morning we weighed anchor , leaving Caycos , with good hope , that the first land that we saw next should be Virginia . 
 About the 16 of July we fell with the main of Virginia , which Simon Ferdinando took to be the Island of 
 390 
 THE FOURTH VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA a.d. 
 1587 Croatoan , where we came to anchor , and road there two or three days : but finding himself deceived , he weighed , and bore along the coast , where in the night , had not Captain Stafford be more careful in looking out , then our Simon Ferdinando , we had be all cast away upon the breach , called the Cape of Fear , for we were come within two cables length upon it : such was the carelessness , and ignorance of our Master .. 
 The two and twentieth of July we arrived safe at Hatorask , where our ship and pinnace anchored : the Governor went aboard the pinnace , accompanied with fortie of his best men , intending to pass up to Roanoak forthwith , hoping there to find those fifteene Englishmen , which Sir Richard Grinvile had left there the year before , with whom he meant to have conference , concerning the state of the Country , and Savages , meaning after he had so done , to return again to the fleet , and pass along the coast , to the Bay of Chesepiok , where we And intent to intended to make our seat and fort , according to the charge given us among other directions in writing , under sepi0^ the hand of Sir Walter Ralegh : but assoon as we were put with our pinnace from the ship , a Gentleman by the means of Ferdinando , who was appointed to return for England , called to the sailors in the pinnace , charging them not to bring any of the planters back again , but to leave them in the Island , except the Governor , & two or three such as he approved , saying that the Summer was far spent , wherefore he would land all the planters in no other place . Unto this were all the sailors , both in the pinnace , and ship , persuaded by the Master , wherefore it booted not the Governor to contend with them , but passed to Roanoak , and the same night at sunset went aland on the Island , in the place where our fifteene men were left , but we found none of them , nor any sign that they had be there , saving only we found the bones of one of those fifteene , which the Savages had slain long before . 
 The three and twentieth of July the Governor with 
 391 
 diverse of his company , walked to the North end of the Island , where Master Ralfe Lane had his fort , with sundry necessary and decent dwelling houses , made by his men about it the year before , where we hoped to find some signs , or certain knowledge of our fifteene men . When we came thither , we found the fort rased down , but all the houses standing unhurt , saving that the nether rooms of them , and also of the fort , were overgrown with Melons of diverse sorts , and Dear within them , feeding on those Melons : so we returned to our company , without hope of ever seeing any of the fifteene men living . 
 The same day order was given , that every man should be employed for the repairing of those houses , which we found standing , and also to make other new Cottages , for such as should need . 
 The 25 our Flyboat and the rest of our planters arrived all safe at Hatoraske , to the great joy and comfort of the whole company : but the Master of our Admiral Ferdinando grieved greatly at their safe coming : for he purposely left them in the Bay of Portugal , and stole away from them in the night , hoping that the Master thereof , whose name was Edward Spicer , for that he never had be in Virginia , would hardly find the place , or else being left in so dangerous a place as that was , by means of so many men of war , as at that time were abroad , they should surely be taken , or slain : but God disappointed his wicked pretences . 
 The eight and twentieth , George Howe , one of our twelve Assistants was slain by diverse Savages , which were come over to Roanoak , either of purpose to espy our company , and what number we were , or else to hunt Dear , whereof were many in the Island . These Savages being secretly hidden among high redes , where oftentimes they find the Dear asleep , and so kill them , espied our man wading in the water alone , almost naked , without any weapon , save only a small forked stick , catching Crabs therewithal , and also being strayed two miles from 
 392 
 his company , and shot at him in the water , where they gave him sixteen wounds with their arrows : and after they had slain him with their wooden swords , they beatrice his head in pieces , and fled over the water to the main . 
 On the thirtieth of July Master Stafford and twenty of our men passed by water to the Island of Croatoan , with Manteo , who had his mother , and many of his kindred dwelling in that Island , of whom we hoped to understand some news of our fifteene men , but especially to learn the disposition of the people of the country towards us , and to renew our old friendship with them . At our first landing they seemed as though they would fight with us : but perceiving us begin to march with our shot towards them , they turned their backs , and fled . Then Manteo their country man called to them in their own language , whom , assoon as they herd , they returned , and threw away their bows and arrows , and some of them came unto us , embracing and entertaining us friendly , desiring us not to gather or spill any of their corn , for that they had but little . We answered them , that neither their corn , nor any other thing of theirs , should be diminished by any of us , and that our coming was only to renew the old love , that was between us and them at the first , and to live with them as brothers and friends : which answer seemed to please them well , wherefore they requested us to walk up to their Town , who there feasted us after their manner , and desired us earnestly , that there might be some token or badge given them of us , whereby we might know them to be our friends , when we met them any where out of the Town or Island . They told us further , that for want of some such badge , diverse of them were hurt the year before , being found out of the Island by Master Lane his company , whereof they showed us one , which at that very instant lay lame , and had lain of that hurt ever since : but they said , they knew our men mistook them , and hurt them in stead of Winginos men , wherefore they held us excused . 
 393 
 A.D. 
 I587 - 
 August . 
 THe next day we had conference further with them , concerning the people of Secotan , Aquascogoc , & Pomeiok , willing them of Croatoan to certify the people of those towns , that if they would accept our friendship , we would willingly receive them again , and that all unfriendly dealings passed on both parts , should be utterly forgiven and forgotten . To this the chief men of Croatoan answered , that they would gladly do the best they could , and within seven days , bring the Wiroances and chief Governors of those towns with them , to our Governor at Roanoak , or their answer . We also understood of the men of Croatoan , that our man Master How was slain by the remnant of Winginos men dwelling then at Dasamonguepeuk , with whom Wanchese kept company : and also we understood by them of Croatoan , how that the 15 Englishmen left at Roanoak the year before , by Sir Richard Grinvile , were suddenly set upon , by 30 of the men of Secota , Aquascogoc , and Dasamonguepeuk , in manner following . They conveyed themselves secretly behind the trees , near the houses where our men carelessly lived : and having perceived that of those fifteene they could see but eleven only , two of those Savages appeared to the 11 Englishmen , calling to them by friendly signs , that but two of their chiefest men should come unarmed to speak with those two Savages , who seemed also to be unarmed . Wherefore two of the chiefest of our Englishmen went gladly to them : but whilst one of those Savages traitorously embraced one of our men , the other with his sword of wood , which he had secretly hidden under his manteli , struck him on the head and slew him , and presently the other eight and twenty Savages showed them selves : the other Englishman perceiving this , fled to his company , whom the Savages pursued with their bows , and arrows , so fast , that the Englishmen were forced to take the house , wherein all their victuali , and weapons were : but the 394 
 THE FOURTH VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA a.d. . 1587 - 
 Savages forthwith set the same on fire : by means whereof our men were forced to take up such weapons as came first to hand , and without order to run forth among the Savages , with whom they skirmished above and hour . In this skirmish another of our men was shot into the mouth with and arrow , where he died : and also one of the Savages was shot into the side by one of our men , with a wild fire arrow , whereof he died presently . The place where they fought was of great advantage to the Savages , by means of the thick trees , behind which the Savages through their nimbleness , defended themselves , and so offended our men with their arrows , that our men being some of them hurt , retired fighting to the water side , where their boat lay , with which they fled towards Hatorask . By that time they had rowed but a quarter of a mile , they espied their foure fellows coming from a creek thereby , where they had be to fetch Oysters : these foure they received into their boat , leaving Roanoak , and landed on a little Island on the right hand of our entrance into the harbour of Hatorask , where they remained a while , but afterwards departed , whither as yet we know not . 
 Having now sufficiently dispatched our business at Croatoan , the same day we departed friendly , taking our leave , and came aboard the fleet at Hatorask . 
 The eight of August , the Governor having long expected the coming of the Wiroanses of Pomeiok , Aquascogoc , Secota , and Dasamonguepeuk , seeing that the seven days were passed , within which they promised to come in , or to send their answers by the men of Croatoan , and no tidings of them herd , being certainly also informed by those men of Croatoan , that the remnant of Wingina his men , which were left alive , who dwelled at Dasamonquepeuk , were they which had slain George Howe , and were also at the driving of our eleven Englishmen from Roanoak , he thought to defer the revenge thereof no longer . Wherefore the same night about midnight , he passed over the water , 
 395 
 accompanied with Captain Stafford , and 24 men , whereof Manteo was one , whom we took with us to be our guide to the place where those Savages dwelled , where he behaved himself towards us as a most faithful Englishman . 
 The next day , being the 9 of August , in the morning so early that it was yet dark , we landed near the dwelling place of our enemies , & very secretly conveyed our selves through the woods , to that side , where we had their houses between us and the water : and having espied their fire , and some sitting about it , we presently set on them : the miserable souls herewith amazed , fled into a place of thick redes , growing fast by , where our men perceiving them , shot one of them through the body with a bullet , and therewith we entered the redes , among which we hoped to acquit their evil doing towards us , but we were deceived , for those Savages were our friends , and were come from Croatoan to gather the corn & fruit of that place , because they understood our enemies were fled immediately after they had slain George Howe , and for haste had left all their corn , Tobacco , and Pompions standing in such sort , that all had be devoured of the birds , and Dear , if it had not be gathered in time : but they had like to have paid dearly for it : for it was so dark , that they being naked , and their men and women appareled all so like others , we knew not but that they were all men : and if that one of them which was a Wiroances wife had not had a child at her back , she had be slain in stead of a man , and as hap was , another Savage knew master Stafford , and ran to him , calling him by his name , whereby he was saved . Finding our selves thus disappointed of our purpose , we gathered all the corn , Peas , Pompions , and Tobacco that we found ripe , leaving the rest unspoiled , and took Menatoan his wife , with the young child , and the other Savages with us over the water to Roanoak . 
 396 
 THE FOURTH VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA a.d. 
 Although the mistaking of these Savages somewhat grieved Manteo , yet he imputed their harm to their own folly , saying to them , that if their Wiroances had kept their promise in coming to the Governor at the day appointed , they had not known that mischance . 
 The 13 of August our Savage Manteo , by the commandment of Sir Walter Ralegh , was christened in Roanoak , and called Lord thereof , and of Dasamonguepeuk , in reward of his faithful service . 
 The 18 Elenor , daughter to the Governor , and wife to Ananias Dare one of the Assistants , was delivered of a daughter in Roanoak , and the same was christened there the Sonday following , and because this child was the first Christian born in Virginia , she was nam Virginia . By this time our ships had unladen the goods and victuals of the planters , and began to take in wood , and fresh water , and to new calk and trim them for England : the planters also prepared their letters and tokens to send back into England . 
 Our two ships , the Lion and the Flyboat almost ready to depart , the 21 of August , there arose such a tempest at Northeast , that our Admiral then riding out of the harbour , was forced to cut his cables , and put to sea , where he lay beating off and on sixe days before he could come to us again , so that we feared he had be cast away , and the rather for that at the time that the storm took them , the most and best of their sailors were left aland . 
 At this time some controversies arose between the Governor and Assistants , about choosing two out of the twelve Assistants , which should go back as factors for the company into England : for every one of them refused , save only one , which all other thought not sufficient : but at length by much persuading of the Governor , Christopher Cooper only agreed to go for England : but the next day , through the persuasion of diverse of his familiar friends , he changed his mind , so that now the matter stood as at the first . 
 397 
 The next day , the 22 of August , the whole company both of the Assistants and planters came to the Governor , and with one voice requested him to return himself into England , for the better and sooner obtaining of supplies , and other necessaries for them : but he refused it , and alleged many sufficient causes , why he would not : the one was , that he could not so suddenly return back again without his great discredit , leaving the actium , and so many whom he partly had procured through his persuasions , to leave their native country , and undertake that voyage , and that some enemies to him and the actium at his return into England would not spare to slander falsely both him and the actium , by saying , he went to Virginia , but politicly , and to no other end but to lead so many into a country , in which he never meant to stay himself , and there to leave them behind him . Theirmeaning Also he alleged , that seeing they intended to remove to remove 50 mnes farther up into the main presently , he being country . then absent , his stuff and goods might be both spoiled , & most of them pilfered away in the carriage , so that at his return he should be either forced to provide himself of all such things again , or else at his coming again to Virginia find himself utterly unfurnished , whereof already he had found some proof , being but once from them but three days . Wherefore he concluded that he would not go himself . 
 The next day , not only the Assistants but diverse others , as well women as men , began to renew their requests to the Governor again , to take upon him to return into England for the supply , and dispatch of all such things as there were to be done , promising to make him their bound under all their hands and seals for the safe preserving of all his goods for him at his return to Virginia , so that if any part thereof were spoiled or lost , they would see it restored to him , or his Assigns , whensoever the same should be missed 398 
 THE FOURTH VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA a.d. 
 1587. and demanded : which bound , with a testimony under their hands and seals , they forthwith made , and delivered into his hands . The copy of the testimony I thought good to set down . 
 May it please you , her Majesties subject's of England , we your friends and countrymen , the planters in Virginia , do by these presents let you and every of you to understand , that for the present and speedy supply of certain our known and apparent lacks and needs , most requisite and necessary for the good and happy planting of us , or any other in this land of Virginia , we all of one mind 8c consent , have most earnestly entreated , and uncessantly requested John White , Governor of the planters in Virginia , to pass into England , for the better and more assured help , and setting forward of the foresaid supplies : and knowing assuredly that he both can best , and will labour and take pains in that behalf for us all , and he not once , but often refusing it , for our sakes , and for the honour 8c maintenance of the actium , hath at last , though much against his will , through our importunacy , yielded to leave his government , and all his goods among us , and himself in all our behalfs to pass into England , of whose knowledge and fidelity in handling this matter , as all others , we do assure ourselves by these presents , and will you to give all credit thereunto , the 25 of August 1587. 
 The Governour being at the last through their extreme entreating constrained to return into England , having then but half a days respite to prepare himself for the same , departed from Roanoak the seven and twentieth of August in the morning , and the same day about midnight , came aboard the Flyboat , who already had weighed anchor , and road without the bar , the Admiral riding by them , who but the same morning was newly come thither again . The same day both the ships weighed anchor , and set sail for England : at this weighin their anchors , twelve of the men which 
 399 
 were in the Flyboat were thrown from the Capstone , which by means of a bar and brake , came so fast about upon them , that the other two bars thereof struck and hurt most of them so soar , that some of them never recovered it : nevertheless they assayed presently again to weigh their anchor , but being so weakened with the first fling , they were not able to weye it , but were thrown down and hurt the second time . Wherefore having in all but fifteene men aboard , and most of them by this unfortunate beginning so bruised , and hurt , they were forced to cut their Cable , and lose their anchor . Nevertheless , they kept company with the Admiral , until the seventeenth of September , at which time we fell with Corvo , and saw Flores . 
 September . 
 THe eighteenth , perceiving of all our fifteene men in the Flyboat there remained but five , which by means of the former mischance , were able to stand to their labour : and that the Admiral meant not to make any haste for England , but to linger about the Island of Tercera for purchase : the Flyboat departed for England with letters , where we hoped by the help of God to arrive shortly : but by that time we had continued our course homeward about twenty days , having had sometime scarce and variable winds , our fresh water also by leaking almost consumed , there arose a storm at Northeast , which for sixe days ceased not to blow so exceeding , that we were driven further in those sixe then we could recover in thirteene days : in which time others of our sailors began to fallen very sick and two of them died , the weather also continued so close , that our Master sometime in foure days together could see neither sun nor star , and all the beverage we could make , with stinking water , dregs of beer , and lees of wine which remained , was but three gallons , and therefore now we expected nothing but famine to perish at Sea. 
 400 
 THe 16 of October we made land , but we knew not what land it was , bearing in with the same land at that day : about sun set we put into a harbour , where we found a Hulk of Dublin , and a pinnace of Hampton riding , but we knew not as yet what place . this was , neither had we any boat to go ashore , until the pinnace sent off their boat to us with 6 or 8 men , of whom we understood we were in Smerwick in the West parts of Ireland : they also relieved us presently with fresh water , wine , and other fresh meat . 
 The 18 the Governor and the Master rid to Dingen a Cushe , 5 miles distant , to take order for the new victualing of our Flyboat for England , and for relief of our sick and hurt men , but within foure days after the Boatswain , the Steward , and the Boatswains mate died aboard the Flyboat , and the 28 the Master's mate and two of our chief sailors were brought sick to Dingen . 
 Smerwick in the West of Ireland . 
 November . 
 THe first the Governor shipped himself in a ship called the Monkey , which at that time was ready to put to sea from Dingen for England , leaving the Flyboat and all his company in Ireland . The same day we set sail , and on the third day we fell with the North side of the lands end , and were shut up the Severne , but the next day we doubled the same for Mounts Bay. 
 The 5 the Governor landed in England at Martasew , near Saint Michaels mount in Cornewall . 
 The 8 we arrived at Hampton , where we understood that our consort the Admiral was come to Portsmouth , and had be there three weeks before : and also that Ferdinando the Master with all his company were not only come home without any purchase , but also in such weakness by sickness , and death of their chiefest men , that they were scarce able to bring their ship into harbour , but were forced to let fallen anchor without , which they vin 401 2 c 
 could not weigh again , but might all have perished there , if a small bark by great hap had not come to them to help them . The names of the chief men that died are these , Roger Large , John Mathew , Thomas Smith , and some other sailors , whose names I knew not at the writing hereof . An. Dom. 1587. 
 