To the Worshipful and my very friend Master Richard Hakluyt , much happiness in the Lord . 
 Ir , as well for the satisfying of your earnest request , as the performance of my promise made unto you at my last being with you in England , I have sent you ( although in a homely style , especially for the contentation of a delicate ear ) the true discourse of my last voy - 
 age into the West Indies , and parts of America called Virginia , taken in hand about the end of Februarie , in the year of our redemption 1590. And what events happened unto us in this our journey , you shall plainly perceive by the sequel of my discourse . There were at the time aforesaid three ships absolutely determined to go for the West Indies , at the speciali charges of M. John Wattes of London Marchant . But when they were fully furnished , and in readiness to make their departure , a general stay was commanded of all ships throughout England . Which so soon as I herd , I presently ( as 1 thought it most requisite ) acquainted Sir Walter Ralegh therewith , desiring him that as I had sundry times afore be chargeable and troublesome unto him , for the supplies and reliefs of the planters in Virginia : so likewise , that by his endeavour it would please him at that instant to procure license for those three ships to proceed on with their determined voyage , that thereby the people in Virginia ( if it were God’s pleasure ) might speedily be comforted and relieved without further charges unto him . Whereupon he by his good means obtained license of the Queens Majesty , and order to be taken , that the owner of the 3 ships should be bound unto Sir Walter Ralegh or his assigns , in 3000 pounds , that those 3 ships in consideration of their release - 
 404 
 meant should take in , & transport a convenient number of passengers , with their furnitures and necessaries to be landed in Virginia . Nevertheless that order was not observed , neither was the bound taken according to the intention aforesaid . But rather in contempt of the aforesaid order , I was by the owner and Commanders of the ships denied to have any passengers , or any thing else transported in any of the said ships , saving only my self & my chest ; no not so much as a boy to attend upon me , although I made great suit , 8c earnest intreaty aswell to the chief Commanders , as to the owner of the said ships . Which cross and unkind dealing , although it very much discontented me , notwithstanding the scarcity of time was such , that I could have no opportunity to go unto Sir Walter Ralegh with complaint : for the ships being then all in readiness to go to the Sea , would have be departed before I could have made my return . Thus both Governors , Master's , and sailors , regarding very smally the good of their countrymen in Virginia ; determined nothing less then to touch at those places , but wholly disposed themselves to seek after purchase & spoils , spending so much time therein , that summer was spent before we arrived at Virginia . And when we were come thither , the season was so unfit , 8c weather so foul , that we were constrained of force to forsake that coast , having not seen any of our planters , with loss of one of our ship-boats , and 7 of our chiefest men : and also with loss of 3 of our anchors and cables , and most of our casks with fresh water left on shore , not possible to be had aboard . Which evils 8c unfortunate events ( as well to their own loss as to the hindrance of the planters in Virginia ) had not chanced , if the order set down by Sir Walter Ralegh had be observed , or if my daily 8c continual petitions for the performance of the same might have taken any place . Thus may you plainly 
 405 
 perceive the success of my fift & last voyage to Virginia , which was no less unfortunately ended then frowardly begun , and as luckless to many , as sinister to my self . But I would to God it had be as prosperous to all , as noisome to the planters ; & as joyful to me , as discomfortable to them . Yet seeing it is not my first crossed voyage , I remain contented . And wanting my wishes , I leave off from prosecuting that whereunto I would to God my wealth were answerable to my will . Thus committing the relief of my discomfortable company the planters in Virginia , to the merciful help of the Almighty , whom I most humbly beseech to help & comfort them , according to his most holy will & their good desire , I take my leave : from my house at Newtowne in Kylmore the 4 of February , 1593. 
 Your most wellwishing friend , 
 John White . 
 