Certain Voyages to Florida , and the later and more perfect Discoveries thereof , to wit , of all the Seacoasts , Rivers , Baize , Havens , Isles , and Main Lands far up into the Country , and a Report of some Colonies and Forts there planted and displanted , with a Description of the Government , Disposition and Quality of the natural Inhabitants , and a Declaration of the Temperature of the Climate , and of the manifold good Commodities found in those Regions . 
 To the most Christian King of France , Francis the first . 
 The relation of John de Verrazzano a Florentine , of the land by him discovered in the name of his Majesty . Written in Diepe the eight of July , 1524. 
 Wrote not to your Majesty , most Christian king , since the time we suffered the tempest in the North parts , of the success of the foure Ships , which your Majesty sent forth to discover new lands by the Ocean , thinking your Majesty had be already duly 
 informed thereof . Now by these presents I will give your Majesty to understand , how by the violence of the winds we were forced with the two ships , the Norman and the Dolphin ( in such evil case as they were ) to land in Britaine . Where after we had repaired them in all points as was needful , and armed them very well , we took our course along by the coast of Spaine , which your Majesty shall understand by the profit that we received thereby . Afterwards with the Dolphin alone we determined to make dis-423 
 coverie of new Countries , to prosecute the navigation we had already begun , which I purpose at this present to recount unto your Majesty to make manifest the whole proceeding of the matter . 
 The 17. of January the year 1524. by the grace of God we departed from the dishabited rock by the isle of Madera , aPPERTAINING to the king of Portugal , with 50. men , with victuals , weapons , and other shipmunition very well provided & furnished for 8. months : And sailing Westwards with a fair Easterly wind , in 25. days we ran 500. leagues , and the 20. of Februarie we were overtaken with as sharp and terrible a tempest as ever any sailors suffered : whereof with the divine help and merciful assistance of Almighty God , and the goodness of our ship , accompanied with the good happen of her fortunate name , we were delivered , and with a prosperous wind followed our course West and by North . And in other 25. days we made above 400. leagues more , where we discovered a new land , never before seen of any man either ancient or modern , and at the first sighed it seemed somewhat low , but being within a quarter of a league of it , we perceived by the great fires that we saw by the Sea coast , that it was inhabited : and saw that the land stretched to the Southwards . In seeking some convenient Harboro ugh wherein to anchor and to have knowledge of the place , we sailed fiftie leagues in vain , and seeing the land to run ne still to the Southwards , we resolved to return back again towards the North , where we found our selves troubled with the like difficulty . At length being in despair to find any Port , we cast anchor upon the coast , and sent our Boat to shore , where we saw great store of people which came to the Sea side ; and seeing us approach , they fled away , and sometime would stand still and look back , beholding us with great admiration : but afterwards being animated and assured with signs that we made them , some of them came hard to the Sea 
 424 
 side , seeming to rejoice very much at the sighed of us , and marvelling greatly at our apparel , shape and whiteness , showed us by sundry signs where we might most command odiously come aland with our Boat , offering us also of their victuals to eat . Now I will briefly declare to your Majesty their life and manners , as far as we could have notice thereof : These people go altogether naked , except only that they cover their privy parts with certain skins of beasts like unto Marterns , which they fasten unto a narrow girdle made of grass very artificially wrought , hanged about with tails of diverse other beasts , which round about their bodies hang dangling down to their knees . Some of them wear garlands of birds feathers . The people are of colour russet , and not much unlike the Saracens : their hair black , thick and not very long , which they tie together in a knot behind and wear it like a little tail . They are well featured in their limbs , of mean stature , and commonly somewhat bigger then we : broad breasted , strong armed , their legs and other parts of their bodies well fashioned , and they are disfigured in nothing , saving that they have somewhat broad visages , and yet not all of them : for we saw many of them well favoured , having black and great eyes , with a cheerful and steady look , not strong of body , yet sharp witted , nimble and exceeding great runners , as far as we could learn by experience , and in those two last qualities they are like to the people of the East parts of the world , and especially to them of the uttermost parts of China . We could not learn of this people their manner of living , nor their particular customs , by reason of the short abided we made on the shore , our company being but small , and our ship riding far off in the Sea. And not far from these we found another people , whose living we think to be like unto theirs ; ( as hereafter I will declare unto your Majesty ) showing at this present the situation and nature of the foresaid land . The shore 
 425 
 A.D. 
 I524 - 
 is all covered with small sand , and so ascendeth upward for the space of 15. foot , rising in form of little hills about 50. paces broad . And sailing forward , we found certain small Rivers and arms of the Sea , that fallen down by certain creeks , washing the shore on both sides as the coast lies . And beyond this we saw the open Country rising in height above the sandy shore with many fair fields and plains , full of mighty great woods , some very thick , and some thin , replenished with diverse sorts of trees , as pleasant and delectable to behold , as is possible to imagine . And your Majesty may not think that these are like the woods of Hercynia or the wild deserts of Tartary , and the Northern coasts full of ffuitlesse trees : But they are full of Palm trees , Bay trees , and high Cypress trees , and many other sorts of trees unknown in Europe , which yield most sweet savours far from the shore , the property whereof we could not learn for the cause aforesaid , and not for any difficulty to pass through the woods , seeing they are not so thick but that a man may pass through them . Neither do we think that they partaking of the East world round about them , are altogether void of drugs or spicery , and other riches of gold , seeing the colour of the land does so much argue it . And the land is full of many beasts , as Stags , Dear and Hares , and likewise of Lake's and Pools of fresh water , with great plenty of Fowls , convenient for all kind of pleasant game . This land is in latitude 34. degrees , with good and wholesome air , temperate , between hight and cold , no vehement winds do blow in those Regions , and those that do commonly reign in those coasts , are the Northwest and West winds in tlje summer season , ( in the beginning whereof we were there ) the sky clear and filire with very little rain : and if at any time the air be cloudy and misty with the Southern wind , immediately it is dissolved and waxes clear and fair again . The Sea is calm , not 426 
 boisterous , the waves gentle : and although all the shore be somewhat should and without harbour , yet is it not dangerous to the sailors , being free from rocks and deep , so that within 4 or 5. foot of the shore , there is 20. foot deep of water without ebb or flood , the depth still increasing in such uniform proportion . There is very good riding at Sea : for any ship being shaken in a tempest , can never perish there by breaking of her cables , which we have proved by experience . For in the beginning of March ( as it is usual in all regions ) being in the Sea oppressed with Northern winds , and riding there , we found our anchor broken before the earth failed or moved at all . We departed from this place , still running along the The coast coast , which we found to trend towards the East , & we t0 the saw every where very great fires , by reason of the j^-eesof multitude of the inhabitants . While we road on that latitude . coast , partly because it had no harbour , and for that we wanted water , we sent our boat ashore with 25. men : where by reason of great and continual waves that beatrice against the shore , being and open Coast , without succour , none of our men could possibly go ashore without losing our boat . we saw there 
 many people which came unto the shore , making diverse Courteous and signs of friendship , and showing that they were content we should come aland , and by trial we found them to be very courteous and gentle , as your Majesty shall understand by the success . To the intent we might send 
 them of our things , which the Indians commonly desire and esteem , as sheets of paper , glasses , bells , and such like trifles ; we sent a young man one of our Mariners ashore , who swimming towards them , & being within 3. or 4. yards of the shore , not trusting them , cast the things upon the shore : but seeking afterwards to return , he was with such violence of the waves beaten upon the shore , that he was so bruised that he lay there almost dead : which the Indians perceiving , ran to catch him , and drawing him out , they 
 427 
 carried him a Iide way off from the sea . The young man perceiving they carried him , being at the first dismayed , began then greatly to fear , and cried out piteously : likewise did the Indians which did accompany him , going about to cheer him and to give him courage , and then setting him on the ground at the foot of a little hill against the sun , they began to behold him with great admiration , marvelling at the whiteness of his flesh : And putting ofF his clothes , they made him warm at a great fire , not without our great fear which remained in the boat , that they would have roasted him at that fire , and have eaten him . The young man having recovered his strength , and having stayed a while with them , showed them by signs that he was desirous to return to the ship : and they with great love clapping him fast about with many embracings , accompanying him unto the sea , and to put him in more assurance , leaving him alone , went unto a high ground and stood there , beholding him until he was entered into the boat . This young man observed , as we did also , that these are of colour inclining to Black as the other were , with their flesh very shining , of mean stature , handsome visage , and delicate limbs , and of very little strength , but of prompt wit : farther we observed not .. 
 Departing from hence , following the shore which trended somewhat towards the North , in 50. leagues space we came to another land which showed much more fair and full of woods , being very great , where we road at anchor : and that we might have some knowledge thereof , we . sent 20. men aland , which entered into the country about 2. leagues , and they found that the people were fled to the woods for fear . They saw only one old woman with a young maid of 18. or 20. years old , which seeing our company , hid themselves in the grass for fear : the old woman carried two Infants on her shoulders , and behind her neck a child of 8. years old . The young woman was laden 428 
 likewise with as many : but when our men came unto them , the women cried out : the old woman made signs that the men were fled unto the woods . Assoon as they saw us to quiet them and to win their favour , our men gave them such victuals as they had with them , to eat , which the old woman received thankfully : but the young woman disdained them all , & threw them disdainfully on the ground . They took a child from the old woman to bring into France , and going about to take the young woman which was very beautiful and of tall stature , they could not possibly , for the great outcries that she made , bring her to the sea : and especially having great woods to pass thorough , and being far from the ship , we purposed to leave her behind , bearing away the child only . We found those folks to be more white then those that we found before , being clad with certain leaves that hang on boughs of trees , which they sew together with threads of wild hemp : their heads were trussed up Wild after the same manner as the former were : their ordinary food is of pulse , whereof they have great store , differing in colour and taste from ours ; of good and pleasant taste . Moreover they live by fishing and fowling , which they take with begins , and bows made of hard wood , the arrows of Canes , being headed with the bones of fish , & other beasts . The beasts in these parts are much wilder then in our Europe , by reason they are continually chased and hunted . We saw many of their boats made of one tree 20. foot long , and 4. foot broad , which are not made with iron or stone , or any other kind of metal ( because that in all this country for the space of 200. leagues which we ran , Tty ran we never saw one stone of any sort : ) they help alon& coast themselves with fire , burning so much of the tree as is make sufficient for the hollowness of the boat , ; the like hollow their they do in making the stern & the forepart , until it Canoas with be fit to sail upon the sea . The land is in situation re‘ goodness and fairness like the other : it hath woods 
 429 
 100 Leagues sayRng . 
 A mighty river . 
 like the other , thin and full of diverse sorts of trees : but not so sweet , because the country is more Northerly and cold . 
 We saw in this Country many Vines growing naturally , which growing up , took hold of the trees as they do in Lombardie , which if by husbandmen they were dressed in good order , without all doubt they would yield excellent wines : for having oftentimes seen the fruit thereof dried , which was sweet and pleasant , and not differing from ours , we think that they do esteem the same , because that in every place where they grow , they take away the under branches growing round about , that the fruit thereof may ripen the better . 
 We found also roses , violets , lilies , and many sorts of herbs , and sweet and odoriferous flowers different from ours . We knew not their dwellings , because they were far up in the land , and we judge by many signs that we saw , that they are of wood & of trees framed together . 
 We do believe also by many conjectures and signs , that many of them sleeping in the fields , have no other covert then the open sky . Further knowledge have we not of them : we think that all the rest whose countries' we passed , live all after one manner . Having made our abode three days in this country , and riding on the coast for want of harboroughs , we concluded to depart from thence , trending along the shore between the North and the East , sailing dnely in the daytime , and riding at anchor by night . In the space of 100. leagues sailing we found a very pleasant place situated among certain little steep hills : from amid the which hills there ran down into the sea and exceeding great stream of water , which wlin the mouth was very deep , & from the sea to the mouth of the same with you tide which we found to rise 8. foot , any great ship laden may pass up . 
 But because we road at anchor in a place well fenced 43° 
 from the wind , we would not venture our selves without knowledge of the place : and we passed up with our boat only into the said River , and saw the country very well peopled . The people are almost like unto the others , and are clad with the feathers of fowls of diverse colours : they came towards us very cheerfully , making great shouts of admiration ; showing us where we might come to land most safely with our boat . We entered up the said river into the land about half a league , where it made a most pleasant lake about 3. leagues in compass : on the which they rowed from the one side to the other to the number of 30. of their small boats , wherein were many people which passed from one shore to the other to come and see us . And behold upon the sudden ( as it is wont to fallen out in sailing ) a contrary flaw of wind coming from the sea , we were enforced to return to our ship , leaving this land to our great discontentment , for the great commodity and pleasantness thereof , which we suppose is not without some riches , all the hills showing minerali matters in them . We weighed anchor , and sailed towards the East , for so the coast trended , and so always for 50. leagues being in the sighed thereof , we discovered and Hand in form of a triangle , distant from the main land 10. leagues , about the bigness of the Hand of the Rhodes : it was full of hills covered with trees , well peopled , for we saw fires all along the coast : we gave it the name of your Majesties mother , not staying there by reason of the weather being contrary . 
 And we came to another land being 15. leagues distant from the Hand , where we found a passing good haven , wherein being entered , we found about 20. small boats of the people , which with diverse cries and wonderings came about our ship , coming no nearer then 50. paces towards us : they stayed and beheld the artificialness of our ship , our shape & apparel : then they all made a loud shout together , 
 431 
 People clad with feathers of diverse colours . 
 The pleasantness and riches of the land . The coast trendeth to the East . 
 The descrip-tionofClaudia Hand , tenne leagues from the may ne . Claudia was mother of king Francis . 
 A passing good haven . 
 declaring that they rejoiced . When we had something animated them , using their gestures , they came so near us , that we cast them certain bells and glasses , and many toys , which when they had received , they looked on them with laughing , and came without fear aboard our ship . There were among these people 2. kings of so goodly stature and shape as is possible to declare : the eldest was about 40. years of age , the second was a young man of 20. years old . Their apparel was on this manner : the elder had upon his naked body a Hearts skin wrought artificially with diverse branches like damask : his head was bore with the hair tied up behind with diverse knots : about his neck he had a large chain , garnished with diverse stones of sundry colours : the young man was almost appareled after you same manner . This is the goodliest people , & of the fairest conditions that we have found in this our voyage . They exceed us in bigness : they are of the colour of brass , some of them incline more to whiteness : others are of yellow colour , of comely visage , with long and black hair , which they are very careful to trim and deck up : they are black and quick eyed , and of sweet and pleasant countenance , imitating much the old fashion . I write not to your Majesty of the other parts of their body , having all such proportion as appertaineth to any handsome man . The women are of the like conformity and beauty : very handsome and well favoured , of pleasant countenance , and comely to behold : they are as well mannered and continent as any women , and of good education : they are all naked save their privy parts , which they cover with a Deeres skin branched or embroidered as the men use : there are also of them which wear on their arms very rich skins of Luzernes : they adorn their heads with diverse ornaments made of their own hair , which hang down before on both sides their breasts : others use other kind of dressing themselves like unto 
 432 
 the women of Egypt and Syria , these are of the elder sort : and when they are married , they wear diverse toys , according to the usage of the people of the East , aswell men as women . 
 Among whom we saw many plataeae of wrought copper , which they esteem more then gold , which for the colour they make no account of , for that among all other it is counted the basest : they make most account of Azure and Red. The things that they esteem most of all those which we gave them , were bells , crystal of Azure colour , and other toys to hang at their ears or about their neck . They did not desire cloth of silk or of gold , much less of any other sort , neither cared they for things made of steel and iron , which we often showed them in our armour which they made no wonder at , and in beholding them they only asked the art of making them : the like they did at our glasses , which when they beheld , they suddenly laughed and gave them us again . They are very liberali , for they give that which they have : we became great friends with these , and one day we entered into the Haven with our ship , whereas before we road a league off at Sea by reason of the contrary weather . They came in great companies of their small boats unto the ship with their faces all bepainted with diverse colours , showing us that it was a sign of joy , bringing us of their victuals , they made signs unto us where we might safest ride in the Haven for the safeguard of our ship keeping still our company : and after we were come to and anchor , we bestowed 15 days in providing our selves many necessary things , whither every day the people repaired to see our ship bringing their wives with them , whereof they were very jealous : and they themselves entering aboard the ship & staying there a good space , caused their wives to stay in their boats , and for all the intreaty we could make , offering to give them diverse things , we could never obtain that 
 VIII 
 1524. 
 Copper more esteemed then guide . 
 433 
 2 E 
 they would suffer them to come aboard our ship . And oftentimes one of the two kings coming with his queen , and many gentlemen for their pleasure to see us , they all stayed on the shore 200 paces from us , sending a small boat to give us intelligence of their coming , saying they would come to see our ship : this they did in token of safety , and assoon as they had answer from us , they came immediately , and having stayed a while to behold it , they wondered at hearing the cries and noises of the mariners . The queen and her maids stayed in a very light boat , at and Hand a quarter of a league off , while the king abided a long space in our ship uttering diverse conceits with gestures , viewing with great admiration all the furniture of the ship , demanding the property of every thing particularly . He took likewise great pleasure in beholding our apparel , and in tasting our meats , & so courteously taking his leave departed . And sometime our men staying 2 or 3 days on a little Hand near the ship for diverse necessaries ( as it is the use of seamen ) he returned with 7 or 8 of his gentlemen to see what we did , & asked of us oftentimes if we meant to make any long abided there , offering us of their provision : then the king drawing his bow and running up and down with his gentlemen , made much sport to gratify our men : we were oftentimes within the land 5 or 6 leagues , which we found as pleasant as is possible to declare , very apt for any kind of husbandry of corn , wine and oil : for that there are plains 25 or 30 leagues broad , open and without any impediment , of trees of such fruitfulness , that any seed being sown therein , will bring forth most excellent fruit . We entered afterwards into the woods , which we found so great and thick , that any army were it never so great might have hid it self therein , the trees whereof are oaks , cypress trees , and other sorts unknown in Europe . We found Pomi appii , damson trees , and nut trees , and 
 434 
 many other sorts of fruit differing from ours : there are beasts in great abundance , as hearts , deer , luzerns , & other kinds which they take with their nets & bows which are their chief weapons : the arrows which they use are made with great cunning , and in stead of iron , they head them with flint , with jasper stone & hard marble & other sharp stones which they use in stead of iron to cut trees , & to make their boats of one whole piece of wood , making it hollow with great and wondered art , wherein io . or 12. men may fit commodiously : their oars are short and broad at the end , and they use them in the sea without any danger , and by main force of arms , with as great speediness as they list themselves . We saw their houses made in circular or round form io The fashion of or 12 paces in compass , made with half circles of their houses-timber , separate one from another without any order of building , covered with mats of straw wrought cunningly together , which save them from the wind and rain : and if they had the order of building and perfect skill of workmanship as we have , there were no doubt but that they would also make eftsoons great & stately buildings . For all the sea coasts are full of clear and glistering stones , & alabaster , and therefore it is full of good havens and The coast full harboroughs for ships . They move the foresaid houses from one place to another according to the commodity of the place & season wherein they will make their abided , and only taking off the mats , they have other houses budded incontinent . The father and the whole family dwell together in one house in great number : in some of them we saw 25 or 30 persons . They feed as the other doe aforesaid of pulse which grow in that Country with better order of husbandry then in the others . They observe in their sowing the course of the Moon and the rising of certain stars , and diverse other customs spoken of by antiquity . Moreover they live by 
 435 
 Their curing with Tobacco and perfumes . 
 ^ . degrees & 2. tierces . 
 The description of a notable haven in 41. deg . and 2. tierces . 
 150 leagues . 
 A show of minerail . 
 hunting and fishing . They live long , & are seidome sick , and if they chance to fallen sick at any time , they heal themselves with fire without any physician , and they say that they die for very age . They are very pitiful and charitable towards their neighbours , they make great lamentations in their adversity : and in their misery , the kindred reckon up all their felicity . At their departure out of life , they use mourning mixed with singing , which continueth for a long space . This is as as we could learn of them . This land is situated in the Paralele of Rome , in 41. degrees and 2 terces : but somewhat more cold by accidentali causes and not of nature , ( as I will declare unto your highness elsewhere ) describing at this present the situation of the foresaid Country , which lies East and West , I say that the mouth of the Haven lies open to the South half a league broad , and being entered within it between the East and the North , it stretcheth twelve leagues : where it waxes broader and broader , and makes a gulf about 20. leagues in compass , wherein are five small Islands very fruitful and pleasant , full of high and broad trees , among the which Islands any great Navy may ride safe without any fear of tempest or other danger . Afterwards turning towards the South in the entering into the Haven on both sides there are most pleasant hills , with many rivers of most clear water falling into the Sea. 
 In the midst of this entrance there is a rock of free stone growing by nature apt to built any Castle or Fortress there , for the keeping of the haven . The fift of May being furnished with all things necessary , we departed from the said coast keeping along in the sighed thereof , and we sailed 150. leagues finding it always after one manner : but the land somewhat higher with certain mountains , all which bear a show of minerail matter , we sought not to land there in any place , because the weather served our turn for sailing : but we suppose that it was like the former , the coast 436 
 The coast runningEastward 50. leagues . 
 Here the people be^n to be more savage . 
 ran Eastward for the space of fiftie leagues . And trending afterwards to the North , we found another land high full of thick woods , the trees whereof were firres , cipresses and such like as are wont to grow in cold Countries' . The people differ much from the other , and look how much the former seemed to be courteous and gentle : so much were these full of rudeness and ill manners , and so barbarous that by no signs that ever we could make , we could have any kind of traffic with them . They cloth themselves with Bears skins and Luzernes and Seals and other beasts skins . Their food , as far as we could perceive , repairing often unto their dwellings , we suppose to be by hunting & fishing , and of certain fruits , which are a kind of roots which the earth yields of her own accord . They have no grain , neither saw we any kind or sign of tillage , neither is the land , for the barrenness thereof , apt to bear fruit or seed . If at any time we desired by exchange to have any of their commodities , they used to come to the sea shore upon certain craggy rocks , and we standing in our boats , they let down with a rope what it pleased them to give us , crying continually that we should not approach to the land , demanding immediately the exchange , taking nothing but knives , fishookes , and tools to cut withal , neither did they make any account of our courtesy . And when we had nothing left to exchange with them , when we departed from them , the people showed all signs of discourtesy and disdain , as were possible for any creature to invent . We were in despite of them 2 or 3 leagues within the land , being in number 25 armed men of us : And when we went on shore they shot at us with their bows making great outcries , and afterwards fled into the woods . We found not in this land any thing notable , or of importance , saving very great woods and certain hills , they may have some minerali matter in them , because we saw many of them Beads of have beadstones of Copper hanging at their ears . We copper . 
 437 
 departed from thence keeping our course Northeast along the coast , which we found more pleasant champion and without woods , with high mountains within the land continuing directly along the coast for the space of fiftie leagues , we discovered 32 Islands lying all near the land , being small and pleasant to the view , high and having many turnings and windings between them , making many fair harboroughs and channels as they do in the gulf of Venice in Sclavonia , and Dalmatia , we had no knowledge or acquaintance with the people : we suppose they are of the same manners and nature as the others are . Sailing Northeast for the space of 150. leagues we approached to the land that in times past was discovered by the Britons , which is in fiftie degrees . Having now spent all our provision and victuals , and having discovered about 700 leagues and more of new Countries' , and being furnished with water and wood , we concluded to return into France . 
 Touching the religion of this people , which we have found , for want of their language we could not understand neither by signs nor gesture that they had any religion or law at all , or that they did acknowledge any first cause or mover , neither that they worship the heaven or stars the Sun or Moon or other planets , and much less whither they be idolaters , neither could we learn whither that they used any kind of sacrifices or other adorations , neither in their villages have they any Temples or houses of prayer . We suppose that they have no religion at all , and that they live at their own liberty . And that all this proceedeth of ignorance , for that they are very easy to be persuaded : and all that they see us Christians do in our divine service , they did the same with the like imitation as they saw us to do it . 
 