The relation of the navigation and discovery which Captain Fernando Alarchon made by the order of the right honourable Lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa Viceroy of New Spaine , dated in Colima , and haven of New Spaine . 
 Chap. 1. 
 Fernando Alarchon after he had suffered a storm , arrived with his Fleet at the haven of Saint Iago , and from thence at the haven of Aguaiaval : he was in great peril in seeking to discover a Bay , and getting out of the same he discovered a river on the coast with a great current , entering into the same , and coasting along he descried a great many of Indians with their weapons : with signs he hath traffic with them , and fearing some great danger returns to his ships . 
 N Sunday the ninth of May in the year 1540. I set sail with two ships , the one called Saint Peter being Admiral , and the other Saint Catherine , and we set forward meaning to go to the haven of Saint Iago of good hope : but before we arrived there we had a terrible storm , 
 wherewith they which were in the ship called Saint Catherine , being more afraid then was need , cast over board nine pieces of Ordinance , two anchors and one cable , and many other things as needful for the enterprise wherein we went , as the ship it self . Assoon as we were arrived at the haven of Saint Iago I repaired The haven of my loss which I had received , provided my self of Stint Jag > . things necessary , and took aboard my people which looked for my coming , and directed my course towards the haven of Aguaiavall . And being there arrived I The haven of understood that the general Francis Vazquez de Coronado was departed with all his people : whereupon taking 
 279 
 the ship called Saint Gabriel which carried victuals for the army I led her with me to put in execution your Lordship's order . Afterwards I followed my course along the coast without departing from the same , to see if I could find any token or any Indian which could give me knowledge of him : and in sailing so near the shore I discovered other very good havens , for the ships whereof Captain Francis de Ullua was general for the Marquess de Valle neither saw nor found them . And These shoalds when we were come to the flats and shoalds from whence “ ofmarBe^ f°resaid fleet returned , it seemed aswell to me as mrin nr th , to the rest , that we had the firm land before us , and Bay of Cali - that those shoalds were so perilous and fearful , that it fimia . was a thing to be considered whither with our skiffs we could enter in among them : and the Pilots and the rest of the company would have had us done as Captain Ullua did , and have returned back again . But because your Lordship commanded me , that I should bring you the secret of that gulf , I resolved , that although I had known I should have lost the ships , I would not have ceased for any thing to have seen the head thereof : and therefore I commanded Nicolas Zamorano Pilot major , and Dominico deal Castello that eke of them should take a boat , and their led in their hands , and run in among those shoalds , to see if they could find out the channel whereby the ships might enter in : to whom it seemed that the ships might sail up higher ( although with great travel and danger ) and in this sort I and he began to follow our way which they had taken , and within a short while after we found our selves fast on the sands with all our three ships , in such sort that one could not help another , neither could the boats succour us , because the current was so great that it was impossible for one of us to come unto another : whereupon we were in such great j eopardie that the deck of the Admiral was oftentimes under water , and if a great surge of the sea had not come & driven our ship right up , and gave her leave as it were to breath a while , 
 280 
 1540 ’ we had there been drowned : and likewise the other two 
 ships found themselves in very great hazard , yet because they were lesser and drew less water , their danger was not so great as ours . Now it pleased God upon the return of the flood that the ships came on float , and so we went forward . And although the company would have returned back , yet for all this I determined to go forward , and to pursue our attempted voyage : and we passed forward with much ado , turning our stems now this way , now that way , to seek to find the channel . And it pleased God that after this sort we came to the very bottom of the Bay ; where we found a very mighty river , which ran with so great fury of a stream , that we could hardly sail against it . In this sort I determined as well as I could to go up this river , and with two boats , leaving the third with the ships , and twenty men , my self being in one of them with Roderigo Maldonado treasurer of this fleet , and Gaspar de Castilleia comptroller , and with certain small pieces of artillery I began to sail up the river , and charged all my company , that none of them should stir nor use any sign , but he whom I appointed , although we found Indians . The same day , which was Thursday the sixe and twentieth of August , following our voyage with drawing the boats with halsers we went about some 6 leagues : and the next day which was Friday by the break of day thus following our way upward , I saw certain Indians which went towards cer 
 The bottom of the Bay of California . 
 They go up the river of Buena guia the 26. of August . 
 taine cottages near unto the water , who assoon as they saw us , ten or twelve of them rose up furiously , and crying with a loud voice , other of their companions came running together to the number of 50 which with all haste carried out of their cottages such things as they 
 had , and laid them under certain shrubs and many of them came running towards that part whither we approached , making great signs unto us that we should go back again , using great threatenings against us , one while running on this side and and other 
 281 
 He carried and interpreter with him . 
 A very good course taken to appease unknown Savages . 
 while on that side . I seeing them in such a rage , caused our boats to launch from the shore into the mids of the river , that the Indians might be out of fear , and I road at anchor , and set my people in as good order as I could , charging them that no man should speak , nor make any sign nor motion , nor stir out of his place , nor should not be offended for any thing that the Indians did , nor should show no token of war : And by this means the Indians came every foot near the rivers side to see us : and I gate by little and little towards them where the river seemed to be deepest . In this mean space there were above two hundred and fiftie Indians assembled together with bows and arrows , and with certain banners in warlike sort in such manner as those of New Spayne do use : and perceiving that I drew towards the shore , they came with great cries towards us with bows and arrows put into them , and with their banners displayed . And I went unto the stem of my boat with the interpreter which I carried with me , whom I commanded to speak unto them , and when he spoke , they neither understood him , nor he them , although because they saw him to be after their fashion , they stayed themselves : and seeing this I drew nearer the shore , and they with great cries came to keep me from the shore of the river , making signs that I should not come any farther , putting stakes in my way between the water and the land : and the more I lingered , the more people still flocked together . Which when I had considered I began to make them signs of peace , and taking my sword and target , I cast them down in the boat and set my feet upon them , giving them to understand with this and other tokens that I desired not to have war with them , and that they should do the like . Also I took a banner and cast it down , and I caused my company that were with me to fit down likewise , and taking the wares of exchange which I carried with me , I called them to give them some of them : yet for 
 282 
 all this none of them stirred to take any of them , but rather flocked together , and began to make a great murmuring among themselves : and suddenly one came out from among them with a staff wherein certain shells were set , and entered into the water to give them unto me , and I took them , and made signs unto him that he should come near me , which when he had done , I embraced him , and gave him in recompense certain beads and other things , and he returning with them unto his fellows , began to look upon them , and to parley together , and within a while after many of them came towards me , to whom I made signs to lay down their banners , and to leave their weapons : which they did incontinently , then I made signs that they should lay them altogether , and should go aside from them , which likewise they did : and they caused those Indians which newly came thither to leave them , and to lay them together with the rest . After this I called them unto me , and to all them which came I gave some small trifle , using them gently , and by this time they were so many that came thronging about me , that I thought I could not stay any longer in safety among them , and I made signs unto them that they should withdraw themselves , and that they should stand all upon the side of and hill which was there between a plain & the river , and that they should not press to me above ten at a time . And immediately the most ancient among them called unto them with a loud voice , willing them to do so : and some ten or twelve of them came where I was : whereupon seeing my self in some security , I determined to go on land the more to put them out of fear : and for my more security , I made signs unto them , to fit down on the ground which they did : but when they saw that ten or twelve of my companions came a shore after me , they began to be angry , and I made signs unto them that we would be friends , and that they should not fear , & herewithal they were pacified , and sat down as they did before , and I went 283 
 A.D. i54° - 
 unto them , & embraced them , giving them certain trifles , commanding mine interpreter to speak unto them , for I greatly desired to understand their manner of speech , and the cry which they made at me . And that I might know what manner of food they had , I made a sign unto them , that we would gladly eat , and they brought me certain cakes of Maiz , and a loaf of Mizquiqui , and they made signs unto me that they desired to see and harquebus shot oflF , which I caused to be discharged , and they were all wonderfully afraid , except two or three old men among them which were not moved at all , but rather cried out upon the rest , because they were afraid : and through the speech of one of these old men , they began to rise up from the ground , and to lay hold on their weapons : whom when I sought to appease , I would have given him a silken girdle of diverse colours , and he in a great rage bit his neither lip cruelly , and gave me a thump with his elbow on the breast , and turned in a great fury to speak unto his company . After that I saw them advance their banners , I determined to return my self gently to my boats , and with a small gale of wind I set sail , whereby we might break the current which was very great , although my company were not well pleased to go any farther . In the mean space the Indians came following us along the shore of the river , making signs that I should come on land , and that they would give me food to eat , some of them sucking their fingers , and others entered into the water with certain cakes of Maiz , to give me them in my boat . 
 Chap. 2. 
 Of the habit , armour and stature of the Indians . A relation of many others with whom he had by signs traffic , victuals and many courtesies . 
 IN this sort we went up two leagues , and I arrived near a clifle of and hill , whereupon was and arbour made newly , where they made signs unto me , crying 284 
 that I should go thither , showing me the same with their hands , and telling me that there was meat to eat . But I would not go thither , seeing the place was Good forecast . apt for some ambush , but followed on my voyage , within a while after issued out from thence above a thousand armed men with their bows and arrows , and after that many women and children showed themselves , towards whom I would not go , but because the Sun was almost set , I road in the midst of the river . These Indians came decked after sundry fashions , some came with a painting that covered their face all over , some had their faces half covered , but all besmouched with Indians be-cole , and every one as it liked him best . Others carried visards before them of the same colour which had the ' shape of faces . They wear on their heads a piece of a Deeres skin two spans broad set after the manner of a helmet , and upon it certain small sticks with some sorts of feathers . Their weapons were bows and arrows of hard wood , and two or three sorts of maces of wood hardened in the fire . This is a mighty people , well feitured , and without any grossness . They have holes bored in their nostrils whereat certain pendents hang : and others wear shells , and their ears are full of holes , whereon they hang bones and shells . All of them both great and small wear a girdle about their waste made of diverse colours , and in the middle is fastened a round bunch of feathers , which hangs down behind like a tail . Likewise on the brawn of their arms they wear a strait string , which they wind so often about that it becomes as broad as ones hand . 
 They wear certain pieces of Deeres bones fastened to their arms , wherewith they strike ofF the sweat , and at the other certain small pipes of canes . They carry Pipes and also certain little long bags about and hand broad tied to their left arm , which serve them also in stead of Dam counterfeit ' brasers for their bows , full of the powder of a certain herb , whereof they make a certain beverage . They have their bodies traced with coals , their hair cut before , 285 
 and behind it hangs down to their waste . The women go naked , and wear a great wreathe of feathers behind them , and before painted and glued together , and their hair like the men . There were among these Indians three or foure men in women's apparel . Now the next day being Saturday very early I went forward on my way up the river , setting on shore two men for each boat to draw them with the rope , and about breaking forth of the Sun , we herd a mighty cry of Indians on both sides of the river with their weapons , but without any banner . I thought good to attend their coming , aswell to see what they would have , as also to try whither our interpreter could understand them . When they came over against us they leapt into the river on both sides with their bows and arrows , and when they spoke , our interpreter understood them not : whereupon I began to make a sign unto them that they should lay away their weapons , as the other had done . Some did as I willed them , and some did not , and those which did , I willed to come near me and gave them some things which we had to truck withal , which when the others perceived , that they might likewise have their part , they laid away their weapons likewise . I judging my self to be in security leapt on shore with them , and stood in the midst of them , who understanding that I came not to fight with them , Skels and began to give some of those shells and beads , and some beads . brought me certain skins well dressed , and others 
 Maiz and a roll of the same naughtily grinded , so that none of them came unto me that brought me not some - thing , and before they gave it me going a little way from me they began to cry out amain , and made a sign with their bodies and arms , and afterwards they approached to give me that which they brought . And now that the Sun began to set I put off from the shore , and road in the midst of the river . The next morning before break of day on both sides of the river we herd greater cries and of more Indians , which 286 
 leapt into the river to swim , and they came to bring me certain gourds full of Maiz , and of those wreathes which I spoke of before . I showed unto them Wheat and Beans , and other seeds , to see whither they had any of those kinds : but they showed me that they had no knowledge of them , and wondered at all of them , and by signs 1 came to understand that the thing which they most esteemed and reverenced was the Sun : and I signified unto them that I came from A notable the Sun . Whereat they marveiled , and then they began to behold me from the top to the toe , and showed me more favour then they did before ; and when I asked them for food , they brought me such abundance that I was enforced twice to call for the boats to put it into them , and from that time forward of all the things which they brought me they flang up into the air one part unto the Sun , and afterwards turned towards me to give me the other part : and so I was always better served and esteemed of them as well in drawing of the boats up the river , as also in giving me food to eat : and they showed me so great love , that when I stayed they would have carried us in their arms unto their houses : and in no kind of thing they would break my commandment : and for my surety , I willed them not to carry any weapons in my sighed : and they were so careful to do so , that if any man came newly thither with them , suddenly they would go and meet him to cause him to lay them down far from me : and I showed them that I took great pleasure in their so doing : and to some of the chief of them I gave certain little napkins and other trifles ; for if I should have given somewhat to every one of them in particular , all the small wares in Swarms of New Spayne would not have sufficed . Sometime it fell M / ' k out ( such was the great love and good will which they showed me ) that if any Indians came thither by chance with their weapons , and if any one being warned to leave them behind him , if by negligence , or because he understood them not at the first warning , he had not laid them 
 287 
 And exceeding great current of the river . 
 away , they would run unto him , and take them from him by force , and would break them in pieces in my presence . Afterwards they took the rope so lovingly , and with striving one with another for it , that we had no need to pray them to do it . Wherefore if we had not had this help , the current of the river being exceeding great , and our men that drew the rope being not well acquainted with that occupation , it would have been impossible for us to have got up the river so against the stream . When I perceived that they understood me in all things , and that I likewise understood them , I thought good to try by some way or other to make a good entrance to find some good issue to obtain my desire : And I caused certain crosses to be made of certain small sticks and paper , and among others when I gave any thing I gave them these as things of most price and kissed them , making signs unto them that they should honour them and make great account of them , and that they should wear them at their necks : giving them to understand that this sign was from heaven , and they took them and kissed them , and lifted them up aloft , and seemed greatly to rejoice thereat when they did so , and sometime I took them into my boat , showing them great good will , and sometime I gave them of those trifles which I carried with me . And at length the matter grew to such issue , that I had not paper and sticks enough to make crosses . In this manner that day I was very well accompanied , until that when night approached I sought to launch out into the river , and went to ride in the midst of the stream , and they came to ask leave of me to depart , saying that they would return the next day with victuals to visit me , and so by little and little they departed , so that there stayed not above fiftie which made fires over against us , and stayed there all night calling us , and before the day was perfectly broken , they leapt into the water and swam unto us asking for the rope , and we gave it them with a good will , thanking God for the good provision which 
 288 
 1540-hee gave us to go up the river : for the Indians were so many , that if they had gone about to let our passage , although we had be many more then we were , they might have done it . 
 Chap. 3. 
 One of the Indians understanding the language of the interpreter , asks many questions of the originali of the Spaniards , he telleth him that their Captain is the child of the Sun , and that he was sent of the Sun unto them , and they would have received him for their king . They take this Indian into their boat , and of him they have many informations of that country . 
 IN this manner we sailed until Tuesday at night , going as we were wont , causing mine interpreter to speak unto the people to see if peradventure any of them could understand him , I perceived that one answered him , whereupon I caused the boats to be stayed , and called him , which he understood , charging mine interpreter that he should not speak nor answer him any thing else , but only that which I said unto A wise devise . him : and I saw as I stood still that that Indian began to speak to the people with great fury : whereupon all of them began to draw together , and mine interpreter understood , that he which came to the boat said unto them , that he desired to know what nation we were , and whence we came , and whither we came out of the water , or out of the earth , or from heaven : And at this speech and infinite number of people came together , which marveled to see me speak : and this Indian turned on this side and on that side to speak unto them in . another language which mine interpreter understood not . Whereas he asked me what we were , I answered that we were Christians , and that we came from far to see them : and answering to the question , who had sent me , I said , I was sent by the Sun , pointing unto him by signs as at the first , because they should 
 ix 289 TO 
 not take me in a lie . He began again to ask me , how the Sun had sent me , seeing he went aloft in the sky and never stood still , and seeing these many years neither he nor their old men had ever seen such as we were , of whom they ever had any kind of knowledge , and that the Sun till that hour had never sent any other . I answered him that it was true that the Sun made his course aloft in the sky , and did never stand still , yet nevertheless that they might well perceive that at his going down and rising in the morning he came near unto the earth , where his dwelling was , and that they ever saw him come out of one place , and that he had made me in that land and country from whence he came , like as he had made many others which he sent into other parts , and that now he had sent me to visit and view the same river , and the people that dwelled near the same , that I should speak unto them , and should join with them in friendship , and should give them things which they had not , and that I should charge them that they should not make war one against another . Whereunto he answered , that I should tell him the cause why the Sun had not sent me no sooner to pacific the wars which had continued a long time among them , wherein many had been slain . I told him the cause hereof was , because at that time I was but a child . Then he asked the interpreter whither we took him with us perforce having taken him in the war , or whither he came with us of his own accord . He answered him that he was with us of his own accord , and was very well apaid of our company . He returned to inquire , why we brought none save him only that understood us , and wherefore we understood not all other men , seeing we were the children of the Sun : he answered , that the Sun also had begotten him , and given him a language to understand him , and me , and others : that the Sun knew well that they dwelled there , but that because he had many other businesses , and because 
 290 
 I was but young he sent me no sooner . And he turning unto me said suddenly : Comest thou therefore hither to be our Lord , and that we should serve thee ? I supposing that I should not please him if I should have said yea , answered him , not to be their Lord , but rather to be their brother , and to give them such things as I had . He asked me , whither the Sun had begotten me as he had begotten others , and whither I was his kinsman or his son : I answered him that I was his son . He proceeded to ask me whither the rest that were with me were also the children of the Sun , I answered him not , but that they were born all with me in one country , where I was brought up . Then he cried out with a loud voice and said , seeing thou dost us so much good , and wilt not have us to make war , and art the child of the Sun , we will all receive thee for our Lord , and always serve thee , therefore we pray thee that thou wilt not depart hence nor leave us : and suddenly he turned to the people , and began to tell them , that I was the child of the Sun , and that therefore they should all choose me for their Lord . Those Indians hearing this , were astonished beyond measure , and came nearer still more and more to behold me . That Indian also asked me other questions , which to avoid tediousness I do not recite : and in this wise we passed the day , and seeing the night approach , I began by all means I could devise to get this fellow into our boat with us : and he refusing to go with us , the interpreter told him that we would put him on the other side of the river , and upon this condition he entered into our boat , and there I made very much of him , and gave him the best entertainment I could , putting him always in security , and when I judged him to be out of all suspicion , I thought it good to ask him somewhat of that country . And among the first things that I asked him this was one , whither he had ever seen any men like us , or had herd any report of them . He answered me not , saving that he 
 291 
 The Sun worshipped as God . 
 had sometime heard of old men , that very far from that Country there were other white men , and with beards like us , and that he knew nothing else . I asked him also whither he knew a place called Cevola , and a River called Totonteac , and he answered me not . Whereupon perceiving that he could not give me any knowledge of Francis Vazquez nor of his company , I determined to ask him other things of that country , and of their manner of life : and began to inquire of him , whither they held that there was one God , creator of heaven and earth , or that they worshipped any other Idol . And he answered me no : but that they esteemed and reverenced the Sun above all other things , because it warmed them and made their crops to grow : and that of all things which they did eat , they cast a little up into the air unto him . I asked him next whither they had any Lord , and he said no : but that they knew well that there was a great Lord , but they knew not well which way he dwelled . And I told him that he was in heaven , and that he was called Jesus Christ , and I went no farther in divinity with him . I asked him whither they had any war , and for what occasion . He answered that they had war and that very great , and upon exceeding small occasions : for when they had no cause to make war , they assembled together , and some of them said , let us go to make war in such a place , and then all of them set forward with their weapons . I asked them who commanded the army : he answered the eldest and most valiant , and that when they said they should proceed no farther , that suddenly they retired from the war . I prayed him to tell me what they did with those men which they killed in battle : he answered me that they took out the hearts of some of them , and eat them , and others they burned ; and he added , that if it had not be for my coming , they should have been now at war : and because I commanded them that they should not war , and that they should cease 
 292 
 from arms , therefore as long as I should not command them to take arms , they would not begin to wage war against others , & they said among themselves , that seeing I was come unto them , they had given over their intention of making war , & that they had a good mind to live in peace . He complained of certain people which dwelled behind in a mountain Certain war-which made great war upon them , and slew many of people bethem 1 1 answered hun } that from henceforward they taint should not need to fear any more , because I had commanded them to be quiet , & if they would not obey my commandment , I would chasten them and kill them . 
 He inquired of me how I could kill them seeing we were so few , and they so many in number . And because it was now late and that I saw by this time he was weary to stay any longer with me , I let him go out of my boat , and therewith I dismissed him very well content . 
 Chap. 4. 
 Of Naguachato and other chief men of those Indians they receive great store of victuals , they cause them to set up a cross in their countries' , and he teaches them to worship it . They have news of many people , of their diverse languages , and customs in matrimony , how they punish adultery , of their opinions concerning the dead , and of the sicknesses which they are subject unto . 
 THe next day betimes in the morning came the chief man among them called Naguachato , and wished me to come on land because he had great store of victuals to give me . And because I saw my self in security I did so without doubting ; and incontinently and old man came with rolls of that Maiz , and certain little gourds , and calling me with a loud voice and using many gestures with his body and arms , came near unto me , and causing me to turn me unto that people , and he himself also turning unto them said unto 
 293 
 [ HL 431-1 These people are greatly inclined to learn the Christian faith . 
 them , Sagueyca , and all the people answered with a great voice , Hu , and he offered to the Sun a little of every thing that he had there , and likewise a little more unto me ( although afterwards he gave me all the rest ) and did the like to all that were with me : & calling out mine interpreter , by means of him I gave them thanks , telling them that because my boats were little I had not brought many things to give them in exchange , but that I would come again another time and bring them , and that if they would go with me in my boats unto my ships which I had beneath at the rivers mouth , I would give them many things . They answered that they would do so , being very glad in countenance . Here by the help of mine interpreter I sought to instruct them what the sign of the cross meant , and willed them to bring me a piece of timber , whereof I caused a great cross to be made , and commanded all those that were with me that when it was made they should worship it , and beseech the Lord to grant his grace that that so great a people might come to the knowledge of his holy Catholic faith : and this done I told them by mine interpreter that I left them that sign , in token that I took them for my brothers , and that they should keep it for me carefully until I returned , and that every morning at the Sun rising they should kneel before it . And they took it incontinently , & without suffering it to touch the ground they carried it to set it up in the midst of their houses , where all of them might behold it ; and I willed them always to worship it because it would preserve them from evil . They asked me how deep they should set it in the ground , & I showed them . Great store of people followed the same , and they that stayed behind inquired of me , how they should join their hands , and how they should kneel to worship the same ; and they seemed to have great desire to learn it . This done , I took that chief man of the Country , and going to our boats with him , I followed my journey up the 
 294 
 River , and all the company on both sides of the shore accompanied me with great good will , and served me in drawing of our boats , and in hailing us off the sands , whereupon we often fell : for in many places we in 
 found the river so shoaled , that we had no water for 
 , . 1 ri fallen ofshelfes . 
 our boat . As we thus went on our way , some or the Indians which I had left behind me , came after us to pray me that I would thoroughly instruct them , how they should join their hands in the worshipping of the cross : others showed me whither they were well set in such & such sort , so that they would not let me be quiet . Near unto the other side of the river was greater store of people , which called unto me very often , that I would receive the victuals which they had brought me . And because I perceived that one envied the other , because I would not leave them discontented , I did so . And here came before me another old man 
 like unto the former with the like ceremonies & Another old 
 offerings : and I sought to learn something of him as man ' 
 I had done of the other . This man said likewise to 
 the rest of the people , This is our lord . Now you see how long ago our ancestors told us , that there were bearded & white people in the world , and we laughed them to scorn . I which am old and the rest which are here , have never seen any such people as these . And if you will not believe me , behold these people which be in this river : let us give them therefore meat , seeing they give us of their victuals : let us willingly serve this lord , which wishes us so well , and forbiddeth us to make war , and embraceth all of us : and they have mouth , hands and eyes as we have , and speak as we do . 1 gave these likewise another cross as I had done to the others beneath , and said unto them the self same words : which they listened unto with a better will , & used greater diligence to learn that which I said . Afterwards as I passed farther up the river , I found another people , whom mine interpreter understood not a whit : wherefore I showed them by signs the self - 
 Their ancestors told them thattherewere bearded and white men In the world . 
 Another nation . 
 295 
 same ceremonies of worshipping the cross , which I had taught the rest . And that principal old man which I took with me , told me that farther up the river I should find people which would understand mine interpreter : and being now late , some of those men called me to give me victuals , and did in all points as the others had done , dancing and playing to show me pleasure . I desired to know what people lived on the banks of this People of 23. river : and I understood by this man that it was inlanguages habited by 23 languages , and these were bordering upon Ms river the river > beside others not far ofF , and that there were beside these 23. languages , other people also which he knew not , above the river . I asked him whither every people were living in one town together : and he answered me , No : but that they had many houses standing scattered in the fields , and that every people had their Country several and distinguished , and that in every habitation there were great store of people . JcueoasGo - He showed me a town which was in a mountain , mara writeth and ( j to | j me that fhere was there great store of people ouiuabse^ °f bad conditions , which made continual war upon them : which being without a governor , and dwelling in that desert place , where small store of Maiz grows , came down into the plain to buy it in truck of Deeres skins , wherewith they were appareled with long garments , which they did cut with razors , and sewed with Great houses needles made of Deeres bones : and that they had great of stone . houses of stone . I asked them whither there were any there of that Country ; and I found one woman which beware a garment like a little Mantle , which clad her from the waste down to the ground , of a Deeres skin well dressed . Then I asked him whither the people which dwelled on the rivers side , dwelled always there , or else sometime went to dwell in some other place : he answered me , that in the summer season they abode there , and sowed there ; and after they had gathered in their crop they went their way , and dwelled in other houses which they had at the foot of the mountain far from the 296 
 river . And he showed me by signs that the houses were of wood compassed with earth without , and I understood that they made a round house wherein the men Roundhouses . and women lived all together . I asked him whither their women were common or no : he told me not , and that he which was married , was to have but one wife only . I desired to know what order they kept in marrying : and he told me , that if any man had a daughter to marry , he went where the people kept , and said , I have a daughter to marry : is there any man here that will have her ? And if there were any that would have her , he answered that he would have her : and so the marriage was made . And that the father of him which would have her , brought some thing to give the young woman ; and from that hour forward the marriage was taken to 
 be finished , and that they sang & danced : and that when Dancing and night came , the parents took them , and left them to - nn&ngatma-gether in a place where no body might see them . And 6 
 I learned that brothers , and sisters , and kinsfolks married not together : and that maids before they were married conversed not with men , nor talked not with them , but 
 kept at home at their houses and in their possessions , and wrought : and that if by chance any one had company with men before she were married , her husband forsook her , and went away into other Countries : and that those women which fell into this fault , were accounted naughty packs . And that if after they were married , any man were taken in adultery with another woman , they put him to death : and that no man might have more then one wife , but very secretly . They told me that 
 they burned those which died : and such as remained They bume widows , stayed half a year , or a whole year before their dead-they married . I desired to know what they thought of such as were dead . He told me that they went to another world , but that they had neither punishment nor glory . The greatest sickness that this people die of , is vomiting of blood by the mouth : and they have Physicians which cure them with charms and blowing 
 297 
 which they make . The apparel of these people were Pipes to drink like the former : they carried their pipes with them to Tobacco with . perfume themselves , like as the people of New Spaine use Tobacco . I inquired whither they had any governor , and found that they had none , but that every family had their several governor . These people have beside Maiz , gourds , their Maiz certain gourds , and another corn like unto Mill : they have grindstones & earthen pots , wherein earthenpots , they boil those gourds , and fish or the river , which goodfish . are very good . My interpreter could go no farther then 
 this place : for he said that those which we should find farther on our way , were their enemies , and therefore I sent him back very well contented . Not long after I espied many Indians to come crying with a loud voice , and running after me . I stayed to know what they would have ; and they told me that they had set up the cross which I had given them , in the midst of their dwellings as I had appointed , but that I was to This river wit , that when the river did overflow , it was wont to ‘ banks^fcer*1 reac^ to P^aceJ therefore they prayed me to give them taine seasons . eave to remove it , and to set it in another place where the river could not come at it , nor carry it away : which I granted them . 
 Chap. 5. 
 Of and Indian of that country they have relation of the state of Cevola , and of the conditions and customs of these people , and of their governor : and likewise of the countries' not far distant from thence , whereof one was called Quicoma , and the other Coama : of the people of Quicoma , and of the other Indians not far distant they receive courtesy . 
 THus sailing I came where were many Indians , and another interpreter , which I caused to come with Cold and me in my boat . And because it was cold , & my 
 rain - people were wet , I leapt on shore , and commanded a 
 fire to be made , and as we stood thus warming our 
 298 
 W-selves , and Indian came and struck me on the arm , pointing with his finger to a wood out of which I saw two companies of men come w‘ their weapons , & he told me that they came to set upon us : & because I meant not to fallen out with any of them , I retired my company into our boats , & the Indians which were with me swam into the water , and saved themselves on the other side of the river . In the mean season I inquired of that Indian which I had with me , what people they were that came out of the wood : and he told me that they were their enemies , and therefore these others at their approach without saying any word leapt into the water : and did so , because they meant to turn back again , being without weapons , because they brought none with them , because they understood my will & pleasure , that they should carry none . I inquired the same things of this interpreter which I had done of the other of the things of that country , because I understood that among some people one man used to have many wives , and among others but one . Now I understood by him , that he had been at Cevola , and that it was a months journey from his country , and that from that place by a path that went along that river a man Cevola 40 might easily travel thither in xl . days , and that the occasion that moved him to go thither , was only to see tk^river* ? Cevola , because it was a great thing , & had very high houses of stone of 3. or 4. lofts , and windows on each side ; that the houses were compassed about with a wall containing the height of a man & and half , and that aloft & beneath they were inhabited with people , and that they used the same weapons , that others used , which we had seen , that is to say , bows & arrows , maces , staves & bucklers : and that they had one governor , & that they were appareled with mantles , and with ox-hides , & that their mantles had a painting about them , and that their governor beware a long shirt very fine girded unto him , and over the same diverse mantles : and that the women beware very long garments , and that they were 
 299 
 white , and went all covered : and that every day many Indians waited at the gate of their governor to serve Turqueses in him , & that they did wear many Azure or blue stones , Cevola . which were dug out of a rock of stone , and that they had but one wife , with whom they were married , and that when their governors died , all the goods that they had were buried with them . And likewise all the while they eat , many of their men wait at their table to court them , and see them eat , and they eat with napkins , and that they have baths . On thursday morning at break of day the Indians came with the like cry to the bank of the river , and with greater desire to serve us , bringing me meat to eat , and making me the like good cheer , which the others had done unto me , having understood what I was : & I gave them crosses , with the self same order which I did unto the former . And going farther up the river , I came to a country where I found better government : for the inhabitants are wholly obedient unto one only . But returning again to confer with mine interpreter touching the dwellings of those of Cevola , he told me , that the lord of that country had a dog like that which I carried with me . Afterwards when I called for dinner , this interpreter saw certain dishes carried in the first and later service , whereupon he told me that the lord of Cevola had also such as those were , but that they were green , and that none other had of them saving their governor , and that they were 4. which he had got together This was the with that dog , and other things , of a black man wentwlth which had a beard , but that he knew not from what ™ rier Marco Quarter he came thither , and that the king caused him the Niza . afterwards to be killed , as he herd say . I asked him whither he knew of any town that was near unto that place : he told me that above the river he knew some , & that among the rest there was a lord of a Quicoma . town called Quicoma , and another of a town called 
 Coama . Coama : and that they had great store of people under 
 them . And after he had given me this information , he 
 300 
 i54°-craved leave of me to return unto his companions . From hence I began again to set sail , and within a days sailing I found a town dispeopled : where assoon as I was entered , by chance there arrived there 500. Indians with their bows & arrows , and with them was that principali Indian called Naguachato , which I had left behind , and brought with them certain conies Conies and & yucas : and after I had friendly entertained them all , departing from them , I gave them license to return to their houses . As I passed further by the desert , I came to certain cottages , out of which much people came towards me with and old man before them , crying in a language which mine interpreter well understood , and he said unto those men : Brothers , you see here that lord ; let us give him such as we have , seeing he doth us pleasure , and hath passed through so many discourteous people , to come to visit us . And having thus said , he ofired to the Sun , and then to me in like sort as the rest had done . These had certain great bags & well made of the skins of fish called Sea-bremes . And I understood that this was a town belonging unto the lord of Quicoma , which people came thither only to gather the fruit of their harvest in summer ; and among them I found one which understood mine interpreter very well : whereupon very easily I gave them the like instruction of the cross which I had given to others behind . These people had cotton , but Cotton . they were not very careful to use the same : because there was none among them that knew the art of weaving , & to make apparel thereof . They asked me how they should set up their cross when they were come to their dwelling which was in the mountain , and whither A mountain . it were best to make and house about it , that it might not be wet , & whither they should hang any thing upon the arms thereof . I said no ; & that it sufficed to set it in a place where it might be seen of all men , until I returned : and lest peradventure any men of war should come that way , they ofired me more men to go with 
 301 
 me , saying that they were naughty men which I should find above ; but I would have none : nevertheless 20. of them went with me , which when I drew near unto those which were their enemies , they warned me thereof : and I found their centinels set upon their guard on their borders . On Saturday morning I found a great squadron of people sitting under and exceeding great arbour , & another part of them without : and when I saw that they rose not up , I passed along on my voyage : when they beheld this , and old man rose up which said unto me , Sir , why do you not receive victuals to eat of us , seeing you have taken food of others ? I answered , that I took nothing but that which was given me , & that I went to none but to such as requested me . Here without any stay they brought me victuals , saying unto me , that because I entered not into their houses , and stayed all day and all night in the river , and because I was the son of the Sun , all men were to receive me for their lord . I made them signs to fit down , and called that old man which mine interpreter understood , and asked him whose that country was , and whither the lord thereof were there , he said , yea : and I called him to me ; and when he was come , I embraced him , showing him great love : & when I saw that all of them took great pleasure at the friendly entertainment which I gave him , I put a shirt upon him , and gave him other trifles , and willed mine interpreter to use the like speeches to that lord which he had done to the rest ; and that done , I gave him a cross , which he received with a very good will , as the others did : and this lord went a great way with me , until I was called unto from the other side of the river , where the former old man stood with much people : to whom I gave another cross , using the like speech to them which I had unto the rest , to wit , how they should use it . Then following my way , I met with another great company of people , with whom came that very same old man whom mine interpreter under - 
 302 
 stood ; and when I saw their lord which he showed unto me , I prayed him to come with me into my boat , which he did very willingly , and so I went still up the river , and the old man came and showed me who were the chief lords : and I spoke unto them always with great courtesy , 8c all of them showed that they rejoiced much thereat , 8c spoke very well of my coming thither . At night I withdrew my self into the midst of the river , 8c asked him many things concerning that country : and I found him as willing 8c well disposed to show them me , as I was desirous to know them . I asked him of Cevola : and he told me he had been there , and that it was a goodly thing , 8c that the lord thereof was very well obeyed : and that there were other lords thereabouts , with whom he was at continual war . I asked him whither they had silver 8c gold , and he beholding certain bells , said they had metal of their colour . I inquired whither they made it there , and he answered me not , but that they brought it from a certain mountain , where and old woman dwelled . I demanded whither he had any knowledge of a river called Totonteac , he answered me not , but of another exceeding mighty river , wherein there were such huge Crocodiles , that of their hides they made bucklers , and that they worship the Sun neither more nor less then those which I had passed : and when they offer unto him the fruits of the earth , they say : Receive hereof , for thou hast created them , and that they loved him much , because he warmed them ; and that when he brake not forth , they were acold . Herein reasoning with him , he began somewhat to complain , saying unto me , I know not wherefore the Sun uses these terms with us , because he gives us not clothes , nor people to spin nor to weave them , nor other things which he gives to many other , and he complained that those of that country would not suffer them to come there , and would not give them of their corn . I told him that I would remedy this , whereat he remained very well satisfied . 
 3°3 
 A.D. 
 1540. 
 Cevola a goodly thing . 
 Gold and silver in a mountain near Cevola . 
 A mighty river . 
 This river seems to be Northward by the cold . 
 They are advertised by the Indians , wherefore the lord of Cevola killed the Negro , which went with Frier Marco , and of many other things : And of and old woman called Guatazaca , which lives in a lake and eateth no food . The description of a beast , of the skin whereof they make targets . The suspicion that they conceive of them , that they are of those Christians which were seen at Cevola , and how they cunningly save themselves . 
 THe next day which was Sunday before break of day , began their cry as they were wont : and this was the cry of 2. or 3. sorts of people , which had lyen all night near the rivers side , waiting for me : and they took Maiz & other corn in their mouth , and sprinkled me therewith , saying that that was the fashion which they used when they sacrificed unto the Sun : afterwards they gave me of their victuals to eat , and among other things , they gave me many white peason . I gave them a cross as I had done to the rest : and in the mean season that old man told them great matters of my doing , and pointed me out with his finger , saying , this is the lord , the son of the Sun : and they made me to comb my beard , & to set mine apparel handsomely which I beware upon my back . And so great was the confidence that they had in me , that all of them told me what things had passed , & dick pass among them , & what good or bad mind they bore one towards another . I asked them wherefore they imparted unto me all their secrets , and that old man answered me : Thou art our lord , & we ought to hide nothing from our lord . After these things , following on our way , I began again to inquire of him the state of Cevola , & whither he knew that those of this country had ever seen people like unto us : he answered me not , saving one Negro which beware about his legs & arms certain things which did ring . Your lordship 3°4 
 is to call to mind how this Negro which went with friar 2% Negro Marco was wont to wear bells , & feathers on his arms & legs , & that he carried plataeae of diverse colours , and that it was not much above a year ago since he came into those parts . I demanded upon what occasion he was killed ; and he answered me , That the lord of Cevola inquired of him whither he had other brothers : he answered that he had and infinite number , and that they had great store of weapons with them , and that they were not very far from thence . Which when he had herd , many of the chief men consulted together , and resolved to kill him , that he might not give news unto cause these his brothers , where they dwelled , & - that for this w^refire^te-cause they slew him , and cut him into many pieces , the Negro was which were divided among all those chief lords , that slalne . they might know assuredly that he was dead ; and also that he had a dog like mine , which he likewise killed a great while after . I asked him whither they of Cevola 
 had any enemies , and he said they had . And he reckoned They of unto me 14. or 15. lords which had war with them : C^^have and that they had mantles , and bows like those above d^their mentioned : howbeit he told me that I should find going enemies . up the river a people that had no war neither with their neighbours , nor with any other . He told me that they had 3. or 4. sorts of trees bearing most excellent 
 fruit to eat : and that in a certain lake dwelled and old Anoldewoman woman , which was much honoured and worshipped of called Guatu-them : and that she remained in a little house which or-e was there , and that she never did eat any thing : and shipped . 
 that there they made things which did found , and that many mantles , feathers and Maiz were given unto her . Antonio d^Es-I asked what her name was , and he told me that she was called Guatuzaca , and that thereabouts were many 1^ lords which in their life & death , used the like order which they of Cevola did , which had their dwelling in the summer with painted mantles , and in the winter dwelled in houses of wood of 2. or 3. lofts high : and that he had seen all these things , saving the old woman . 
 ix 305 u 
 This might be the crook backed ox of Quivira . 
 The sea side . 
 And when again I began to ask him more questions , he would not answer me , saying that he was weary of me : and many of those Indians coming about me , they said among themselves : Let us mark him well , that we may know him when he comes back again . The Monday following , the river was beset with people like to them , and I began to request the old man to tell me what people were in that country , which told me he thought I would soon forget them : and here he reckoned up unto me a great number of lords , and people at the least 200. And discoursing with him of their armour , he said that some of them had certain very large targets of leather , above two fingers thick . I asked him of what beasts skin they made them : and he described unto me a very great beast , like unto and Ox , but longer by a great handful , with broad feet , the legs as big as the thigh of a man , and the head seven handfuls long , the forehead of three spans , and the eyes bigger then ones fist , and the homes of the length of a men leg , out of which grew sharp points , and handful long , the forfeete and hinderfeete above seven handfuls big , with a wreathed tail , but very great ; and holding up his arms above his head , he said the beast was higher then that . After this he gave me information of another old woman which dwelled towards the sea side . I spent this day in giving crosses to those people as I had done unto the former . This old man that was with me leapt on shore , 8c fell in conference with another which that day had often called him ; and here both of them used many gestures in their speech , moving their arms , and pointing at me . Therefore I sent mine interpreter out , willing him to draw near unto them , and listen what they said ; and within a while I called him , and asked him whereof they talked , and he said , that he which made those gestures said unto the other , that in Cevola there were others like unto us with beards , and that they said they were Christians , and that both of them said that we were all of one company , 306 
 and that it were a good deed to kill us , that those others might have no knowledge of us , lest they might come to do them harm : and that the old man had answered him , this is the son of the Sun , & our lord , he does us good , and will not enter into our houses , although we request him thereunto : he will take away nothing of ours , he will meddle with none of our women , and that to be short , he had spoken many other things in my commendation and favour : and for all this the other steadfastly affirmed that we were all one , and that the old man said , Let us go unto him , and ask him whither he be a Christian as the other 
 1540. 
 The Savages treasons to be taken heed of . 
 be , or else the son of the Sun : and the old man 
 came unto me , and said : In the country of Cevola whereof you spoke unto me doe other men like unto you dwell . Then I began to make as though I wondered , and answered him , that it was impossible ; and they assured me that it was true , and that two men had seen them which came from thence , which reported that they had things which did shoot fire , and swords as we had . I asked them whither they had seen them with their own eyes ? and they answered no ; but that certain of their companions had seen them . Then he asked me whither I were the son of the Sun , I answered him yea . They said that those Christians of Cevola said so likewise . And I answered them that it might well be . Then they asked me if those Christians of Cevola came to join themselves with me , whither I would join with them : and I answered them , that they needed not to fear any whit at all , for if they were the sons of the Sun as they said , they must needs be my brothers , and would use towards all men the like love 
 Certain news of the Span yards at Cevola . 
 and courtesy which I used : whereupon hereat they seemed to be somewhat satisfied . 
 307 
 [ Chap. 7 
 It is told him that they are ten days journey distant from Cevola , and that there be Christians there , which make war against the lords of that country . Of the Sodomy which those Indians use with foure young men appointed for that service , which wear women's apparel . Seeing they could not send news of their being there to them of Cevola , they went back again down the river to their ships . 
 Cevola tenne r ■ ^en I prayed them to tell me how many days that ^fromMs^lace kingdom of Cevola , which they spoke of , was distant A desert of fr°m that river : and that man answered , that there was ten dayesjour - the space of tenne days journey without habitation , ne3 - and that he made none account of the rest of the way , because there were people to be found . Upon this advertisement I was desirous to certify Captain Francis Vazquez of my being there , and imparted my mind with my soldiers , among whom I found none that was willing to go thither , although I offered them many rewards in your lordship's name , only one Negro slave though with and evil will offr ed himself unto me to go thither : but I looked for the coming of those two Indians which they told me of , and herewithal we went on our way up the river against the stream in such sort as we had done before . Here that old man showed me as a strange thing a son of his clad in woman's apparel , exercising their office : I asked him how many there were of these among them , and he told me there were foure ; & that when any of them died , there was a search made of all the women with child which were in the country , and that the first son which was born of them , was appointed to do that duty belonging unto women , and that the women clad him in their apparel , saying , that seeing he was to do that which belonged to them , he should wear their apparel : these young men may not have carnail copulation with any woman : but all the young men of the country which are to marry , 308 
 may company with them . These men receive no kind of reward for this incestuous act of the people of that country , because they have liberty to take whatsoever they find in any house for their food . I saw likewise certain women which lived dishonestly among men : and I asked the old man whither they were married , who answered me noe , but they were common women , which lived apart from the married women . I came at length after these discourses to pray them to send for those Indians , which they said had been at Cevola , & they told me that they were eight days journey distant from that place , but that notwithstanding there was one among them which was their companion and which had spoken with them , as he met them on the way , when they went to see the kingdom of Cevola , and that they told him that he were not best to go any farther , for he should find there a fierce nation like us , and of the same qualities and making , which had fought much with the people of Cevola , because they had killed a Negro of their company , saying , Wherefore , have ye killed him ? what did he to you ? did he take any bred from you , or do you any other wrong ? and such like speech . And they said moreover , that these people were called Christians , which dwelled in a great house , & that many of them had oxen like those of Cevola , and Oxen of other little black beasts with wool and homes , & that evola-some of them had beasts which they road upon , which ran very swiftly ; & that one day before their departure , from sun rising until sun setting these Christians were all day in coming thither , & all of them lodged in that place where others had lodged , & that these two met with two Christians , which asked them whence they were , & whither they had fields sown with corn ; and they told them that they dwelled in a far country , and that they had corn , and that then they gave each of them a little cap , and they gave them another to carry to their other companions , which they promised to do , & departed quickly . When I understood this , I spoke 
 3°9 
 again with my company , to see if any one of them would go thither , but I found them unwilling as at the first , and they laid against me greater inconveniences . Then I called the old man to see if he would give me any people to go with me , & victuals to travel through A desert , that wilderness , but he laid before me many inconveniences & dangers , which I might incur in that voyage , showing me the danger that there was in passing by a Cumana , lord of Cumana , which threatened to make war upon them , because his people had entered into the others country to take a stag , and that I should not therefore depart thence without seeing him punished . And when I replied that in any wise I must needs go to Cevola , he willed me to surcease from that purpose , for they looked that that lord without all doubt would come to annoy them , 8c that therefore they could not leave their country naked to go with me , and that it would be better , that I would make and end of that war between them , and that then I might have their company to Cevola . And upon this point we grew to such variance , that we began to grow into choler , and in a rage he would have gone out of the boat , but I stayed him , and with gentle speeches began to pacific him , seeing that it imported me much to have him my friend : but for all my courtesies which I showed him , I could not altar him from his mind , wherein he still remained obstinate . In this mean while I sent a man away unto my ships to give them knowledge of the journey that I had determined to make . After this I prayed the old man that he would fetch him back again , because I had determined , that seeing I saw no means to be able to go to Cevola , 8c because I would stay no longer among those people , because they should not discover me , and likewise because I meant in person to visit my ships , with determination to return again up the river , carrying with me other companions , 8c leave there some which I had sick , and telling the old man and the rest that I would return , and leaving them satisfied the best I 
 310 
 could ( although they always said that I went away for fear ) I returned down the river : and that way which I had gone against the stream up the river in 15. days and and half , I made in my return in 2. days and and half , because the stream was great and very swift . In this wise going down the river , much people came to the banks , saying , Sir , wherefore do you leave us ? what discourtesy hath been done unto you ? did you 
 He returns in 2. days and and half to his ships . 
 not say that you would remain continually with us , and be our Lord ? And turn back again ? if any man above the river hath done you any wrong we will go with our weapons with you and kill him ; and such like words full of love and kindness . 
 Chap. 8. 
 When they came to their ships the Captain nam that coast La Campanna de la Cruz , and built a Chapel unto our Lady , and called the river El Rio de Buena Guia , and returned up the same again : when he came to Quicona and Coama the Lords of those places used him very courteously . 
 UPon mine arrival at my ships I found all my people in health , although very heavy for my long stay , and because the current had fretted fower of their cables , and that they had lost two anchors which were recovered . After we had brought our ships together , I caused them to bring them into a good harbour , & to give the carena to the ship called Sanct Peter , & to mend all things that were needful . And here assembling all my company together , I opened unto them what knowledge I had received of Francis Vasquez ; and how it might be that in those sixteene days space which I was in sailing up the river he might peradventure have some knowledge of me , and that I was minded to return up the river once again to try if I could find any means to join my self with him : and although some spoke against my determination , I caused all my boats to be made ready , because the ships had no need of 
 311 
 Mark what them . I caused one of them to be filled with wares things the of exchange , with corn and other seeds , with hens Spamardes & cocks of Castile , and departed up the river , leaving in new dis - order that in that province called Campanna de la Cruz emeries . they should built and Oratory or Chapel , and called it the Chapel of our Lady de la Buena Guia , and that Rio de buena they should call this river Rio de Buena Guia because Guia - that is your Lordship's Devise : I carried with me Nicolas Zamorano Pilot mayor , to take the height of the pole . And I departed on tuesday the fourteenth of September , & on Wednesday I came unto the first dwellings of the first Indians , which came running to hinder my passage , supposing that we had be other people , for we carried with us a fifer , & a drummer , and I was clad in other apparel then I went in before , when they saw me first of all : and when they knew me they stayed , though I could not grow unto perfect friendship with them , whereupon I gave them some of those seeds which I brought with me ; teaching them how they should sow them : and after I had sailed 3 leagues , my first interpretor came even to my boat to seek me with great joy , of whom I demanded wherefore he had left me , he told me that certain companions of his had led him away . I made him good countenance and better entertainment , because he should bear me company again , considering how much it did import me to have him with me . He excused himself because he 
 Parrats in stayed there to bring me certain feathers of Parrats , these parts . which he 
 gave me . I asked him what people these were , and whither they had any Lord : he answered me , yea ; and nam three or foure unto me , of foure or 25 names of people which he knew and that they had houses painted within , and that they had traffic with Two moons those of Cevola , and that in two moons he came into to Cevola . the country . He told me moreover many other names Lords , and other people , which I have written down particulars of in a b°oke ot mine , which 1 will bring my self unto that country . your Lordship . But I thought good to deliver this 
 312 
 ...... I54°‘ brief relation to Augustine Guerriero in this haven of Colima , that he might send it overland to your Lordship , to whom I have many other things to impart . 
 But to return to my journey , I arrived at Quicama , Quicoma . where the Indians came forth with great joy and gladness to receive me , advertising me that their Lord waited for my coming ; to whom when I was come I found that he had with him five or sixe thousand men without weapons , from whom he went apart with some two hundred only , all which brought victuals with them , and so he came towards me , going before the rest with great authority , and before him and on each side of him were certain which made the people stand aside , making him way to pass . He beware a garment close before and behind and open on both sides , fastened with buttons , wrought with white and black checker work , it was very soft and well made , being of the skins of certain delicate fish called Sea breams . Assoon as he was come to the waters side his servants took him up in their arms , and brought him into my boat , where I embraced him and received him with great joy , showing unto him much kindness : upon which entertainment his people standing by and beholding the same seemed not a little to rejoice . This Lord turning himself to his people willed them to consider my courtesy , and that he being of his own accord come unto me with a strange people , they might see how good a man I was , and with how great love I had entertained him , and that therefore they should take me for their Lord , and that all of them should become my servants , and do whatsoever 1 would command them . There I caused him to fit down , and to eat certain conserves of sugar which I had brought with me , and willed the interpreter to thank him in my name for the favour which he had done me in vouchsafing to come to see me , recommending unto him the worshipping of the cross , and all such other things as I had recommended to the 
 313 
 rest of the Indians ; namely that they should live in peace , and should leave off wars , and should continue always good friends together : he answered that of long time they had continued in wars with their neighbours , but that from thence forward he would command his people that they should give food to all strangers that passed through his kingdom , and that they should do them no kind of wrong , and that if any nation should come to invade him , he said he would tell them how I had commanded that they should live in peace , and if they refused the same , he would defend himself , and promised me , that he would never go to seek war , if others came not to invade him . Then I gave him certain trifles , as well of the seeds which I brought , as of the hens of Castile , wherewith he was not a little pleased . And at my departure I carried certain of his people with me , to make friendship between them and those other people which dwelled above the River : and here the interpreter came unto me , to crave leave to return home ; and I gave him certain gifts wherewith he departed greatly satisfied . 
 Coama . The next day I came to Coama , and many of them knew me not , seeing me clad in other aparrel , but the old man which was there as soon as he knew me leapt into the water , saying unto me , Sir , lo here is the man which you left with me , which came forth very joyful & pleasant declaring unto me the great courtesies which that people had showed him , saying that they had stroven together who should have him to his house , and that it was incredible to think what care they had at the rising of the Sun to hold up their hands and kneel before the Cross . I gave them of my seeds , and thanked them heartily for the good entertainment which they had showed my man , and they besought me that I would leave him with them , which I granted them until my return , and he stayed among them very willingly . Thus I went forward up the River , taking that old man in my company , which told me , that two 
 314 
 Indians came from Cumana to inquire for the Christians , Cumana . & that he had answered them that he knew none such , but that he knew one which was the son of the Sun , and that they had persuaded him to join with them Treason of thee to kill me and my companions . I wished him to lend me two Indians , and I would send word by them , that I would come unto them , and was desirous of their friendship , but if that they on the contrary would have war , I would make such a war with them , that should displease them . And so I passed through all that people , and some came and asked me , why I had not given them Crosses as well as the rest , and so I gave them some . 
 Chap. 9. 
 They go on land , and see the people worship the Cross which they had given them . The Captain causeth and Indian to make a draught of the country : he sends a Cross to the Lord of Cumana , and going down the River with the stream , he arriveth at his ships . Of the error of the Pilots of Cortez as touching the situation of this Coast . 
 THe next day I went on land to see certain cottages , and I found many women and children holding up their hands and kneeling before a Cross which I had given them . When I came thither I did the like my self ; and conferring with the old man , he began to inform me of as many people and Provinces as he knew . And when evening was come I called the old man to come and lodge with me in my boat ; he answered that he would not go with me because I would weary him with asking him questions of so many matters : I told him that I would request him nothing else but that he would set me down in a chart as much as he knew concerning that River , and what manner of people those were which dwelled upon the banks thereof on both sides : which he did willingly . And then he requested me that I would describe my country unto him , as he had done his unto me . And for to 
 315 
 content him , I caused a draught of certain things to be made for him . The next day I entered between certain very high mountains , through which this River passes with a straight channel , and the boats went up against the stream very hardly for want of men to draw the same . Here certain Indians came and told me , that in the same place , there were certain people of Cumana , And Enchanter , and among the rest and enchanter , who inquired which way we would pass ; & they telling him that we meant to pass by the River , he set certain canes on both sides thereof , through which we passed , without receiving any kind of damage which they intended against us . Thus going forward I came unto the house of the old man which was in my company , and here I caused a very high Cross to be set up , whereupon I engraved certain letters to signify that I was come thither : and this I did , that if by chance any of the people of the generail Vasquez de Coronado should come thither , they might have knowledge of my being there . At length seeing I could not attain to the knowledge of that which I sought for , I determined to return back unto my ships . And being ready to depart there arrived two Indians , which by means of the interpreters of the old man , told me that they were sent to me , and that they were of Cumana , and that their Lord could not come himself , because he was far from that place , but desired me to signify unto him what my pleasure was . I told them , that I wished that he would always embrace peace , and that I was coming to see that country , but being enforced to return back down the River I could not now do it , but that hereafter I would return , and that in the mean season they should give that Cross unto their Lord , which they promised me to do , and they went directly to carry him that Cross with certain This River feathers which were on the same . Of these I sought to he^up^n ' understand what people dwelled upward upon the banks he^tra^ thee & iverJ which gave me knowledge of many people , veiled . and told me that the River went far more up into the 
 316 
 land then I had yet seen , but that they knew not the head thereof , because it was very far into the country , and that many other Rivers fell into the same . 
 Having learned thus much the next day morning I returned down the River , and the day following I came where I had left my Spaniard , with whom I spoke , and told him that all things had gone well with me , and that at this time and the former I had gone above 30 leagues into the country . The Indians of that place inquired of me what the cause was of my departure , and when I would return ; to whom I answered , that I would return shortly . Thus sailing down the stream , a woman leapt into the water crying unto us to stay for her , and she came into our boat , and crept under a bench , from whence we could not make her to come out : I understood that she did this , because her husband had taken unto him another wife , by whom he had children , saying that she meant not to dwell any longer with him , seeing he had taken another wife . Thus she and another Indian came with me of their own accord , and so I came into my ships , and making them ready we proceeded home on our voyage , coasting and oftentimes going on land , and entering a great way into the country , to see if I could learn any news of Captain Francis Vasquez and his company ; of whom I could have no other knowledge , but such as I learned in the aforesaid River . I bring with me many acts of taking possession of all that Coast . And by the situation of the River , and the height which I took , I find that that which the Master's and Pilots of the Marquess took is false , & that they were deceived by 2 degrees , and I have sailed beyond them above 4 degrees . I sailed up He sailed it , the River 8 5 leagues , where I saw and learned all the the 
 particulars before mentioned , and many other things ; ' whereof when it shall please God to give me leave to kiss your Lordship's hands , I will deliver you the full and perfect relation . I think my self to have had 
 317 
 very good fortune , in that I found DONE Luis de Castilia , The port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima . Galiot of the Adelantado came upon me , which was there with the rest of his fleet , and commanded me to strike sail , which seeming a strange thing unto me , and not understanding in what state things were in Nueva Espanna , I went about to defend my self , and not to do it . In the mean while came DONE Luis de Castilia in a boat and conferred with me , and I lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the said fleet road , and I gave unto him this relation ( and to avoid striffe I determined to sail away by night ) which relation I carried about me briefly written ; for I always had a purpose to send the same , as soon as I should touch upon Nueva Espanna , to advertise your Lordship of my proceedings . 
 