A discourse written by one Miles Philips Englishman , one of the company put on shore Northward of Panuco , in the West Indies 
 by M. John Hawkins 1568. containing many special things of that country and of the Spanish government , but specially of ' ’ 
 cruelties used to our Englishmen , among the rest to him self for the of 15. or 16. years together , until by and happy means he was delivered 
 1. The Jesus . 
 2. The Minion . 
 ^ . TheWilliam and John. 
 4. TheJudith . 
 5. The Angel . 
 6. The Swallow . 
 their and 
 space good from 
 This Fleet consisted of 6. ships . 
 their bloody hands , and returned into his own Country . An. 1582. 
 Chap. 1. 
 Wherein is showed the day and time of our departure from the coast of England , with the number and names of the ships , their Captains and Master's , and of our traffic and dealing upon the coast of Africa . 
 Pon munday the second of October 1567. the weather being reasonable fair , our general M. John Hawkins , having commanded all his Captains and Master's to be in a readiness to make sail with him , he himself being embarked in the Jesus , whereof was appointed for Master Robert Barret , hoist sail , and departed from Plymouth upon his intended voyage for the parts of Africa , and America , being accompanied with five other sail of ships , as namely the Minion , wherein went for Captain M. John Hampton , and John Garret Master . The William and John , wherein was Captain Thomas Bolton , and James Raunce Master . The Judith , in whom was Captain M. Francis Drake afterwards knight , and the Angel , whose Master , as also the Captain and Master of the Swallow I now remember not . And so 398 
 sailing in company together upon our voyage until the tenth of the same month , and extreme storm then took us near unto Cape Finister , which dured for the space of foure days , and so separated our ships , that we had lost one another , and our general finding the Jesus to be but in ill case , was in mind to give over the voyage , and to return home . Howbeit the eleventh of the same month the Seas waxing calm , and the wind coming fair he altered his purpose , and held on the former intended voyage : And so coming to the island of Gomera being one of the islands of the Canaries , where according to and order before appointed , we met with all our ships which were before dispersed , we then took in fresh water and departed from thence the fourth of November , and holding on our course , upon the eightenth day of the same month we came to and anchor upon the coast of Africa , at Cape Verde in twelve fathom water ; and here our general landed certain of our men , to the number of 160. or thereabouts , seeking to take some 
 ros . And they going up into the Country for the space of sixe miles , were encountered with a great number of the Negroes : who with their envenomed arrows did hurt a great number of our men , so that they were enforced to retire to the ships , in which conflict they recovered but a few Negroes , and of these our men which were hurt with their envenomed arrows , there died to the number of seven or eight in very strange manner , with their mouths shut , so that we were forced to put sticks and other things into their mouths to keep them open , and so afterwards passing the time upon the coast of Guinea , until the twelfth of January , we obtained by that time the number of 150. Negros . And being ready to depart from the Sea coast , there was a Negro sent as and Ambassador to our general , from a King of the Negroes , which was oppressed with other Kings his bordering neighbours , desiring our general to grant him succour and 
 399 
 The William and John separated and never after met with the fleet . 
 aid against those his enemies , which our general granted unto , and went himself in person a land , with the number of two hundreth of our men or thereabouts , and the said King which had requested our aid , did join his force with ours , so that thereby our general assaulted , and set fire upon a Town of the said King his enemies , in which there was at the least the number of eight or ten thousand Negroes , and they perceiving that they were not able to make any resistance sought by flight to save themselves , in which their flight there were taken prisoners to the number of eight or nine hundreth , which our general ought to have had for his share : howbeit the Negro King which requested our aid , falsifying his word and promise , secretly in the night conveyed himself away with as many prisoners as he had in his custody : but our general notwithstanding finding himself to have now very near the number of 500. Negros thought it best without longer abided to depart with them , and such merchandise as he had from the coast of Africa , towards the West Indies , and therefore commanded with all diligence to take in fresh water and fuel , and so with speed to prepare to depart . Howbeit before we departed from thence , in a storm that we had , we lost one of our ships , namely the William and John , of which ship and of her people , we herd no tidings during the time of our voyage . 
 Chap. 2. 
 Wherein is showed the day and time of our departure from the coast of Africa , with the day and time of our arrival in the West Indies , also of our trade , and traffic there , and also of the great cruelty that the Spaniards used towards us , by the Viceroy his direction , and appointment , falsifying his faith and promise given , and seeking to have entrapped us . 
 A LI things being made in a readiness , at our general his appointment , upon the thirde day of Februarie 1568. we departed from the coast of Africa , having the 400 
 weather somewhat tempestuous , which made our passage the more hard ; and sailing so for the space of 52. days , upon the 27. of March 1568. we came in sighed of and island called Dominica , upon the coast of America in the West Indies , situated in 14. degrees of latitude , and 322. of longitude : from thence our general coasted from place to place , ever making traffic with the Spaniards and Indians as he might , which was somewhat hardly obtained , for that the King had straightly charged all his governors in those parts not to trade with any : yet notwithstanding , during the months of April and May , our general had reasonable trade and traffic , and courteous entertainment in sundry places , as at Margarita , Coragao , and else where , till we came to Cape de la vela , and Rio de Hacha , ( a place from whence all the pearls do come : ) the governor there would not by any means permit us to have any trade or traffic , nor yet suffer us to take in fresh water : by means whereof our general for the avoiding of famine and thirst about the beginning of June , was inforced to land two hundreth of our men , and so by main force and strength to obtain that which by no fair means he could procure : And so recovering the Town with the loss of two of our men , there was a secret and peaceable trade admitted , and the Spaniards came in by night , and bought of our Negroes to the number of 200. and upward , and of our other merchandise also . From thence we departed for Carthagena , where the Governor was so straight , that we could not obtain any traffic there , and so for that our trade was near finished , our general thought it best to depart from thence the rather for the avoiding of certain dangerous storms called the Huri-canos , which accustomed to begin there about that time of the year , & so the 24. of July 1568. we departed from thence directing our course North : and leaving the island of Cuba upon our right hand , to the Eastward of us , and so sailing towards Florida upon the 12. of August and extreme tempest arose , which dured for the space of 
 ix 401 2C 
 Mexico 60. leagues from 8. Juan de Ullua . 
 8 days , in which our ships were most dangerously tossed and beaten hither , & thither , so that we were in continual fear to be drowned by reason of the shallowness of the coast , and in the end we were constrained to flee for succour to the port of S. John de Ullua , or Vera Cruz , situated in 19. degrees of latitude , and in 279. degrees of longitude , which is the port that serves for the City of Mexico : in our seeking to recover this port our general met by the way three small ships that carried passengers , which he took with him , and so the sixtenth of September 1568. we entered the said port of S. John de Ullua . The Spaniards there supposing us to have be the King of Spaines Fleet , the chief officers of the Country thereabouts came presently aboard our general , where perceiving themselves to have made and unwise adventure , they were in great fear to have be taken and stayed : howbeit our general did use them all very courteously . In the said port there were twelve ships which by report had in them in treasure to the valve of two hundreth thousand pound all which being in our general his power and at his devotion , he did freely set at liberty , as also the passengers which he had before stayed , not taking from any of them all the valve of one groat : only he stayed two men of credit and account , the one nam DONE Laurenzo de Alva , and the other DONE Pedro de Rivera , and presently our general sent to the Viceroy to Mexico which was threescore leagues off , certifying him of our arrival there by force of weather , desiring that forasmuch as our Queen his Sovereign , was the king of Spaine his loving sister and friend , that therefore he would , considering our necessities and wants , furnish us with victuals for our Navy , and quietly suffer us to repair and amend our ships . And furthermore that at the arrival of the Spanish Fleet which was there daily expected and looked for , to the end that there might not quarrel arise between them , and our general and his company for the breach of amity , he humbly requested of his excellency , that there 
 402 
 might in this behalf some special order be taken . This message was sent away the 16. of September 1568. it being the very day of our arrival there . 
 The next morning being the sevententh of the same month , we descried 13. sail of great ships : and after that our general understood , that it was the king of Spaines Fleet then looked for , he presently sent to advertise the general hereof , of our being in the said port , and giving him further to understand , that before he should enter there into that harbour , it was requisite that there should pass between the two Generals some order and conditions to be observed on either part , for the better contriving of peace between them and theirs , according to our Generals request made unto the Viceroy . And at this instant our general was in a great perplexity of mind , considering with himself that if he should keep out that Fleet from entering into the port , a thing which he was very well able to do with the help of God , then should that Fleet be in danger of present shipwreck and loss of all their substance , which amounted unto the valve of one million and eight Itisputdowne hundreth thousand pounds . Again he saw that if he suffered them to enter , he was assured that they ns^t ' would practise by all manner of means to betray him relation . and his , and on the other side the haven was so little , that the other Fleet entering , the ships were to ride one hard aboard of another . Also he saw that if their Fleet should perish by his keeping of them out , as of necessity they must if he should have done so , then stood he in great fear of the Queen our Sovereigns displeasure in so weighty a cause : therefore did he choose the least evil , which was to suffer them to enter under assurance , and so to stand upon his guard , and to defend himself and his from their treasons which we were well assured they would practise , and so the messenger being returned from DONE Martin de Henriques , the new Viceroy , who came in the same Fleet , and had sufficient authority to command in all cases both 
 403 
 4. Articles concluded upon , betwixt the English y the Spaniards ; although the treacherous Spaniards kept none of them . 
 by Sea and by land in this province of Mexico or new Spaine , did certify our general , that for the better maintenance of amity between the king of Spaine and our Sovereign , all our requests should be both favourably granted , and faithfully performed : signifying further that he herd and understood of the honest and friendly dealing of our general , towards the king of Spaines subject's in all places where he had be , as also in the said port : so that to be brief our requests were articled , and set down in writing . Viz. 
 1 The first was that we might have victuals for our money , and license to fell as much wares , as might suffice to furnish our wants . 
 2 The second , that we might be suffered peaceably to repair our ships . 
 3 The thirde that the island might be in our possession during the time of our abided there , In which island our general for the better safety of him and his , had already planted and placed certain Ordinance which were eleven pieces of brass , therefore he required that the same might so continue , and that no Spaniard should come to land in thee . said island , having or wearing any kind of weapon about him . 
 4 The fourth and the last , that for the better and more sure performance and maintenance of peace , and of all the conditions , there might twelve gentlemen of credit be delivered of either part as hostages . 
 These conditions were concluded and agreed upon in writing by the Viceroy and signed with his hand , and sealed with his seal , and 10. hostages upon either part were received . And further it was concluded that the two Generals should meet , and give faith each to other for the performance of the premises . All which being done , the same was proclaimed by the found of a trumpet , & commandment was given that none of either part should violate or break the peace upon pain of death : thus at the end of three days all was concluded , and the Fleet entered the port , the ships 
 404 
 saluting one another as the manner of the Sea does require : the morrow after being friday we laboured on all sides in placing the English ships by themselves , & the Spanish ships by themselves , the Captains and inferior persons of either part , offering , and showing great courtesy one to another , and promising great amity upon all sides . Howbeit as the sequel showed , the Spaniards meant nothing less upon their parts . For the Viceroy and governor thereabouts had secretly at land assembled to the number of 1000. chosen men , and well appointed , meaning the next thursday being the 24. of September at dinner time to assault us , and set upon us on all sides . But before I go any further , I think it not amiss briefly to describe the manner of the island as it then was , and the force and strength , that it is now of . For the Spaniards since the time of our Generals being there , for the better fortifying of the same place , have upon the same island built a fair Castle , fain cutie and bulwark very well fortified : this port was then at our being there , a little island of stones , not passed three faylaiuiqf foot above water in the highest place , and not passed a San Juan de bowshot over any way at the most , and it stands Ullua . from the main land , two bowshootes or more : and there is not in all this coast any other place for ships safely to arrive at : also the North winds in this coast are of great violence and force , and unless the ships be safely mored in , with their anchors fastened in this island , there is no remedy , but present destruction and shipwreck . All this our general wisely foreseeing , did provide that he would have the said island in his custody , or else the Spaniards might at their pleasure , have but cut our cables , and so with the first Northwind that blew we had had our passport , for our ships had gone a shore . But to return to the matter . 
 The time approaching that their treason must be put in practice , the same Thursday morning , some appearance thereof began to show it self , as shifting of weapons from ship to ship , and planting , and bending thpir 405 
 The valve of a Spanishvice-roy his faith . 
 The villainous treachery of the Spaniards and their cruelty . 
 Ordinance against our men that warded upon the land , with great repair of people : which apparent shows of breach of the Viceroys faith caused our general to send one to the Viceroy , to inquire of him what was meant thereby , which presently sent and gave order , that the Ordinance aforesaid , and other things of suspicion should be removed , returning answer to our general in the faith of a Viceroy , that he would be our defence , and safety from all villainous treachery : this was upon Thursday in the morning . Our general not being therewith satisfied , seeing they had secretly conveyed a great number of men aboard a great hulk or ship of theirs of sixe hundreth tun , which ship road hard by the Minion , he sent again to the Viceroy Robert Barret the Master of the Jesus , a man that could speak the Spanish tongue very well , and required that those men might be unshipt again , which were in that great hulk . The Viceroy then perceiving that their treason was thoroughly espied , stayed our Master , and sounded the Trumpet , and gave order that his people should upon all sides charge upon our men , which warded on shore , and else where , which struck such a maze , and sudden fear among us , that many gave place , and sought to recover our ships for the safety of themselves . The Spaniards which secretly were hid in ambush at land were quickly conveyed over to the island in their long boats , and so coming to the island , they slew all our men that they could meet with , without mercy . The Minion which had somewhat before prepared her self to avoid the danger , haled away and abided the first brunt of the 300 men that were in the great hulk : then they sought to fallen aboard the Jesus , where was a cruel fight , and many of our men slain : but yet our men defended themselves , and kept them out : so the Jesus also god lose , and joining with the Minion , the fight waxed hight upon all sides : but they having won and god our ordinance on shore , did greatly annoy us . In this fight there were two great ships of the 
 406 
 Spaniards sunk , and one burned , so that with their ships they were not able to harm us , but from the shore they beatrice us cruelly with our own ordinance , in such sort that the Jesus was very soar spoiled : and suddenly the Spaniards having fired two great ships of their own , they came directly against us , which bred among our men a marvellous fear . Howbeit the Minion which had made her sails ready , shifted for her self , without consent of the general , Captain or Master , so that very hardly our general could be received into the Minion : the most of our men that were in the Jesus shifted for themselves , and followed the Minion in the boat , and those which that small boat was not able to receive , were most cruelly slain by the Spaniards . Of our ships none escaped saving the Minion and the Judith : and all such of our men as were not in them were enforced to abide the tyrannous cruelty of the Spaniards . For it is a certain truth , that whereas they had taken certain of our men ashore , they took and hung them up by the arms upon high posts until the blood burst out of their fingers ends : of which men so used , there is one Copstow , and certain others yet alive , who by the merciful providence of the almighty , were long since 
 Copstoweoneof M. Hawkins men returned 
 arrived here at home in England , carrying still about with from ^ueva them ( and shall to their graves ) the marks and tokens of Espanna . 
 those inhumane and more then barbarous cruel dealings . 
 Chap. 3. 
 Wherein is showed , how that after we were escaped from the Spaniards , we were like to perish with famine at the Sea , and how our general , for the avoiding thereof was constrained to put half of his men on land , and what misery's we after that sustained among the Savage people , and how again we fell into the hands of the Spaniards . 
 AFter that the Viceroy , DONE Martin Henriques , had thus contrary to his faith and promise , most cruelly dealt with our general master Hawkins , at S. John de 
 407 
 Ullua , where most of his men were by the Spaniards slain and drowned , and all his ships sunk and burned , saving the Minion , and the Judith , which was a small bark of fiftie tun , wherein was then Captain master Francis Drake aforesaid : the same night the said bark lost us , we being in great necessity , and enforced to remove with the Minion two bow-shoote from the Spanish fleet , where we anchored all that night : and the next morning we weighed anchor , and recovered and Island a mile from the Spaniards , where a storm took us with a North wind , in which we were greatly distressed , having but two cables and two anchors left : for in the conflict before we had lost three cables and two anchors . The morrow after , the storm being ceased and the weather fair , we weighed , and set sail , being many men in number , and but small store of victuals to suffice us for any long time : by means whereof we were in despair and fear that we should perish through famine , so that some were in mind to yield themselves to the mercy of the Spaniards , other some to the Savages or Infidels , and wandering thus certain days in these unknown seas , hunger constrained us to eat hides , cats and dogs , mice , rats , parrats and munkies : to be short , our hunger was so great , that we thought it savoury and sweet whatsoever we could get to eat . 
 And on the eight of October we came to land again , in the bottom of the bay of Mexico , where we hoped to have found some inhabitants , that we might have had some relief of victuals , and a place where to repair our ship , which was so greatly bruised , that we were scarce able with our weary arms to keep forth the water : being thus oppressed with famine on the one side and danger of drowning on the other , not knowing where to find relief , we began to be in wonderful despair , and we were of many minds , among whom there were a great many that did desire our general to set them on land , making their choice rather to submit themselves to the mercy of the Savages or Infidels , then longer to 408 
 hazard themselves at sea , where they very well saw , that if they should remain together , if they perished not by drowning , yet hunger would enforce them in the end to eat one another : to which request our general did very willingly agree , considering with himself that it was necessary for him to lessen his number , both for the safety of himself & thee rest : and thereupon being resolved to set half his people ashore that he had then left alive , it was a world to see how suddenly men's minds were altered : for they which a little before desired to be set on land , were now of another mind , and requested rather to stay : by means where - [ III . 474 - . ] of our general was enforced for the more contentation of all men's minds , and to take away all occasions of offence , to take this order : First he made choice of such persons of service and account , as were needful to stay , and that being done , of those which were willing to go he appointed such as he thought might be best spared , and presently appointed that by the boat they should be set on shore , our general promising us that the next year he would either come himself , or else send to fetch us home . Here again it would have caused any stony heart to have relented to hear the pitiful moan that many did make , and how loath they were to depart : the weather was then somewhat stormy and tempestuous , and therefore we were to pass with great danger , yet notwithstanding there was no remedy , but we that were appointed to go away , must of necessity do so . Howbeit those that went They were put in the first boat were safely set on shore , but of them » » 2 5 
 which went in the second boat , of which number I ' ' ™ rth-my self was one , the seas wrought so high , that we panucJ0 tO } ie 8 could not attain to the shore , and therefore we were ef October constrained through the cruel dealing of John Hampton 1568. captain of the Minion , and John Sanders boatswain of the Jesus , and Thomas Pollard his mate , to leap out of the boat into the main sea , having more then a mile to shore , and so to shift for our selves , and either 
 409 
 Chichimici a ■ warlike and truel people . 
 to sink or swim . And of those that so were ( as it were ) thrown out , and compelled to leap into the sea , there were two drowned , which were of captain Blands men . 
 In the evening of the same day , it being Munday the eight of October , 1568 , when we were all come to shore , we found fresh water , whereof some of our men drunk so much , that they had almost cast themselves away , for we could scarce get life of them for the space of two or three hours after : other some were so cruelly swollen , what with the drinking in of the salt water , and what with the eating of the fruit which we found on land , having a stone in it much like and almond ( which fruit is called Capule ) that they were all in very ill case , so that we were in a manner all of us both feeble , faint and weak . 
 The next morning being Tewsday , the ninth of October , we thought it best to travel along by the sea coast , to seek out some place of habitation : ( whither they were Christians or Savages , we were indifferent , so that we might have wherewithal ! to sustain our hungry bodies ) and so departing from and hill where we had rested all night , not having any dry thread about us , ( for those that were not wet being not thrown into the sea , were thoroughly wet with rain , for all the night it reigned cruelly : ) As we went from the hill , and were come into the plain , we were greatly troubled to pass for the grass and weeds that grew there higher then any man . On the left hand we had the sea , and upon the right hand great woods , so that of necessity we must needs pass on our way Westward , through those marshes ; and going thus , suddenly we were assaulted by the Indians , a warlike kind of people , which are in a manner as Canibals , although they do not feed upon men flesh as Canibals do . 
 These people are called Chichimici , and they use to wear their hair long , even down to their knees , they do also colour their faces green , yellow , read and blue , 410 
 which makes them to seem very ugly and terrible to behold . These people do keep wars against the Spaniards , of whom they have be oftentimes very cruelly handled : for with the Spaniards there is no mercy . They perceiving us at our first coming on land , supposed us to have be their enemies , the bordering Spaniards , and having by their forerunners descried what number we were , and how feeble and weak without armour or weapon , they suddenly according to their accustomed manner , when they encounter with any people in warlike sort , raised a terrible and huge cry , men as and so came running fiercely upon us , shooting off their arrows as thick as hail , unto whose mercy we were ’ 
 constrained to yield , not having among us any kind of armour , nor yet weapon , saving one caliver , and two old rusty swords , whereby to make any resistance , or to save our selves : which when they perceived , that we sought not any other then favour and mercy at their hands , and that we were not their enemies the Spaniards , they had compassion on us , and came and caused us all to fit down : and when they had a while surveyed , and taken a perfect view of us , they came to all such as had any coloured clothes among us , and those they did strip stark naked , and took their clothes away with them , but those that were appareled in black they did not meddle withal , and so went their ways , and left us without doing us any further hurt , only in the first brunt they killed eight of our men . Eight of our And at our departure , they perceiving in what weak slalne . case we were , pointed us with their hands which way we should go to come to a town of the Spaniards , which as we afterwards perceived , was not passed ten leagues from thence , using these words : Tampice , Tampice , Christiano , Tampice Christiano , which is as much ( we think ) as to say in English , at Tampice you shall find the Christians . The weapons that they 
 use are no other but bows and arrows , and their arm is so good , that they very seidome miss to hit 
 411 
 any thing that they shoot at . Shortly after they had left us stripped ( as aforesaid ) we thought it best to divide our selves into two companies , and so being separ-Anthony ated , half of us went under the leading of one Anthony Godard . Godard , who is yet a man alive , and dwells at this instant in the town of Plimmouth , whom before we chosen to be captain over us all , and those which went under his leading , of which number I Miles Philips was one , travailed Westward that way which the Indians with their hands had before pointed us to go . The other half went under the leading of one John Hooper , whom they did choose for their captain , & with the David company that went with him , David Ingram was one , Ingram . and ( j gy took their way and traveled Northward , and shortly after , within the space of two days , they were again encountered with the savage people , and their captain Hooper and two more of his company were slain : then again they divided themselves , and some held on their way still Northward , and other some , knowing that we were gone Westward , sought to meet with us again , as in truth there was about the number of 25 or 26 of them that met with us in the space of foure days again , and then we began to reckon among our selves , how many we were that were set on shore , and we found the number to be and hundred and foureteene , whereof two were drowned in the sea , and eight were slain at the first encounter , so that there remained and hundred and foure , of which 25 went Westward with us , and 52 to the North with Hooper and Ingram : and as Ingram since hath often told me , there were not passed three of their company slain , and there were but sixe and twenty of them that came again to us , so that of the company that went Northward , there is yet lacking , and not certainly herd of , the number of three and twenty men . And verily I do think that there are of them yet alive , and married in the said country , at Cibola , as hereafter I purpose ( God willing ) to discourse of more particularly , with the reason 
 412 
 and causes that make me so to think of them that were lacking , which were David Ingram , Twide , brown , and sundry others , whose names we could not remember . And being thus met again together , we traveled on still Westward , sometime thorough such thick woods , that we were enforced with cudgels to break away the brambles and bushes from tearing our naked bodies : other sometime we should travel thorough the plains , in such high grass that we could scarce see one another , and as we passed in some places , we should have of our men slain , and fallen down suddenly , being strooken by the Indians , which stood behind trees and bushes , in secret places , and so killed our men as they went by , for we went scatteringly in seeking of fruits to relieve our selves . We were also oftentimes greatly annoyed with a kind of fly , which in the Indian tongue is called Tequani , and the Spaniards called them Muskitos . There are also in the said country a number of other kind of flies , but none so noisome as these Tequanies be : you shall hardly see them they be so small , for they are scarce so big as a gnat ; they will suck ones blood marvelously , and if you kill them while they are sucking , they are so venomous that the place will swell extremely , even as one that is stung with a Wasp or Bee : but if you let them suck their fill , and to go away of themselves , then they do you no other hurt , but leave behind them a read spot somewhat bigger then a flea-biting . At the first we were terribly troubled with these kind of flies , not knowing their qualities , and resistance we could make none against them , being naked : as for cold we feared not any , the country there is always so warm . And as we traveled thus for the space of tenne or twelve days , our captain did oftentimes cause certain to go up into the tops of high trees , to see if they could descry any town or place of inhabitants , but they could not perceive any , and using often the same order to climb up into high trees , at the length they descried a 
 413 
 great river that fell from the Northwest into the main sea , and presently after , we herd and harquebus shot off , which did greatly encourage us , for thereby we knew that we were near to some Christians , and did therefore hope shortly to find some succour and comfort , and within the space of one hour after , as we traveled , we herd a cock crow , which was also no small joy unto us , and so we came to the North side of the river of Panuco , where the Spaniards have certain Salines , at which place it was that the harquebus was shot off , which before we herd : to which place we went not directly , but missing thereof , we left it about a bowshot upon our left hand : of this river we drank very greedily , for we had not met with any water in sixe days before , and as we were here by the river side resting our selves , and longing to come to the place where the cock did crow , and where the harquebus was shot off , we perceived many Spaniards upon the other side of the river , riding up and down on horseback , and they perceiving us , did suppose that we had been of the Indians their bordering enemies , the Chichimeci : the river was not past half a bow shoot over : and presently one of the Spaniards took and Indian boat called a Canoa , and so came over , being rowed by two Indians , and having taken the view of us , did presently row over back again to the Spaniards , who without any delay made out about the number of twenty horsemen , and embarking themselves in the Canoas , they led their horses by the reins swimming over after them , and being come over to that side of the river where we were , they saddled their horses , and being mounted upon them with their lances charged , they came very fiercely running at us . Our captain Anthony Godard seeing them come in that order , did persuade us to submit and yield our selves unto them , for being naked , as we at this time were , and without weapon , we could not make any resistance , whose bidding we obeyed , and upon the yielding of our selves , they perceived us to be Christians , and did call for more Canoas , and carried us over by foure 414 
 1568. and foure in a boat , and being come on the other side , they understanding by our captain how long we had be without meat , imparted between two and two a loaf of bred made of that country wheat , which the Spaniards call Maiz , of the bigness of our halfpenny loaves , which bred is nam in the Indian tongue Clashacally . This bred was very sweet and pleasant unto us , for we had not eaten any in a long time before : and what is it that hunger does not make to have a savoury and a delicate taste ? And having thus parted the bred among us , those which were men they sent afore to the town , having also many Indians inhabitants of that place to guard them : they which were young , as boys , and some such also as were feeble , they took up upon their horses , behind them , and so carried us to the town where they dwelled , which was very near distant a mile from the place where we came over . 
 This town is well situated , and well replenished with all kinds of fruits , as Oranges , Limons , Pomegranates , Apricoks , and Peaches , and sundry others , and is inhabited with a great number of tame Indians , or Mexicans , and had in it also at that time about the number of two hundred Spaniards , men , women , and children , beside Negroes . Of their Salines , which lie The Salines upon the West side of the river , more then a mile distant °fPan^o-from thence , they make a great profit , for it is and excellent good merchandise there : the Indians do buy much thereof , and carry it up into the country , and there fell it to their own country people , in doubling the price . 
 Also much of the Salt made in this place , is transported from thence by sea to sundry other places , as to Cuba , S. John de Ullua , and the other ports of Tamiago , and Tamachos , which are two barred havens West and by South above threescore leagues from S. John de Ullua . When we were all come to the town , the Governor there showed himself very severe unto us , and threatened to hang us all : and then he demanded what money we had , which in truth was very little , for the Indians which 415 
 we first met withal , had in a manner taken all from us , and of that which they left , the Spaniards which brought us over , took away a good part also : howbeit , from Anthony Godard the Governor here had a chain of gold , which was given unto him at Carthagena , by the Governor there , and from others he had some small store of money : so that we accounted that among us all he had the number of five hundred Pezos , beside the chain of gold . 
 And having thus satisfied himself , when he had taken all that we had , he caused us to be put into a little house much like a hogsty , where we were almost smothered : and before we were thus shut up into that little coat , they gave us some of the country wheat , called Mayz , sodden , which they feed their hogs withal . But many of our men which had be hurt by the Indians at our first coming on land , whose wounds were very soar and grievous , desired to have the help of their Surgeons to cure their wounds . The governor , and most of them all answered , that we should have none other Surgeon but the hangman , which should sufficiently heal us of all our griefs : and thus reviling us , and calling us English dogs , and Lutheran heretics , we remained the space of three days in this miserable state , not knowing what should become of us , waiting every hour to be bereft of our lives . 
 Chap. 4. 
 Wherein is showed how we were used in Panuco , and in what fear of death we were there , and how we were carried to Mexico to the Viceroy , and of our imprisonment there and at Tescuco , with the courtesies and cruelties we received during that time , and how in the end we were by proclamation given to serve as slaves to sundry gentlemen Spaniards . 
 UPon the fourth day after our coming thither , and there remaining in a perplexity , looking every hour when we should suffer death , there came a great number 416 
 of Indians and Spaniards weaponed to fetch us out of the house , and among them we espied one that brought a great many of new halters , at the sighed whereof we were greatly amazed , and made no other account but that we should presently have suffered death , and so crying and calling to God for mercy and forgiveness of our sins , we prepared our selves , making us ready to die : yet in the end , as the sequel showed , their meaning was not so : for when we were come out of the house , with those halters they bound our arms behind us , and so coupling us two and two together , they commanded us to march on through the town , and so along the country from place to place towards the city of Mexico , which is distant from Panuco West and by South the space of ninetie leagues , having only but two Spaniards to conduct us , they being accompanied with a great number of Indians warding on either side with bows and arrows , lest we should escape from them . And traveling in this order , upon the second day at night we came unto a town which the Indians call Nohele , and the Spaniards call it Santa Maria : in which town there is a house of white friars , which did very courteously use us , and gave us hight meat , as mutton and broth , and garments also to cover our selves withal , made of white bays : we fed very greedily of the meat , and of the Indian fruit , called Noc-hole , which fruit is long and small , much like in fashion to a little cucumber . Our greedy feeding caused us to fallen sick of hight burning agues . And here at this place one Thomas Baker one of our men died of a hurt : for he had be before shot with and arrow into the throat at the first encounter . 
 The next morrow about ten of the clock , we departed from thence , bound two 8c two together , and guarded as before , and so travailed on our way towards Mexico , till we came to a town within forty leagues of Mexico , nam Mestitlan , where is a house of black friars : and in this town there are about the number of three hundred Spaniards , both men , women , and children . 
 ix 417 2D 
 [ HIM . 477-1 
 The friars sent us meat from the house ready dressed , and the friars , and the men and women used us very courteously , and gave us some shirts and other such things as we lacked . Here our men were very sick of their agues , and with eating of another fruit called in the Indian tongue , Guiaccos , which fruit did bind us so soar , that for the space of tenne or twelve days we could not ease our selves . The next morning we departed from thence with our two Spaniards and Indian guard , as aforesaid . Of these two Spaniards the one was and aged man , who all the way did very courteously entreat us , and would carefully go before to provide for us both meat and things necessary to the uttermost of his power : the other was a young man who all the way traveled with us , and never departed from us , who was a very cruel caitiff , and he carried a javelin in his hand , and sometime when as our men with very feebleness and faintness were not able to go so fast as he required them , he would take his javelin in both his hands , and strike them with the same between the neck and the shoulders so violently , that he would strike them down ; then would he cry , and say , Marchad , marchad Ingleses perros , Luterianos , enemigos de Dios : which is as much to say in English , as March , march on you English dogs , Lutherans , enemies to God . And the next day we came to a town called Pachuca , and there are two places of that name : as this town of Pachuca , and the mines of Pachuca , which are mines of silver , and are about sixe leagues distant from this town of Pachuca towards the Northwest . 
 Here at this town the good old man our Governor suffered us to stay two days and two nights , having compassion of our sick and weak men , full soar against the mind of the young man his companion . From thence we took our journey , and traveled foure or five days by little villages , and Stantias , which are farms or dairy houses of the Spaniards , and ever as we had need , the good old man would still provide us sufficient of meats , fruits , and water to sustain us . At the end of which 418 
 five days we came to a town within five leagues of Mexico , which is called Quoghliclan , where we also stayed one whole day and two nights , where was a fair house of grey friars , howbeit we saw none of them . Here we were told by the Spaniards in the town , that we had not passed fifteene English miles from thence to Mexico , whereof we were all very joyful and glad , hoping that when we came thither , we should either be relieved , and set free out of bonds , or else be quickly dispatched out of our lives : for seeing our selves thus carried bound from place to place , although some used us courteously , yet could we never joy , nor be merry till we might perceive our selves set free from that bondage , either by death or otherwise . 
 The next morning we departed from thence on our journey towards Mexico , and so traveled till we came within two leagues of it , where there was built by the Spaniards a very fair church , called our Ladies church , in which there is and image of our Lady of silver & gilded , being as high , & as large as a tall woman , in which church , and before this image , there are as many lamps of silver as there be days in the year , which upon high days are all lighted . Whensoever any Spaniards pass by this church , although they be on horse back , they will alight , and come into the church , and kneel before the image , and pray to our Lady to defend them from all evil ; so that whither he be horseman or footman he will not pass by , but first go into the Church , and pray as aforesaid , which if they do not , they think and believe that they shall never prosper : which image they call in the Spanish tongue , Nuestra sennora de Guadalupe . At Nuestr a this place there are certain cold baths , which arise , spring - Sennora-ing up as though the water did sees : the water whereof is somewhat brackish in taste , but very good for any that have any soar or wound , to wash themselves therewith , for as they say , it heals many : and every year once upon our Lady day the people use to repair thither to offer , and to pray in that Church before the image , and 
 419 
 Certain Englishmen taken prisoners at the fight at Sant Juan de Ullua . 
 they say that our Lady of Guadalupe doth work a number of miracles . About this Church there is not any town of Spaniards that is inhabited , but certain Indians do dwell there in houses of their own country building . 
 Here we were met with a great number of Spaniards on horseback , which came from Mexico to see us , both gentlemen , and men of occupations , and they came as people to see a wonder : we were still called upon to march on ; and so about foure of the clock in the afternoon of the said day we entered into the city of Mexico , by the way or street called La call Santa Catherina : and we stayed not in any place till we came to the house or palace of the Vice Roy , DONE Martin Henriques , which stands in the midst of the city , hard by the market place , called La plaga deal Marquese . We had not stayed any long time at this place , but there was brought us by the Spaniards from the market place great store of meat , sufficient to have satisfied five times so many as we were : some also gave us hats , & some gave us money : in which place we stayed for the space of two hours , & from thence we were conveyed by water in two large Canoas to and hospital where as certain of our men were lodged , which were taken before the fight at S. John de Ullua : we should have gone to our Ladies hospitali , but that there were also so many of our men taken before at that fight that there was no room for us . After our coming thither , many of the company that came with me from Panuco died within the space of fourteene days : soon after which time we were taken forth from that place , and put altogether into our Ladies hospitali , in which place we were courteously used , and visited oftentimes by virtuous gentlemen and gentlewomen of the city , who brought us diverse things to comfort us withal , as succats and marmilads , and such other things , and would also many times give us many things , and that very liberally . In which hospitali we remained for the 420 
 space of sixe months , until we were all whole and found of body , and then we were appointed by the Vice Roy to be carried unto the town of Tescuco , which is from Mexico Southwest distant eight leagues : in which town there are certain houses of correction and punishment for ill people called Obraches , like to Bridewell here in London : into which place diverse Indians are sold for slaves , some for ten years , and some for twelve . It was no small grief unto us when we understood that we should be carried thither , and to be used as slaves , we had rather be put to death : howbeit there was no remedy , but we were carried to the prison of Tescuco , where we were not put to any labour , but were very straitly kept , & almost famished , yet by the good providence of our merciful God , we happened there to meet with one Robert Sweet - Robert ing , who was the son of and Englishman born of a feting and Spanish woman : this man could speak very good Eng - * lish , and by his means we were helped very much with victuals from the Indians , as mutton , hens , & bred . 
 And if we had not be so relieved , we had surely perished : and yet all the provision that we had got that way was but slender . And continuing thus straightly kept in prison there for the space of two months , at the length we agreed among our selves to break forth of prison , come of it what would , for we were minded rather to suffer death then longer to live in that miserable state . And so having escaped out of prison , we knew not what way to fly for the safety of our selves , the night was dark , and it reigned terribly , and not having any guide , we went we knew not whither , and in the morning , at the appearing of the day , we perceived our selves to be come hard to the city of Mexico , which is 24 English miles from Tescuco . The day being come we were espied by the Spaniards , & pursued , and taken , and brought before the Vice Roy and head justices , who threatened to hang English us for breaking of the kings prison . Yet in the end they E^emen sent us into a garden belonging to the Vice Roy , & 6 ’ 
 coming thither , we found there our English gentlemen 
 421 
 which were delivered as hostages when as our General was betrayed at S. John de Ullua , as is aforesaid , and with them we also found Robert Barret , the Master of the Jesus , in which place we remained labouring and doing such things as we were commanded , for the space of 4 months , having but two sheep a day allowed to Almost and suffice us all , being very near a hundred men , and for bred we had every man two loaves a day , of the quantity prhonenTn one halfpenny loaf . At the end of which foure Mexico , months , they having removed our gentlemen hostages , and the Master of the Jesus to a prison in the Vice Roy his own house , did cause it to be proclaimed , that what gentleman Spaniard soever was willing , or would have any English man to serve him , and be bound to keep him forth coming , to appear before the Justices within one month after notice given , that they should repair to the said garden , and there take their choice : which proclamation was no sooner made , but the gentlemen came and repaired to the garden amain , so that happy was he that could soonest get one of us . 
 Chap. 5. 
 Wherein is showed in what good sort , and how wealthily we lived with our master's until the coming of the Inquisition , when as again our sorrows began a fresh : Of our imprisonment in the holy house , and of the severe judgement and sentences given against us , and with what rigour and cruelty the same were executed . 
 THe gentlemen that thus took us for their servants or slaves did new apparel us through out , with whom we abided , doing such service as they appointed us unto , which was for the most part to attend upon them at the table , and to be as their chamberlains , & to wait upon them when they went abroad , which they greatly accounted of ; for in that country not Spaniard will serve one another , but they are all of them attended and served by Indians weekly , and by Negroes which 422 
 be their slaves during their life . In this sort we remained and served in the said city of Mexico , and thereabouts for the space of a year and somewhat longer . Afterwards many of us were by our master's appointed to go to sundry of their Mines where they had to do , and to be as overseers of the Negroes and Indians that laboured there . In which mines many of us did profit & gain greatly : for first we were allowed three hundred Pezos a man for a year , which is threescore pound sterling , and beside that the Indians and Negroes which wrought under our charge , upon our well using & entreating of them , would at times as upon Saturdayes when they had left work , labour for us , and blow as much silver as should be worth unto us 3 marks or thereabouts , every mark being worth 6 Pezos , and a half of their money , which 19 Pezos & a half , is worth 4IL 10s . of our money . Sundry weeks we did gain so much by this means beside our wages , that many of us became very rich , and were worth three thousand or foure thousand Pezos , for we lived and gained thus in those Mines some three or foure years . As concerning those Gentlemen which were delivered as hostages , and that were kept in prison , in the Viceroy his house , after that we were gone from out the garden to serve sundry gentlemen as aforesaid , they remained prisoners in the said house for the space of 4 months after their coming thither , at the end whereof the fleet being ready to depart from S. John de Ullua , to go for Spaine , the said Gentlemen were sent away into Spaine with the fleet , where as I have herd it credibly reported , many of them died with the cruel handling of the Spaniards in the Inquisition house , as those which have be delivered home after they had suffered the persecution of that house can more perfectly declare . Robert Barret also master of the Jesus , was sent away with the fleet into Spaine the next year following , where afterwards he suffered persecution in the Inquisition , and at the last was con - 
 423 
 demeaned to be burned , and with him one more of our men whose name was John Gilbert . 
 Now after that sixe years were fully expired since our first coming into the Indies , in which time we had be imprisoned and served in the said countries' as is before truly declared , In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred seventie foure , the Inquisition began to be established in the Indies , very much against the minds of many of the Spaniards themselves : for never until this time since their first conquering and planting in the Indies , were they subject to that bloody and cruel Inquisition . The chief Inquisitor was nam DONE Pedro Moya de Contreres , and John de Bovilla his companion , and John Sanches the Fischall , and Pedro de los Rios , the Secretary : they being come and settled , and placed in a very fair house near unto the white Friars , considering with themselves that they must make and entrance and beginning of that their most detestable Inquisition here in Mexico , to the terror of the whole country , thought it best to call us that were Englishmen first in question , and so much the rather , for that they had perfect knowledge and intelligence that many of us were become very rich , as hath be already declared , and therefore we were a very good booty and pray to the Inquisitors : so that now again began our sorrows a fresh , for we were sent for , and sought out in all places of the country , and proclamation made upon pain of losing of goods and excommunication , that no man should hide or keep secret any Englishmen or any part of their goods . By means whereof we were all soon apprehended in all places , and all our goods seized and taken for the Inquisitors use , and so from all parts of the country we were conveyed and sent as prisoners to the city of Mexico , and there committed to prison in sundry dark dungeons , where we could not see but by candle light , & were never past two together in one place , so 
 424 
 that we saw not one another , neither could one of us tell what was become of another . Thus we remained close imprisoned for the space of a year and a half , and others for some less time , for they came to prison ever as they were apprehended . During which time of our imprisonment , at the first beginning we were often called before the Inquisitors alone , and there severely examined of our faith , and commanded to say the Pater noster , the Have Maria , & the Creed in Latin , which God knoweth a great number of us could not say , otherwise then in the English tongue . And having the said Robert Sweating who was our friend at Tescuco always present with them for and interpreter , he made report for us , y* in our own country speech we could say them perfectly , although not word for word as they were in Latin . Then did they proceed to demand of us upon our oaths what we did believe of the Sacrament , & whither there did remain any bred or wine after the words of consecration , yea or no , and whither we did not believe that the host of bred which the priest did hold up over his head , and the wine that was in the chalice , was the very true and perfect body & blood of our Saviour Christ , yea or no : To which if we answered not yea , then was there no way but death . Then they would demand of us what we did remember of our selves , what opinions we had held , or had been taught to hold contrary to the same while we were in England : to which we for the safety of our lives were constrained to say , that we never did believe , nor had be taught otherwise then has before we had said . Then would they charge us that we did not tell them the truth , that they knew the contrary , and therefore we should call our selves to remembrance , & make them a better answer at the next time , or else we should be racked , and made to confess the truth whither we would or no . And so coming again before them the next time , we were still demanded of our belief while we 
 425 
 A.D. 
 1575 - 
 were in England , and how we had been taught , & also what we thought or did know of such of our own company as they did name unto us , so that we could never be free from such demands , and at other times they would promise us , that if we would tell them truth , then should we have favour & be set at liberty , although we very well knew their fair speeches were but means to entrap us , to the hazard and loss of our lives : howbeit God so mercifully wrought for us by a secret means that we had , that we kept us still to our first answer , & would still say that we had told the truth unto them , and knew no more by our selves nor any other of our fellows then as we had declared , and that for our sins and offences in England against God and our Lady , or any of his blessed Saints , we were heartily sorry for the same , and did cry God mercy , and besought the Inquisitors for Gods sake , considering that we came into those countries' by force of weather , & against our wills , and that never in all our lives we had either spoken or done any thing contrary to their laws , and therefore they would have mercy upon us . Yet all this would not serve ; for still from time to time we were called upon to confess , and about the space of 3 months before they proceeded Our men are to their severe judgement , we were all racked , and some cruelly racked . inforced to utter that against themselves , which afterwards cost them their lives . And thus having got from our own mouths matter sufficient for them to proceed in judgement against us , they caused a large scaffold to be made in the midst of the market place in Mexico right over against the head church , & 14 or 15 days before the day of their judgement , with the found of a trumpet , and the noise of their Attabalies , which are a kind of drums , they did assemble the people in all parts of the city : before whom it was then solemnly proclaimed , that whosoever would upon such a day repair to the market place , they should hear the sentence of the holy Inquisition against the 426 
 English heretics , Lutherans , and also see the same put in execution . Which being done , and the time approaching of this cruel judgement , the night before they came to the prison where we were , with certain officers of that holy hellish house , bringing with them certain fools coats which they had prepared for us , being called in their language S. Benitos , which coats were made of yellow cotton & read crosses upon them , both before & behind : they were so busied in putting on their coats about us , and bringing us out into a large yard , and placing and pointing us in what order we should go to the scaffold or place of judgement upon the morrow , that they did not once suffer us to sleep all that night long . The next morning being come , there was given to every one of us for our breakfast a cup of wine , and a slice of bred fried in honey , and so about eight of the clock in the morning , we set forth of the prison , every man alone in his yellow coat , and a rope about his neck , and a great green Wax candle in his hand unlighted , having a Spaniard appointed to go upon either side of every one of us : and so marching in this order and manner towards the scaffold in the market place , which was a bow shoot distant or thereabouts , we found a great assembly of people all the way , and such a throng , that certain of the Inquisitors officers on horseback were constrained to make way , and so coming to the scaffold , we went up by a pair of stairs , and found seats ready made and prepared for us to fit down on , every man in order as he should be called to receive his judgement . We being thus set down as we were appointed , presently the Inquisitors came up another pair of stairs , and the Viceroy and all the chief Justices with them . When they were set down and placed under the cloth of estate agreeing to their degrees and calling , then came up also a great number of Friars , white , black and grey , about the number of 300 persons , they being set in the places for them appointed . Then was there a 
 427 
 solemn Oyes made , and silence commanded , and then presently began their severe and cruel judgement . 
 The cruel The first man that was called was one Roger the chief e^mtish^ Armourer of the Jesus , and he had judgement to have inquisitors three hundred stripes on horseback , and after condemned upon our poor to the galleys as a slave for io years . 
 countrymen . After him were called John Grey , John brown , John Rider , John Moon , James Collier , and one Thomas Browne : these were adjudged to have 200 stripes on horseback , and after to be committed to the galleys for the space of 8 years . 
 Then was called John Keys , and was adjudged to have 100 stripes on horseback , and condemned to serve in the galleys for the space of 6 years . 
 Then were severally called the number of 53 one after another , and every man had his several judgement , some to have 200 stripes on horseback , and some 100 , and condemned for slaves to the galleys , some for 6 years , some for 8 and some for 10. 
 And then was I Miles Philips called , and was adjudged to serve in a monastery for 5 years , without any stripes , and to wear a fools coat , or S. Benito , during all that time . 
 Then were called John Story , Richard Williams , David Alexander , Robert Cook , Paul Horsewell and Thomas Hull : the sixe were condemned to serve in monasteries without stripes , some for 3 years and some for foure , and to wear the S. Benito during all the said time . Which being done , and it now drawing towards night , George Rively , Peter Momfrie , and Cornelius the Irishman , were called and had their judgement to be burned to ashes , and so were presently sent away to the place of execution in the market place but a little from the scaffold , where they were quickly burned and consumed . And as for us that had received our judgement , being 68 in number , we were carried back that night to prison again . And the next day in the morning being good Friday , the year of our Lord 1575 , we 42S 
 were all brought into a court of the Inquisitors palace , where we found a horse in a readiness for every one of our men which were condemned to have stripes , and to be committed to the galleys , which were in number 60 and so they being enforced to mount up on horseback naked from the middle upward , were carried to be showed as a spectacle for all the people to behold throughout the chief and principali streets of the city , and had the number of stripes to every one of them appointed , most cruelly laid upon their naked bodies with long whips by sundry men appointed to be the executioners thereof : and before our men there went a couple of criers which cried as they went : Behold these English dogs , Lutherans , enemies to God , and all the way as they went there were some of the Inquisitors themselves , and of the familiars of that rakehel order , that cried to the executioners , Strike , lay on those English heretics , Lutherans , Gods enemies : and so this horrible spectacle being showed round about the city , they returned to the Inquisitors house , with their backs all gore blood , and swollen with great bumps , and were then taken from their horses , & carried again to prison , where they remained until they were sent into Spaine to the galleys , there to receive the rest of their martyrdom : and I and the 6 other with me which had judgement , and were condemned among the rest to serve and apprenticeship in the monastery , were taken presently and sent to certain religious houses appointed for the purpose . 
 429 
 [ Chap. 6 
 Wherein is showed how we were used in the religious houses , and that when the time was expired , that we were adjudged to serve in them , there came news to Mexico of M. Francis Drakes being in the South Sea , and what preparation was made to take him , and how I seeking to escape , was again taken and put in prison at Vera Cruz , and how again I made mine escape from thence . 
 I Miles Philips and William Low were appointed to the black Friars , where I was appointed to be and overseer of Indian workmen , who wrought there in building of a new church : among which Indians I learned their language or Mexican tongue very perfectly , and had great familiarity with many of them , whom I found to be a courteous and loving kind of people , ingenious , and of great understanding , and they hate and abhor the Spaniardes with all their hearts , they have used such horrible cruelties against them , and do still keep them in such subjection and servitude , that they and the Negroes also do daily lie in wait to practise their deliverance out of that thraldom and bondage , that the Spaniardes do keep them in . William Low he was appointed to serve the Cook in the kitchen , Richard Williams and David Alexander were appointed to the grey Friars , John Story and Robert Cook to the white Friars : Paul Horsewel the Secretary took to be his servant : Thomas Hull was sent to a Monastery of priests , where afterwards he died . Thus we served out the years that we were condemned for , with the use of our fools coats , and we must needs confess that the Friars did use us very courteously : for every one of us had his chamber with bedding & diet , and all things clean and neat : yea many of the Spaniards and Friars themselves do utterly abhor and mislike of that cruel Inquisition , and would as they durst bewail our misery's , and comfort us the best they could , 43° 
 although they stood in such fear of that devilish Inquisition , that they durst not let the left hand know what the right does . Now after that the time was expired for which we were condemned to serve in those religious houses , we were then brought again before the chief Inquisitor , and had all our fools coats pulled off and hanged up in the head church , called Ecclesia Major , and every men name and judgement written thereupon with this addition , And heretic Lutheran reconciled . And there are also all their coats hanged up , which were condemned to the galleys , with their names and judgements , and underneath his coat , Heretic Lutheran reconciled . And also the coats and names of the three that were burned , whereupon were written , And obstinate heretic Lutheran burned . Then were we suffered to go up and down the country , and to place our selves as we could , and yet not so free , but that we very well knew that there was good espial always attending us and all our actions , so that we durst not once speak or look awry . David Alexander & Robert Cooke returned to serve the Inquisitor , who shortly after married them both to two of his Negro women : Richard Williams married a rich widow of Biskay with 4000 Pezos : Paul Horsewell is married to a Mestisa , as they name those whose father's were Spaniards , and their mother's Indians , and this woman which Paul Horsewell hath married , is said to be the daughter of one that came in with Hernando Cortes the Conqueror , who had with her in marriage foure thousand Pezos , and a fair house : John Story is married to a Negro woman : William Low had leave and licence to go into Spaine where he is now married : for mine own part I could never thoroughly settle my self to marry in that country , although many fair offers were made unto me of such as were of great ability and wealth , but I could have no liking to live in that place , where I must every where see and know such horrible idolatry committed , and durst not once for my life speak against it : and therefore 
 431 
 A.D. 
 1575-80 . 
 I had always a longing and desire to this my native country : and , to return and serve again in the Mines where I might have gathered great riches and wealth , I very well saw that at one time or another I should fallen again into the danger of that devilish Inquisition , and so be stripped of all , with loss of life also , and therefore I made my choice rather to learn to weave Grogranes and Taffaties , and so compounding with a Silk-weaver , I bound my self for three years to serve him , and gave him and hundred and fiftie Pezos to teach me the science , otherwise he would not have taught me under seven years prenticeship , and by this means I lived the more quiet , and free from suspicion . Howbeit I should many times be charged by familiars of that devilish house , that I had a meaning to run away into England , and to be and heretic Lutherane again : To whom I would answer that they had no need to suspect any such thing in me , for that they knew all very well that it was impossible for me to escape by any manner of means : yet notwithstanding I was called before the Inquisitor , and demanded why I did not marry : I answered that I had bound my self at and occupation . Well said the Inquisitor , I know thou meanest to run away , and therefore I charge thee here upon pain of burning as and heretic relapsed , that thou depart not out of this city , nor come near to the port of S. John de Ullua , nor to any other port : To the which I answered , that I would willingly obey . Yea said he , see thou do so and thy fellows also , they shall have the like charge . 
 So I remained at my science the full time , and learned the Art , at the end whereof there came news to Mexico that there were certain Englishmen landed with a great power at the port of Acapulco , upon the South sea , and that they were coming to Mexico to take the spoil thereof , which wrought a marvellous great fear among them , & many of those that were rich , began to shift for themselves , their wives & children : upon which hurly burly the Viceroy caused a general muster to be made of 
 432 
 all the Spaniards in Mexico , and there were found to be the number of 7000 and odd householders of Spaniards in the city and suburbs , and of single men unmarried , the number of 3000 and of Mestizoes , which are counted to be the sons of Spaniards born of Indian women , twenty thousand persons , and then was Paul Horsewel & I Miles Philips sent for before the Viceroy , and were examined if we did know and English man nam Francis Drake , which was brother to Captain Hawkins : to which we answered , that Captain Hawkins had not any brother but one , which was a man of the age of threescore years or thereabouts , and was now governor of Plimmouth in England . And then he demanded of us if we knew one Francis Drake , and we answered , no . 
 While these things were in doing , there came news that all the Englishmen were gone , yet were there eight hundred men made out under the leading of several Captains , whereof two hundred were sent to the port of S. John de Ullua , upon the North Sea under the conduct of DONE Luys Suares , two hundred were sent to Guatimala in the South sea , who had for their captain John Cortes , two hundred more were sent to Guatulco , a port of the South sea , over whom went for captain DONE Pedro de Robles , and two hundred more were sent to Acapulco , the port where it was said that Captain Drake had be . And they had for Captain doctor Robles Alcalde de Corte , with whom I Miles Philips went as interpreter , having licence given by the Inquisitors . When we were come to Acapulco , we found that Captain Drake was departed from thence , more then a month before we came thither . But yet our captain Alcalde de Corte there presently embarked himself in a small ship of threescore tun or thereabouts , having also in company with him two other small barks , and not passed two hundred men in all , with whom I went as interpreter in his own ship , which God knoweth was but weak and ill appointed , so that for certain , if we had met with Captain Drake , he might easily have taken us all : We 
 ix 433 2 E 
 being embarked kept our course and ran Southward towards Panama , keeping still as nigh the shore as we could , and leaving the land upon our left hand , and having coasted thus for the space of eighteene or twentie days , and being more to the South then Guatimala , we met at last with other ships which came from Panama , of whom we were certainly informed that he was clean gone off the coast more then a month before : and so we returned back to Acapulco again , and there landed , our Captain being thereunto forced , because his men were very soar seasick : All the while that I was at Sea , with them , I was a glad man , for I hoped that if we met with master Drake , we should all be taken , so that then I should have been freed out of that danger and misery wherein I lived , and should return to mine own country of England again . But missing thereof , when I saw there was no remedy but that we must needs come on land again , little doth any man know the sorrow and grief that inwardly I felt , although outwardly I was constrained to make fair weather of it . And so being landed , you next morrow after , we began our journey towards Mexico , and passed these towns of name in Tuatepec , our way , as first the town of Tuatepec , 50 leagues from Washaca , Te - Mexico , from thence to Washaca , 40 leagues from 
 Angles Mexico : from thence to Tepiaca 24 leagues from Mexico , Ztapelapa . ’ an from thence to Pueblo de los Angels , where is a high hill which casts out fire three times a day , which hill is 18 leagues in manner directly West from Mexico , from thence we went to Stapelapa , 8 leagues from Mexico , and there our captain and most of his men took boat , and came to Mexico again , having be forth about the space of seven weeks or thereabouts . Our captain made report to the Viceroy what he had done , and how far he had traveled , and that for certain he was informed that captain Drake was not to be herd of . To en^ro - which Viceroy replied and said , Surely we shall have phecudjmt him shortly come into our hands driven a land through falsely . necessity in some one place or other , for he being now in 
 434 
 these seas of Sur , it is not possible for him to get out of them again , so that if he perish not at sea , yet hunger will force him to land . And then again I was commanded by the Viceroy that I should not depart the city of Mexico , but always be at my master's house in a readiness at and hours warning , when soever I should be called : for that notwithstanding within one month after certain Spaniards going to Mecameca , 18 leagues from Mexico , to send away certain hides and Cochinilla , that they had there at their Stantias or dairy houses , and my master having leave of the Secretary for me to go with them , I took my journey with them being very well horsed and appointed , and coming thither and passing the time there at Mecameca certain days till we had perfect intelligence that the fleet was ready to depart , I not being passed 3 days journey from the port of S. John de Ullua , thought it to be the meetest time for me to make and escape , and I was the bolder , presuming upon my Spanish tongue , which I spoke as naturally as any of them all , thinking with my self , that when I came to S. John de Ullua , I would get to be entertained as a soldier , and so go home into Spaine in the same Fleet , and therefore secretly one evening late , the moon shining fair , I conveyed my self away , and riding so for the space of two nights and two days , sometime in , and sometime out , resting very little all that time , upon the second day at night I came to the town of Vera Cruz , We ™ Cruz distant from the port of S. John de Ullua , where the d^ant\Bm ships road , but only 5 leagues , and here purposing to rest s juand ™ my self a day or two , I was no sooner alighted , but Ullua . within the space of one half hour after , I was by ill hap arrested , and brought before Justices there , being taken and suspected to be a gentleman's son of Mexico , that 
 was run away from his father , who in truth was the man they sought for : So I being arrested , and brought before the Justices , there was a great hurly burly about the matter , every man charging me that I was the son of such a man dwelling in Mexico , which I flatly denied , 
 435 
 affirming that I knew not the man , yet would they not believe me , but urged still upon me that I was he that they sought for , and so I was conveyed away to prison . And as I was thus going to prison , to the further increase of my grief , it chanced that at that very instant there was a poor man in the press that was come to town to fell hens , who told the Justices that they did me wrong , and that in truth he knew very well that I was and Englishman and no Spaniard . They then demanded of him how he knew that , and threatened him that he said so , for that he was my companion , and sought to convey me away from my father , so that he also was threatened to be laid in prison with me : he for the discharge of himself stood stiffly in it , that I was and Englishman , & one of captain Hawkins men , and that he had known me wear the S. Benito in the Blackfriars at Mexico , for 3 or 4 whole years together : which when they herd , they forsook him , and began to examine me a new , whither that speech of his were true , yea or no , which when they perceived that I could not deny , and perceiving that I was run from Mexico , 8c came thither of purpose to convey my self away with the fleet , I was presently committed to prison with a sorrowful heart , often wishing my self that that man which knew me had at that time be further off : howbeit he in sincerity had compassion of my distressed estate , thinking by his speech , and knowing of me , to have set me free from that present danger which he saw me in : howbeit , contrary to his expectation , I was thereby brought into my extreme danger , and to the hazard of my life , yet there was no remedy but patience perforce . And I was no sooner brought into prison , but I had a great pair of bolts clapped on my legs , and thus I remained in that prison for the space of 3 weeks , where were also many other prisoners which were thither committed for sundry crimes , 8c condemned to the galleys . During which time of imprisonment there , I found among those my prison-fellows some that had known me before in 
 436 
 Mexico , and truly they had compassion of me , & would spare of their victuals and any thing else that they had to do me good : among whom there was one of them that told me that he understood by a secret friend of his which often came to the prison to him , that I should be shortly sent back again to Mexico by wagon , so soon as the fleet was gone from S. John de Ullua , for Spaine . This poor man my prison-fellow of himself , & without any request made by me , caused his said friend which came often unto him to the grate of the prison , to bring him wine and victuals , to buy for him 2 knives which had files in their backs , which files were so well made that they would serve & suffice any prisoner to file off his irons , & of those knives or files he brought one to me , & told me that he had caused it to be made for me , and let me have it at that very price it cost him , which was 2 Pezos , the valve of 8 . s . of our money : which knife when I had it , I was a joyful man , and conveyed the same into the foot of my boot , upon the inside of my left leg , and so within 3 or 4 days after that I had thus received my knife , I was suddenly called for , & brought before the head Justice which caused those my irons with the round bolt to be stricken off and sent to a Smiths in the town , where was a new pair of bolts made ready for me of another fashion , which had a broad iron bar coming between the shackles , and caused my hands to be made fast with a pair of manacles , and so was I presently laid into a wagon all alone , which was there ready to depart with sundry other wagons , to the number of 60. towards Mexico , and they all were laden with sundry merchandise which came in the fleet out of Spaine . 
 The wagon that I was in was foremost in all the company , and as we traveled I being alone in the wagon , began to try if I could pluck my hands out of the manacles , and as God would , although it were 437 
 Miles Philips his last wonderful escape . 
 somewhat painful for me , yet my hands were so slender that 1 could pull them out , and put them in again , and ever as we went , when the wagon made most noise , and the men were busiest , I would be working to file off my bolts , & traveling thus for the space of 8 leagues from Vera Cruz , we came to and high hill , at the entering up of which ( as God would ) one of the wheels of the wagon wherein I was , brake , so that by that means the other wagons went afore , and the wagon-man that had charge of me set and Indian Carpenter a work to mend the wheel : and here at this place they baited at and hostry that a Negro-woman keeps : and at this place , for that the going up of the hill is very steep , for the space of two leagues and better , they do always accustom to take the moiles of 3 or 4 wagons , and to place them altogether for the drawing up of one wagon , and so to come down again , and fetch up others in that order . All which came very well to pass : for as it drew towards night when most of the Waggoners were gone to draw up their wagons , in this sort I being alone had quickly filed off my bolts , and so espying my time in the dark of the evening before they returned down the hill again , I conveyed my self into the woods there adjoining , carrying my bolts and manacles with me , & a few biscuits , and two small cheeses . And being come into the woods , I threw my irons into a thick bush , and then covered them with moss and other things , and then shifted for my self as I might all that night . And thus by the good providence of Almighty God , I was freed from mine irons all saving the collar that was about my neck , and so god my liberty the second time . 
 438 
 Wherein is showed how I escaped to Guatimala , upon the South sea , and from thence to the port of Cavallos , where I god passage to go into Spaine , and of our arrival at Havana , and our coming to Spaine , where I was again like to have be committed prisoner , and how through the great mercy of God I escaped , and came home in safety into England in February 1582. 
 THe next morning ( day light being come ) I perceived by the Sun rising what way to take to escape their hands , for when I fled , I took the way into the woods upon the left hand : and having left that way that went to Mexico upon my right hand , I thought to keep my course as the woods and mountains lay , still direct South as near as I could : by means whereof I was sure to convey my self far enough from that way that went to Mexico . And as I was thus going in the woods , I saw many great fires made to the North not passed a league from the mountain where I was , and travailing thus in my boots with mine iron collar about my neck , and my bred and cheese , the very same forenoon I met with a company of Indians which were hunting of Dear for their sustenance : to whom I spoke in the Mexican tongue , and told them how that I had of a long time been kept in prison by the cruel Spanyards , and did desire them to help me to file off mine iron collar , which they willingly did : rejoicing greatly with me , that I was thus escaped out of the Spanyards hands . Then I desired that I might have one of them to guide me out of those desert mountains towards the South , which they also most willingly did : and so they brought me to and Indian town 8. leagues distant from thence , nam Shalapa , where I stayed three days , for that I was somewhat sickly . At which town ( with the gold that I had quilted in my doublet ) I bought me and horse 439 
 of one of the Indians , which cost me 6. pezos , and so travailing South , within the space of 2. leagues I happened to overtake a grey Friar , one that I had be familiar withal in Mexico , whom then I knew to be a zealous good man , and one that did much lament the cruelty used against us by the Inquisitors , and truly he used me very courteously : and I having confidence in him did indeed tell him , that I was minded to adventure to see if I could get out of the said country if I could find shipping , and did therefore pray him of his aid , direction , and advice herein , which he faithfully did , not only in directing me which was my safest way to travail , but he also of himself kept me company for the space of three days , and ever as we came to the Indians houses ( who used and entertained us well ) he gathered among them in money to the valve of 20. pezos , which at my departure from him he freely gave unto me . So came I to the city of Guatimala upon the South sea , which is distant from Mexico about 250. leagues , where I stayed 6. days , for that my horse was weak . And from thence I travailed still South and by East seven days journey , passing by certain Indian towns , until I came to and Indian town distant from Mexico , direct South 309. leagues . And here at this town inquiring to go to the Port de Cavallos in the Northeast sea , it was answered that in travailing thither I should not come to any town in 10. or 12. days journey : so here I hired two Indians to be my guides , and I bought hens , and bred to serve us so long time , and took with us things to kindle fire every night , because of wild beasts , and to dress our meat : and every night when we rested , my Indian guides would make two great fires , between the which we placed our selves , and my horse . And in the night time we should hear the Lions roar , with Tigers , Ounces , and other beasts , and some of them we should see in the night , which had eyes shining like fire . And travailing thus for the space of twelve days , 440 
 we came at last to the port of Cavallos upon the East Puerto de sea , distant from Guatimala South and by East , two CavaU°s-hundreth leagues , and from Mexico 450. or thereabouts . This is a good harbour for ships , and is without either castle or bulwark . I having dispatched away my guides , went down to the Haven , where I saw certain ships laden chiefly with Canary wines , where I spoke with one of the Master's , who asked me what Country man I was , and I told him that I was born in Granado , & he said , that then I was his countryman . I required him that I might pass home with him in his ship , paying for my passage : and he said yea , so that I had a safe conduct , or letter testimonial to show , that he might incur no danger : for said he , it may be that you have killed some man , or be indebted , and would therefore run away . To that I answered , that there was not any such cause . Way , in the end we grew to a price , that for 60. pezos he would carry me into Spaine : a glad man was I at this good hap , and I quickly sold my horse , and made my provision of hens and bred to serve me in my passage ; And thus within 2. days after we set sail , and never stayed until we came to Havana , which is distant from puerto de Cavallos by sea 500. leagues : where we found the whole fleet of Spaine , which was bound home from the Indies . And here I was hired for a soldier to serve in the Admiral ship of the same fleet , wherein the General himself went . There landed while I was here 4. ships out of Spaine , being all full of soldiers and ordinance , of which number there were 200. men landed here , & 4. great brass pieces of ordinance , although the castle were before sufficiently provided : 200. men more were sent to Campeche , & certain ordinance : 200. to Florida with ordinance : and 100. 
 lastly to S. John Ullua . As for ordinance there they have sufficient , and of the very same which was ours , which we had in the Jesus , and those others which we had planted in the place , where the Viceroy betrayed M. Hawkins our general , as hath be declared . The 
 441 
 sending of those soldiers to every of those Ports , and the strengthening of them , was done by commandment from the king of Spaine , who wrote also by them to the general of his fleet , giving him in charge so to do , as also directing him what course he should keep in his coming home into Spaine , charging him in any hand not to come nigh to the isles of Azores , but to keep his course more to the Northward , advertising him withal , what number and power of French ships of war , and other , DONE Antonio had at that time at Ten ; era , & the isles aforesaid : which the general of the fleet well considering , and what great store of riches he had to bring home with him into Spaine , did in all very dutifully observe and obey : for in truth he had in his said fleet 37. sail of ships , and in every of them there was as good as 30. pipes of silver one with another , beside great store of gold , Cochinilla , sugars , hides , and Cana Fistula , with other Apothecary drugs . This our general , who was called DONE Pedro de Guzman , did providently take order for , for their most strength and defence , if need should be , to the uttermost of his power , and commanded upon pain of death , that neither passenger nor soldier should come aboard without his sword and harquebus , with shot and powder , to the end that they might be the better able to encounter the fleet of DONE Antonio , if they should hap to meet with them , or any of them : and ever as the weather was fair , the said general would himself go aboard from one ship to another , to see that every man had his full provision according to the commandment given . Yet to speak truly what I think , two good tall ships of war would have made a foul spoil among them . For in all this fleet there were not any that were strong and warlike appointed , saving only the Admiral , and Viceadmiral : And again over and beside the weakness and the ill furnishing of the rest , they were all so deeply laden , that they had not be able ( if they had be charged ) to have held out any long fight . Well , thus we set sail , & had 
 442 
 a very ill passage home , the weather was so contrary . We kept our course in manner Northeast , and brought our selves to the height of 42. degrees of latitude , to be sure not to meet with DONE Antonio his fleet , and were upon our voyage from the 4. of June , until the 10. of September , and never saw land till we fell with the Arenas Gordas hard by S. Lucar . And there was and order taken that none should go on shore until he had licence : as for me , I was known by one in the ship , who told the Master that I was and Englishman , which ( as God would ) it was my good hap to hear : for if I had not herd it , it had cost me my life . Notwithstanding , I would not take any knowledge of it , and seemed to be merry & pleasant , that we were all come so well in safety . Presently after , licence came that we should go on shore , and I pressed to be gone with the first : howbeit , the Master came unto me , & said , Sirrah , you must go with me to Sivil by water : I knew his meaning well enough , & that he meant there to ofler me up as a sacrifice to the Holy house . For the ignorant zeal of a number of these superstitious Spaniards is such , that they think that they have done God good service , when they have brought a Lutheran heretic to the fire to be burned : for so do they account of us . Well , I perceiving all this , took upon me not to suspect any thing , but was still jocund 8c merry : howbeit , I knew it stood me upon to shift for my self . And so waiting my time when the Master was in his cabin asleep , I conveyed my self secretly down by the shrowds into the ship boat , and made no stay but cut the rope wherewithal she was moared , and so by the cable haled on shore , where I leapt on land , & let the boat go whither it would . Thus by the help of God I escaped that day , 8c then never stayed at S. Lucar , but went all night by the way which I had seen other take towards Sivil : so that the next morning I came to Sivil , and sought me out a workmaster , that I might fallen to my science , which was weaving of taffataes ; and being entertained I set my self close to my work , 443 
 and durst not for my life once to stir abroad for fear of being known : and being thus at my work , within 4. days after I herd one of my fellows say , that he herd there was great inquiry made for and Englishman that came home in the fleet : what and heretic Lutheran ( quoth I ) was it , I would to God I might know him , surely I would present him to the Holy house . And thus I kept still within doors at my work , and feigned my self not well at ease , & that I would labour as I might to get me new clothes . And continuing thus for the space of 3. months I called for my wages , and bought me all things new , different from the apparel that I did wear at sea , and yet durst not be overbold to walk abroad : and after understanding that there were certain English ships at S. Lucar bound for England , I took a boat and went aboard one of them , and desired the Master that I might have passage with him to go into England , and told him secretly that I was one of those which Captain Hawkins did set on shore in the Indies : he very courteously prayed me to have him excused , for he durst not meddle with me , & prayed me therefore to return from whence I came . Which when I perceived , with a sorrowful heart , God knoweth , I took my leave of him , not without watty cheeks . And then I went to S. Marry port , which is 3. leagues from S. Lucar , where I put my self to be a soldier to go in the king of Spaines Galleys , which were bound for Majorca , and coming thither in He comes the end of the Christmas holidays , I found there two X English ships , the one of London , and the other of thee from Majorca . West country , which were ready freighted and stayed but for a fair wind . To the Master of the one , which was of the West country went I , and told him that I had be 2. years in Spaine to learn the language , and that I was now desirous to go home and see my friends , for that I lacked maintenance : and so having agreed with him for my passage , I took shipping . And thus through the providence of Almighty God , after 16. years absence , having sustained many and sundry great troubles and 
 444 
 misery's , as by this discourse appears , I came home to this my native country of England in the year 1582. in the month of February , in the ship called the Landret , and arrived at Pool . 
 