A relation of a memorable fight made the 13. of June 1591. against certain Spanish ships & galleys in the West Indies , by 3. ships of the honourable sir George Carey knight , then marshal of her Majesties household , and captain of the He of Wight , now lord Hunsdon , lord Chamberlaine , and captain of the honourable band of her Majesties Pensioners . 
 He 13. of June 1591. being sunday , at 5. of the clock in the morning we descried 6. sail of the king of Spaine his ships . Foure of them were armadas , ( viz. the Admiral and viceadmiral of 700. tons apiece , and the other 2. of 600. apiece ) and the other 2. were small ships , each of 
 them about 100. tons . We met w‘ them off the Cape de Corrientes , which stands on the Hand of Cuba . The 
 sighed of the foresaid ships made us joyful , hoping that they should make our voyage . But assoon as they descried us , they made false fires one to another & gathered their fleet together , lying all close by a wind to 178 
 the Southwards . We therefore at 6. of the clock in the morning ( the wind being at East ) having made our prayers to almighty God , prepared our selves for the fight : And ( in hope they had be of the Cartagena fleet ) we bore up with our admiral and viceadmiral , to determine of the combat for the better direction thereof . Our parley being ended , our admiral , viceadmiral , & the Hopewel gave their admiral the prow , bringing themselves to leeward of him . We in the Content bore up with their viceadmiral , and ( ranging along by his broad side aweather of him ) gave him a voley of muskets and our great ordinance : then coming up with another small ship ahead of the former , we hailed her in such sort , that she paid room . Thus being in fight with the little ship , we saw a great smoke come from our admiral , and the Hopewel & Swallow forsaking him with all the sails they could make : whereupon bearing up with our admiral ( before we could come to him ) we had both the small ships to windward of us , purposing ( if we had not be too hot for them ) to have laid us aboard . Thus ( the fight continuing between us and them 3. hours ) we were forced to stand to the Northwards , the Hopewel and the Swallow not coming in all this while to aid us , as they might easily have done . Our admiral by this time being in fight with their viceadmiral , and another great ship of theirs , stood ofF to sea with his topgallant sail , and all the sails he could make : then might the Hopewel & the Swallow have paid room to second him , but they failed him as they did us , standing ofF close by a wind to the Eastward . All this time we were forced to the Northwards with 2. of their great ships and one of their small . They having a loom gale ( we being altogether becalmed ) with both their great ships came up iaire by us , shot at us , and on the sudden furled their spritsails & mainsails , thinking that we could not escape them . Then falling to prayer , we shipped our oars that we might row to shore , & anchor in shallow water where their great ships could not come 
 179 
 nigh us , for other refuge we had none . Then i . of their small ships being manned from i . of their great , & having a boat to row themselves in , shipped her oars likewise & rowed after us , thinking w‘ their small shot to have put us from our oars , until you great ships might come up with us : but by you time she was within musket shot , the Lord of his mercy did send us a fair 
 gale of wind at the Northwest off the shore . What time ( they being all to leeward of us ) we stood to the East . The small ship was under our lee within Falcon shot , and another great ship lay to the Westward , so that we could not way possibly escape them upon that board : then ( we thinking to avoid them by casting about to the Westwards ) the other great ship gate under our lee , and the small ship on our weather quarter , purposing to make us pay room with the great ship , by force of her small & great shot . Then ( we being lerboord tacked , and they sterboord ) we made her spring her looffe , and by a fortunate shot which our gunner made , pierced her betwixt wind and water . Hereupon she was forced to lay herself upon the carena , and to stand with one of the other ships for aid . Afterwards ( commending our selves to almighty God in prayer , and giving him thanks for the wind which he had sent us for our deliverance ) we looked forth and descried two sail more to the offen : these we thought to have be the Hopewell , and the Swallow that had stood in to aid us : but it proved far otherwise , for they were two of the kings galleys . Now having a loom gale of wind , we shipped our oars , and rowed off the shore : and our watch was no sooner set , but we espied one galley under our lee hard by us , boging up with us . Then ( because it was evening ) one of the great ships discharged sixe great shot at us , to the end the galleys should know that we were the ship they looked for . Then the galley came up , and ( hailing us of whence our ship was ) a Portugall which we had with us , made them answer , that we were of 
 180 
 the fleet of Tierra firma , and of Sivil : with that they bid us amain English dogs , and came upon our quarter starboard : and giving us five cast pieces out of her prow , they sought to lay us aboard : but we so galled them with our muskets , that we put them from our quarter . Then they winding their galley , came up into our stern , and with the way that the galley had , did so violently thrust in the boards of our Captains cabin , that her nose came into it , minding to give us all their prow , and so to sink us . But we being resolute , so plied them with our small shot , that they could have no time to discharge their great ordinance : and when they began to approach , we heaved into them a ball of fire , and by that means put them off : whereupon they once again fell astern of us , and gave us a prow . Then having the second time put them off , we went to prayer , and sang the first part of the 25. Psalm , praising God for our safe deliverance . This being done , we might see 2. galleys and a frigate all three of them bending themselves together to encounter us : hereupon we ( eftsoons commending our estate into the hands of God ) armed our selves , and resolved ( for the honour of God , her Majesty , and our country ) to fight it out till the last man . Then shaking a pike of fire in defiance of the enemy , and weaving them amain , we bade them come aboard : and and Englishman in the galley made answer , that they would come aboard presently . So managing ourselves to our furniture , and every moment expecting the assault , we herd them parley to this effect , that they determined to keep us company till the morning , and then to make and end with us : then giving us another shot from one of the galleys , they fell astern . Thus our fight continued with the ships and with the galleys , from seven of the clock in the morning till eleven at night . Howbeit God ( which never faileth them that put their trust in him ) sent us a gale of wind about two of the clock in the morning at Eastnortheast , which was for the preventing of their cruelty , and the saving of our 181 
 A fight from 7. in the morning till 11. at night . 
 lives . Also ( the Lord be praised for it ) in all this dangerous fight , we had not one man slain , and . but 2. hurt : but our sails and ropes were so rend with their shot , that it was wonderful to behold : our main mast also was shot clean through , whereby we were in exceeding great danger . Thus our consorts forsook us , and left us in these extremities . The next day being the 14. of June in the morning , we saw all our adversaries to leeward of us , and they espying us , chased us till 10. of the clock , and then seeing they could not prevail , gave us over . So that day about 5. of the clock in the afternoon , we bore up to the Southwest , in hope to find our consorts , but we had no sighed of them at that time , nor afterwards . Then stood we in all that night for the Cape of S. Anthonie , hoping there to see our Admiral according to his direction . The 15. day of June early in the morning , we descried the Spanish fleet again , being within 5. leagues of Cape S. Anthonie . Then ( having no sighed of our consorts ) we stood for the place according to the direction of our owner sir George Carey , where we did ply for the space of 23. days , and never could see any sail but two frigates , which we gave chase unto the 24. of June , and could not fetched them up . Thus we give God most humble thanks for our safe deliverance from the cruel enemy , which hath been more mighty by the providence of God , then any tongue can express : to whom be all praise , honour , and glory , both now and ever , Amen . 
 Appendix . 
 THe bark called The Content had but one Minion ; 
 one Falcon , one Saker , & 2. port-bases . She continued fight ( from seven in the morning till sunset ) with 3. armadas of 600. and 700. tons apiece , and one small ship of 100. tons , not being above musket shot from any of them . And before the sun was set , there came up to her two of the kings galleys . Beside , the Armadas shot their great ordinance continually at her , not so few 182 
 as 500. times . And the sides , hull , and masts of the Content were sowed thick with musket bullets . Moreover , all their sheats , tops and shrowds were almost cut insunder with their great & small shot . There passed from the galies ( each whereof came thrice up to her , & discharged five great pieces at a time , out of every their prowess forthright , within three yards of her poop ) through her main sail 19. great shot , through her main topsail foure : through her foresail seven : through her fore-top-saile five : and through her main mast one . The upper part of the Content was hurt in five places . Only 13 men continued this fight , the rest being in hold . 
 A frigate of the Spaniards ( being afterwards taken ) confessed , that there were in the galleys above 40. Spaniards slain , and many were hurt in that combat . 
 persons that continued the 
 ' Charles Cream . Thomas Godfrey . Giles Thornton . John Pells . 
 John Bourel . Ralph Gray . William Their . 
 The names of those 13 fight . 
 Nicolas Lisle , Captain . M. Major , Lieutenant . William King , Master . John Barwick , Mrs. mate . William Clement , gunner . Thomas Houldships , Boatswain . 
 The names of the rest be 
 John John John John John 
 Pie. 
 Smith . 
 White . 
 Butcher . 
 Brook . 
 these following . 
 ' John Towpenie . Edmund Giggs . William Bateman . William White . Laurence Shelly . 
 