A resolution of the Land-captains , what course they think most expedient to be taken . Given at Cartagena the xxvij . of Februarie 1585. 
 Hereas it hath pleased the general to demand the opinions of his Captains what course they think most expedient to be now undertaken , the Land-captains being assembled by themselves together , and having advised hereupon , do in three points deliver the same . 
 The first , touching the keeping of the town against the force of the enemy , either that which is present , or that which may come out of Spaine , is answered thus . 
 WE hold opinion , that with this troop of men which we have presently with us in land-service , being victualed and munitioned , we may well keep the Town , albeit that of men able to answer present service , we have not above 700. The residue being some 150. men by reason of their hurts and sickness are altogether unable to stand us in any stead : wherefore hereupon the Sea-captaines are likewise to give their resolution , how they will undertake the safety and service of the Ships upon the arrival of any Spanish Fleet . 
 The second point we make to be this , whither it be meet to go presently homeward , or else to continue further trial of our fortune in undertaking such like enterprises as we have done already , and thereby to seek after that bountiful mass of treasure for recompense of our travails , which was generally expected at our coming forth of England : wherein we answer . 
 THat it is well known how both we and the soldiers are entered into this actium as voluntary men , without any impressed or gage from her Majesty or any body else : 121 
 and forasmuch as we have hitherto discharged the parts of honest men , so that now by the great blessing and favour of our good God there have been taken three such notable towns , wherein by the estimation of all men would have be found some very great treasures , knowing that S. Iago was the chief city of all the Islands and traffics thereabouts , S. Domingo the chief city of Hispaniola , and the head government not only of that Hand , but also of Cuba , and of all the Hands about it , as also of such inhabitations of the firm land , as were next unto it , & a place that is both magnificently built , and entertaineth great trades of merchandise ; and now lastly the city of Cartagena , which cannot be denied to be one of the chief places of most especial importance to the Spaniard of all the cities which be on this side of the West India : we do therefore consider , that since all these cities , with their goods & prisoners taken in them , and the ransoms of the said cities being all put together , are found far short to satisfy that expectation which by the generality of the enterprisers was first conceived : And being further advised of the slenderness of our strength , whereunto we be now reduced , as well in respect of the small number of able bodies , as also not a little in regard of the slack disposition of the greater part of those which remain , very many of the better minds and men being either consumed by death , or weakened by sickness and . hurts : And lastly , since that as yet there is not laid down to our knowledge any such enterprise as may seem convenient to be undertaken with such few as we are presently able to make , and withal of such certain likelihood , as with Gods good success which it may please him to bestow upon us , the same may promise to yield us any sufficient contentment : We do therefore conclude hereupon , that it is better to hold sure as we may the honour already got , and with the same to return towards our gracious Sovereign and Country , from whence if it shall please 
 her Majesty to set us forth again with her orderly means and entertainment , we are most ready and willing 122 
 to go through with any thing that the uttermost of our strength and endeavour shall be able to reach unto ; but therewithal we do advice and protest that it is far from our thoughts , either to refuse , or so much as to seem to be weary of any thing , which for the present shall further required or directed to be done by us from our general . 
 The third and last point is concerning the ransom of this city of Cartagena , for the which , before it was touched with any fire , there was made and offer of some xxvij . or xxviij . thousand pounds sterling . 
 THus much we utter herein as our opinions agreeing ( so it be done in good sort ) to accept this offer aforesaid , rather then to break off by standing still upon our demands of one hundred thousand pounds , which seems a matter impossible to be performed for the present by them , and to say truth , we may now with much honour and reputation better be satisfied with that sum offered by them at the first ( if they will now be contented to give it ) then we might at that time with a great deal more , inasmuch as we have taken our full pleasure both in the uttermost sacking and spoiling of all their household goods and merchandise , as also in that we have consumed and ruined a great part of their Town with fire . And thus much further is considered herein by us , that as there be in the Voyage a great many poor men , who have willingly adventured their lives and travails , and diverse among them having spent their apparel and such other little provisions as their small means might have given them leave to prepare , which being done upon such good and allowable intention as this actium hath always carried with it , meaning , against the Spanyard our greatest and most dangerous enemy : so surely we cannot but have and inward regard so far as may lie in us , to help either in all good sort towards the satisfaction of this their expectation , and by procuring them some little benefit to encourage them and to nourish 
 123 
 this ready and willing disposition of theirs both in them and in others by their example against any other time of like occasion . But because it may be supposed that herein we forget not the private benefit of our selves , and are thereby the rather moved to incline our selves to this composition , we do therefore think good for the clearing of our selves of all such suspicion , to declare hereby , that what part or portion soever it be of this ransom or composition for Cartagena , which should come unto us , we do freely give and bestow the same wholly upon the poor men , who have remained with us in the Voyage , meaning as well the Sailor as the Soldier , wishing with all our hearts it were such or so much as might seem a sufficient reward for their painful endeavour . And for the firm confirmation thereof , we have thought meet to subsign these presents with our own hands in the place and time aforesaid . 
 Captain Christopher Carliell Lieutenant general . Captain Goring . Captain Sampson . 
 Captain Powell etc. 
 But while we were yet there , it happened one day , that our watch called the Centinel , upon the Churchsteeple , had discovered in the Sea a couple of small Barks or Boats , making in with the Harbour of Cartagena , whereupon Captain Moon and Captain Varney , with John Grant the Master of the Tiger , and some other Seamen , embarked themselves in a couple of small Pinnaces , to take them before they should come nigh the shore , at the mouth of the Harbour , lest by some straggling Spaniards from the Land , they might be warned by signs from coming in : which fell out accordingly , notwithstanding all the diligence that our men could use : for the Spanish Boats , upon the sighed of our Pinnaces coming towards them , ran themselves ashore , and so their men presently hid themselves in bushes hard by the Sea side , among some others that had called them by signs thither . Our men presently without any due 
 124 
 regard had to the quality of the place , and seeing no man of the Spanyards to show themselves , aboorded the Spanish Barks or Boats , and so standing all open in them , were suddenly shot at by a troop of Spaniards out of the bushes : by which volley of shot there were slain Captain Varney , which died presently , and Captain Moon , who died some few days after , beside some foure or five others that were hurt : and so our folks returned without their purpose , not having any sufficient number of soldiers with them to fight on shore . For those men they carried were all Mariners to row , few of them armed , because they made account with their ordinance to have taken the Barks well enough at sea , which they might full easily have done , without any loss at all , if they had come in time to the harbour mouth , before the Spaniards boats had got so near the shore . 
 During our abided in this place , as also at S. Domingo , there passed diverse courtesies between us and the Spaniards , as feasting , and using them with all kindness and favour : so as among others there came to see the general , the Governor of Cartagena , with the Bishop of the same , and diverse other Gentlemen of the better sort . 
 This town of Cartagena we touched in the out parts , & consumed much with fire , as we had done S. Domingo upon discontentments , and for want of agreeing with us in their first treaties touching their ransom , which at the last was concluded between us , should be 100. and xoooo . Ducats for that which was yet standing , the Ducat valued at five shillings sixe pence sterling . 
 This town though not half so big as S. Domingo , gives as you see , a far greater ransom , being in very deed of far more importance , by reason of the excellende of the Harbour , and the situation thereof , to serve the trade of Number de Dios and other places , and is inhabited with far more richer Merchant's . The other is chiefly inhabited with Lawyers and brave Gentlemen , 125 
 being the chief or highest appeal of their suits in law of all the Islands about it , and of the main land coast next unto it . And it is of no such account as Cartagena , for these and some other like reasons , which I could give you , over long to be now written . 
 The warning which this town received of our coming towards them from S. Domingo , by the space of twentie days before our arrival here , was cause that they had both fortified and every way prepared for their best defence . As also that they had carried and conveyed away all their treasure and principali substance . 
 The ransom of and hundred & ten thousand Ducats thus concluded on , as is aforesaid , the same being written , and expressing for nothing more then the town of Cartagena , upon the payment of the said ransom , we left the said town , and drew some part of our soldiers into the Priory or Abbey , standing a quarter of and English mile below the town upon the harbour waterside , the same being walled with a wall of stone , which we told the Spaniards was yet ours , and not redeemed by their composition : whereupon they finding the defect of their contract , were contented to enter into another ransom for all places , but specially for the said house , as also the Blockhouse or Castle , which is upon the mouth of the inner harbour . And when we asked as much for the one as for the other , they yielded to give a thousand Crowns for the Abbey , leaving us to take our pleasure upon the Blockhouse , which they said they were not able to ransom , having stretched themselves to the uttermost of their powers : and therefore the said Blockhouse was by us undermined , and so with blown up in pieces . 
 While this latter contract was in making , our whole Fleet of ships fell down towards the harbour mouth , where they anchored the third time , and employed their men in fetching of fresh water aboard the ships for our voyage homeward , which water was had in a great well , 126 
 gun powder 
 1586. that is in the Island by the harbour mouth : which Island The Island of is a very pleasant place as hath be seen , having in Cam-it many sorts of goodly and very pleasant fruits , as the Orange trees and others , being set orderly in walks of great length together . Insomuch as the whole Island being some two or three miles about , is cast into grounds of gardening and orchards . 
 After sixe weeks abided in this place , we put to sea the last of March , where after two or three days a great ship which we had taken at S. Domingo , and thereupon was called The new years gift , fell into a great leak , being laden with ordinance , hides , and other spoils , and in the night she lost the company of our Fleet ; which being missed the next morning by the general , he cast about with the whole Fleet , fearing some great mischance to be happened unto her , as in very deed it so fell out : for her leak was so great , that her men were all tired with pumping . But at the last having found her & the Bark Talbot in her company , which stayed by great hap with her , they were ready to take their men out of her , for the saving of them . And so the general being fully advertised of their great extremity , made sail directly back again to Cartagena with the whole Fleet , where having stayed eight or ten days more , about the unlading of this ship , and the bestowing thereof and her men into other Ships , we departed once again to Sea , directing our course towards the Cape S. Antony , being the Westermost part of Cuba , where we arrived the seven and twentieth of April . But because fresh water could not presently be found , we weighed anchor , and departed , thinking in few days to recover the Matan^as , a place to the Eastward of Havana . 
 After we had sailed some fourteen days , we were brought to Cape S. Anthony again , through lack of favourable wind : but then our scarcity was grown such , as need made us look a little better for water , which we found in sufficient quantity , being indeed , as I judge , none other then rain water newly fallen , and gathered [ III . 54.6 . ] 127 
 A most commendable example of diligence in a general . 
 up by making pits in a plot of marrish ground , some three hundred pases from the sea side . 
 I do wrong if I should forget the good example of the general at this place , who to encourage others , and to hasten the getting of fresh water aboard the ships , took no less pain himself then the meanest ; as also at S. Domingo , Cartagena , and all other places , having always so vigilant a care and foresight in the good ordering of his Fleet , accompanying them , as it is said , with such wonderful travel ! of body , as doubtless had he be the meanest person , as he was the chiefest , he had yet deserved the first place of honour : and no less happy doe we account him , for being associated with Master Carliel his Lieutenant general , by whose experience , prudent counsel , and gallant performance he achieved so many and happy enterprises of the war , by whom also he was very greatly assisted , in setting down the needful order , laws , and course of justice , and the due administration of the same upon all occasions . 
 After three days spent in watering our Ships , we departed now the second time from this Cape of S. Anthony the thirteenth of May , and proceeding about the Cape of Florida , we never touched any where ; but coasting alongst Florida , and keeping the shore still in sighed , the 28. of May early in the Morning we descried on the shore a place built like a Beacon , which was in deed a scaffold upon foure long masts raised on end , for men to discover to the seaward , being in the latitude of thirtie degrees , or very near thereunto . Our Pinnaces manned , and coming to the shore , we marched up alongst the river side , to see what place the enemy held there : for none among us had any knowledge thereof at all . 
 Here the general took occasion to march with the companies himself in person , the Lieutenant generail having the Vanguard ; and going a mile up or somewhat more by the river side , we might discern on the other side of the river over against us , a Fort which newly had 128 
 be built by the Spaniards : and some mile or thereabouts above the Fort was a little Town or Village without walls , built of wooden houses , as the Plot doth plainly show . we forthwith prepared to have ordinance for the battery ; and one piece was a little before the Evening planted , and the first shot being made by the Lieutenant general himself at their Ensign , strake through the Ensign , as we afterwards understood by a French man , which came unto us from them . One shot more was then made , which strake the foot of the Fort wall , which was all massive timber of great trees like Masts . The Lieutenant general was determined to pass the river this night with 4. companies , and there to lodge himself entrenched as near the Fort , as that he might play with his muskets and smallest shot upon any that should appear , and so afterwards to bring and plant the battery with him : but the help of Mariners for that sudden to make trenches could not be had , which was the cause that this determination was remitted until the next night . 
 In the night the Lieutenant general took a little rowing Skiff , and half a dozen well armed , as Captain Morgan , and Captain Sampson , with some others beside the rowers , & went to view what guard the enemy kept , as also to take knowledge of the ground . And albeit he went as covertly as might be , yet the enemy taking the Alarm , grew fearful that the whole force was approaching to the assault , and therefore with all speed abandoned the place after the shooting of some of their pieces . They thus gone , and he being returned unto us again , but nothing knowing of their flight from their Fort , forthwith came a French man being a Phipher ( who had Nicholas be prisoner with them ) in a little boat , playing on his BorSoiSnm-Phiph the tune of the Prince of Orenge his song ; and being called unto by the guard , he told them before he put foot out of the boat , what he was himself , and how the Spaniards were gone from the Fort , offering either to remain in hands there , or else to return to the place with them that would go . 
 x 129 I 
 Upon this intelligence , the general , the Lieutenant general , with some of the Captains in one Skiff , and the Viceadmiral with some others in his Skiff , and two or three Pinnaces furnished of soldiers with them , put presently over towards the Fort , giving order for the rest of the Pinnaces to follow . And in our approach , some of the enemy bolder then the rest , having stayed behind their company , shot off two pieces of ordinance at us : but on shore we went , and entered the place without finding any man there . 
 When the day appeared , we found it built all of timber , the walls being none other but whole Masts or bodies of trees set up right and close together in manner of a pale , without any ditch as yet made , but wholly intended with some more time ; for they had not as yet finished all their work , having begun the same some three or foure months before : so as , to say the truth , they had no reason to keep it , being subject both to fire , and easy assault . 
 The platform whereon the ordinance lay , was whole bodies of long pine trees , whereof there is great plenty , laid a cross one on another , and some little earth among . There were in it thirteene or fourteene great pieces of Brass ordinance , and a chest unbroken up , having in it the valve of some two thousand pounds sterling by estimation of the kings treasure , to pay the soldiers of that place , who were a hundred and fiftie men . 
 The Fort thus won , which they called S. Johns Fort , and the day opened , . we assayed to go to the town , but could not by reason of some rivers and broken ground which was between the two places : and therefore being inforced to embark again into our Pinnaces , we went thither upon the great main river , which is called as also the Town , by the name of S. Augustin . 
 At our approaching to land , there were some that began to show themselves , and to bestow some few shot 
 130 
 1586. upon us , but presently withdrew themselves . And in their running thus away , the Sergeant Major finding one of their horses ready saddled and bridled , took the same to follow the chase ; and so overgoing all his company , was ( by one laid behind a bush ) shot through the head : and falling down therewith , was by the same and two or three more , stabbed in three or foure places of his body with swords and daggers , before any could come near to his rescue . His death was much lamented , being in very deed and honest wise Gentleman , and a soldier of good experience , and of as great courage as any man might be . 
 In this place called S. Augustin , we understood the king did keep , as is before said , one hundred and fiftie soldiers , and at another place some dozen leagues beyond to the Northwards , called S. Helena , he did there likewise keep and hundred and fiftie more , serving there for no other purpose , then to keep all other nations from inhabiting any part of all that coast ; the government whereof was committed to one Pedro Melendez Marquess , nephew to that Melendez the Admiral , who had overthrown Master John Hawkins in the bay of Mexico some seventeen or eighteene years ago . This Governor had charge of both places , but was at this time in this place , and one of the first that left the same . 
 Here it was resolved in full assembly of Captains , to undertake the enterprise of S. Helena , and from thence to seek out the inhabitation of our English countrymen in Virginia , distant from thence some sixe degrees Northward . 
 When we came thwart of S. Helena , the sholds Santa Helena , appearing dangerous , and we having no Pilot to undertake the entry , it was thought meetest to go hence alongst . For the Admiral had be the same night in foure fathom and a half , three leagues from the shore : and yet we understood by the help of a known Pilot , there may and do go in Ships of greater burden and draught then any we had in our Fleet . 
 131 
 We passed thus alongst the coast hard aboard the shore , which is shallow for a league or two from the shore , and the same is low and broken land for the most part . 
 The ninth of June upon sighed of one speciali great fire ( which are very ordinary all alongst this coast , even from the Cape of Florida hither ) the general sent his Skiff to the shore , where they found some of our English countrymen ( that had be sent thither the year before by Sir Walter Ralegh ) and brought them aboard : by whose direction we proceeded along to the place which they make their Port. But some of our ships being of great draught unable to enter , anchored without the harbour in a wild road at sea , about two miles from shore . 
 From whence the General wrote letters to master Ralfe Lane , being governor of those English in Virginia , and then at his Fort about sixe leagues from the Road in and Island which they call Roanoac , wherein especially he showed how ready he was to supply his necessities and wants , which he understood of , by those he had first talked withal . 
 The morrow after , Master Lane himself and some of his company coming unto him , with the consent of his captains he gave them the choice of two offers , that is to say : Either he would leave a ship , a pinnace , and certain boats with sufficient Master's and Mariners , together furnished with a months victuali , to stay and make farther discovery of the country and coasts , and so much victuali likewise as might be sufficient for the bringing of them all ( being and hundred and three persons ) into England , if they thought good after such time , with any other thing they would desire , and that he might be able to spare . 
 Or else if they thought they had made sufficient discovery already , and did desire to return into England , he would give them passage . But they , as it seemed , being desirous to stay , accepted very thankfully and with great 
 132 
 gladness , that which was offered first . Whereupon the ship being appointed and received into charge by some of their own company sent into her by Master Lane , before they had received from the rest of the Fleet the provision appointed them , there arose a great storm ( which they said was extraordinary and very strange ) that lasted three dayes'together , and put all our Fleet in great danger , to be driven from their anchoring upon the coast . For we brake many Cables , and lost many Anchors : and some of our Fleet which had lost all ( or which number was the ship appointed for Master Lane and his company ) was driven to put to sea in great danger , in avoiding the coast , and could never see us again until we met in England . Many also of our small Pinnaces and boats were lost in this storm . 
 Notwithstanding after all this , the general offered them ( with consent of his Captains ) and other ship with some provision , although not such a one for their turns , as might have be spared them before , this being unable to be brought into their Harbour . Or else if they would , to give them passage into England , although he knew we should perform it with greater difficulty then he might have done before . 
 But Master Lane with those of the chiefest of his company which he had then with him , considering what should be best for them to do , made request unto the General under their hands , that they might have passage for England : the which being granted , and the rest sent for out of the country and shipped , we departed from that coast the 18. of June . 
 And so , God be thanked , both they and we in good safety arrived at Portesmouth the 28. of July 1586. to the great glory of God , and to no small honour to our Prince , our Country , and our selves . 
 The total valve of that which was got in this voyage is esteemed at three score thousand pounds , whereof the companies which have traveled in the voyage were to have twentie thousand pounds , the adventurers 
 ! 33 
 the other fortie . Of which twentie thousand pounds ( as I can judge ) will redound some sixe pounds to the single share . 
 We lost some seven hundred and fiftie men in the voyage ; above three parts of them only by sickness . 
 The men of name that died and were slain in this voyage , which I can presently call to remembrance , are these . 
 Captain Powel . ) ( Captain Bigges . 
 Captain Varney . ( ) Captain Cecill . 
 Captain Moon . ( ) Captain Hannam . 
 Captain Fortescue . ) ( Captain Greenefield . 
 Thomas Tucker a Lieutenant . 
 Alexander Starkey a Lieutenant . 
 Master Escot a Lieutenant . 
 Master Waterhouse a Lieutenant . 
 Master George Candish . 
 Master Nicholas Winter . 
 Master Alexander Carliell . 
 Master Robert Alexander . 
 Master Scroope . 
 Master James Dier . 
 Master Peter Duke . 
 With some other , whom for haste I cannot suddenly think on . 
 The ordinance got of all sorts Brass and Iron , were about two hundred and forty pieces , whereof the two hundred and some more were brass , and were thus found and got . 
 At S. Iago some two or three and fiftie pieces . 
 In S. Domingo about fourescore , whereof was very much great ordinance , as whole Cannon , Demicanon , Culverins , and such like . 
 In Cartagena some sixtie and three pieces , and good store likewise of the greater sort . 
 In the Fort of S. Augustin were foureteene pieces . 
 The rest was Iron ordinance , of which the most part was got at S. Domingo , the rest at Cartagena . 
 