A summary and true discourse of sir Francis Drakes West Indian voyage , begun in the year 1585. Wherein were taken the cities of Saint Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the town of Saint Augustine in Florida ; Published by M. Thomas Cates . 
 His worthy knight for the service of his Prince and country having prepared his whole fleet , and got them down to Plimmouth in Devonshire , to the number of five and twenty sail of ships and pinnaces , and having assembled of soldiers and mariners , to the number of 2300. in 
 the whole , embarked them and himself at Plimmouth aforesaid , the 12. day of September 1585. being accompanied with these men of name and charge , which hereafter follow : 
 Master Christopher Carleil Lieutenant general , a man x 97 G 
 of long experience in the wars as well by sea as land , who had formerly carried high offices in both kinds in many fights , which he discharged always very happily , and with great good reputation . 
 Anthonie Powel Sergeant Major . 
 Captain Matthew Morgan , and Captain John Sampson , Corporals of the field . 
 These officers had commandment over the rest of the land-Captaines , whose names hereafter follow . 
 Captain Anthony Plat. ' Captain Edward Winter . Captain John Goring . Captain Robert Pew . Captain George Barton . 
 " Captain John Merchant . Captain William Cecill . 
 « Captain Walter Bigs . Captain John Hannam . Captain Richard Stanton . 
 Captain Martine Frobisher Viceadmiral , a man of great experience in seafaring actions , who had carried the chief charge of many ships himself , in sundry voyages before , being now shipped in the Primrose . 
 Captain Francis Knolles , Reereadmirall in the Galeon Leicester . 
 Master Thomas Vennor Captain in the Elizabeth Bonad-venture under the general . 
 Master Edward Winter Captain in the Aid . 
 Master Christopher Carleil the Lieutenant general , Captain of thee Tygar . 
 Henry White Captain of the sea Dragon . 
 Thomas Drake Captain of the Thomas . 
 Thomas Seely Captain of the Minion . 
 Baily Captain of the Bark Talbot . 
 Robert Cross Captain of the Bark Bond. 
 George Fortescue Captain of the Bark Bonner . 
 Edward Careless Captain of the Hope . 
 James Erizo Captain of the White Lion . 
 Thomas Moon Captain of the Francis . 
 John Rivers Captain of the Vantage . 
 John Vaughan Captain of the Drake . 
 John Varney Captain of the George . 
 John Martin Captain of the Benjamin . Edward Gilman Captain of the Skout . 
 Richard Hawkins Captain of the Galiot called the Duck . 
 Bitfield Captain of the Swallow . 
 After our going hence , which was the foureteenth of September , in the year of our Lord 1585. and taking our course towards Spaine , we had the wind for a few days somewhat skant , and sometime calm . And being arrived near that part of Spaine , which is called the Moors , we happened to espy diverse sails , which kept their course close by the shore , the weather being fair and calm . The general caused the Viceadmiral to go with the pinnaces well manned to see what they were , who upon sighed of the said pinnaces approaching near unto them , abandoned for the most part all their ships ( being Frenchmen ) laden all with salt , and bound homeward into France , among which ships ( being all of small burden ) there was one so well liked , which also had no man in her , as being brought unto you general , he thought good to make stay of her for the service , meaning to pay for her , as also accordingly he performed at our return : which bark was called the Drake . The rest of these ships ( being eight or nine ) were dismissed without any thing at all taken from them . Who being afterwards put somewhat farther off from the shore , by the contrariety of the wind , we happened to meet with some other French ships , full laden with Newland fish , being upon their return homeward from the said Newfoundland : whom the general after some speech had with them ( and seeing plainly that they were Frenchmen ) dismissed , without once suffering any man to go aboard of them . 
 The day following standing in with the shore again , we descried another tall ship of twelve score tons or thereabouts , upon whom Master Carliel the Lieutenant 99 
 [ HL 535-J 
 general being in the Tygar , undertook the chase , whom also anon after the Admiral followed , and the Tygar having caused the said strange ship to strike her sails , kept her there without suffering any body to go aboard until the Admiral was come up : who forthwith sending for the Master , and diverse others of their principali men , and causing them to be severally examined , found the ship and goods to be belonging to the inhabitants of S. Sebastian in Spaine , but the mariners to be for the most part belonging to S. John de Luz , and the Passage . In this ship was great store of dry Newland fish , commonly called with us Poor John , whereof afterwards ( being thus found a lawful prize ) there was distribution made into all the ships of the fleet , the same being so new and good , as it did very greatly besteaded us in the whole course of our voyage . A day or two after the The Isles of taking of this ship , we put in within the Isles of Bayon , Bayona . for jack of favourable wind : where we had not sooner anchored some part of the fleet , but the general commanded all the pinnaces with the shipboats to be manned , and every man to be furnished with such arms as were needful for that present service ; which being done , the general put himself into his galley , which was also well furnished , and rowing towards the city of Bayon , with intent , and the favour of the Almighty to surprise it , before we had advanced one half league of our way , there came a messenger being and English merchant from the Governor , to see what strange fleet we were , who came to our General , conferred a while with him , and after a small time spent , our general called for Captain Sampson , and willed him to go to the Governor of the city , to resolve him of two points . The first , to know if there were any wars between Spaine and England . The second , why our merchants with their goods were embarged or arrested . Thus departed captain Sampson with the said messenger to the city , where he found the governor & people much amazed of such a sudden accident . 
 100 
 The general with the advice and counsel of M. Carleil 
 his Lieutenant general , who was in the galley with him , thought not good to make any stand , till such time as they were within the shot of the city , where they might be ready upon the return of Captain Sampson , to make a sudden attempt if cause did require before it were dark . 
 Captain Sampson returned with his message in this sort . First , touching peace or wars the Governor said he knew of no wars , and that it lay not in him to make any , he being so mean a subject as he was . And as for the stay of the merchant's with their goods , it was the kings pleasure , but not with intent to endamage any man . And that the kings counter-commandment was ( which had be received in that place some sevennight before ) that English merchant's with their goods should be discharged : for the more verifying whereof , he sent such merchant's as were in the town of our nation , who trafficked those parts : which being at large declared to our General by them , counsel was taken what might best be done . And for that the night approached , it was thought needful to land our forces , which was done in the shutting up of the day , & having quartered our selves to our most advantage , with sufficient guard upon every strait , we thought to rest our selves for that night there . The Governor sent us some refreshing , as bred , wine , oil , apples , grapes , marmalad and such like . About midnight the weather began to overcast , insomuch that it was thought meeter to repair aboard , then to make any longer abided on land , and before we could recover the Fleet , a great tempest arose , which caused many of our ships to drive from their anchorhold , and some were forced to sea in great peril , as the bark Talbot , the bark Hawkins , and the Speedewell , which Speedewel was only driven into England , the others recovered us again : the extremity of the storm lasted three days , which no sooner began to assuage , but M. Carleil our Lieutenant general was sent with his own ship and three others : as also with the galley and with diverse 
 IOI 
 pinnaces , to see what he might do above Vigo , where he took many boats and some caravels , diversely laden with things of small valve , but chiefly with household stufie , running into the high country , and among the rest , he found one boat laden with the principal church-stuff of the high Church of Vigo , where also was their great cross of silver , of very fair embossed work , and double gilded all over , having cost them a great mass of money . They complained to have lost in all kind of goods above thirty thousand ducats in this place . 
 The next day the general with his whole fleet went from up the Isles of Bayon , to a very good harbour above Vigo , where M. Carleil stayed his coming , aswell for the more quiet riding of his ships , as also for the good commodity of fresh watering , which the place there did afourd full well . In the mean time the Governor of Galicia had reared such forces as he might , his numbers by estimate were some two thousand foot , and three hundred horse , and marched from Bayon to this part of the country , which lay in sighed of our fleet , where making a stand , he sent to parley with our general , which was granted by our general , so it might be in boats upon the water : and for safety of their persons , there were pledges delivered on both sides : which done , the Governor of Galicia put himself with two others into our Viceadmirals skiff , the same having be sent to the shore for him , and in like sort our general went in his own skifFe ; where it was by them agreed , we should furnish our selves with fresh water , to be taken by our own people quietly on the land , and have all other such necessaries , paying for the same , as the place would affburd . 
 When all our business was ended , we departed , and took our way by the Islands of Canaria , which are esteemed some three hundred leagues from this part of Spaine , and falling purposely with Palma , with intention to have taken our pleasure of that place , for the full digesting of many things into order , and the better 
 102 
 furnishing our store with such several good things as it affordeth very abundantly , we were forced by the vile Sea-gate , which at that present fell out , and by the naughtiness of the landing place , being but one , and that under the favour of many platforms well furnished with great ordinance , to depart with the receipt of many of their Canon-shot , some into our ships , and some beside , some of them being in very deed full Canon high . But the only or chief mischief was the dangerous sea-surge , which at shore all alongst plainly threatened the overthrow of as many pinnaces and boats , as for that time should have attempted any landing at all . 
 Now seeing the expectation of this attempt frustrated by the causes aforesaid , we thought it meeter to fallen with the Isle Hierro , to see if we could find any better fortune : and coming to the Island , we landed a thousand men in a valley under a high mountain , where we stayed some two or three hours , in which time the inhabitants , accompanied with a young fellow born in England , who dwelled there with them , came unto us , showing their state to be so poor , that they were all ready to starve , which was not untrue : and therefore without any thing got , we were all commanded presently to embark , so as that night we put off to sea Southsoutheast along towards the coast of Barbary . 
 Upon Saturday in the morning , being the 13. of November , we fell with Cape Blank , which is a low land and shallow water , where we catched store of fish , and doubling the Cape , we put into the Bay , where we found certain French ships of war , whom we entertained with great courtesy , and there left them . This afternoon the whole fleet assembled , which was a little scattered about their fishing , and put from thence to the Isles of Cape Verde , sailing till the 16. of the same month in the morning , on which day we descried the Island of S. Iago , and in the evening we anchored the fleet between the town called the Playa or Praya , and 
 103 
 S. Iago , where we put on shore 1000. men or more , under the leading of M. Christopher Carleil Lieutenant general , who directed the service most like a wise commander . The place where we had first to march did afford no good order , for the ground was mountainous & full of dales , being a very stony and troublesome passage ; but such was his industrious disposition , as he would never leave , until we had got up to a fair plain , where we made stand for the assembling of the army . And when we were all gathered together upon the plain , some 2 miles from the town , the lieutenant general thought good not to make attempt till daylight : because there was not one that could serve for guide or giving knowledge at all of you place . And therefore after having well rested , even half and hour before day , he commanded the army to be divided into 3 speciali parts , such as he appointed , whereas before we had marched by several companies , being thereunto forced by the badness of the way as is aforesaid . 
 Now by the time we were thus ranged into a very brave order , daylight began to appear , and being advanced hard to the wall , we saw no enemy to resist , whereupon the Lieutenant general appointed Captain Sampson with thirtie shot , and Captain Barton with other thirtie , to go down into the town which stood in the valley under us , and might very plainly be viewed all over from that place where the whole Army was now arrived : and presently after these Captains was sent the great ensign , which had nothing in it but the plain English cross , to be placed towards the Sea , that our Fleet might see Saint Georges cross flourish in the enemies fortress . Order was given that all the ordinance throughout the town and upon all the platforms , which were above fiftie pieces all ready charged , should be shot ofF in honour of the Queens Majesties coronation day , being the seventeenth of November , after the yearly custom of England , 104 
 which was so answered again by the ordinance out of all the ships in the fleet which now was come near , as it was strange to hear such a thundering noise last so long together . In this mean while the Lieutenant general held still the most part of his force on the hill top , till such time as the town was quartered out for the lodging of the whole Army : which being done every captain took his own quarter , and in the evening was placed such a sufficient guard upon every part of the town that we had no cause to fear any present enemy . 
 Thus we continued in the city the space of 14. The title of days , taking such spoils as the place yielded , which ta^en were for the most part , wine , oil , meal , and some such like things for victuali , as vinegar , olives , and some such other trash , as merchandise for their Indians trades . 
 But there was not found any treasure at all , or any thing else of worth beside . 
 The situation of S. Iago is somewhat strange , in form like a triangle , having on the East and West sides two mountains of rock and cliff , as it were hanging over it , upon the top of which two mountains were built certain fortifications to preserve the town from any harm that might be offered , as in a plot is plainly showed . From thence , on the South side of the town is the main sea , and on the North side , the valley lying between the foresaid mountains , wherein the town stands : the said valley & town both do grow very narrow , insomuch that the space between the two cliffs of this end of the town is estimated not to be above 10. or 12. score over . 
 In the midst of the valley comes down a riveret , rill , or brook of fresh water , which hard by the sea side makes a pond or pool , whereout our ships were watered with very great ease and pleasure . Somewhat above the town on the North side between the two mountains , the valley waxes somewhat larger then at the towns end , which valley is wholly converted into i°5 
 gardens and orchards well replenished with diverse sorts of fruits , herbs and trees , as lymmons , oranges , sugar-canes , cochars or cochos nuts , plantans , potato-roots , cucumbers , small and round onions , garlic , and some other things not now remembered , among which the cochos nuts , and plantans are very pleasant fruits , the said cochos hath a hard shell and a green husk over it , as hath our walnut , but it far exceeds in greatness , for this cochos in his green husk is bigger than any men two fists : of the hard shell many drinking cups are made here in England , and set in silver as I have often seen . 
 Next within this hard shell is a white rind resembling in show very much even as any thing may do , to the white of and egg when it is hard boiled . And within this white of the nut lies a water , which is whitish and very clear , to the quantity of half a pint or thereabouts , which water and white rind before spoken of , are both of a very cool fresh taste , and as pleasing as any thing may be . I have herd some hold opinion , that it is very restorative . 
 The plantan grows in cods , somewhat like to beans , but is bigger and longer , and much more thick together on the stalk , and when it waxes ripe , the meat which fills the rind of the cod becomes yellow , and is exceeding sweet and pleasant . 
 In this time of our being there happened to come a Portugall to the Western fort , with a flag of truce , to whom Captain Sampson was sent with Captain Goring , who coming to the said messenger , he first asked them what nation they were , they answered Englishmen , he then required to know if wars were between England and Spaine , to which they answered that they knew not , but if he would go to their general he could best resolve him of such particulars , and for his assurance of passage and repassage , these Captains made offer to engage their credits , which he refused for that he was not sent from his Governor . Then they told him , if 106 
 his Governor did desire to take a course for the common benefit of the people and country , his best way were to come and present himself unto our noble and merciful Governor sir Francis Drake , whereby he might be assured to find favour , both for himself and thee inhabitants . Otherwise within three days we should march over the land , and consume with fire all inhabited places , and put to the sword all such living souls as we should chance upon : so thus much he took for the conclusion of his answer , and departing , he promised to return the next day , but we never herd more of him . 
 Upon the foure and twentieth of November , the general accompanied with the lieutenant general and sixe hundred men marched forth to a village twelve miles within the land , called Saint Domingo , where the Governor and the Bishop with all the better sort were lodged , and by eight of the clock we came to it , finding the place abandoned , and the people fled into the mountains : so we made stand a while to ease our selves , and partly to see if any would come to speak to us . 
 After we had well rested our selves , the general commanded the troops to march away homeward , in which retreat the enemy showed themselves , both horse and foot , though not such force as durst encounter us : and so in passing sometime at the gaze with them , it waxed late and towards night before we could recover home to S. Iago . 
 On Munday the sixe and twentieth of November , the general commanded all the pinnaces with the boats , to use all diligence to embark the Annie into such ships as every man belonged . The Lieutenant general in like sort commanded Captain Goring and Lieutenant Tucker , with one hundred shot to make a stand in the market place , until our forces were wholly embarked , the viceadmiral making stay with his pinnace & certain boats in the harbour , to bring the said last 
 107 
 A wise course to be Imitated in all great actions . 
 company aboard the ships . Also the general willed forthwith the galley with two pinnaces to take into them the company of Captain Barton , and the company of Captain Bigs , under the leading of captain Sampson , to seek out such munition as was hidden in the ground , at the town of Praya or Playa , having be promised to be showed it by a prisoner , which was taken the day before . 
 The Captains aforesaid coming to the Playa , landed their men , and having placed the troop in their best strength , Captain Sampson took the prisoner , and willed him to show that he had promised , the which he could not , or at least would not : but they searching all suspected places , found two pieces of ordinance , one of iron , and other of brass . In the after noon the general anchored with the rest of the Fleet before the Playa , coming himself ashore , willing us to burn the town and make all haste aboard , the which was done by sixe of the clock the same day , and our selves embarked again the same night , and so we put off to Sea Southwest . 
 But before our departure from the town of S. Iago , we established order for the better government of the Army , every man mustered to his captain , and oaths were ministered to acknowledge her Majesty supreme Governor , as also every man to do his uttermost endeavour to advance the service of the actium , and to yield due obedience unto the directions of the general and his officers . By this provident counsel , and laying down this good foundation before hand , all things went forward in a ' due course , to the achieving of our happy enterprise . 
 In all the time of our being here , neither the Governor for the king of Spaine , ( which is a Portugall ) neither the Bishop , whose authority is great , neither the inhabitants of the town , or Island ever came at us ( which we expected they should have done ) to entreat us to leave them some part of their needful provisions , 108 
 or at the least , to spare the ruining of their town at our going away . The cause of this their unreasonable distrust ( as I do take it ) was the fresh remembrance of the great wrongs they had done to old M. William Hawkins of Plimmouth , in the voyage he made 4. or 5. The treason of years before , when as they did both break their promise , the fortug . al5 and murdered many of his men , whereof I judge you have understood , & therefore it is needless to be re - Hawkins . peated . But since they came not at us , we left written in sundry places , as also in the spittle house , ( which building was only appointed to be spared ) the great discontentment & scorn we took at this their refraining to come unto us , as also at the rude manner of killing , & savage kind of handling the dead body of one of our boys found by them straggling all alone , from whom they had taken his head and heart , and had straggled the other bowels about the place , in a most brutish and beastly manner . 
 In revenge whereof at our departing we consumed with fire all the houses , aswell in the country which we saw , as in the town of S. Iago . 
 From hence putting off to the West Indies , we were not many days at Sea , but there began among our people such mortality , as in few days there were dead above two or three hundred men . And until some seven or eight days after our coming from S. Iago , there had not died any one man of sickness in all the fleet : the sickness showed not his infection wherewith so many were stroken , until we were departed thence , and then seized our people with extreme hight burning and continual agues , whereof very few escaped with life , and yet those for the most part not without great alteration and decay of their wits and strength for a long time after . In some that died were plainly showed the small spots , which are often found upon those that be infected with the plague : we were not above eighteene days in passage between the sighed of Saint Iago aforesaid , and the Island of Dominica , being the 
 109 
 first Island of the West Indies that we fell withal , the same being inhabited with savage people , which go all naked , their skin coloured with some painting of a reddish tawny , very personable and handsome strong men , who do admit little conversation with the Spanyards : for as some of our people might understand them , they had a Spaniard or twaine prisoners with them , neither do I think that there is any safety for any of our nation , or any other to be within the limits of their commandment , albeit they used us very kindly for those few hours of time which we spent with them , helping our folks to fill and carry on their bore shoulders fresh water from the river to our ships boats , and fetching from their houses great store of Tobacco , as also a kind of bred which they fed on , called Cassavi , very white and savoury , made of the roots of Cassavi . In recompense whereof , we bestowed liberali rewards of glass , coloured beads , and other things , which we had found at Saint Iago , wherewith ( as it seemed ) they rested very greatly satisfied , and showed some sorrowful countenance when they perceived that we would depart . 
 From hence we went to another Island Westward of it , called Saint Christophers Island , wherein we spent some days of Christmas , to refresh our sick people , and to cleanse and air our ships . In which Island were not any people at all that we could hear of . 
 In which time by the General it was advised and resolved , with the consent of the Lieutenant general , the Viceadmiral , and all the rest of the Captains to proceed to the great Island of Hispaniola , aswell for that we knew our selves then to be in our best strength , as also the rather allured thereunto , by the glorious fame of the ci tie of S. Domingo , being the ancientest and chief inhabited place in all the tract of Country thereabouts . And so proceeding in this determination , by the way we met a small Frigate , bound for the same place , the which the Viceadmiral took : and having duly examined the men that were in her , 
 IIO 
 there was one found , by whom we were advertised , the Haven to be a barren Haven , and the shore or land thereof to be well fortified , having a Castle thereupon furnished with great store of Artillery , without the danger whereof was no convenient landing place within ten English miles of the City , to which the said Pilot took upon him to conduct us . 
 All things being thus considered on , the whole forces were commanded in the Evening to embark themselves in Pinnaces , boats , and other small barks appointed for this service . Our soldiers being thus embarked , the general put himself into the bark Francis as Admiral , and all this night we lay on the sea , bearing small sail until our arrival to the landing place , which was about the breaking of the day , and so we landed , being Newyeeres day , nine or ten miles to the Westwards of that brave City of S. Domingo : for at that time nor yet is known to us any landing place , where the sea-surge does not threaten to overset a Pinnace or boat . Our general having seen us all landed in safety , returned to his Fleet , bequeathing us to God , and the good conduct of Master Carliell our Lieutenant general : at which time , being about eight of the clock , we began to march , and about noon time , or towards one of the clock , we approached the town , where the Gentlemen and those of the better sort , being some hundred and fiftie brave horses or rather more , began to present themselves ; but our small shot played upon them , which were so sustained with good proportion of pikes in all parts , as they finding no part of our troop unprepared to receive them ( for you must understand they viewed all round about ) they were thus driven to give us leave to proceed towards the two gates of the town , which were the next to the seaward . They had manned them both , and planted their ordinance for that present , and sudden alarm without the gate , and also some troops of small shot in Ambuscado upon the high way side . We divided our whole force , being some thousand or twelve hundred 
 men into two parts , to enterprise both the gates at one instant , the Lieutenant general having openly vowed to Captain Powel ( who led the troop that entered the other gate ) that with Gods good favour he would not rest until our meeting in the market place . 
 Their ordinance had no sooner discharged upon our near approach , and made some execution among us , though not much , but the Lieutenant general began forthwith to advance both his voice of encouragement , and pace of marching : the first man that was slain with the ordinance being very near unto himself : and thereupon hasted all that he might , to keep them from the recharging of the ordinance . And notwithstanding their Ambuscados , we marched or rather ran so roundly in to The city of them , as pell mell we entered the gates , and gave them S. Domingo more care every man to save himself by flight , then ' reason to stand any longer to their broken fight . we forthwith repaired to the market place : but to be more truly understood , a place of very fair spacious square ground , whither also came as had be agreed Captain Powel with the other troop : which place with some part next unto it , we strengthened with Barricados , and there as the most convenient place assured our selves , the City being far too spacious for so small and weary a troop to undertake to guard . Somewhat after midnight , they who had the guard of the Castle , hearing us busy about the gates of the said Castle , abandoned the same : some being taken prisoners , and some fleeing away by the help of boats to the other side of the Haven , and so into the country . 
 The next day we quartered a little more at large , but not into the half part of the town , and so making substantiali trenches , and planting all the ordinance , that each part was correspondent to other , we held this town the space of one month . 
 In the which time happened some accidents , more then are well remembered for the present , but among other things , it chanced that the general sent on his message 112 
 to the Spanyards a Negro boy with a flag of white , signifying truce , as is the Spanyards ordinary manner to do there , when they approach to speak to us : which boy unhappily was first met withal by some of those , who had be belonging as officers for the King in the Spanish Galley , which with the Town was lately fallen into our hands , who without all order or reason , & contrary to that good usage wherewith we had entertained their messengers , furiously struck the poor boy thorough the body with one of their horsemen's staves : with which wound the boy returned to the General , and after he had declared the manner of this wrongful cruelty , died forthwith in his presence , wherewith the general being greatly passioned , commanded the Provost Martiali , to cause a couple of Friars then prisoners , to be carried to the same place where the boy was stroken , accompanied with sufficient guard of our soldiers , and there presently to be hanged , dispatching at the same instant another poor prisoner , with this reason wherefore this execution was done , & with this message further , that until the party who had thus murdered the Generals messenger were delivered into our hands , to receive condign punishment , there should not day pass , wherein there should not two prisoners be hanged , until they were all consumed which were in our hands . 
 Whereupon the day following , he that had be Captain of the kings Galley , brought the offender to the towns end , offering to deliver him into our hands ; but it was thought to be a more honourable revenge to make them there in our sighed , to perform the execution themselves : which was done accordingly . 
 During our being in this town , as formerly also at S. Iago there had passed justice upon the life of one of our own company for and odious matter , so here likewise was there and Irishman hanged , for the murdering of his Corporali . 
 In this time also passed many treaties between their Commissioners and us , for ransom of their City ; but 
 x 113 H 
 upon disagreements we still spent the early morning's in firing the outmost houses : but they being built very magnificently of stone , with high lofts , gave us not small travel to ruin them . And albeit for diverse days together we ordained each morning by day break , until the heat began at nine of the dock , that two hundred Mariners did nought else but labour to fire and burn the said houses without our trenches , while the soldiers in a like proportion stood forth for their guard : yet did we not , or could not in this time consume so much as one third part of the town : which town is plainly described and set forth in a certain Map. And so in the end , what wearied with firing , and what hastened by some other respects , we were contented to accept of five and twentie thousand Ducats of five shillings sixe pence the piece , for the ransom of the rest of the town . 
 among other things which happened and were found at S. Domingo , I may not omit to let the world know one very notable mark & token of the unsatiable ambition of the Spanish king and his nation , which was found in the kings house , wherein the chief governor of that City and Country is appointed always to lodge , which was this : In the coming to the Hall or other rooms of this house , you must first ascend up by a fair large pair of stairs ; at the head of which stairs is a handsome 
 spacious place to walk in , somewhat like unto a gallery : wherein upon one of the walls , right over against you as you enter the said place , so as your eye cannot escape the sighed of it , there is described & painted in a very large Scutcheon the arms of the king of Spaine , and in the lower part of the said Scutcheon , there is likewise described 
 a Globe , containing in it the whole circuit of the sea and the earth whereupon is a horse standing on his hinder part within the globe , and the other forepart without the globe , lifted up as it were to leap , with a scroll painted in his mouth , wherein was written these words in Latin , Non sufficit orbis : which is as much to say , as the world suffices not . Whereof the meaning was required to be 
 114 
 1586. known of some of those of the better sort , that came in commission to treat upon the ransom of the town , who would shake their heads , and turn aside their countenance in some smiling sort , without answering any thing , as greatly ashamed thereof . For by some of our company it was told them , that if the Queen of England would resolutely prosecute the wars against the king of Spaine , he should be forced to lay aside that proud and unreasonable reaching vain of his : for he should find more then enough to do to keep that which he had already , as by the present example of their lost town they might for a beginning perceive well enough . 
 Now to the satisfying of some men , who marvel greatly that such a famous and goodly built City so well inhabited of gallant people , very brave in their apparel ( whereof our soldiers found good store for their relief ) should afford no greater riches then was found there : herein it is to be understood that the Indian people , which were the naturals of this whole Island of Hispaniola ( the same being near hand as great as England ) were many years since clean consumed by the tyrannic of the Spanyards , which was the cause , that for lack of people to work in the Mines , the gold and silver Mines of this Island are wholly given over , and thereby they are feign in this Island to use Copper money , whereof was found very great quantity . The chief trade of this place consisteth of Sugar and Ginger , which grows in the Island , and of Hides of oxen and kine , which in this waste country of the Island are bred in infinite numbers , the soil being very fertile : and the said beasts are fed up to a very large grouth , and so killed for nothing so much , as for their Hides aforesaid . we found here great store of strong wine , sweet oil , vinegar , olives , and other such like provisions , as excellent Wheat-meal packed up in winepipes and other cask , and other commodities likewise , as Woollen and Linen cloth , and some Silks : all which provisions are brought out of Spaine , and served us for ” 5 
 great relief . There was but a little Plate or vessel of Silver , in comparison of the great pride in other things of this town , because in these hot Countries' they use much of those earthen dishes finely painted or varnished , which they call Porcellana , which is had out of the East India : & for their drinking , they use glasses altogether , whereof they make excellent good and fair in the same place . But yet some plate we found , and many other good things , as their household garniture very gallant and rich , which had cost them deer , although unto us they were of small importance . 
 From Saint Domingo we put over to the main or firm land , and going all alongst the coast , we came at Cartagena , the last in sighed of Cartagena , standing upon the sea side , so near , as some of our barks in passing alongst , approached within the reach of their Culverin shot , which they had planted upon certain platforms . The Harbour mouth lay some three miles towards the Westward of the town , whereinto we entered about three or foure of the clock in the afternoon without any resistance of ordinance , or other impeachment planted upon the same . In the Evening we put our selves on land towards the harbour mouth , under the leading of Master Carliell our Lieutenant general , who after he had digested us to march forward about midnight , as easily as foot might fallen , expressly commanded us to keep close by the sea-wash of the shore for our best & surest way , whereby we were like to go through , and not to miss any more of the way , which once we had lost within and hour after our first beginning to march , through the slender knowledge of him that took upon him to be our guide , whereby the night spent on , which otherwise must have be done by resting . But as we came within some two miles of the town , their horsemen which were some hundred , met us , and taking the alarm , retired to their townward again upon the first volley of our shot that was given them : for the place where we encountered being 
 116 
 woody and bushy even to the water side was unmeet for their service . 
 At this instant we might hear some pieces of Artillery discharged , with diverse small shot towards the harbour , which gave us to understand , according to the order set down in the Evening before by our general , that the Viceadmiral accompanied with Captain Venner , Captain White , and Captain Cross , with other sea Captains , and with diverse Pinnaces and boats should give some attempt unto the little Fort standing on the entry of the inner Haven , near adjoining to the town , though to small purpose , for that the was strong , and the entry very narrow was chained over : so as there could be nothing got by the attempt , more than the giving of them and alarm on that other side of the Haven being a mile and a half from the place we now were at . In which attempt the Viceadmiral had the rudder of his skiff stroken through with a Saker shot , and a little or no harm received elsewhere . 
 The troops being now in their march , half a mile behither the Town or less , the ground we were on grew to be straight , and not above fiftie paces over , having the main Sea on the one side of it , and the harbour-water or inner sea ( as you may term it ) on the other side , which in the plot is plainly showed . This straight was fortified clean over with a stone wall and a ditch without it : the said wall being as orderly built with flanking in every part , as can be set down . There was only so much of this straight unwalled , as might serve for the issuing of the horsemen , or the passing of carriage in time of need : but this unwalled part was not without a very good Barricado of wine-buts or pipes , filled with earth , full and thick as they might stand on end one by another , some part of them standing even within the main sea . 
 This place of strength was furnished with sixe great pieces , Demi-culverins , and Sakers , which shot 
 117 
 directly in front upon us as we approached . Now without this wall upon the inner side of the straight , they had brought likewise two great Galleys with their prowess to the shore , having planted in them eleven pieces of ordinance , which did beat all cross the straight , and flanked our coming on . In these two Galleys were planted three or foure hundred small shot , and on the land in the guard only of this place , three hundred shot and pikes . 
 They in this their full readiness to receive us , spared not their shot both great and small . But our Lieutenant general , taking the advantage of the dark ( the day light as yet not broken out ) approached by the lowest ground , according to the express direction which himself had formerly given , the same being the sea-wash shore , where the water was somewhat fallen , so as most of all their shot was in vain . Our Lieutenant general commanded our shot to forbear shooting until we were come to the wall side , and so with pikes roundly together we approached the place , where we soon found out the Barricades of pipes or buts , to be the meetest place for our assault , which , notwithstanding it was well furnished with pikes and shot , was without staying attempted by us : down went the buts of earth , and pell mell came our swords and pikes together , after our shot had first given their volley , even at the enemies nose . Our pikes were somewhat longer then theirs , and our bodies better armed ; for very few of them were armed : with which advantage our swords and pikes grew too hard for them , and they driven to give place . In this furious entry , the Lieutenant general slew with his own hands the chief Ensign bearer of the Spaniards , who fought very manfully to his lives end . 
 We followed into the town with them , and giving them no leisure to breath , we won the Marketplace , albeit they made head , and fought a while before we god it , and so we being once seized and assured of 118 
 1586. that , they were content to suffer us to lodge within their town , and themselves to go to their wives , whom they had carried into other places of the country before our coming thither . 
 At every streets end they had raised very fine Barricados of earth-works , with trenches without them , as well made as ever we saw any work done : at the entering whereof was some little resistance , but soon overcome it was , with few slain or hurt . They had joined with them many Indians , whom they had placed in corners of advantage , all bowmen , with their arrows most villanously empoisoned , so as if they did but break the skin , the party so touched died without great marvel : some they slew of our people with their arrows : some they likewise mischieved to death with certain pricks of small sticks sharply pointed , of a foot and a half long , the one end put into the ground , the other empoisoned , sticking fast up , right against our coming in the way , as we should approach from our landing towards the town , whereof they had planted a wonderful number in the ordinary way : but our keeping the sea-wash shore missed the greatest part of them very happily . 
 I overpass many particular matters , as the hurting of Captain Sampson at sword blows in the first entering , unto whom was committed the charge of the pikes of the Vanguard by his lot and turn ; as also of the taking of Alonso Bravo the chief commander of Ahnto Bravo that place by Captain Goring , after the said captain had first hurt him with his sword : unto which Captain was committed the charge of the shot of the said Vanguard . 
 Captain Winter was likewise by his turn of the Vanguard in this attempt , where also the Lieutenant general marched himself : the said Captain Winter through a great desire to serve by land , having now exchanged his charge by sea with Captain Cecil for his band of footmen . 
 119 
 Captain Powel the Sergeant mayor had by his turn the charge of the foure companies which made the battle . 
 Captain Morgan , who at S. Domingo was of the Vanguard , had now by turn his charge upon the companies of the Rearward . 
 Every man as well of one part as of another , came so willingly on to the service , as the enemy was not able to endure the fury of such hight assault . 
 We stayed here sixe weeks , and the sickness with mortality before spoken of still continued among us , though not with the same fury as at the first : and such as were touched with the said sickness , escaping death , very few or almost none could recover their strength : yea , many of them were much decayed in their memory , insomuch that it was grown and ordinary judgement , when one was herd to speak foolishly , to say he had be sick of the Calenture , which is the Spanish name of their burning Ague : for as I told you before , it is a very burning and pestilent ague . The originali cause thereof , is imputed to the Evening or first night air , which they term La serena , wherein they say and hold very firm opinion , that who so is then abroad in the open air , shall certainly be infected to the death , not being of the Indian or natural raze of those country people : by holding their watch , our men were thus subjected to the infectious air , which at S. Iago was most dangerous and deadly of all other places . 
 With the inconvenience of continual mortality , we were forced to give over our intended enterprise to go with Number de Dios , and so overland to Panama , where we should have strooken the stroke for the treasure , and full recompense of our tedious travails . And thus at Cartagena we took our first resolution to return homewards : the form of which resolution I thought good here to put down under the principali Captains hands , as follows . 
 