A Libel of Spanish lies written by DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spaines Armada , concerning some part of the last voyage of sir Francis Drake ; together with a confutation of the most notorious falsehoods therein contained , and a declaration of the truth by M. Henrie Savile Esquire : and also and approbation of both by sir Thomas Baskefvil general of her Majesties Armada after the decease of sir Francis Drake . 
 To the courteous Reader . 
 Hereas DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the Spanish fleet , hath by his printed letters published to the world diverse untruths , concerning our fleet and the commanders thereof , 
 seeking thereby his own glory , our disgrace ; I have taken upon ( though of many least able ) to confute the same , rather for that the printed copy came first into hands , having my self be Captain of one of 
 and me the my her 
 Majesties ships in the same voyage . Take this therefore ( gentle Reader ) as a token of my duty and love to my country and countrymen , and expect only a plain truth , as from the pen of a soldier and Navigator : Which if you take in good part , you may draw me hereafter to publish some greater labour . 
 Henry Savile . 
 THe true copy of a letter found at the sacking of 
 Cadiz , written by DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spaine his Navy in the West Indies , sent unto Doctor Peter Florez , President of the contractation house for the Indies , and by him put in print with privilege : wherein are declared 246 
 many untruths , and false reports , tending to the disgrace of the service of her Majesties Navy , and the commanders thereof , lately sent to the West Indies , under the command of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins Generals at the sea ; and sir Thomas Baskervill general at land : with a confutation of diverse gross lies and untruths , contained in the same letter : together with a short relation of the fight , according to the truth . Copia de una carta , que ernbio DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , General de la Armada de sum Magestad , embiada all Doctor Pedro Florez Presidente de la casa de la contratacion de las Indias : en que trata del sucesso de la Armada de Ynglatierra , despues que partio de Panama , de que fue por General Francisco Draque , y de sum muerte . 
 E Cartagena di cuenta a vuestra Merced como sali del puerto de la ciudad de Lisbona , en busca de la armada Ynglesa , aunque por la mucha priessa , no se pudieron reparar tanbien los Galeones como fuera necessario , y con el tiempo se perdio uno , y por desgracia se quemo 
 un Filibote , y aviendo andado muchos dias en busca deal enemigo , hasta que llegue a Cartagena , donde aviendo tornado el parecer de DONE Pedro de Acunna Governador y capitan general de aquella ciudad , porque tenia mucha necessidad de agua , y reparar los Navios por que venian faltos della , me detuve en aquel puerto , adonde tuve noticia por un Aviso , que Francisco Draque murio en Number de Dios , de pena de aver perdido tantos Baxeles y gente , aunque despues se supo mass por estenso . Y aviendo dado a vuestro Merced cuenta de lo que hasta alii a sucedido , agora la doy de que sali de aquel puerto a dos the Marzo , y tome la derrota de la Havana , donde entendi hallarlo : y aviendo hecho la diligencia ’247 
 possible , Lunes a onze deal dicho mes , alas dos despues de medio dia , all salir de la Ysla de Pinos , en la ensenada de Guaniguanico , tope con el , que yva con catorze Navios muy buenos : fueme arrimando a el , aunque tenia el viento por suyo , y el Almiranta que yva mass all viento con otros dos Navios commenzo arrimarsele , y aunque vino sober ella con todos los suyos tres vezes , no fue part acercarsele paraque quisiesse envestir : los que estavamos mass apartados fuymos dando bordos acercan-donos hasta jugar la artilleria , Mosqueteria , y Arcabuzeria de los mass dellos , en lo qual el recibio muy conocido danno , el lo hizo con el artilleria como suele , y particularment el Almiranta , y en reconociendo la voluntad con que a el nos arrimavamos , con mass diligencia de lo que se puede creer se desembarazo de todos , poniendose en huyda , dando las velas , dexando en la mar todas las Lanchas que traya . The le segui con nueve Navios toda la noche , y con quatro mass todo el dia , hasta hazerle doblar el cabo de Sant Anton , y tomar la derrota de la Canal de Bahama , conform a las instruciones de sum Magestad : sirvio de poco el for me con menos numero de Navios , ni todas las diligencias que se hizieron , para que se inclinase a esperar ni abordar , ni tirar un arcabuz , ni una pieza , porque el se dio la diligencia que pudo , porque sus Navios los avia reduzido a la mitad , y los mejores , y estos acabava de reparar en Puerto Bello , donde se estuvo mass de quarenta dias , y ansi venian muy reparados ; y the saque los mios desbaratados , que no me dio el tiempo lugar para aderezarlos . A que navego dos meses y medio , y traygo la capitana , que desde que parti de Cartagena no and parado las bombas , y el dia que sali se me Io arrimo una Zabra con esta necessidad ; la Almiranta y los demas Navios vienen con el mismo trabajo , pero since embargo , por lo que the vi en los enemigos ; era muy conocida la ventaja que nos hazia , y mucha dicha seria apoderarse del , sino es hallarlo sober el Ferro . Con todo esso me and dexado un Navio muy bueno en las manos con muy buena 248 
 gente , la qual dize como murio el Draque en Number de Dios , y que va por general de la dicha armada Ynglesa el Coronel Quebraran , y por el poco lugar que se a dado not and podido tomar Agua , lenna , ni carnem , y van de manera que no se como an de Hegar a Ynglatierra . Enter la gente deven de ser ciento y quarenta , y quinze nobles capitanes de lo mejor de alii , y algunos ricos , segun se echa de ver en eHos . No se ofrece otra cosa : nuestro sennor guard a vuestra Merced , como puede , y the desseo . De la Havana . 30 de Marzo , the 1596. 
 Annos . 
 DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda . 
 EL Licenciado DONE Juan Bermudes y Figueroa , Teniente mayor de Assistente desta ciudad de Sevilla y sum tierra , que hago officio de Assistente della por ausencia de sum Sennoria del Conde de Priego , Doy licencia a Rodrigo de Cabrera , para que pueda imprimir la Relacion de la muerte de Francisco Draque . La qual haga por dos meses , y por ellos no lo imprima otro alguno . So pena de diez mil maravedis para la camara de sum Magestad . Fecha en Sevilla a quinze de Mayo , de mil y quinientos y noventa y seys annos . 
 El Licenciado DONE Juan Bermudez y Figueroa . 
 Por sum mandado , Gregoria de Gutierez , Escrivano . 
 249 
 [ The Spanish 
 The Copy of a letter which DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spaine his army , sent unto Doctor Peter Florez , President of the contractation house for the Indies , wherein he makes mention of the success of the English army , after they departed from Panama , whereof was general Francis Drake , and of his death . 
 Rom Cartagena I gave relation unto your Worship how I departed from the city of Lisbone , in the pursuit of the English army : although for the great haste the Galleons could not be so well repaired as was needful , and with foul weather one was lost , and a Flyboat 
 was burned . And having sailed many days in pursuit of the enemy , until I arrived at Cartagena , and there taking the advice of DONE Pedro de Acunna , Governor of the city , and Captain generail ( for we had great need of water , and to repair our ships ) we stayed in that port : whereas I had intelligence by and Indian that Francis Drake died in Number de Dios , for very grief that he had lost so many Barks and men , as was afterwards more manifestly known . Thus having given you a relation of all that happened hitherto , now I let you understand , that I left this Port the second of March , and took our course towards Havana , where I thought to have found the English fleet . And having used all the diligence possible , upon Munday the eleventh of the said month , about two of the clock in the afternoon , at the end of thee He of Pinos , in the entrance of Guaniguanico , I met with the English fleet , being fourteene very good ships : I drew towards them although they had the wind of us , and our 
 250 
 Admiral who boar up towards the wind , with other two ships began to draw near them , and although we set thus upon them , three times with all their ships , yet would they not set again upon us , and those of our men which were farthest off cried to them amain , being both within shot of artillery , muskets , and calivers , whereby they received evident hurt by us : They plied their great ordinance according to their manner , and especially their Viceadmiral , and seeing our resolution how sharp we were bent towards them , they with all expedition and speed possible prepared to fly away , hoisting sails and leaving their boats for haste in the sea : but I followed them , with nine ships all the night following , and with foure more the next day , till I made them double the Cape of S. Antonie , and to take the course towards the Channel of Bahama , according to the instructions from his Majesty . It little availed us to be seen , with less number of ships , neither yet all the diligence we could use , could cause them to stay or come near us , nor to shoot off one harquebus or piece of artillery , for they fled away as fast as they could , and their ships were half diminished , and that the best part of them : the rest they repaired in Puerto Bello , whereas they were about fortie days , and so by that means they were all well repaired ; and our ships were very foul , because the time would not permit us to trim them : I have sailed 2 months and a half in the Admiral , since we departed from Cartagena , we have not repaired their pumps nor cleansed them : and the same day I departed thence , there came unto me a small Pinnace in the like distress : our Viceadmiral and the rest of our ships have the like impediment , but no great hindrance unto us , for ought I could perceive by our enemies : It is manifest what advantage they had of us , and by no means was it possible for us to take them , unless we could have come to have found them at and anchor . Nevertheless they left us one good ship behind for 
 251 
 our share , well manned , which told me that Drake died in Number de Dios , and that they have made for general of the English fleet the Colonel Quebraran : and also by means of the small time , being straightly followed by us , they had no opportunity to take either water , wood or flesh , and they are also in such bad case , that I know not how they will be able to arrive in England . The number of men we have taken are about and hundred and fortie , and fifteen e noble captains of their best sort , and some of them rich , as well may appear by their behaviour : I have no other thing to write at this time . Our Lord keep you who best can , and as I desire . From Havana the 30 of March , 1596 ’ 
 DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo De Avellaneda . 
 THe Licenciat DONE John Bermudes of Figueroa Lieutenant of the Assistants of the city of Sivill , and the Province thereof , who does supply the office of the Assistant in the absence of the Right honourable the Earl of Priego , gives licence to Roderigo de Cabriera to imprint the Relation of the death of Francis Drake , which only he may do for two months , and no other to imprint the same within the said term , upon pain of tenne thousand Maravedis for his Majesties chamber . Given in Sivill the 15 of May 1596. 
 The Licenciat DONE John Bermudes of Figueroa . 
 By his Assign Gregorie Gutierez Notary . 
 THis letter of the general DONE Bernaldino sent into Spaine declaring the death of Sir Francis Drake and their supposed victory , was altogether received for and undoubted truth , and so pleasing was this news unto the Spaniarde , that there was present commandment given to publish the letter in print , that all the people of Spaine might be partakers of this common joy : the which letter printed in Sivill , bearing date the 15 of May , 1596 came to the hands of Henrie Savile 252 
 Esquire , who being employed in that service for the West Indies , and Captain of her Majesties good ship the Adventure , under the conduct of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , hath caused the said printed letter to be translated into English . And that the impudency of the Spanish general may the more plainly appear , the said Henrie Savile does answer particularly to every untruth in the same letter contained , as hereafter follows . 
 The answer to the Spanish letter . 
 First the general does say , that Francis Drake died at Number de Dios , as he had intelligence by and Indian . 
 He 
 general sent this news into his 
 The Generals 
 country confirmed with his hand and first news , & 
 ■ * - _ .. - - his best news 
 seal of Arms : It is the first news in his letter , and it was the best news that he could send into Spaine . For it did ease the stomachs of the timorous Spaniards greatly to hear of the death of him , whose life was a scourge and a continual plague unto them : But it was a point of great simplicity , and scarcely beseeming a general , to tie the credit of his report locally to any place upon the report of a silly Indian slave . For it had be sufficient to have'sayd , that Francis Drake was certainly dead , without publishing the lie in print , by naming Number de Dios : for it is most certain sir Francis Drake died betwixt the Hand of Escudo , and Puerto Bello : but the general being ravished with the sudden joy of this report as a man that hath escaped a great danger of the enemy , does break out into and insolent kind of bragging of his valour at Sea , and heaping one lie upon another , does not cease until he hath drawn them into sequences , and so does commend them unto Peter the Doctor , as censor of his learned work . 
 253 
 is in part lying news . 
 Secondly , The general does write unto the Doctor , that Francis Drake died for very grief that he had lost so many barks and men . 
 A Thing very strange that the general or the Indian whom he does vouch for his lie , should have such speculation in the body of him whom they never saw , as to deliver for truth unto his country , the very cause or disease whereof he died : and this second report of his is more gross then the first . For admit the mistaking of the place might be tolerable ; notwithstanding , this precise affirming the cause of his death does manifestly prove that the general does DONE Bernal - make no conscience to lie . And as concerning the < Rno M lie loss of any Barks or men in our Navy , by the impudently . valour of Spaniard before Sir Francis Drake his death , we had none ( one small pinnace excepted ) which we assuredly know was taken by chance , falling single into a fleet of five Frigates ( of which was general DONE Pedro Telio ) near unto the Hand of Dominica , and not by the valour of DONE Bernaldino : the which The success five Frigates of the kings afterwards had but ill success , of the kings for one of them we burned in the harbour of S. Juan 
 de Puerto rico , and one other was sunk in the same harbour , and the other three were burned among many other ships at the taking of Cadiz . This I think in wise men's judgements , will seem a silly cause to make a man sorrow to death . For true it is , sir The certain Francis Drake died of the flux which he had grown ‘ sirTrmcis^ uPon eight days before his death , and yielded Drake died UP his spirit like a Christian to his creator quietly in his cabin . And when the general shall survey his loss , he shall find it more then the loss of the English , and the most of his , destroyed by the bullet : but the death of Sir Francis Drake was of so great comfort unto the Spaniard , that it was thought to be a sufficient amends , although their whole fleet had been utterly lost . 
 254 
 Thirdly , the general does say of his own credit , and not by intelligence from any Indian or other , that on the eleventh of March last he met the English fleet at the He of Pinos , being fourteene good ships : who although they had the wind of him , yet he set upon them three times with all their ships : but the English Fleet fled , and refused to fight , shooting now and then a shot , but especially the Viceadmiral . 
 THis third lie of the general DONE Bernaldino 
 Delgadillo de Avellaneda ( whose name for the prolixity thereof may be drawn somewhat near the length of a cable ) hath not colour of protection , but it hath a just proportion in measure to the lies of old Bernardino de Mendoza his countryman , concerning the A payee of overthrow of his Majesties Navy in the year one Spanish Hers. thousand five hundred eightie and eight . For except DONE Bernaldino the general did purpose to win the whetstone from DONE Bernardino de Mendoza the old Spanish Iyer ; I cannot conjecture why he should write to his country for a truth , that he chased the English Navy with nine ships , and did three several times give the onset to the English fleet , who being fourteene good ships ( as he says ) did fly and refuse to fight ; considering that the Spanish Viceadmiral ( if he be living ) The Spanish and many other can witness the contrary : who fighting Viceadmiral like a true valiant man , departed from the fight with a torn and battered ship to save her from sinking . ' Neither can I imagine that there is any one in the Spanish Fleet ( DONE Bernaldino excepted ) that will say they were less then twentie sail of ships when they met the English fleet : and the Spanish Navy can witness that they received such store of bullets from the English fleet , that they were glad to depart , and in despite of them the English navy did hold their determined course : And taking a view of the Spanish fleet the next day , their number was not above thirteene after the fight . 
 255 ’ 
 * The translation of the Spanish word Lanchas is here mistaken . 
 This lie was made in the Generals own forge . 
 ships , which did argue that they were either sunk or fled to harbour to save themselves . 
 Fourthly , the General says , that the English fleet fled away , and left their * oars for haste behind them in the sea . 
 IT was strange that they should leave behind them oars in the sea , since there was not in the English fleet either Galley or Galliass , which required the use of oars : as for the oars of their ship-boats and other such small vessels , they had stowed them aboard their ships , and were not impediment unto them , but most necessary for them to use , and therefore not likely they would cast them overboard : But it is more likely , that the general fell into some pleasant dream at Sea , wherein he did see a false apparition of victory against the English , and for lack of matter did set this down in his letter for news to his country : It is sin to belie the Devil , and therefore the general shall have his right : the letter is so well contrived , and yet with no great eloquence , but with such art , that there are not many more lines , then there are lies , which showed that there are wonderful and extraordinary gifts in the general : but I am persuaded if DONE Bernaldino had thought that his letter should have been printed , he would have omitted many things contained in the letter : for the Doctor did use him somewhat hardly in showing the letter openly , and more in suffering it to be printed : for friends may like good fellows send lies one to the other for recreation , and feed their friends with some small taste thereof , so it be kept close , without danger to incur the title of a lying general : But as the matter is now handled through the simplicity of the Doctor , I cannot see but the general DONE Bernaldino is like to carry the title equally betwixt both his shoulders . 
 256 
 Fiftly , the general does say in his printed letter , that notwithstanding all the diligence he could use , he could not cause the English fleet to stay nor come near them , nor discharge one harquebus or piece of artillery , but fled away as fast as they could . 
 A Nd this lie also he does not receive by intelligence from any other , but himself was and eyewitness in the actium , which made him bold to send this with the rest into his country for current news : but herein DONE Bernaldino was more bold than wise , for the torn and battered sides of his Galleons , being compared The tom sides with her Majesties ships , and others that served in of the Spanish that fight , do declare , that his ships received at least two bullets for one . Neither can it be concealed but Bernaldino oj his own countryman ( if any do favour truth ) may lying . easily see the loss , and late reparations , done unto the kings fleet , since they did encounter with the English Navy , whensoever they that remain shall arrive in Spaine . But the general seems to be a very good proficient in his profession , and waxes somewhat bold , treading the true steps of old Bernardino de Mendoza : and yet Mendoza was somewhat more wary in his lies , for he had sometime the colour of intelligence to shadow them : but the general growing from boldness to impudency makes no scruple to say , that the English Navy fled as fast as they could without discharging any harquebus or piece of artillery , when as the battered sides of his ships do return the lie to his face : For in this conflict DONE Bernaldino did behave himself so valiantly , that he was always farthest off7 in the fight , and had so great care of his own person , that he stood clear from the danger of musket or any small shot , and durst not apprpch ; whereas our The order of general was the foremost , and so held his place , the English until by order of fight other ships were to have Naw . their turns , according to his former direction : who wisely and politicly had so ordered his vangarde , 
 x 257 R 
 and rearward , that as the manner of it was altogether strange to the Spaniarde , so might they have be without all hope of victory , if their general had be a man of any judgement in sea-fights : I know no reason why the English Navy should fly from him ; The Spaniard for the Spaniarde may put all the gain in his eye that cannot brag ever he did win from the English : Peradventure some of his gain . novice of our country meeting the general in 
 Spaine , and hearing a repetition of so many syllables in one name , as DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , might think them to be words of conjuration , and for fear of raising a spirit , might fly from him as from the Devil : or some simple Indian slave hearing the like repetition of his long and tedious name , might suppose it to be and army of Spaniards , and for fear run away : but the commanders and captains of the English Navy Spanish brags were men of such resolution , that no Spanish brags could are of no valve dismay them ( for they have often met them with their ^EnT^ Pikes in their Spanish beards ) nor the countenance of ' DONE Bernaldino quail them , although he were acowtred in his gilded leather buskin's , and his Toledo rapier . 
 Sixtly the general says in his letter , that notwithstanding their flying away so fast , the English left them one good ship well manned , who told him that Drake died in Number de Dios : in which ship were one hundred and fortie men , and fifteene noble captains of the best sort . 
 THe general DONE Bernaldino , like a resolute Spaniarde having already gone over his shoes , makes no danger to wade over his boots also : and as he hath begun , so he does conclude . I marvel that he did not in writing his discourse remember this old saying : that is , A liar ought to have a good memory : It were much better for him in mine opinion to revoke the testimony which he says he had from the Englishmen , concerning Sir Francis Drake his death at Number de Dios , and stand to the intelligence received from 258 
 the silly Indian slave , as it appears in his first lie : for without all doubt there is no English man that will say ( if he have his right senses ) that he died at Number de Dios , for they all know the contrary : neither can the General avouch that he received intelligence from any English man , that after the death of Sir Francis Drake they did elect for general Colonel Quebraran DONE Bernal - ( as he does most falsely affirm in the latter end of ra ™ his vain and frivolous letter ) seeing that this name new^nd^ was strange & unknown to any in the English Navy . Grange name . Neither do I imagine that any of those which the general says he hath taken , were so forgetful , as not to remember their Generals name . But without all 
 doubt this addition of so new and strange a name to the English general , does prove that DONE Bernaldino is not unfurnished of a forge and storehouse of lies , from whence as from and everflowing fountain , he sends forth lies of all sorts sufficient for his own store , and great plenty to furnish his friends : the general was much beholding to his godfathers who gave him the name Bernaldino , which we in English do take to be plain Barnard , which name hath as it were a kind of privilege from being sharply reprehended , when the party is thought to err : for it is a common saying among the schoolmen that Bernardus non videt omnia , viz. Barnard sees not all things , ( when he does dissent from their opinions ) the which favour we could be content to yield to Bernaldino for the name sake , if he were not taken with so many manifest and impudent lies : neither do I think that Sennor Bernaldino will say , that he saw all that he hath written , be it spoken in council for shaming the general : for is there any man so void of reason as to think , that any Englishman being demanded of his Generals name , would write or speak Quebraran for Baskervil . So much difference there is in the found of the syllables , as there is no affinity at all , or likelihood of truth . But such are the Generals rare gifts , ( be it spoken to 
 259 
 [ III . 596. J 
 The schoolmen of modesty do use this kind of reprehension , when they do think the author to err . 
 The difference betwixt Quebraran and Basker-vill . 
 his small praise ) that we Englishmen must of force confess , that the general hath given a proud onset to carry the whetstone from Sennor Bernaldino de Mendoza : neither will the hundred and fortie men and fifteene noble Captains ( which he says he did take , of whom he might have be rightly informed of their Generals name ) acquit him of lying forgery , for giving the name of Quebraran to the English general . As for the good ship well manned , which he says the English left them after the fight , I am persuaded he hath no man to witness that lie , for the ship was separated by weather from the English fleet in the night , thirteene days before the fight with the Spanish Navy , and never to any men knowledge came more in sighed The general of the English fleet . If the Spanish ship by chance makes great did take the said well manned ship ( as they call her ) ^ “ di^si^ 1 doubt not but they have the ship , the hundred and ship which is forty men , and the fifteene noble Captains to show : supposed not to But evermore I guess the Spanish reckoning will fallen strike one short when it is examined , for the fifteene noble Capi noble ta'nes prove , ( as I take it ) but three , whose loss Captain ™ ‘ I grieve to think on : Neither did the Spaniards gain contrary to the them by valour , or we lose or leave them for cowGenerals lying ardise , as most untruly this bragging liar hath certified . wi^rme but ®ut tbe general like a provident man , to make his ‘ ‘ three ™ ** fame and credit the greater with his Prince and country , takes upon him ( among other his miracles performed before the English fleet ) by way of amplification to make small matters seem great , as a little shoe to serve a great foot , and finding that it can hardly be brought to pass , he does so stretch the leather with his teeth that it is ready to break : and yet notwithstanding all this will not serve his purpose ; for the printing of the letter does mar the play , and brings such matter in question , as the general does wish might be concealed , and were he not of so dry and choleric a complexion , as commonly Spaniards are , he would blush for very shame in publishing so impudently 
 260 
 such manifest untruths . For since his meeting with the English fleet at the He of Pinos , there hath be by the worthy English Generals and honourable expedition from England into the Continent of Spaine , where among other exploits having taken the city of Cadiz , in the sack thereof was found some of DONE The first Bernaldino his printed letters : which coming to the hands of a captai ne that served in Sir Francis Drakes last voyage to the West Indies , he hath thought very fit ( in regard of the slanders to the English Navy contained in the said letter ) to quote the errors , that the truth only may appear , to all such as have a desire to be rightly informed of such accidents as befell them in this late voyage to the West Indies : and this may suffice to show DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda his great judgement in amplifying small matters , or of nothing to make in show somewhat . And now having thus far informed you of the truth in reproof of the slanderous , false , and untrue reports of this glorious lying general , with a true disproof to some of the grossest of his lies , I will leave him with the rest of his lying letter , and the circumstances therein contained to your censures : who in discretion may easily discern the same : And have here following plainly and truly set down the course and order of our whole fight after we met . 
 The meeting of our English Navy and the Spanish fleet , and the order of our encounter . 
 Unday the first of March , according to our computation , we descried the Hand of Pinos , where haling in for the Western part thereof , thinking there to have watered , being within foure leagues off it Southerly , we sent in three of our Pinnaces to discover the harbour , and 
 to found afore us , about one of the clock in the afternoon ; the same day we discovered a fleet of twentie 261 
 The first discovery of the Spanish fleet . 
 High incoimter betwixt the English and the Spanish ships . 
 sails , and deeming them to be the Spanish fleet , we kept our loof to get the wind , but their Viceadmiral with diverse other ships went about to cut ofF our Pinnaces : so that our general with some other of our ships , was forced to tack about upon the larbourd tack , and so ran in towards the land keeping the wind , so as we recovered our Pinnaces ; which forced the enemies ships to tack about , and to take the aid of their fleet , and being come near unto them they shot at us ; we still approached , having our close fights up , our flags , ensigns and streamers displayed , our men orderly placed in each quarter , but forbore our fight until our general began , and gave us warning to come in and fight , by shooting off " a great piece , according to his former directions : so being within musket shot , the Viceadmiral of the Spanish fleet came nearest unto us , to whom our Viceadmiral John Traughton Captain of the Elizabeth Bonadventure gave fight , betwixt whom there was the greatest voley of small shot changed that lightly hath be herd at Sea , which continued a long half hour . In which time the Spanish fleet came in to fight . Our general Sir Thomas Baskervill being in the Garland ( whereof Humphrey Reignolds was Captain , being the next ship unto the Elizabeth Bonadventure ) bore up to the enemy , playing with his great ordinance hotly until he came within musket shot . Jonas Boden-ham Captain of the Defiance , and Henrie Savile Captain of the Adventure , came likewise in to fight with them . After the Garland being within musket shot played her part , and made good fight for the space of and hour . The Defiance bore up likewise and had her turn : after came the Adventure again within musket shot , who having changed many a great bullet with them before , renewed his fight , & continued it and hour with small shot . Then came Thomas Drake Captain of the Hope , who last of all had his turn . Thus had all the Queens ships their course : The 
 262 
 merchants ships with other small vessels being without the Queens ships , shot when they saw opportunity . After the enemy finding no good to be done ( being well beaten ) fell from us , the Adventure playing upon them with her great ordinance , made three of the last shot at them : their Viceadmiral with diverse others of their ships , were so beaten that they left ofF the fight , and were forced to lie in the wind , for that they durst not lie of either board by reason of their many and great leaks , which they had received by our great shot . The general with the rest of their fleet tacking about , fell in our wake , thinking to get the wind , which in the beginning we sought to hinder . But our general seeing that in holding the wind we should shoot our selves into the bay , gave them the wind . All that night they kept themselves upon our broad side , notwithstanding our Admiral carried his cresset-light all night , having great care of our smallest ships . This fight continued about foure hours till it was near night , in the which fight , thanks be to God , there were slain so few persons of our English fleet , as I think the like conflict hath not be performed with so little loss of men : What harm befell the Spaniards in their fleet I leave to your judgements . Yet our eyes can witness their ships were soar beaten and racked through , whereby there was such falling back and lying by the lee to stop their leaks , as some of them were driven to haste away , and rather to run on shore to save themselves then sink in the Sea : beside within two hours after our fight with them , we saw one of their great ships on fire which burned into the Sea , and all the stern of another of their ships blown up : And in the morning a ship of our fleet was run so near the land , that to double the Cape de los Corrientes he must of necessity tack about and fallen in the wake of the enemy , which caused our general in the Garland and the Defiance to tack about ; which two ships forced the three ships of the 263 
 The Spanish Viceadmiral can witness , what stucesse they had in this fight . 
 The English admiral carried his Cresset light , notwithstanding the enemy was upon his broad side . 
 The English received little loss in this conflict . 
 enemies ( which were put forth to take our ship , or else to cause her run on ground ) to return to their fleet to save themselves , hoisting all their sails The remain - for haste : This morning they were fair by us having 
 derofthe the w [ n ( je of USj being but thirteen sail of their 
 werehut^ to be seen : then we stroke our top sails 
 thirteene thinking to have fought with them again , which they 
 sails . perceiving tacked about from us , and after that never 
 durst nor would come near us : What became of the rest of their fleet we know not , but true it was that they were in great distress mightily beaten and torn , by having received many bullets from us . All this day we had sighed of them , but they showed little will to fight or come near us , so we keeping our course West , and by North , about sixe of the clock at night lost the sighed of them . And this is a true discourse of our fight with the Spanish fleet . The which the author hereof will justify with the adventure of his life , against any Spaniarde serving in that actium , that shall contradict the same . Henry Savile . 
 Thomas Baskervil knight , his approbation to the former twofold discourse of Captain Savile . 
 Thomas Baskervill knight , general ot her Majesties late Indian armada in the late conflict had between the Spanish fleet and us , having perused the Spanish letter written by DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spaines Navy , and also having 
 perused captain Henrie Savile his answers unto the sixe exceptions in the Generals letter , with his discourse of the manner of our fight with the Spanish fleet , do say that the said Henrie Savile hath answered the letter , and set down the order of the fight sincerely according to truth , for testimony of which I have hereunto set my hand . 
 264 
 And if DONE Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda the general shall take any exceptions to this my approbation , or stand in the justification of his lying letter written to Doctor Peter Florez , President of the Contractation house for the Indies , and by him for Bernaldinos glory lately put in print : I then say that he falsely lied , and that I will maintain against him with whatsoever arms he shall make choice of . And because the kingdomeS wherein we abide are enemies ( by reason of which there is no means in either of them , to maintain that I have written ) let him make choice of any indifferent kingdom of equal distance from either realm , and I will there be ready to maintain as much as I have written : But if by my employments into France I be so stayed by her Majesties commandments , that I cannot out of that realm meet him in any other , I cannot see why he should take any exception to that , considering the equality of the place , and that the Armies of both our princes be there resident . 
 Thomas Baskervile . 
 