IT The discovery of Guiana . 
 N Thursday the 6. of February in the year 1595. we departed England , and the Sunday following had sighed of the North cape of Spaine , the wind for the most part continuing prosperous : we passed in sighed of the Burlings , & the Rock , and so onward for the Canaries , 
 and fell with Fuerte ventura the 17 of the same month , where we spent two or three days , and relieved our com-348 
 panies with some fresh meat . From thence we coasted by the Grand Canaria , & so to Tenerif , and stayed there for the Lions whelp your Lordship's ship , and for Captain Amy as Preston and the rest . But when after 7. or 8. days we found them not , we departed and directed our course for Trinidad with mine own ship , and a small Theyleof bark of captain Crosses only ( for we had before lost Trinitia , i-sight of a small Galego on the coast of Spaine , which came with us from Plimmouth : ) we arrived at Trinidad the 22. of March , casting anchor at point Curiapan , which the Spaniards call punta de Gallo , which is situate in 8. degrees or there about : we abided there 4. or 5. days , & in all that time we came not to the speech of any Indian or Spaniard : on the coast we saw a fire , as we sailed from the point Caroa towards Curiapan , but for fear of the Cunapan . Spaniards none durst come to speak with us . I my self coasted it in my barge close aboard the shore and landed in every Cove , the better to know the island , while the ships kept the channel . From Curiapan after a few days we turned up Northeast to recover that place which the Spaniards call Puerto de los Espannoles , and the inhabitants Conquerabia , and as before ( revictualing my barge ) I left the ships and kept by the shore , the better to come to speech with some of the inhabitants , and also to understand the rivers , watering places , & ports of the island , which ( as it is rudely done ) my purpose is to send your Lordship after a few days . From Curiapan I came to a port and seat of Indians called Parico , where we Parico . found a fresh water river , but saw no people . From thence I rowed to another port , called by the naturals Piche , and by the Spaniards Tierra de Brea : In the way Tierra de between both were diverse little brooks of fresh water and one salt river that had store of oysters upon the branches of the trees , and were very salt and well tasted . All their oysters grow upon those boughs and sprays , and not on the ground : the like is commonly seen in other places of the West Indies , and else where . 
 This tree is described by Andrew Thevet in his French 
 349 
 Antarctic , and the form figured in the book as a plant very strange , and by Plinie in his 12. book of his natural historic . But in this island , as also in Guiana there are very many of them . 
 At this point called Tierra de Brea or Piche there is that abundance of stone pitch , that all the ships of the world may be therewith laden from thence , and we made trial of it in trimming our ships to be most excellent good , and melts not with the Sun as the pitch of Norway , and therefore for ships trading the South parts very profitable . From thence we went to the mountain foot called Anniperima , and so passing the river Carone on which the Spanish City was seated , we met with our ships at Puerto de los Espannolles or Conquerabia . 
 This island of Trinidad hath the form of a sheephook , and is but narrow , the North part is very mountainous , the soil is very excellent and will bear sugar , ginger , or any other commodi tie that the Indies yield . It hath store of deer , wild porks , fruits , fish and foul : it hath also for bred sufficient maiz , cassavi , and of those roots and fruits which are common every where in the West Indies . It hath diverse beasts which the Indies have not : the Spaniards confessed that they found grains of gold in some of the rivers , but they having a purpose to enter Guiana ( the Magazin of all rich metals ) cared not to spend time in the search thereof any further . This island is called by the people thereof Cairi , jand in it are diverse nations : those about Parico are called laio , those at Punta de Carao are of the Arwacas , and between Carao and Curiapan they are called Salvajos , between Carao and Punta de Galera are the Nepojos , and those about the Spanish city term themselves Carinepagotes : Of the rest of the nations , and of other ports and rivers I leave to speak here , being impertinent to my purpose , and mean to describe them as they are situate in the particular plot and description of the island , three parts whereof I coasted with my barge , that I might the better describe it . 
 35° 
 Meeting with the ships at Puerta de los Espannoles , we found at the landing place a company of Spaniards who kept a guard at the descent , and they offering a sign of peace , I sent Captain Whiddon to speak with them , whom afterwards to my great grief I left buried in the said island after my return from Guiana , The death of being a man most honest and valiant . The Spaniards seemed to be desirous to trade with us , and to enter into terms of peace , more for doubt of their own strength then for ought else , and in the end upon pledge , some of them came aboard : the same evening there stale also aboard us in a small Canoa two Indians , the one of them being a Cacique or Lord of the people called Cantyman , who had the year before bene with Captain Whiddon , and was of his acquaintance . By this Cantyman we understood what strength the Spaniards had , how far it was to their City , and of DONE Antonio de Berreo the governor , who was said to be slain in his second attempt of Guiana , but was not . 
 While we remained at Puerto de los Espannoles some Spaniards came aboard us to buy linen of the company , and such other things as they wanted , and also to view our ships and company , all which I entertained kindly and feasted after our manner : by means whereof I learned of one and another as much of the estate of Guiana as I could , or as they knew , for those poor soldiers having be many years without wine , a few draughts made them merry , in which mood they vaunted of Guiana and of the riches thereof , and all what they knew of the ways and passages , my self seeming to purpose nothing less then the entrance or discovery thereof , but bred in them and opinion that I was bound only for the relief of those English which I had planted in Virginia , whereof the bruit was come among them ; which I had performed in my return , if extremity of weather had not forced me from the said coast . 
 351 
 8 Englishmen betrayed by Antony Berreo . 
 I found occasions of staying in this place for two causes : the one was to be revenged of Berreo , who the year before 1594. had betrayed eight of Captain Whiddons men , and took them while he departed from them to seek the Edward Bonaventure , which arrived at Trinidad the day before from the East Indies : in whose absence Berreo sent a Canoa aboard the pinnace only with Indians and dogs inviting the company to go with them into the woods to kill a deer , who like wise men in the absence of their Captain followed the Indians , but were no sooner one harquebus shot from the shore , but Berreos soldiers lying in ambush had them all , notwithstanding that he had given his word to Captain Whiddon that they should take water and wood safely : the other cause of my stay was , for that by discourse with the Spaniards I daily learned more and more of Guiana , of the rivers and passages , and of the enterprise of Berreo , by what means or fault he failed , and how he meant to prosecute the same . 
 While we thus spent the time I was assured by another Cacique of the North side of the island , that Berreo had sent to Margarita and Cumana for soldiers , meaning to have given me a cassado at parting , if it had be possible . For although he had given order through all the island that no Indian should come aboard to trade with me upon pain of hanging & quartering , ( having executed two of them for the same , which I afterwards found ) yet every night there came some with most lamentable complaints of his cruelty , how he had divided the island and given to every soldier a part , that he made the ancient Caciques which were Lords of the country to be their slaves , that he kept them in chains , and dropped their naked bodies with burning bacon , and such other torments , which I found afterwards to be true : for in the city after I entered the same there were 5. of you lords or little kings ( which they call Caciques in the West Indies ) in one chain 352 
 1595-almost dead of famine , and wasted with torments : these are called in their own language Acarewana , and now of late since English , French and Spanish are come among them , they call themselves Captains , because they perceive that the chiefest of every ship is called by that name . Those five Captains in the chain were called Wannawanare , Carroaori , Maquarima , Tarroo-panama , and Aterima . So as both to be revenged of the former wrong , as also considering that to enter Guiana by small boats , to depart 400. or 500. miles from my ships , and to leave a garrison in my back interested in the same enterprise , who also daily expected supplies out of Spaine , I should have savoured very much of the ass : and therefore taking a time of most advantage I set upon the Corpse du guard in the evening , and having put them to the sword , sent Captain Calfield onward with 60. soldiers , and my self followed with 40. more and so took their new City which 
 they called S. Joseph by break of day : they abided The City of not any fight after a few shot , and all being dismissed \'a^e^ntm but only Berreo and his companion , I brought them Berreo with me aboard , and at the instance of the Indians , I prisoner . set their new city of S. Joseph on fire . 
 The same day arrived Captain George Gifford with your Lordship's ship , and Captain Keymis whom I lost on the coast of Spaine , with the Galego , and in them diverse gentlemen and others , which to our little army was a great comfort and supply . 
 We then hasted away towards our purposed discovery , and first I called all the Captains of the island together that were enemies to the Spaniards ; for there were some which Berreo had brought out of other countries' , and planted there to eat out and wast those that were natural of the place , and by my Indian interpreter , which I carried out of England , I made them understand that I was the servant of a Queen , who was the great Cacique of the North , and a virgin , and had more Caciques under her then there were trees in 
 x 353 z 
 Sir W. Ralegh passed 400. miles towards Guiana . 
 that island : that she was and enemy to the Castellani in respect of their tyrannic and oppression , and that she delivered all such nations about her , as were by them oppressed , and having freed all the coast of the Northern world from their servitude , had sent me to free them also , and withal to defend the country of Guiana from their invasion and conquest . I showed them her Majesties picture which they so admired and honoured , as it had be easy to have brought them idolatrous thereof . 
 The like and a more large discourse I made to the rest of the nations both in my passing to Guiana , and to those of the borders , so as in that part of the world her Majesty is very famous and admirable , whom they now call Ezrabeta Cassipuna Aquerewana , which is as much as Elizabeth , the great princess or greatest commander . This done we left Puerto de los Espannoles , and returned to Curiapan , and having Berreo my prisoner I gathered from him as much of Guiana as he knew . 
 This Berreo is a gentleman well descended , and had long served the Spanish king in Millain , Naples , the Low countries and elsewhere , very valiant and liberali , and a gentleman of great assuredness , and of a great heart : I used him according to his estate and worth in all things I could , according to the small means I had . 
 I sent Captain Whiddon the year before to get what knowledge he could of Guiana , and the end of my journey at this time was to discover and enter the same , but my intelligence was far from truth , for the country is situate above 600. English miles further from the Sea , then I was made believe it had been , which afterwards understanding to be true by Berreo , I kept it from the knowledge of my company , who else would never have be brought to attempt the same : of which 600. miles I passed 400. leaving my ships so far from me at anchor in the Sea , which was more of desire to perform that discovery , then of reason , especially having 
 354 
 * 595-such poor and weak vessels to transport our selves in ; for in the bottom of and old Galego which I caused to be fashioned like a galley , and in one barge , two whirries , and a shipboat of the Lions whelp , we carried 100. persons and their victuals for a month in the same , being all driven to lie in the rain and weather , in the open air , in the burning Sun , and upon the hard boards , and to dress our meat , and to carry all manner of furniture in them , wherewith they were so pestered and unsavoury , that what with victuals being most fish , with wet clothes of so many men thrust together , and the heat of the Sun , I will undertake there was never any prison in England , that could be found more unsavoury and loathsome , especially to my self , who had for many years before be dieted and cared for in a sort far more differing . 
 If Captain Preston had not be persuaded that he should have come too late to Trinidad to have found us there ( for the month was expired which I promised to tarry for him there ere he could recover the coast of Spaine ) but that it had pleased God he might have joined with us , and that we had entered the country but some ten days sooner ere the Rivers were overflown , we had adventured either to have gone to the great City of Manoa , or at least taken so many of the other Cities [ in . 634. J and towns nearer at hand , as would have made a royal return : but it pleased not God so much to favour me at this time : if it shall be my lot to prosecute the same , I shall willingly spend my life therein , and if any else shall enabled thereunto , and conquer the same , I assure him thus much , he shall perform more then ever was done in Mexico by Cortez , or in Peru by Pizarro , whereof the one conquered the Empire of Mutezuma , the other of Guascar , and Atabalipa , and whatsoever prince shall possess it , that Prince shall be Lord of more gold , and of a more beautiful Empire , and of more Cities and people , then either the King of Spaine , or the great Turke . 
 3S5 
 But because there may arise many doubts , and how this Empire of Guiana is become so populous , and adorned with so many great Cities , towns , temples , and treasures , I thought good to make it known , that the Emperor now reigning is descended from those magnificent princes of Peru , of whose large territories , of whose policies , conquests , edifices , and riches Pedro de Cieza , Francisco Lopez , and others have written large discourses : for when Francisco Pizarro , Diego Almagro and others conquered the said Empire of Peru , and had put to death Atabalipa son to Guaynacapa , which Atabalipa had formerly caused his eldest brother Guascar to be slain , one of the younger sons of Guaynacapa fled out of Peru , and took with him many thousands of those soldiers of the Empire called Orejones , and with those and many others which followed him , he vanquished all that tract and valley of America which is situate between the great river of Amazones , and Baraquan , otherwise called Orenoque and Marannon . 
 The Empire of Guiana is directly East from Peru towards the Sea , and lies under the Equinoctial line , and it hath more abundance of gold then any part of Peru , and as many or more great Cities then ever Peru had when it flourished most : it is governed by the same laws , and the Emperor and people observe the same religion , and the same form and policies in government as were used in Peru , not differing in any part : and I have be The stateliness assured by such of the Spaniards as have seen Manoa the of Manoa . Imperial City of Guiana , which the Spaniards call El 
 Dorado , that for the greatness , for the riches , and for the excellent seat , it far exceeds any of the world , at least of so much of the world as is known to the Spanish nation : it is founded upon a lake of salt water of 200. leagues long like unto Mare Caspium . And if we compare Fran. Lopez , it to that of Peru , & but read the report of Francisco LoPez and othersj it will seem more then credible : and 120* ’ ? because we may judge of the one by the other , I thought good to insert part of the 120. Chapter of 356 
 Lopez in his generail historic of the Indies , wherein he describeth the Court and magnificence of Guaynacapa , ancestor to the Emperor of Guiana , whose very words are these . Todo el servicio de sum casa , mesa , y cozina , era de oro , y de piata , y quando menos de plata , y cobre por mass rezio . Tenia en sum recamara estatuas huecas de oro , que parecian gigantes , y las figuras all propio , y tamanno the quantos animales , aves , arboles , y yervas produze la tierra , y de quantos pieces cria la mar y aguas de sus reynos . Tenia assi mesmo sogas , costales , cestas , y troxes de oro y plata , rimeros de palos de oro , que pareciessen lenna raiada para quemar . En fin no avia cosa en sum tierra , que no la tuviesse de oro contrahecha : y an dizen , que tenian los Ingas un vergel en una Isla cerca de la Puna , donde se yuan a holgar , quando querian mar , que tenia la ortaliza , las flores , y arboles de oro y plata , invention y grandeza hasta entonces nunca vista . Allende de todo esto tenia infinitissima cantitad de plata , y oro por labrar en el Cuzco , que se perdio por la muerte de Guascar , ca los Indios lo escondieron , viendo que los Espannoles se lo tomavan , y embiavan a Espanna . That is , All the vessels of his house , table and kitchen were of gold and silver , and the meanest of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal . He had in his wardrobe hollow statues of gold which seemed giants , and the figures in proportion and bigness of all the beasts , birds , trees , and herbs , that the earth brings forth : and of all the fish that the sea or waters of his kingdom breeds . He had also ropes , budgets , chests and troughs of gold and silver , heaps of billets of gold , that seemed wood marked out to burn . Finally , there was nothing in his country , whereof he had not the counterfeit in gold : Yea and they say , The Ingas had a garden of pleasure in and island near Puna , where they went to recreate themselves , when they would take the air of the Sea , which had all kind of garden-herbs , flowers and trees of gold and silver , and invention , and magnificence till then never seen . Beside all this , he had and infinite quantity 
 357 
 of silver and gold unwrought in Cuzco which was lost by the death of Guascar , for the Indians hid it , seeing that the Spaniards took it , and sent it into Spaine . 
 And in the 117. chapter Francisco Pizarro caused the gold and silver of Atabalipa to be weighed after he had taken it , which Lopez sets down in these words following . Hallaron cinquenta y dos mil marcos de buena plata , y un millon y trezientos y veinte y seys mil , y quinientos pesos de oro , Which is : They found fiftie and two thousand marks of good silver , and one million , and three hundred twenty and sixe thousand and five hundred pezos of gold . 
 Now although these reports may seem strange , yet if we consider the many millions which are daily brought out of Peru into Spaine , we may easily believe the same : for we find that by the abundant treasure of that country the Spanish king vexes all the princes of Europe , and is become , in a few years , from a poor king of Castile , the greatest monarch of this part of the world , and likely every day to increase , if other princes forslow the good occasions offered , and suffer him to add this empire to the rest , which by far exceeds all the rest : if his gold now endanger us , he will then be unresistable . Such of the Spanyards as afterwards endeavoured the conquest thereof ( whereof there have be many , as shall be declared hereafter ) thought that this Inga ( of whom this emperor now living is descended ) took his way by the river of Amazones , by that branch which is called Papamene : for by that way followed Orellana ( by the commandment of Gonzalo Pizarro , in the year 1542 ) whose name the river also bears this day , which is also by others called Marannon , although Andrew Thevet doth affirm that between Marannon and Amazones there are 120 leagues : but sure it is that those rivers have one head and beginning , and the Marannon , which Thevet describeth , is but a branch of Amazones or Orellana , of which I will speak more in another place . It was attempted by Ordas ; but it is now little less then 70 358 
 years since that Diego Ordas , a knight of the order of Saint Iago attempted the same : and it was in the year 1542 that Orellana discovered the river of Amazones ; but the first that ever saw Manoa was Juan Martinez master of the munition to Ordas . At a port called Morequito in Guiana there lies at this day a great anchor of Ordas his ship ; and this port is some 300 miles within the land , upon the great river of Orenoque . 
 I rested at this port foure days : twenty days after I left the ships at Curiapan . The relation of this Martinez ( who was the first that discovered Manoa ) his success and end are to be seen in the Chancery of Saint Juan de Puerto rico , whereof Berreo had a copy , which appeared to be the greatest encouragement aswell to Berreo as to others that formerly attempted the discovery and conquest . Orellana after he failed of the discovery of Guiana by the said river of Amazones , passed into Spaine , and there obtained a patent of the king for the invasion and conquest , but died by sea about the Islands , and his fleet severed by tempest , the actium for that time proceeded not . Diego Ordas followed the enterprise , and departed Spaine with 600 soldiers , and 30 horse , who arriving on the coast of Guiana , was slain in a mutiny , with the most part of such as favoured him , as also of the rebellious part , insomuch as his ships perished , and few or none returned , neither was it certainly known what became of the said Orgas , until Berreo found the anchor of his ship in the river of Orenoque ; but it was supposed , and so it is written by Lopez , that he perished on the seas , and of other writers diversely conceived and reported . And hereof it came that Martines entered so far within the land , and arrived at that city of Inga the emperor ; for it chanced that while Ordas with his army rested at the port of Morequito ( who was either the first or second that attempted Guiana ) by some negligence , the whole store of powder provided for the service was set on fire ; and Martinez having the chief charge , was condemned by the general Ordas to be executed forthwith : 359 
 1595 - 
 Juan Martinez the first that ever saw Manoa . 
 Fran. Lopez hist . gen . de las Ind. cap . 87 - 
 Diego de Ordas went forth with 600 soldiers 
 1531. 
 Martinez being much favoured by the soldiers , had all the means possible procured for his life ; but it could not be obtained in other sort then this : That he should be set into a canoa alone without any victuali , only with his arms , and so turned lose into the great river : but it pleased God that the canoa was carried down the stream , and that certain of the Guianians met it the same evening : and having not at any time seen any Christian , nor any man of that colour , they carried Martinez into the land to be wondered at , and so from The great city town to town , until he came to the great city of of Manoa or Manoa ? the seat and residence of Inga the emperor . 
 °ra ° ' The emperor after he had beheld him , knew him to be a Christian ( for it was not long before that his brothers Guascar and Atabalipa were vanquished by the Spanyards in Peru ) and caused him to be lodged in his palace , and well entertained . He lived seven months in Manoa , but was not suffered to wander into the country any where . He was also brought thither all the way blindfold , led by the Indians , until he came to the entrance of Manoa it self , and was foureteene or fifteene days in the passage . He avowed at his death that he entered the city at Noon , and then they uncovered his face , and that he traveled all that day till night thorough the city , and the next day from Sun rising to Sun setting year he came to the palace of Inga . After that Martinez had lived seven months in Manoa , and began to understand the language of the country , Inga asked him whither he desired to return into his own country , or would willingly abide with him . But Martinez not desirous to stay , obtained the favour of Inga to depart : with whom he sent diverse Guianians to conduct him to the river of Orenoque , all laden with as much gold as they could carry , which he gave to Martinez at his departure : but when he was arrived near the rivers side , the borderers which are called Orenoqueponi robbed him and his Guianians of all the treasure ( the borderers being at that time at wars , which Inga had not conquered ) save only of two 
 360 
 great bottles of gourds , which were filled with beads of gold curiously wrought , which those Orenoqueponi thought had be no other thing then his drink or meat , or grain for food , with which Martinez had liberty to pass : and so in canoas he fell down from the river of Orenoque to Trinidad , and from thence to Margarita , and also to Saint Juan de puerto rico , where remaining a long time for passage into Spaine , he died . In the time of his extreme sickness , and when he was without hope of life , receiving the Sacrament at the hands of his Confessor , he delivered these things , with the relation of his travels , and also called for his calabazas or gourds of the gold beads which he gave to the church and friars to be prayed for . This Martinez was he that Christened the city of Manoa by the name of El Dorado , and as Berreo informed me , upon this occasion : Those Guianians , and also the borderers , and all other in that tract which I have seen , are marvellous great drunkards ; in which vice , I think no nation can compare with them : and at the times of their solemn feasts , when the emperor carowseth with his captains , tributaries , and governors , the manner is thus : All those that pledge him are first stripped naked , and their bodies anointed all over with a kind of white balsamum ( by them called curca ) of which there is great plenty , and yet very deer among them , and it is of all other the most precious , whereof we have had good experience : when they are anointed all over , certain servants of the emperor , having prepared gold made into fine powder , blow it thorough hollow canes upon their naked bodies , until they be all shining from the foot to the head : and in this sort they fit drinking by twenties , and hundreds , and continue in drunkenness sometime sixe or seven days together . The same is also confirmed by a letter written into Spaine , which was intercepted , which M. Robert Duddeley told me he had seen . Upon this sighed , and for the abundance of gold which he saw in the city , the images of gold in their temples , the plataeae , armours , and shields of gold 
 361 
 The author of the name of El Dorado . 
 The substance of this report is in the end of the navigation of the great river of Marannon , written by Gonzalo Fernando de Oviedo to cardinali Bembo . Ramusio . Fol. ^ . fol . 416. 
 Sir Robert Duddeley . 
 which they use in the wars , he called it El Dorado . After the death of Ordas and Martinez , and after Orellana , who was employed by Gonzalo Pizarro , one Pedro de Osua a knight of Navarre attempted Guiana , taking his way from Peru , and built his brigandines upon a river called Oia , which riseth to the Southward of Quito , and is very great . This river falls into Amazones , by which Osua with his companies descended , and came out of that province which is called Mutylonez : and it seems to me that this empire is reserved for her Majesty and the English nation , by reason of the hard success which all these and other Spanyards found in attempting the same , whereof I will speak briefly , though impertinent in some Read sort to my purpose . This Pedro de Osua had among ^An^ta h*s trouPs a Biscain , called Agiri , a man meanly born , ' who bore no other office then a sergeant or alferez : but after certain months , when the soldiers were grieved with travels , and consumed with famine , and that no entrance could be found by the branches or body of Amazones , this Agiri raised a mutiny , of which he made himself the head , and so prevailed , as he put Osua to the sword , and all his followers , taking on him the whole charge and commandment , with a purpose not only to make himself emperor of Guiana , but also of Peru , & of all that side of the West Indies : he had of his party seven hundred soldiers , and of those many promised to draw in other captains and companies , to deliver up towns and forts in Peru : but neither finding by you said river any passage into Guiana , nor any possibility to return towards Peru by the same Amazones , by reason that you descent of the river made so great a current , he was enforced to disemboque at the mouth of the said Amazones , which can not be less then a thousand leagues from the place where they embarked : from thence he coasted the land till he arrived at Margarita to the North of Mompatar , which is at this day called Puerto de Tyranno , for that he there slew DONE Juan de villam Andreda , governor of Margarita , who was father to DONE 
 362 
 Juan Sarmiento , governor of Margarita when sir John Burgh landed there , and attempted the Island . Agiri put to the sword all other in the Island that refused to be of his party , and took with him certain Simerones , and other desperate companions . From thence he went to Cumana , and there slew the governor , and dealt in all as at Margarita : he spoiled all the coast of Caracas , and the province of Venezuela , and of Rio de la hacha ; and as I remember , it was the same year that sir John Hawkins sailed to Saint Juan de Ullua in the Jesus of Lubeck : for himself told me that he met with such a one upon the coast that rebelled , and had sailed down all the river of Amazones . Agiri from thence landed about Sancta Marta , and sacked it also , putting to death so many as refused to be his followers , purposing to invade Nuevo reyno de Granada , and to sack Pamplon , Merida , Lagrita , Tunxa , and the rest of the cities of Nuevo reyno , and from thence again to enter Peru : but in a fight in the said Nuevo reyno he was overthrown , and finding no way to escape , he first put to the sword his own children , foretelling them that they should not live to be defamed or upbraided by the Spanyards after his death , who would have termed them the children of a traitor or tyrant ; and that since he could not make them princes , he would yet deliver them from shame and reproach . These were the ends and tragedies of Ordas , Martinez , Orellana ; Ozua , and Agiri . 
 Also soon after Ordas followed Jeronimo Ortal de Saragosa with 130 soldiers , who failing his entrance by sea , was cast with the current on the coast of Paria , & peopled about S. Miguel de Neveri . It was then attempted by DONE Pedro de Silva , a Portugues of the family of Ruigomes de Silva , and by the favour which Ruigomes had with the king , he was set out , but he also shot wide of the mark ; for being departed from Spaine with his fleet , he entered by Marannon and Amazones , where by the nations of the river , and by the Amazones he was utterly overthrown , and himself and all his 363 
 A.D. 
 1595-The voyage of sirlohnDurgh to the West Indies . 
 1534-Gomar . cap . 
 84. y 86. 
 DONE Pedro de Silva . 
 DONE Gonzales Xlmenes de Casada . 
 army defeated , only seven escaped , and of those but two returned . 
 After him came Pedro Hernandez de Serpa , and landed at Cumana in the West Indies , taking his journey by land towards Orenoque , which may be some 120 leagues : but year he came to the borders of the said river , he was set upon by a nation of the Indians called Wikiri , and overthrown in such sort , that of 300 soldiers , horsemen , many Indians , and Negroes , there returned but 18. Others affirm , that he was defeated in the very entrance of Guiana , at the first civil town of the empire called Macureguarai . Captain Preston in taking S. Iago de Leon ( which was by him and his companies very resolutely performed , being a great town , and far within the land ) held a gentleman prisoner , who died in his ship , that was one of the company of Hernandez de Serpa , and saved among those that escaped , who witnessed what opinion is held among the Spanyards thereabouts of the great riches of Guiana , and El Dorado the city of Inga . Another Spanyard was brought aboard me by captain Preston , who told me in the hearing of himself and diverse other gentlemen , that he met with Berreos campmaster at Caracas , when he came from the borders of Guiana , and that he saw with him forty of most pure plataeae of gold curiously wrought , and swords of Guiana decked and inlayed with gold , feathers garnished with gold , and diverse rarities which he carried to the Spanish king . 
 After Hernandez de Serpa , it was undertaken by the Adelantado , DONE Gonzales Ximenes de Casada , who was one of the chiefest in the conquest of Nuevo reino , whose daughter and heir DONE Antonio de Berreo married . Gonzales sought the passage also by the river called Papamene , which riseth by Quito in Peru , & runneth Southeast 100 leagues , and then falls into Amazones , but he also failing the entrance , returned with the loss of much labour and cost . I took one captain George a Spanyard that followed Gonzales in this enterprise . 
 364 
 1595-Gonzales gave his daughter to Berreo , taking his oath Antonio & honour to follow the enterprise to the last of his Berreo-substance and life , who since , as he hath sworn to me , hath spent 300000 ducats in the same , & yet never could enter so far into the land as my self with that poor troop or rather a handful of men , being in all about 100 gentlemen , soldiers , rowers , boat-keepers , boys , & of all sorts : neither could any of the forepassed undertakers , nor Berreo himself , discover the country , till now lately by conference with and ancient king called Carapana , he god the true light thereof : for Berreo came about 1500 miles year he understood ought , or could find any passage or entrance into any part thereof , yet he had experience of all these forenamed , and diverse others , and was persuaded of their errors and mistakings . Berreo sought it by the river Cassamar , which falls into a great river called Pato : Pato falls into Meta , and Meta into Baraquan , which is also called Orenoque . 
 He took his journey from Nuevo reyno de Granada where he dwelled , having the inheritance of Gonzales Ximenes in those parts : he was followed with 700 horse , he drave with him 1000 head of cattle , he had also many women , Indians , and slaves . How all these rivers cross and encounter , how the country lies and is bordered , the passage of Ximines and Berreo , mine own discovery , and the way that I entered , with all the rest of the nations and rivers , your lordship shall receive in a large Chart or Map , which I have not yet finished , and which I shall most humbly pray your lordship to secret , and not to suffer it to pass your own hands ; for by a draught thereof all may be prevented by other nations : for I know it is this very year sought by the French , although by the way that they now take , I fear it not much . It was also told me year I departed England , that Villiers A new Wrick the admiral was in preparation for the planting of Amazones , to which river the French have made diverse ^v^ofAm voyages , and returned much gold , and other rarities . I m “ ~ 365 ’ 
 spoke with a captain of a French ship that came from thence , his ship riding in Falmouth the same year that my ships came first from Virginia . 
 There was another this year in Helford that also came from thence , and had be foureteene months at and anchor in Amazones , which were both very rich . Although , as I am persuaded , Guiana cannot be entered that way , yet no doubt the trade of gold from thence passes by branches of rivers into the river of Amazones , and so it does on every hand far from the country it self ; for those Indians of Trinidad have plataeae of gold from Guiana , and those canibals of Dominica which dwell in the Islands by which our ships pass yearly to the West Indies , also the Indians of Paria , those Indians called Tuearis , Chochi , Apotomios , Cumanagotos , and all those other nations inhabiting never about the mountains that run from Paria thorough the province of Venesuela , and in Maracapana , and the canibals of Guanipa , the Indians called Assawai , Coaca , Aiai , and the rest ( all which shall be described in my description as they are situate ) have plataeae of gold of Guiana . And upon the river of Amazones , Thevet writeth that the people wear croissants of gold , for of that form the Guianians most commonly make them : so as from Dominica to Amazones , which is above 250 leagues , all the chief Indians in all parts wear of those plataeae of Guiana . Undoubtedly those that trade Amazones return much gold , which ( as is aforesaid ) comes by trade from Guiana , by some branch of a river that falls from the country into Amazones , and either it is by the river which passes by the nations called Tisnados , or by Carepuna . I made inquiry among the most ancient and best traveled of the Orenoqueponi , and I had knowledge of all the rivers between Orenoque & Amazones , and was very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike women , because of some it is believed , of others not . And though I digress from my purpose , yet I will set down that which hath be 366 
 delivered me for truth of those women , & I spoke with a Cacique or lord of people , that told me he had be in the river , and beyond it also . The nations of The seat of the these women are on the South side of the river in - Amazones , the provinces of Topago , and their chiefest strengths and retracts are in the Islands situate on the South side of the entrance some 60 leagues within the mouth of the said river . The memories of the like women are very ancient aswell in Africa as in Asia : In Africa those that had Medusa for queen : others in Scithia never the rivers of Tanais and Thermodon : we find also that Lampedo & Marthesia were queens of the Amazones : in many histories they are verified to have be , and in diverse ages and provinces : but they which are not far from Guiana do accompany with men but once in a year , and for the time of one month , which I gather by their relation , to be in April : and that time all kings of the borders assemble , and queens of the Amazones ; and after the queens have chosen , the rest cast lots for their Valentines . 
 This one month , they feast , dance , and drink of their wines in abundance ; and the Moon being done , they all depart to their own provinces . If they conceive , and be delivered of a son , they return him to the father ; if of a daughter they nourish it , and retain it : and as many as have daughters send unto the begetters a present ; all being desirous to increase their own sex and kind : but that they cut off the right dug of the breast , I do not find to be true . It was farther told me , that if in these wars they took any prisoners that they used to accompany with those also at what time soever , but in the end for certain they put them to death : for they are said to be very cruel and bloodthirsty , especially to such as offer to invade their territories . These Amazones have likewise great store of these plataeae of gold , which they recover by exchange chiefly for a kind of green stones , which the Spanyards call Piedras hijadas , & we use for spleen 367 
 stones : and for the disease of the stone we also esteem them . Of these I saw diverse in Guiana : and commonly every king or Cacique hath one , which their wives for the most part wear ; and they esteem them as great jewels . 
 But to return to the enterprise of Bereo , who ( as I have said ) departed from Nuevo reyno with 700 horse , beside the provisions above rehearsed , he descended by the river called Cassanar , which riseth in Nuevo reyno out of the mountains by the city of Tuvia , from which mountain also springs Pato ; both which fallen into the great river of Meta : and Meta riseth from a mountain joining to Pamplon in 
 the same Nuevo reyno de Granada . 
 These , as also 
 [ HIM - 639. J 
 Guaiare , which issueth out of the mountains by Timana , fallen all into Baraquan , and are but of his heads ; for at their coming together they loose their names ; and Baraquan farther down is also rebaptized by the name of Orenoque . On the other side of the city and hills of Timana riseth Rio grande , which falls in the sea by Sancta Marta . By Cassonar first , and so into Meta , Berreo passed , keeping his horsemen on the banks , where the country served them for to march , and where otherwise , he was driven to embark them in boats which he built for the purpose , and so came with the current down the river of Meta , and so into Baraquan . After he entered that great & mighty river , he began daily to loose of his companies both men and horse ; for it is in many places violently swift , and hath forcible eddies , many sands , and diverse Islands sharp pointed with rocks : but after one whole year , journeying for the most part by river , and the rest by land , he grew daily to fewer numbers ; for both by sickness , and by encountering with the people of those regions , thorough which he traveled , his companies were much wasted , especially by diverse encounters with the Amapaians : and in all this time he never could learn of any passage into 368 
 Guiana , nor any news or fame thereof , until he came to a further border of the said Amapaia , eight days journey from the river Caroli , which was the furthest river that he entered . Among those of Amapaia , Guiana was famous , but few of these people accosted Berreo , or would trade with him the first three months of the six , which he sojourned there . This Amapaia is also marvellous rich in gold ( as both Berreo confessed and those of Guiana with whom I had most conference ) and is situate upon Orenoque also . In this country Berreo lost 60 of his best soldiers , and most of all his horse that remained in his former years travel : but in the end , after diverse encounters with those nations , they grew to peace ; and they presented Berreo with tenne images of fine gold among diverse other plataeae and croissants , which , as he sware to me & diverse other gentlemen , were so curiously wrought , as he had not seen the like either in Italy , Spaine , or the Low-countreys : & he was resolved , that when they came to the hands of the Spanish king , to whom he had sent them by his campmaster , they would appear very admirable , especially being wrought by such a nation as had no iron instruments at all nor any of those helps which our goldsmiths have to work withal . The particular name of the people in Amapaia which gave him these pieces , are called Anebas , and the river of Orenoque at that place is above 12 English miles broad , which may be from his out fallen into the sea 700 or 800 miles . 
 This province of Amapaia is a very low and a mar-ish ground never the river ; and by reason of the read water which issueth out in small branches thorough the fenny and boggy ground , there breed diverse poisonful worms and serpents ; and the Spanyards not suspecting , nor in any sort foreknowing the danger , were infected with a grievous kind of flux by drinking thereof ; and even the very horses poisoned therewith : insomuch as at the end of the 6 months , that they abided there , x 369 2 A 
 A.D. 
 ’595 - 
 of all their troops , there were not left above 120 soldiers , & neither horse nor cattle : for Berreo hoped to have found Guiana by 1000 miles nearer then it fell out to be in the end : by means whereof they sustained much want and much hunger , oppressed with grievous diseases , and all the misery's that could be imagined . I demanded of those in Guiana that had traveled Amapaia , how they lived with that tawny or read water when they traveled thither : and they told me that after the Sun was near the middle of the sky , they used to fill their pots and pitchers with that water , but either before that time , or towards the setting of the Sun it was dangerous to drink of , and in the night strong poison . I learned also of diverse other rivers of that nature among them , which were also ( while the Sun was in the Meridian ) very safe to drink , and in the morning , evening , and night wondered dangerous and infective . From this province Berreo hasted away assoon as the Spring and beginning of Summer appeared , and sought his entrance on the borders of Orenoque on the South side ; but there ran a ledge of so high and impassable mountains , as he was not able by any means to march over them , continuing from the East sea into which Orenoque falls , even to Quito in Peru : neither had he means to carry victuali or munition over those craggy , high , and fast hills , being all woody , & those so thick and spiny , & so full of prickles , thorns , and briers , as it is impossible to creep thorough them : he had also neither friendship among the people , nor any interpreter to persuade or treat with them : and more , to his disadvantage , the Caciques and kings of Amapaia had given knowledge of his purpose to the Guianians , and that he sought to sack and conquer the empire , for the hope of their so great abundance and quantities of gold : he passed by the mouths of many great rivers , which fell into Orenoque both from the North and South , which I forbear to name for tediousness , and 
 370 
 .. IS95 " because they are more pleasing in describing then reading . 
 Berreo affirmed that there fell and hundred rivers Many into Orenoque from the North and South , whereof the least was as big as Rio grande , that passed in° > en°iue ' between Popayan and Nuevo reyno de Granada ( Rio grande being esteemed one of the renowned rivers in all the West Indies , and numbered among the great rivers of the world : ) but he knew not the names of any of these , but Caroli only ; neither from what nations they descended , neither to what provinces they led ; for he had no means to discourse with the inhabitants at any time : neither was he curious in these things , being utterly unlearned , and not knowing the East from the West . But of all these I god some knowledge , and of many more , partly by mine own travel , and the rest by conference : of some one I learned one , of others the rest , having with me and Indian that spoke many languages , and that of Guiana naturally . I sought out all the aged men , and such as were greatest travellers , and by the one and the other I came to understand the situations , the rivers , the kingdoms from the East sea to the borders of Peru , and from Orenoque Southward as far as Amazones or Marannon , and the religions of Maria Tamball , & of all the kings of provinces , and captains of towns and villages , how they stood in terms of peace or war , and which were friends or enemies the one with the other , without which there can be neither entrance nor conquest in those parts , nor elsewhere : for by the dissension between Guascar and Atabalipa , Pizarro conquered Peru , and by the hatred that the Tlaxcallians bore to Mutezuma , Cortez was victorious over Mexico ; without which both the one and the other had failed of their enterprise , and of the great honour and riches which they attained unto . 
 Now Berreo began to grow into despair , and looked for no other success then his predecessor in this enter-37 i 
 1595-The province of Emeria inhabited by gentle Indians . 
 Carapana . 
 prise , until such time as he arrived at the province of Emeria towards the East sea and mouth of the river , where he found a nation of people very favourable , and the country full of all manner of victuali . The king of this land is called Carapana , a man very wise , subtle , and of great experience , being little less then and hundred years old : in his youth he was sent by his father into the Island of Trinidad , by reason of civil war among themselves , and was bred at a village in that island , called Parico ; at that place in his youth he had seen many Christians , both French and Spanish , and went diverse times with the Indians of Trinidad to Margarita and Cumana in the West Indies ( for both those places have ever been relieved with victuali from Trinidad ) by reason whereof he grew of more understanding , and noted the difference of the nations , comparing the strength and arms of his country with those of the Christians , and ever after temporized so , as whosoever else did amiss , or was wasted by contention , Carapana kept himself and his country in quiet & plenty : he also held peace with the Caribes or Canibals his neighbours , and bade free trade with all nations , whosoever else had war . 
 Berreo sojourned and rested his weak troop in the town of Carapana sixe weeks , and from him learned the way and passage to Guiana , and the riches and magnificence thereof ; but being then utterly disable to proceed , he determined to try his fortune another year , when he had renewed his provisions , and regathered more force , which he hoped for as well out of Spaine as from Nueva reyno , where he had left his son , DONE Antonio Ximenes to second him upon the first notice given of his entrance , and so for the present embarked himself in canoas , and by the branches of Orenoque arrived at Trinidad , having from Carapana sufficient pilots to conduct him . From Trinidad he coasted Paria , and so recovered Mar - 
 372 
 garita : and having made relation to DONE Juan Ser-miento the governor , of his proceeding , and persuaded him of the riches of Guiana , he obtained from thence fifty soldiers , promising presently to return to Carapana , and so into Guiana . But Berreo meant nothing less at that time ; for he wanted many provisions necessary for such and enterprise , and therefore departed from Margarita , seated himself in Trinidad , and from thence sent his campmaster , and his sergeantmajor back to the borders to discover the nearest passage into the empire , as also to treat with the borderers , and to draw them to his party and love ; without which , he knew he could neither pass safely , nor in any sort be relieved with victuali or ought else . Carapana directed his company to a king called More - Morequito . quito , assuring them that no man could deliver so much of Guiana as Morequito could , and that his dwelling was but five days journey from Macureguarai , the first civil town of Guiana . 
 Now your lordship shall understand , that this Morequito , one of the greatest lords or kings of the borders of Guiana , had two or three years before be at Cumana and at Margarita , in the West Indies , with great store of plataeae of gold , which he carried to exchange for such other things as he wanted in his own country , and was daily feasted , & presented by the governors of those places , and held among them some two months , in which time one Vides governor Vides the goof Cumana won him to be his conductor into ™ ' nou_r_ °f Guiana , being allured by those croissants and images pe^tor " of gold which he brought with him to trade , as also Berreo in the by the ancient fame and magnificence of El Dorado : conquest of whereupon Vides sent into Spaine for a patent to dis - Guiana . cover and conquer Guiana , not knowing of the precedence of Berreos patent , which , as Berreo affirmeth , was signed before that of Vides : so as when Vides understood of Berreo , and that he had made entrance into that territory , and forgone his desire and hope , it 
 373 
 was verily thought that Vides practised with Morequito to hinder and disturb Berreo in all he could , and not to suffer him to enter thorough his signory , nor any of his companies ; neither to victuali , nor guide them in any sort ; for Vides governor of Cumana , and Berreo , were become mortali enemies , aswell for that Berreo had got Trinidad into his patent with Guiana , as also in that he was by Berreo prevented in the journey of Guiana it self : howsoever it was , I know not , but Morequito for a time dissembled his disposition , suffered Spanyards , and a friar ( which Berreo had sent to discover Manoa ) to travel thorough his country , Mature - gave them a guide for Macureguaray , the first town g^ray . civq [ anj appareled people , from whence they had other guides to bring them to Manoa the great city of Inga : and being furnished with those things which they had learned of Carapana were of most price in Ten Span - Guiana , went onward , and in eleven days arrived at at Maiea1 Manoa , as Berreo affirmeth for certain ; although I could not be assured thereof by the lord which now governeth the province of Morequito , for he told me that they god all the gold they had , in other towns on this side Manoa , there being many very great and rich , and ( as he said ) built like the towns of Christians , with many rooms . 
 When these ten Spaniards were returned , and ready Aromaia . to put out of the border of Aromaia , the people of Morequito set upon them , and slew them all but one that swam the river , and took from them to the valve of forty thousand pezos of gold : and one of them only lived to bring the news to Berreo , that both his nine soldiers and holy father were benighted in the said province . I my self spoke with the captains of Morequito that slew them , and was at the place where it was executed . Berreo enraged herewithal , sent all the strength he could make into Aromaia , to be revenged of him , his people , and country . But Morequito suspecting the same , fled over Orenoque , 374 
 * 595-and thorough the territories of the Saima , and Wikiri , Salma and recovered Cumana , where he thought himself very safe , with Vides the governor . But Berreo sending for him in the kings name , and his messengers finding him in the house of one Fashardo on the sudden year he was suspected , so as he could not then be conveyed away , Vides durst not deny him , aswell to avoid the suspicion of the practice , as also for that and holy father was slain by him and his people . Morequito offered Fashardo the weight of three quintals in gold , to let him escape : but the poor Guianian , betrayed on all sides , was delivered to the campmaster of Berreo , and was presently executed . Morequito 
 After the death of this Morequito , the soldiers of execute • Berreo spoiled his territory , and took diverse prisoners , among others they took the uncle of Morequito , called Topiawari , who is now king of Aromaia ( whose son I brought with me into England ) and is a man of great understanding and policy : he is above and hundred years old , and yet of a very able body . The Spaniards led him in a chain seventeene days , and made him their guide from place to place between his country & Emeria , the province of Carapana aforesaid , and he was at last redeemed for and hundred plataeae of gold , and diverse stones called Piedras Hijadas , or Spleen-stones . Now Berreo for executing of Morequito , and other cruelties , spoils , and slaughters done in Aromaia , hath lost the love of the Orenoqueponi , and of all the borderers , and dare not send any of his soldiers any further into the land then to Carapana , town °f which he called the port of Guiana : but from thence by the help of Carapana he had trade further into the G^ana , J country , and always appointed ten Spaniards to reside in Carapanas town , by whose favour , and by being conducted by his people , those ten searched the country thereabouts , aswell for mines , as for other trades and commodities . 
 They also have got a nephew of Morequito* whom 
 375 
 Some feme Spaniards are now seated in Dissequebe . 
 they have Christened , and nam DONE Juan , of whom they have great hope , endeavouring by all means to establish him in the said province . Among many other trades , those Spaniards used canoas to pass to the rivers of Barema , Pawroma , & Dissequebe , which are on the south side of the mouth of Orenoque , and there buy women and children from the Canibals , which are of that barbarous nature , as they will for three or foure hatchet's fell the sons and daughters of their own brothers and sisters , and for somewhat more , even their own daughters . Hereof the Spaniards make great profit : for buying a maid of twelve or thirteene years for three or foure hatchet's , they fell them again at Margarita in the West Indies for fifty and and hundred pezos , which is so many crowns . 
 The master of my ship , John Dowglas , took one of the canoas which came laden from thence with people to be sold , and the most of them escaped ; yet of those he brought , there was one as well favoured , and as well shaped as ever I saw any in England , and afterwards I saw many of them , which but for their tawny colour may be compared to any of Europe . They also trade in those rivers for bred of Cassavi , of which they buy and hundred pound weight for a knife , and fell it at Margarita for ten pezos . They also recover great store of Cotton , Brasill wood , and those beds which they call Hamacas or Brasill beds , wherein in hight countries all the Spaniards use to lie commonly , and in no other , neither did we our selves while we were there . By means of which trades , for ransom of diverse of the Guianians , and for exchange of hatchet's and knives , Berreo recovered some store of gold plataeae , eagles of gold , and images of men and diverse birds , and dispatched his campmaster for Spaine , with all that he had gathered , therewith to levy soldiers , and by the show thereof to draw others to the love of the enterprise . And having sent diverse images aswell of men as beasts , birds & fish , so curiously wrought 376 
 in gold , he doubted not but to persuade the king to yield to him some further help , especially for that this land hath never been sacked , the mines never wrought , and in the Indies their works were well spent , and the gold drawn out with great labour and charge . 
 He also dispatched messengers to his son in Nuevo reyno to levy all the forces he could , 8c to come down the river Orenoque to Emeria , the province of Carapana , to meet him : he had also sent to Saint Iago de Leon on the coast of the Caracas , to buy horses and mules . 
 After I had thus learned of his proceedings passed and purposed , I told him that I had resolved to see Guiana , and that it was the end of my journey , and the cause of my coming to Trinidad , as it was indeed , ( and for that purpose I sent Jacob Whiddon the year before to get intelligence with whom Berreo himself had speech at that time , and remembered how inquisitive Jacob Whiddon was of his proceedings , and of the country of Guiana ) Berreo was stricken into a great melancholy and sadness , and used all the arguments he could to dissuade me , and also assured the gentlemen of my company that it would be labour lost , and that they should suffer many misery's if they proceeded . And first he delivered that I could not enter any of the rivers with any bark or pinnace , or hardly with any ships boat , it was so low , sandy , and full of flats , and that his companies were daily grounded in their canoas , which drew but twelve inches water . He further said , that none of the country would come to speak with us , but would all fly ; and if we followed them to their dwellings , they would burn their own towns : and beside that , the way was long , the Winter at hand , and that the rivers beginning once to swell , it was impossible to stem the current , and that we could not in those small boats by any means carry victuali for half the time , and that ( which indeed most discouraged my company ) the kings and lords of all the borders of Guiana had decreed that none of 
 377 
 them should trade with any Christians for gold , because the same would be their own overthrow , and that for the love of gold the Christians meant to conquer and dispossess them of all together . 
 Many and the most of these I found to be true , but yet I resolving to make trial of all whatsoever happened , directed Captain George Gifford my viceadmiral to take the Lions whelp , and captain Calfield his bark The fwer of to turn to the Eastward , against the mouth of a river Capuri . called Capuri , whose entrance I had before sent captain Whiddon , and John Dowglas the master , to discover , who found some nine foot water or better upon the flood , and five at low water , to whom I had given instructions that they should anchor at the edge of thee shoaled , and upon the best of the flood to thrust over , which shoaled John Dowglas bwoyed and beckoned for them before : but they laboured in vain ; for neither could they turn it up altogether so far to the East , neither did the flood continue so long , but the water fell year they could have passed the sands ; as we after found by a second experience : so as now we must either give over our enterprise , or leaving our ships at adventure foure hundred mile behind us , must run up in our ships boats , one barge , and two wheries . But being doubtful how to carry victuals for so long a time in such babies , or any strength of men , especially for that Berreo assured us that his son must be by that time come down with many soldiers , I sent away one King , master of the Lions whelp , with his shipboat , to try another branch of a river in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , which was called Amana , to prove if there were water to be found for either of the small ships to enter . But when he came to the mouth of Amana , he found it as the rest , but stayed not to discover it thoroughly , because he was assured by and Indian , his guide , that the Canibals of Guanipa would assail them with many canoas , and that they shot poisoned arrows ; so as if he hasted not back , they should all be lost . 
 378 
 In the mean time , fearing the worst , I caused all the carpenters we had , to cut down a Galego boat , which we meant to cast off , and to fit her with banks to row on , and in all things to prepare her the best they could , so as she might be brought to draw but five foot , for so much we had on the bar of Capuri at low water . And doubting of Kings return , I sent John Dowglas again in my long barge , aswell to relieve him , as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of that bay : for it hath be held for infallible , that whatsoever ship or boat shall fallen therein , can never disemboque again , by reason of the violent current which sets into the said bay , as also for that the brize and Easterly wind blows directly into the same . Of which opinion I have herd John Hampton of Plymmouth , one of the greatest experience of England , and diverse others beside that have traded to Trinidad . 
 I sent with John Dowglas and old Cacique of Trinidad for a pilot , who told us that we could not return again by the bay or gulf , but that he knew a by-branch which ran within the land to the Eastward , and that he thought by it we might fallen into Capuri , and so return in foure days . John Dowglas searched those rivers , and found foure goodly entrances , whereof the least was as big as the Thames at Wolwich ; but in the bay thitherward it was shoaled , and but sixe foot water : so as we were now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over , and therefore resolved to go on with the boats , and the bottom of the Galego , in which we thrust 60 men . In the Lions whelps boat & whery we carried 20. Captain Calfield in his whery carried ten more , and in my barge other tenne , which made up a hundred : we had no other means but to carry victuali for a month in the same , and also to lodge therein as we could , and to boil and dress our meat . Captain Gifford had with him master Edward Porter , captain Eynos , and eight more in his whery , with all their victuali , weapons , and provisions . Captain Calfield had with him my 379 
 John Hampton captain of the Minion under sir John Hawkins in his voyage to S. Juan de Ullua . 
 cousin Butshead Gorges , and eight more . In the galley , of gentlemen and officers my self had captain Thin , my cousin John Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Whiddon , captain Keymis , Edward Handcocke , captain Clarke , lieutenant Hewes , Thomas Upton , captain Fancy , Jerome Ferrar , Anthony Welles , William Connocke , and above fifty more . We could not learn of Berreo any other way to enter but in branches , so far to windward , as it was impossible for us to recover : for we had as much sea to cross over in our wheries , as between Dover and Calais , and in a great billow , the wind and current being both very strong , so as we were driven to go in those small boats The bay of directly before the wind into the bottom of the bay Guanipa . of Guanipa , anJ from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those rivers which John Dowglas had last discovered , and had with us for pilot and Indian of Barema , a river to the South of Orenoque , between that and Amazones , whose canoas we had formerly taken as he Barema . was going from the said Barema , laden with Cassavi-bread , to fell at Margarita . This Arwacan promised to bring me into the great river of Orenoque , but indeed of that which he entered he was utterly ignorant , for he had not seen it in twelve years before ; at which time he was very young , and of no judgement : and if God had not sent us another help , we might have wandered a whole year in that labyrinth of rivers , year we had found any way , either out or in , especially after we were passed ebbing and flowing , which was in foure days , for I know A wondered ap the earth doth not yield the like confluence of ‘ streams streams and branches , the one crossing the other so many ' times , and all so fair and large , and so like one to another , as no man can tell which to take : and if we went by the Sun or Compass , hoping thereby to go directly one way or other , yet that way we were also carried in a circle among multitudes of Islands , and every Island so bordered with high trees , as no man could see any further then the breadth of the river , or length of the breach . 
 380 
 But this it chanced , that entering into a river , ( which because it had no name , we called the river of the Read cross , our selves being the first Christians that ever came therein ) the two and twentieth of May , as we were rowing up the same , we espied a small canoa with three Indians , which ( by the swiftness of my barge , rowing with eight oars ) I overtook year they could cross the river , the rest of the people on the banks shadowed under the thick wood , gazed on with a doubtful conceit what might befall those three which we had taken . But when they perceived that we offered them no violence , neither entered their canoa with any of ours , nor took out of the canoa any of theirs , they then began to show themselves on the banks side , and offered to traffic with us for such things as they had . And as we drew near , they all stayed , and we came with our barge to the mouth of a little creek which came from their town into the great river . 
 As we abided there a while , our Indian pilot , called Ferdinando , would needs go ashore to their village to fetch some fruits , and to drink of their artificiali wines , and also to see the place , and know the lord of it against another time , and took with him a brother of his , which he had with him in the journey : when they came to the village of these people , the lord of the Island offered to lay hands on them , purposing to have slain them both , yielding for reason that this Indian of ours had brought a strange nation into their territory , to spoil and destroy them . But the pilot being quick , and of a disposed body , slipped their fingers , and ran into the woods , and his brother being the better footman of the two , recovered the creeks mouth , where we stayed in our barge , crying out that his brother was slain : with that we set hands on one of them that was next us , a very old man , and brought him into the barge , assuring him that if we had not our pilot again , we would presently cut off his head . This old man being resolved that he should pay the loss of the other , cried out to those in the woods to save Ferdinando 381 
 The river of the Read cross . 
 Two nations of the Tivitivas , called Ciawani , and Waraweete . A description of the mighty river of Orenoque or Baraquan . 
 What manner of people the Tivitivas are . 
 our pilot ; but they followed him notwithstanding , and hunted after him upon the foot with the Dear-dogs , and with so main a cry , that all the woods echoed with the shout they made : but at the last this poor chased Indian recovered the river side , and god upon a tree , and as we were coasting , leapt down and swam to the barge half dead with fear . But our good happen was , that we kept the other old Indian which we handfasted to redeem our pilot withal ; for being natural of those rivers , we assured our selves he knew the way better then any stranger could . And indeed , but for this chance , I think we had never found the way either to Guiana , or back to our ships : for Ferdinando after a few days knew nothing at all , nor which way to turn , yea and many times the old man himself was in great doubt which river to take . Those people which dwell in these broken islands and drowned lands , are generally called Tivitivas ; there are of them two sorts , the one called Ciawani , and the other Waraweete . 
 The great river of Orenoque or Baraquan hath nine branches which fallen out on the North side of his own main mouth : on the South side it hath seven other fallings into the sea , so it disemboqueth by sixteene arms in all , between Hands and broken ground , but the Hands are very great , many of them as big as the Isle of Wight , and bigger , and many less . From the first branch on the North to the last of the South , it is at least 100 leagues , so as the rivers mouth is 300 miles wide at his entrance into the sea , which I take to be far bigger then that of Amazones . All those that inhabit in the mouth of this river upon the several North branches , are these Tivitivas , of which there are two chief lords which have continual wars one with the other . The Hands which lie on the right hand , are called Pallamos , and the land on the left , Horotomaka , and the river by which John Dowglas returned within the land from Amana to Capuri , they call Macuri . 
 These Tivitivas are a very goodly people and very 382 
 valiant , and have the most manly speech and most deliberate that ever I herd , of what nation soever . In the Summer they have houses on the ground , as in other places : in the Winter they dwell upon the trees , where they built very artificiali towns and villages , as it is written in the Spanish story of the West Indies , that those people do in the low lands never the gulf of Uraba : for between May & September the river of Orenoque riseth thirty foot upright , and then are those lands overflown twenty foot high above the level of the ground , saving some few raised grounds in the middle of them : and for this cause they are enforced to live in this manner . They never eat of any thing that is set or so wen : and as at home they use neither planting nor other manurance , so when they come abroad , they refuse to feed of ought , but of that which nature without labour brings forth . They use the tops of Palmitos for bred , and kill deer , fish , and porks , for the rest of their sustenance . They have also many sorts of fruits that grow in the woods , and great variety of birds and fowl . 
 And if to speak of them were not tedious , and vulgar , surely we saw in those passages of very rare colours and forms , not elsewhere to be found , for as much as I have either seen or read . Of these people those that dwell upon the branches of Orenoque , called Capuri and Macureo , are for the most part carpenters of canoas , for they make the most and fairest canoas , and sei them into Guiana for gold , and into Trinidad for tobacco , in the excessive taking whereof , they exceed all nations ; and notwithstanding the moistness of the air in which they live , the hardness of their diet , and the great labours they suffer to hunt , fish and fowl for their living ; in all my life , either in the Indies or in Europe , did I never behold a more goodly or better favoured people or a more manly . They were wont to make war upon all nations , and especially on the Canibals , so as none 383 
 The Arwacas on the South side of Orenoque . 
 The port of the Ciatvani . 
 A river called The great Amana . 
 durst without a good strength trade by those rivers : but of late they are at peace with their neighbours , all holding the Spaniards for a common enemy . When their commanders die , they use great lamentation , and when they think the flesh of their bodies is putrified , and fallen from the bones , then they take up the carcase again , and hang it in the Caciques house that died , and deck his scull with feathers of all colours , and hang all his gold plataeae , about the bones of his arms , thighs , and legs . Those nations which are called Arwacas , which dwell on the South of Orenoque , ( of which place and nation our Indian pilot was ) are dispersed in many other places , and do use to beatrice the bones of their lords into powder , and their wives and friends drink it all in their several sorts of drinks . 
 After we departed from the port of these Ciawani , we passed up the river with the flood , and anchored the ebb , and in this sort we went onward . The third day that we entered the river , our galley came on ground , and stuck so fast , as we thought that even there our discovery had ended , and that we must have left foure-score and ten of our men to have inhabited like rooks upon trees with those nations : but the next morning , after we had cast out all her ballast , with tugging and hailing to and from , we god her aflote , and went on . At foure days end we fell into as goodly a river as ever I beheld , which was called The great Amana , which ran more directly without windings and turnings then the other : but soon after the flood of the sea left us ; and being enforced either by main strength to row against a violent current , or to return as wise as we went out , we had then no shift but to persuade the companies that it was but two or three days work , and therefore desired them to take pains , every gentleman 8c others taking their turns to row , and to spell one the other at the hours end . Every day we passed by goodly branches of 384 
 rivers , some falling from the West , others from the East into Amana , but those I leave to the description in the Cart of discovery , where every one shall nam with his rising and descent . When three days more were overwent , our companies began to despair , the weather being extreme hight , the river bordered with very high trees , that kept away the air , and the current against us every day stronger then other : but we evermore commanded our pilots to promise and end the next day , and used it so long , as we were driven to assure them from foure reaches of the river to three , and so to two , and so to the next reach : but so long we laboured , that many days were spent , and we driven to draw our selves to harder allowance , our bred even at the last , and no drink at all ; and our men and our selves so wearied and scorched , and doubtful withal , whither we should ever perform it or no , the heat increasing as we drew towards the line ; for we were now in five degrees . They are in 
 The further we went on ( our victuali decreasing and degrees . 
 the air breeding great faintness ) we grew weaker and weaker , when we had most need of strength and ability ; for hourly the river ran more violently then other against us , and the barge , wheries , and ships boat of captain Gifford and captain Calfield , had spent all their provisions ; so as we were brought into despair and discomfort , had we not persuaded all the company that it was but only one days work more to attain the land where we should be relieved of all we wanted , and if we returned , that we were sure to starve by the way , and that the world would also laugh us to scorn . On the banks of these rivers were diverse sorts of fruits good to eat , flowers and trees of such variety , as were sufficient to make tenne volumes of herbals : we relieved our selves many times with the fruits of the country , and sometime with fowl and fish . we saw birds of all colours , some carnation , some crimson , orenge-tawny , purple , watchet , and of 
 x 385 2 B 
 all other sorts both simple and mixed , and it was unto us a great good passing of the time to behold them , beside the relief we found by killing some store of them with our fowling pieces ; without which , having little or no bred , and less drink , but only the thick and troubled water of the river , we had been in a very hard case . 
 Our old pilot of the Ciawani ( whom , as I said before , we took to redeem Ferdinando ) told us , that if we would enter a branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and wheries , and leave the galley at anchor the while in the great river , he would bring us to a town of the Arwacas , where we should find store of bred , hens , fish , and of the country wine ; and persuaded us , that departing from the galley at noon , we might return year night . I was very glad to hear this speech , and presently took my bark , with eight musketeers , captain Giffords whery , with himself and foure musketeers , and Captain Calfield with his whery , and as many ; and so we entered the mouth of this river : and because we were persuaded that it was so never , we took no victuali with us at all . When we had rowed three hours , we marveled we saw no sign of any dwelling , and asked the pilot where the town was : he told us a little further . After three hours more , the Sun being almost set , we began to suspect that he led us that way to betray us : for he confessed that those Spanyards which fled from Trinidad , and also those that remained with Carapana in Emeria , were joined together in some village upon that river . But when it grew towards night ; and we demanded where the place was ; he told us but foure reaches more . When we had rowed foure and foure ; we saw no sign ; and our poor watermen , even heartbroken , and tired , were ready to give up the ghost : for we had now come from the galley near forty miles . 
 At the last we determined to hang the pilot ; and 386 
 if we had well known the way back again by night , he had surely gone ; but our own necessities pleaded sufficiently for his safety : for it was as dark as pitch , and the river began so to narrow it self , and the trees to hang over from side to side , as we were driven with arming swords to cut a passage thorough those branches that covered the water . we were very desirous to find this town , hoping of a feast , because we made but a short breakfast aboard the galley in the morning and it was now eight a clock at night , and our stomachs began to gnaw apace : but whither it was best to return or go on , we began to doubt , suspecting treason in the pilot more and more : but the poor old Indian ever assured us that it was but a little further , but this one turning and that turning : and at the last about one a clock after midnight we saw a light ; and rowing towards it , we herd the dogs of the village . When we landed we found few people ; for the lord of that place was gone with diverse canoas above foure hundred miles off , upon a journey towards the head of Orenoque to trade for gold , and to buy women of the Canibals , who afterwards unfortunately passed by us as we road at and anchor in the port of Morequito in the dark of the night , and yet came so near us , as his canoas grated against our barges : he left one of his company at the port of Morequito , by whom we understood that he had brought thirty young women , diverse plataeae of gold , and had great store of fine pieces of cotton cloth , and cotton beds . In his house we had good store of bred , fish , hens , and Indian drink , and so rested that night , and in the morning after we had traded with such of his people as came down , we returned towards our gaily , and brought with us some quantity of bred , fish , and hens . 
 On both sides of this river , we passed the most beauty - A most beautiful country that ever mine eyes beheld : and whereas all countrey^ that we had seen before was nothing but woods , prickles , 
 387 
 The river of Lagartos , or Crocodiles . 
 Two canoas taken . 
 Three Spanyards escaped . 
 bushes , and thorns , here we beheld plains of twenty miles in length , the grass short and green , and in diverse parts groves of trees by themselves , as if they had been by all the art and labour in the world so made of purpose : and still as we rowed , the deer came down feeding by the waters side , as if they had been used to a keepers call . Upon this river there were great store of fowl , and of many sorts : we saw in it diverse sorts of strange fish , and of marvellous bigness : but for lagartos it exceeded , for there were thousands of those ugly serpents ; and the people call it for the abundance of them , The river of Lagartos , in their language . I had a Negro a very proper young fellow , who leaping out of the galley to swim in the mouth of this river , was in all our sights taken and devoured with one of those lagartos . In the mean while our companies in the gaily thought we had be all lost , ( for we promised to return before night ) and sent the Lions whelps ships boat with captain Whiddon to follow us up the river ; but the next day , after we had rowed up and down some fourescore miles , we returned , and went on our way , up the great river ; and when we were even at the last cast for want of victuals , captain Gifford being before the galley and the rest of the boats , seeking out some place to land upon the banks to make fire , espied foure canoas coming down the river ; & with no small joy caused his men to try the uttermost of their strengths , and after a while two of the foure gave over , and ran themselves ashore , every man betaking himself to the fastness of the woods , the two other lesser god away , while he landed to lay hold on these ; and so turned into some by-creeke , we knew not whither . Those canoas that were taken , were loaded with bred , and were bound for Margarita in the West Indies , which those Indians ( called Arwacas ) purposed to carry thither for exchange : but in the lesser there were three Spanyards , who having herd of the defeat of their goyernour in Trinidad , and that we purposed to enter Guiana , came away in those canoas : one of them was a 
 388 
 * 595-cavallero , as the captain of the Arwacas after told us , another a soldier , and the third a refiner . 
 In the mean time , nothing on the earth could have be more welcome to us , next unto gold , then the great store of very excellent bred which we found in these canoas ; for now our men cried , Let us go on , we care not how far . After that captain Gifford had brought the two canoas to the galley , I took my barge , and went to the banks side with a dozen shot , where the canoas first ran themselves ashore , and landed there , sending out captain Gifford , and captain Thine on one hand , and captain Calfield on the other , to follow those that were fled into the woods : and as I was creeping thorough the bushes , I saw and Indian basket hidden , which was the Spanish refiners basket ; for I found in it his quicksilver , saltpeter , and diverse things for the trial of metals , and also aings ta^en the dust of such over as he had refined , but in those canoas which escaped there was a good quantity of over and gold . 
 I then landed more men , and offered five hundred pound to what soldier soever could take one of those three Spanyards that we thought were landed . But our labours were in vain in that behalf ; for they put themselves into one of the small canoas : and so while the greater canoas were in taking they escaped . But seeking after the Spanyards , we found the Arwacas hidden in the woods , which were pilots for the Spanyards , and rowed their canoas ; of which I kept the chiefest for a pilot , and carried him with me to Guiana , by whom I understood where and in what countries the Spanyards had laboured for gold , though I made not the same known to all : for when the springs began to break , and the rivers to raise themselves so suddenly , as by no means we could abide the digging of any mine , especially for that the richest are defended with rocks of hard stones , which we r'lchest call the White spar , and that it required both time , men , and instruments fit for such a work , I thought it best not eW to hover thereabouts , lest if the same had been perceived by the company , there would have been by this 
 389 
 * 595 ' .. , , time many barks and ships set out , and perchance other nations would also have got of ours for pilots ; so as both our selves might have been prevented , and all our care taken for good usage of the people be utterly lost , by those that only respect present profit , and such violence or insolence offered , as the nations which are borderers would have changed their desire of our love and defence into hatred and violence . And for any longer stay to have brought a more quantity ( which I hear hath been often objected ) whosoever had seen or proved the fury of that river after it began to arise , and had be a month and odd days , as we were , from hearing ought from our ships , leaving them meanly manned 400 miles off , would perchance have turned somewhat sooner then we did , if all the mountains had be gold , or rich stones . And to say the truth , all the branches and small rivers which fell into Orenoque were raised with such 
 speed , as if we waded them over the shoes in the morning outward , we were covered to the shoulders homeward the very same day : and to stay to dig out gold with our nails , had be Opus laboris but not Ingenii : such a quantity as would have served our turns we could not have had , but a discovery of the Mines to our infinite disadvantage we had made , and that could have be the best profit of farther search or stay : for those Mines are not easily broken , nor opened in haste , and I could have returned a good quantity of gold ready cast , if I had not shot at another mark , then present profit . 
 This Arwacan Pilot with the rest , feared that we would have eaten them , or otherwise have put them to some The Spaniards cruel death ( for the Spaniards , to the end that none of the dtvehsh hes . peOp [ e jn the passage towards Guiana or in Guiana it self might come to speech with us , persuaded all the nations , that we were men-eaters , and Canibals ) but when the poor men and women had seen us , and that we gave them meat , and to every one something or other , which was rare and strange to them , they began to conceive the deceit and purpose of the Spaniards , who indeed ( as 39° 
 they confessed ) took from them both their wives and daughters daily , and used them for the satisfying of their own lustest , especially such as they took in this manner by strength . But I protest before the Majesty of the living God , that I neither know nor believe , that any of our company one or other , by violence or otherwise , ever knew any of their women , and yet we saw many hundreds , and had many in our power , and of those very young , and excellently favoured , which came among us without deceit , stark naked . 
 Nothing god us more love among them then this usage : for I suffered not any man to take from any of the nations so much as a Pina , or a Potato root , without giving them contentment , nor any man so much as to offer to touch any of their wives or daughters : which course so contrary to the Spaniards ( who tyrannise over them in all things ) drew them to admire her Majesty , whose commandment I told them it was , and also wonderfully to honour our nation . 
 But I confess it was a very impatient work to keep the meaner sort from spoil and stealing , when we came to their houses : which because in all I could not prevent , I caused my Indian interpreter at every place when we departed , to know of the loss or wrong done , and if ought were stolen or taken by violence , either the same was restored , and the party punished in their sighed , or else was paid for to their uttermost demand . 
 They also much wondered at us , after they herd that we had slain the Spaniards at Trinidad , for they were before resolved , that no nation of Christians durst abide their presence , and they wondered more when I had made them know of the great overthrow that her Majesties army and Fleet had given them of late years in their own Countries' . 
 After we had taken in this supply of bred , with diverse baskets of roots which were excellent meat , I gave one of the Canoas to the Arwacas , which belonged to the Spaniards that were escaped , and when I had dismissed all 391 
 A.D. 
 1595 - 
 A notable course of justice . 
 but the Captain ( who by the Spaniards was christened Martin ) I sent back in the same Canoa the old Ciawan , and Ferdinando my first Pilot , and gave them both such things as they desired , with sufficient victuali to carry them back , and by them wrote a letter to the ships , which they promised to deliver , and performed it , and then I went on , with my new hired Pilot Martin the Arwacan : but They come on the next or second day after , we came aground again ground with w^h our Galley , and were like to cast her away , with all etr ga y . our victuali and provision , and so lay on the sand one whole night and were far more in despair at this time to free her then before , because we had no tide of flood to help us , and therefore feared that all our hope's would have ended in mishaps : but we fastened and anchor upon the land , and with main strength drew her off : and so the fifteenth day we discovered afar off the mountains of Guiana to our great joy , and towards the evening had a slent of a Northerly wind that blew very strong , which brought us in sighed of the great river Orenoque ; out of which this River descended wherein we were : we descried afar off three other Canoas as far as we could discern them , after whom we hastened with our barge and wherries , but two of them passed out of sighed , and the thirde entered up the great River , on the right hand to the Westward , and there stayed out of sighed , thinking that we meant to take the way Eastward towards the province of Carapana , for that way the Spaniards keep , not daring to go upward to Guiana , the people in those parts being all their enemies , and those in the Canoas thought us to have be those Spaniards that were fled from Trinidad , and had escaped killing : and when we came so far down as the opening of that branch into which they slipped , being near them with our barge and wherries , we made after them , and ere they could land , came within call , and by our interpreter told them what we were , wherewith they came back willingly aboard us : and of such fish and Tortugas eggs 
 392 
 * 595-as they had gathered , they gave us , and promised in the morning to bring the Lord of that part with them , and to do us all other services they could . 
 That night we came to and anchor at the parting of the three goodly Rivers ( the one was the River of Amana by which we came from the North , and ran athwart towards the South , the other two were of Orenoque Twa branches which crossed from the West and ran to the Sea towards the East ) and landed upon a fair sand , where ’ we found thousands of Tortugas eggs , which are very wholesome meat , and greatly restoring , so as our men were now well filled and highly contented both with the fare , and nearness of the land of Guiana which appeared in sighed . 
 In the morning there came down according to promise the Lord of that border called Toparimaca , with some thirtie or fourtie followers , and brought us diverse sorts of fruits , and of his wine , bred , fish , and flesh , whom we also feasted as we could , at least we drank good Spanish wine ( whereof we had a small quantity in bottles ) which above all things they love . I conferred with this Toparimaca of the next way to Guiana , who Toparimaca . conducted our galley and boats to his own port , and carried us from thence some mile and a half to his Town , where some of our Captains karoused of his wine till they were reasonable pleasant , for it is very strong with pepper , and the juice of diverse herbs , and fruits digested and purged , they keep it in great earthen pots of tenne or twelve galons very clean and sweet , and are themselves at their meetings and feasts the greatest karousers and drunkards of the world : when we came to his town we found two Caciques , whereof one was a stranger that had be up the River in trade , and his boats , people , and wife encamped at the port where we anckered , and the other was of that country a follower of Toparimaca : they lay each of them in a cotton Hamaca , which we call brazil beds , and two women attending them with sixe cups and a little 
 393 
 ladle to fill them , out of and earthen pitcher of wine , and so they drank each of them three of those cups at a time one to the other , and in this sort they drink drunk at their feasts and meetings . 
 That Cacique that was a stranger had his wife staying at the port where we anckered , and in all my life I have seidome seen a better favoured woman : She was of good stature , with black eyes , fat of body , of and excellent countenance , her hair almost as long as her self , tied up again in pretty knots , and it seemed she stood not in that awe of her husband , as the rest , for she spoke and discoursed , and drank among the gentlemen and Captains , and was very pleasant , knowing her own comeliness , and taking great pride therein . I have seen a Lady in England so like to her , as but for the difference of colour , I would have sworn might have be the same . 
 The seat of this Town of Toparimaca was very pleasant , standing on a little hill , in and excellent prospect , with goodly gardens a mile compass round about it , and two very fair and large ponds of exedra town of lent fish adjoining . This town is called Arowocai : the Arowocay . people are of the nation called Nepoios , and are followers of Carapana . In that place I saw very aged people , that we might perceive all their sinews and veins without any flesh , and but even as a case covered only with The great skin . The Lord of this place gave me and old man ^er^Ore^ or ot ’ who was great experience and travel , and we knew the River most perfectly both by day and night : and it shall be requisite for any man that passes it , to have such a Pilot , for it is foure , five , and sixe miles over in many places , and twentie miles in other places , with wonderful eddies , and strong currents , many great islands , and diverse sholds , and many dangerous rocks , and beside upon any increase of wind so great a bilowe , as we were sometime in great peril of drowning in the galley , for the small boats durst not come from the shore , but when it was very fair . 
 394 
 The next day we hasted thence , and having and Easterly wind to help us , we spared our arms from rowing : for after we entered Orenoque , the River lies for the most part East and West , even from the Sea unto Quito in Peru. This River is navigable with barks , little less then a thousand miles , & from the place where we entered , it may be sailed up in small pinnaces to many of the best parts of Nuevo reyno de Granada , and of Popayan : and from no place may the cities of these parts of the Indies be so easily taken and invaded as from hence . All that day we sailed up a branch of that River , having on the left hand a great island which they call Assapana which may contain some five and twentie miles in length , and sixe miles in breadth , the great body of the River running on the other side of this island . Beyond that middle branch there is also another island in the River called Iwana , which is twice as big as the isle of Wight , and beyond it , and between it and the main of Guiana , runneth a thirde branch of Orenoque called Arraroopana : all three are goodly branches , and all navigable for great ships . I judge the river in this place to be at least thirty miles broad , reckoning the islands which divide the branches in it , for afterwards I sought also both the other branches . 
 After we reached to the head of the island , called Assapana , a little to the Westward on the right hand there opened a river which came from the North , called Europa , and fell into the great River , and beyond it on the same side , we anckered for that night , by another island sixe miles long , and two miles broad , which they call Ocaywita : From hence in the morning we landed two Guianians , which we found in the Town of Toparimaca , that came with us , who went to give notice of our coming to the Lord of that country called Putyma , a follower of Topiawari , chief Lord of Aromaia , who succeeded Morequito , whom ( as you have herd before ) Berreo put to death : but his town being far within the land , he came not unto us that day , so as we anchored 395 
 A.D. 
 1595-They enter the river Orenoque which runneth East and West . 
 The isle of Assapana . 
 The island of Iwana . 
 The isle of Ocaywita . 
 again that night near the banks of another island , The isle of of bigness much like the other , which they call Puta-Putapayma . payma > over against which island , on the main land , was a very high mountain called Oecope : we coveted to anchor rather by these islands in the River , then by the main , because of the Tortugas eggs , which our people found on them in great abundance , and also because the ground served better for us to cast our nets for fish , the main banks being for the most part stony and high , and the rocks of a blue metalline Steele-ore . colour , like unto the best steele-ore , which I assuredly take it to be : of the same blue stone are also diverse great mountains , which border this river in many places . 
 The next morning towards nine of the clock , we weighed anchor , and the brize increasing , we sailed always West up the river , and after a while opening the land on the right side , the country appeared to be champain , and the banks showed very perfect read . I therefore sent two of the little barges with Captain Gifford , and with him Captain Thine , Captain Calfield , my cousin Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , Captain Eynus , Master Edward Porter , and my cousin Butshead Gorges , with some few soldiers , to march over the banks of that read land , and to discover what manner of country it was on the other side , who at their return found it all a plain level , as far as they went or could discern , from the highest tree they could get upon : And my old Pilot , a man of great travel , brother to the Cacique Toparimica told me , that those were called The plains of the plains of the Sayma , and that the same level Cu-h reac^ed to Cumana , and Caracas in the West Indies , " mana , and the which are a hundreth and twentie leagues to the North , Caracas . and that there inhabited foure principali nations . The first were the Sayma , the next Assawai , the thirde and greatest the Wikiri , by whom Pedro Hernandez de Serpa before mentioned was overthrown , as he passed with three hundred horse from Cumani towards Oren-396 
 oque , in his enterprise of Guiana : the fourth are called Aroras , and are as black as Negroes , but have smooth hair , and these are very valiant , or rather desperate people , and have the most strong poison on their arrows , and most dangerous of all nations , of which poison I will speak somewhat being a digression not unnecessary . 
 There was nothing whereof I was more curious , then to find out the true remedies of these poisoned arrows : for beside the mortality of the wound they make , the par tie shot endureth the most insufferable torment in the world , and abideth a most ugly and lamentable death , sometime dying stark mad , sometime their bowels breaking out of their bellies : which are presently discoloured as black as pitch , and so unsavoury , as no man can endure to cure , or to attend them . And it is more strange to know , that in all this time there was never Spaniard either by gift or torment that could attain to the true knowledge of the cure , although they have martyred and put to invented torture I know not how many of them . But every one of these Indians know it not , no not one among thousands , but their soothsayers and priests , who do conceal it , and only teach it but from the father to the son . 
 Those medicines which are vulgar , and serve for the ordinary poison , are made of the juice of a root called Tupara : the same also quenches marvellously the heat of burning fevers , and heals inward wounds , and broken veins , that bleed within the body . But I was more beholding to the Guianians then any other : for Anthonio de Berreo told me that he could never attain to the knowledge thereof , and yet they taught me the best way of healing as well thereof , as of all other poisons . Some of the Spaniards have be cured in ordinary wounds , of the common poisoned arrows with the juice of garlic : but this is a generail rule for all men that shall hereafter travel the Indies where poisoned arrows are used , that they must abstain from 397 
 A.D. 
 I595 - 
 Aroras a black people using venomous arrows . 
 The juice of garlic good against ordinary poison . Speedy drinking to be avoided of such as are wounded with poisoned arrows . 
 The province Aromaia . 
 The pie of Murrecotima . 
 drink , for if they take any liquour into their body , as they shall be marvelously provoked thereunto by drought , I say , if they drink before the wound be dressed , or soon upon it , there is no way with them but present death . 
 And so I will return again to our journey which for this thirde day we finished , and cast anchor again near the continent or the left hand between two mountains , the one called Aroami , and the other Aio : I made no stay here but till midnight , for I feared hourly lest any rain should fallen , and then it had be impossible to have gone any further up , notwithstanding that there is every day a very strong brize , and Easterly wind . I deferred the search of the country on Guiana-side , till my return down the river . 
 The next day we sailed by a great island in the middle of the river called Manoripano , and as we walked a while on the island , while the Galley god a head of us , there came for us from the main a small Canoa with seven or eight Guianians , to invite us to anchor at their port , but I deferred till my return ; It was that Cacique to whom those Nepoios went , which came with us from the town of Toparimaca : and so the fift day we reached as high up as the province of Aromaia the country of Morequito whom Berreo executed , and anchored to the West of and island called Murrecotima , tenne miles long and five broad : and that night the Cacique Aramiary , ( to whose town we made our long and hungry voyage out of the river of Amana ) passed by us . 
 The next day we arrived at the port of Morequito , and anckered there , sending away one of our Pilots to seek the king of Aromaia , uncle to Morequito slain by Berreo as aforesaid . The next day following before noon he came to us on foot from his house , which was foureteene English miles ( himself being a hundreth and tenne years old ) and returned on foot 398 
 the same day , and with him many of the borderers , with many women and children , that came to wonder at our nation , and to bring us down victuali , which they did in great plenty , as venison , pork , hens , chickens , foul , fish , with diverse sorts of excellent fruits and roots , and great abundance of Pinas , the princes of fruits , that grow under the Sun , especially those of Guiana . They brought us also store of bred , and of their wine , and a sort of Paraquitos , no bigger then wrennes , and of all other sorts both small and great ; one of them gave me a beast called by the Spaniards Armadilla , which they call Cassacam , which seems to be all barred over with small plataeae somewhat like to a Rinoceros , with a white horn growing in his hinder parts , as big as a great hunting horn , which they use to wind in stead of a trumpet . Monardus writeth that a little of the powder of that horn put into the ear , cureth deafness . 
 After this old King had rested a while in a little tent , that I caused to be set up , I began by my interpreter to discourse with him of the death of Morequito his predecessor , and afterwards of the Spaniards , and ere I went any farther I made him know the cause of my coming thither , whose servant I was , and that the Queens pleasure was , I should undertake the voyage for their defence , and to deliver them from the tyrannic of the Spaniards , dilating at large ( as I had done before to those of Trinidad ) her Majesties greatness , her justice , her charity to all oppressed nations , with as many of the rest of her beauty's and virtues , as either I could express , or they conceive : all which being with great admiration attentively herd , and marvelously admired , I began to found the old man as touching Guiana , and the state thereof , what sort of common wealth it was , how governed , of what strength and policy , how far it extended , and what nations were friends or enemies adjoining , and finally of the distance and way to enter the same : he told me that 
 399 
 Orejones are the gentlemen of Peru. Lop. de Gomar . 
 Hist. gen . cap . 119. 
 himself and his people with all those down the River towards the Sea , as far as Emeria , the province of Carapana , were of Guiana , but that they called themselves Orenoqueponi , and that all the nations between the river and those mountains in sighed called Wacarima , were of the same cast and appellation : and that on the other side of those mountains of Wacarima there was a large plain ( which after I discovered in my return ) called the valley of Amariocapana , in all that valley the people were also of the ancient Guianians . 
 I asked what nations those were which inhabited on the farther side of those mountains , beyond the valley of Amariocapana : he answered with a great sighs ( as a man which had inward feeling of the loss of his Country and liberty , especially for that his eldest son was slain in a battle on that side of the mountains , whom he most entirely loved ) that he remembered in his father's life time when he was very old , and himself a young man , that there came down into that large valley of Guiana , a nation from so far off as the Sun slept , ( for such were his own words ) with so great a multitude as they could not be numbered nor resisted , and that they wore large coats , and hats of crimson colour , which colour he expressed , by showing a piece of read wood , wherewith my tent was supported , and that they were called Orejones , and Epuremei , those that had slain and rooted out so many of the ancient people , as there were leaves in the wood upon all the trees , and had now made themselves Lords of all , even to that mountain foot called Curaa , saving only of two nations , the one called Awarawaqueri , and the other Cassipagotos , and that in the last battle fought between the Epuremei , and the Iwarawaqueri , his eldest son was chosen to carry to the aid of the Iwarawaqueri , a great troop of the Orenoqueponi , and was there slain with all his people and friends , and that he had now remaining but one son : and farther told me that those Epuremei had built a great Town 
 400 
 called Macureguarai at the said mountain foot , at the beginning of the great plains of Guiana , which have no end : and that their houses have many rooms , one over the other , and that therein the great King of the Orejones and Epuremei kept three thousande men to defend the borders against them , and withal daily to invade and slay them : but that of late years since the Christians offered to invade his territories , and those frontiers , they were all at peace , and traded one with another , saving only the Iwarawaqueri , and those other nations upon the head of the river of Caroli , called Cassipagotos , which we afterwards discovered , each one holding the Spaniard for a common enemy . 
 After he had answered thus far , he desired leave to depart , saying that he had far to go , that he was old , and weak , and was every day called for by death , which was also his own phrase : I desired him to rest with us that night , but I could not entreat him , but he told me that at my return from the country above , he would again come to us , and in the mean time provide for us the best he could , of all that his country yielded ; the same night he returned to Oroco-tona his own town , so as he went that day eight and twentie miles , the weather being very hight , the country being situate between foure and five degrees of the Equinoctial . 
 This Topiawari is held for the proudest , and wisest of all the Orenoqueponi , and so he behaved himself towards me in all his answers at my return , as I marveiled to finde1 a man of that gravity and judgement , and of so good discourse , that had no help of learning nor breed . 
 The next morning we also left the port , and sailed Westward up to the River , to view the famous River called Caroli , as well because it was marvelous of it self , as also for that I understood it led to the strongest nations of all the frontiers , that were enemies to the Epuremei , which are subject's to Inga , Emperor of 
 x 401 2 c 
 A.D. 
 * 595 - The town of Macureguarai . 
 Orotona between 4. and 5. degrees of Northerly latitude . 
 Guiana , and Manoa , and that night we anckered at The isle of another island called Caiama , of some five or sixe miles 
 ^ama - jn length } anj the next day arrived at the mouth of 
 atth^mouth Caroli . When we were short of it as low or further 
 of the river down as the port of Morequito we herd the great roar 
 Caroli . and fallen of the River , but when we came to enter with 
 our barge and whirries thinking to have gone up some fburtie miles to the nations of the Cassipagotos , we were not able with a barge of eight oars to row one stones cast in and hour , and yet the River is as broad as the Thames at Wolwich , and we tried both sides , and the middle , and every part of the River , so as we encamped upon the banks adjoining , and sent ofF our Orenoque-pone ( which came with us from Morequito ) to give knowledge to the nations upon the River of our being there , and that we desired to see the Lords of Canuria , which dwelled within the province upon that River , making them know that we were enemies to the Spaniards , ( for it was on this River side that Morequito slew the Friar , and those nine Spaniards which came from Manoa , the City of Inga , and took from them fourtie thousande pezos of gold ) so as the next day there came down a Wanuretona . Lord or Cacique called Wanuretona with many people with him , and brought all store of provisions to entertain us , as the rest had done . And as I had before made my coming known to Topiawari , so did I acquaint this Cacique therewith , and how I was sent by her Majesty for the purpose aforesaid , and gathered also what I could of him touching the estate of Guiana , and I found that those also of Caroli were not only enemies to the Spaniards , but most of all to the Epuremei , which abound in gold , and by this Wanuretona , I had and Arana - knowledge that on the head of this River were three gotos three mighty nations , which were seated on a great lake , from mighty nations whence this River descended , & were called Cassipagotos , lake^the EP^ragotos , and Arawagotos , and that all those either head of thee against the Spaniards , or the Epuremei would join with river Caroli , us , and that if we entered the land over the mountains 
 402 
 of Curaa , we should satisfy our selves with gold and all other good things : he told us farther of a nation called Iwarawaqueri before spoken off , that held daily war with the Epuremei that inhabited Macureguarai the first civil town of Guiana , of the subject's of Inga the Emperor . 
 Upon this river one Captain George , that I took with Berreo told me there was a great silver Mine , and that A great silver it was near the banks of the said river . But by this time as well Orenoque , Caroli , as all the rest of the rivers were risen foure or five foot in height , so as it was not possible by the strength of any men , or with any boat whatsoever to row into the River against the stream . I therefore sent Captain Thine , Captain Green vile , my nephew John Gylbert , my cousin Butshead Gorges , Captain Clarke , and some thirtie shot more to coast the River by land , and to go to a town some twentie miles over the valley called Amnatapoi , and they Amnatapol , a found guides there , to go farther towards the mountain iowne-foote to another great town called Capurepana , belonging to a Cacique called Haharacoa ( that was a nephew to old Topiawari King of Arromaia our chiefest friend ) because this town and province of Capurepana adjoined to Macureguarai , which was a frontier town of the Empire : and the mean while my self with Captain Gifford , Captain Calfield , Edward Hancocke , and some half a dosen shot marched over land to view the strange overfals of the river of Caroli which roared so far off , and also to see the plains adjoining , and the rest of the province of Canuri : I sent also Captain Whiddon , William Connocke , and some eight shot with them , to see if they could find any Minerail stone alongst the river side . When we were come to the tops of the first The strange hills of the plains adjoining to the river , we beheld werfal‘ °f that wonderful breach of waters , which ran down Canl1 " Caroli : and might from that mountain see the river how it ran in three parts , above twentie miles off , and there appeared some tenne or twelve overfals in sighed , 
 403 
 every one as high over the other as a Church-tower , which fell with that fury , that the rebound of water made it seem , as if it had be all covered over with a great shower of rain : and in some places we took it at the first for a smoke that had risen over some great town . For mine own part I was well persuaded from thence to have returned , being a very ill footman , but the rest were all so desirous to go near the said strange thunder of waters , as they drew me on by little and little , till we came into the next valley where we might better discern A mostbeauti - the same . I never saw a more beautiful country , nor full country . more lively prospects , hills so raised here and there over the valleys , the river winding into diverse branches , the plains adjoining without bush or stubble , all fair green grass , the ground of hard sand easy to march on , either for horse or foot , the deer crossing in every path , the birds towards the evening singing on every tree with a thousand several tunes , cranes and herons of white , crimson , and carnation perching in the rivers side , the air fresh with a gentle Easterly wind , and every stone that we stooped to take up , promised either gold or silver by his complexion . Your Lordship shall see of many sorts , and I hope some of them cannot be bettered under the Sun , and yet we had no means but with our daggers and fingers to tear them out here and there , the Abundance of rocks being most hard of that minerali Spar afore-^Sparre said , which is like a flint , and is altogether as hard or 
 ' harder , and beside the veins lie a fathom or two deep 
 in the rocks . But we wanted all things requisite save only our desires and good will to have performed more if it had pleased God . To be short , when both our companies returned , each of them brought also several sorts of stones that appeared very fair , but were such as they found lose on the ground , and were for the most part but coloured , and had not any gold fixed in them , yet such as had no judgement or experience kept all that glistered , and would not be persuaded but it was rich because of the lustre , and brought of those , and of Mar-404 
 1595-quesite with all , from Trinidad , and have delivered of those stones to be tried in many places , and have thereby bred and opinion that all the rest is of the same : yet some of these stones I showed afterwards to a Spaniard of the Caracas , who told me that it was El Madre del oro , that is the mother of gold , and that the Mine was farther in the ground . 
 But it shall be found a weak policy in me , either to betray my self , or my country with imaginations , neither am I so far in love with that lodging , watching , care , peril , diseases , ill savours , bad fare , and many other mischiefs that accompany these voyages , as to woo my self again into any of them , were I not assured that the Sun covereth not so much riches in any part of the earth . Captain Whiddon , and our Chirurgeon Nicholas Millechap brought me a kind of stones like Saphires , what they may prove I know not . I showed them to some of the Orenoqueponi , and they promised to bring me to a mountain , that had of them very large pieces growing Diamond wise : whither it be Crystal of the mountain , Bristol-Diamond , or Saphire I do not yet know , but I hope the best , sure I am that the place is as likely as those from whence all the rich stones are brought , and in the same height or very near . 
 On the left hand of this river Caroli are seated those nations which are called Iwarawakeri before remembered , which are enemies to the Epuremei : and on the head of it adjoining to the great lake Cassipa , are situate those other nations which also resist Inga , and the Epuremei , called Cassepagotos , Eparegotos , and Arrawagotos . I farther understood that this lake of Cassipa is so large , Cassipa a as it is above one days journey for one of their Canoas gnat lake . to cross , which may be some fourtie miles , and that thereinto fallen diverse rivers , and that great store of grains of gold are found in the Summer time when the lake falls by the banks , in those branches . 
 There is also another goodly river beyond Caroli which The nver of is called Arui , which also runneth thorough the lake Cassipa , Arui - 
 405 
 Ewaipanomaa strange headless nation . 
 and falls into Orenoque farther West , making all that land between Caroli and Arui and island , which is likewise a most beautiful country . Next unto Arui there are two rivers Atoica and Caora , and on that branch which is called Caora , are a nation of people , whose heads appear not above their shoulders ; which though it may be thought a mere fable , yet for mine own part I am resolved it is true , because every child in the provinces of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the same : they are called Ewaipanoma : they are reported to have their eyes in their shoulders , and their mouths in the middle of their breasts , and that a long train of hair grows backward between their shoulders . The son of Topiawari , which I brought with me into England told me that they are the most mighty men of all the land , and use bows , arrows , and clubs thrice as big as any of Guiana , or of the Orenoqueponi , and that one of the Iwarawakeri took a prisoner of them the year before our arrival there , and brought him into the borders of Aromaia his father's country . And farther when I seemed to doubt of it , he told me that it was no wonder among them , but that they were as great a nation , and as common as any other in all the provinces , and had of late years slain many hundreds of his father's people , and of other nations their neighbours , but it was not my chance to hear of them till I was come away , and if I had but spoken one word of it while I was there , I might have brought one of them with me to put the matter out of doubt . Such a nation was written of by Mandevile , whose reports were held for fables many years , and yet since the East Indies were discovered , we find his relations true of such things as heretofore were held incredible : whither it be true or no , the matter is not great , neither can there be any profit in the imagination ; for mine own part I saw them not , but I am resolved that so many people did not all combine , or forethink to make the report . 
 When I came to Cumana in the West Indies afterwards by chance I spoke with a Spaniard dwelling not far from 406 
 1595-thence , a man of great travel , and after he knew that I had be in Guiana , and so far directly West as Caroli , the first question he asked me was , whither I had seen any of the Ewaipanoma , which are those without heads : who being esteemed a most honest man of his word , and in all things else , told me that he had seen many of them : I may not name him , because it may be for his disadvantage , but he is well known to Monsieur Mucherons son of London , and to Peter Mucheron merchant of the Flemish ship that was there in trade , who also herd what he avowed to be true of those people . 
 The fourth river to the West of Caroli is Casnero The river of which falls into Orenoque on this side of Amapaia , Casnen ' and that river is greater then Danubius , or any of Europe : it riseth on the South of Guiana from the mountains which divide Guiana from Amazones , and I think it to be navigable many hundreth miles : but we had no time , means , nor season of the year , to search those rivers for the causes aforesaid , the Winter The Winter being come upon us , although the Winter and Summer °fGu'lana-as touching cold and heat differ not , neither do the trees ever sensibly loose their leaves , but have always fruit either ripe or green , and most of them both blossom , leaves , ripe fruit , and green at one time : but their Winter only consisteth of terrible reins , and overflowing of the rivers , with many great storms and gusts , thunder and lightnings , of which we had our fill , ere we returned . 
 On the North side , the first river that falls into Orenoque is Cari , beyond it on the same side is the river of Limo , between these two is a great nation of Canibals , and their chief town bears the name of the river , and is called Acamacari : at this town is a continual market of women for three or foure hatchet's a piece , they are bought by the Arwacas , and by them sold into the West Indies . To the West of Limo is the river Pao , beyond it Caturi , beyond that Voari and Capuri which falls out of the great river of Meta , by 4°7 
 which Berreo descended from Nuevo reyno de Granada . To the Westward of Capuri is the province of Amapaia , where Berreo wintered , and had so many of his people poisoned with the tawny water of the marshes of the Anebas . Above Amapaia towards Nuevo reyno fallen in Meta , Pato , Meta , Pato , and Cassanar . To the West of those to-Cassanar . wards the provinces of the Ashaguas and Catetios are 
 the rivers of Beta , Dawney , and Ubarro , and towards the frontier of Peru are the provinces of Thomebamba , and Caxamalca . Adjoining to Quito in the North side of Peru are the rivers of Guiacar and Goauar : and on the other side of the said mountains the river of Papamene . Papamene which descendeth into Marannon or Amazones passing through the province Mutylones where DONE Pedro de Osua who was slain by the traitor Agiri before rehearsed , built his brigandines , when he sought Guiana by the way of Amazones . 
 The Isle of Between Dawney and Beta lies a famous Island in Baraquan . Orenoque now called Baraquan ( for above Meta it is not known by the name of Orenoque ) which is called Athule , beyond which , ships of burden cannot pass by reason of a most forcible overfall , and current of waters : but in the eddy all smaller vessels may be drawn even to Peru it self : But to speak of more of these rivers without the description were but tedious , and therefore Orenoque a I with leave the rest to the description . This river of Orenoque is navigable for ships little less then 1000 Peru , Nuevo miles , and for lesser vessels near 2000. By it ( as afore-reyno , & said ) Peru , Nuevo reyno , and Popaian , may be invaded : Popaian may it also leads to the great empire of Inga , & to the 
 Provinces of Amapaia , and Anebas which abound in gold : L ' ’J his branches of Cosnero , Manta , Caora descended from the middle land & valley , which lies between the easter province of Peru and Guiana ; and it falls into the sea between Marannon and Trinidad in two degrees and a half : all which your Honours shall better perceive in the general description of Guiana , Peru , Nuevo reyno , the kingdom of Popayan , and Roidas , with the 408 
 province of Venezuela , to the bay of Uraba , behind Cartagena Westward ; and to Amazones Southward . While we lay at anchor on the coast of Canuri , and had Canuri . taken knowledge of all the nations upon the head and branches of this river , and had found out so many several people , which were enemies to the Epuremei , and the new conquerors : I thought it time lost to linger any longer in that place , especially for that the fury of Orenoque began daily to threaten us with dangers in our return : for no half day passed , but the river began to rage and overflow very fearfully , and the reins came down in terrible showers , and gusts in great abundance : and withal , our men began to cry out for want of shift , for no man had place to bestow any other apparel then that which he beware on his back , and that was thoroughly washed on his body for the most part tenne times in one day : and we had now be well near a month , every day passing to the Westward farther and farther from our ships . we therefore turned towards the East , and spent the rest They return . of the time in discovering the river towards the sea , which we had not viewed , and which was most materiali . 
 The next day following we left the mouth of Caroli , and arrived again at the port of Morequito where we were before : for passing down the stream we went without labour , and against the wind , little less then a hundreth miles a day . Assoon as I came to anchor , I sent away one for old Topiawari , with whom I much desired to have further conference , and also to deal with him for some one of his country , to bring with us into England , as well to learn the language , as to confer withal by the way , the time being now spent of any longer stay there . Within three hours after my messenger came to him , he arrived also , and with him such a rabble of all sorts of people , and every one laden with somewhat , as if it had been a great market or fair in England : and our hungry companies clustered thick and threefold among their baskets , every one laying hand on 409 
 1595-The last conference of sir Walter Ralegh with Topiawari . whose son he brought into England . 
 Counsel to be followed in other conquests . 
 Macureguarai the first town of Guiana , and of rich and appareled people . 
 what he liked . After he had rested a while in my tent , I shut out all but our selves , and my interpreter , and told him that I knew that both the Epuremei and the Spaniards were enemies to him , his country and nations : that the one had conquered Guiana already , and the other sought to regain the same from them both : and therefore I desired him to instruct me what he could , both of the passage into the golden parts of Guiana , and to the civil towns and appareled people of Inga . He gave me and answer to this effect : first that he could not perceive that I meant to go onward towards the city of Manoa , for neither the time of the year served , neither could he perceive any sufficient numbers for such and enterprise : and if I did , I was sure with all my company to be buried there , for the Emperor was of that strength , as that many times so many men more were too few : beside he gave me this good counsel and advised me to hold it in mind ( as for himself he knew , he could not live till my return ) that I should not offer by any means hereafter to invade the strong parts of Guiana without the help of all those nations which were also their enemies : for that it was impossible without those , either to be conducted , to be victualed , or to have ought carried with us , our people not being able to endure the march in so great heat , and travel , unless the borderers gave them help , to carry with them both their meat and furniture : For he remembered that in the plains of Macureguarai three hundreth Spaniards were overthrown , who were tired out , and had none of the borderers to their friends : but meeting their enemies as they passed the frontier , were environed on all sides , and the people setting the long dry grass on fire , smothered them , so as they had no breath to fight , nor could discern their enemies for the great smoke . He told me farther that 4 days journey from his town was Macureguarai , and that those were the next and nearest of the subject's of Inga , and of the 
 410 
 Epuremei , and the first town of appareled and rich people , and that all those plataeae of gold which were scattered among the borderers and carried to other nations far and near , came from the said Macureguarai and were there made , but that those of the land within were far finer , and were fashioned after the images of men , beasts , birds , and fish . I asked him whither he thought that those companies that I had there with me , were sufficient to take that town or no ? He told me that he thought they were . I then asked him , whither he would assist me with guides , and some companies of his people to joy ne with us ? He answered that he would go himself with all the borderers , if the rivers did remain fordable , upon this condition that I would leave with him till my return again fifty soldiers , which he undertook to victuali : I answered that I had not above fiftie good men in all there , the rest were labourers and rowers , & that I had not pro - . vision to leave with them of powder , shot , apparel , or ought else , and that without those things necessary for their defence , they should be in danger of the Spaniards in my absence , who I knew would use the same measure towards mine , that I offered them at Trinidad : And although upon the motion Captain Calfield , Captain Green vile , my nephew John Gilbert and diverse others were desirous to stay , yet I was resolved that they must needs have perished , for Berreo expected daily a supply out of Spaine , and looked also hourly for his son to come down from Nuevo reyno de Granada , with many horse and foot , and had also in Valencia in the Caracas , two hundreth horse ready to march , and I could not have spared above fortie , and had not any store at all of powder , lead , or match to have left with them , nor any other provision , either spade , pickeaxe , or ought else to have fortified withal . 
 When I had given him reason that I could not at this time leave him such a company , he then desired me to forbear him and his country for that time , for he 
 411 
 assured me that I should be no sooner three days from the coast , but those Epuremei would invade him , and destroy all the remain of his people and friends , if he should any way either guide us or assist us against them . 
 He further alleged , that the Spaniards sought his death , and as they had already murdered his Nephew Morequito lord of that province , so they had him seventeen days in a chain before he was king of the country , and led him like a dog from place to place , until he had paid and hundreth plataeae of gold , and diverse chains of Spleen-stones for his ransom : and now since he became owner of that province , that they had many times laid wait to take him , and that they would be now more vehement , when they should understand of his conference with the English , and because , said he , they would the better displant me , if they cannot lay hands on me , they have got a Nephew of mine called Eparacano , whom they have Christened DONE Juan , and his son DONE Pedro , whom they have also appareled and armed , by whom they seek to make a party against me in mine own country : he also had taken to wife one Loviana of a strong family , which are borderers and neighbours , and my self now being old and in the hands of death am not able to travel nor to shift , as when I was of younger years : he therefore prayed us to defer it till the next year , when he would undertake to draw in all the borderers to serve us , and then also it would be more seasonable to travel , for at this time of the year , we should not be able to pass any river , the waters were and would be so grown ere our return . 
 He farther told me , that I could not desire so much to invade Macureguari , and the rest of Guiana , but that the borderers would be more vehement then I , for he yielded for a chief cause that in the wars with the Epuremei , they were spoiled of their women , and that their wives and daughters were taken from them , so as for their own parts they desired nothing of the gold 412 
 or treasure , for their labours , but only to recover women from the Epuremei : for he farther complained very sadly ( as it had been a matter of great consequence ) that whereas they were wont to have tenne or twelve wives , they were now enforced to content themselves with three or foure , and that the lords of the Epuremei had fifty or a hundreth : And in truth they war more for women then either for gold or dominion : For the lords of countries' desire many children of their own bodies , to increase their races and kindreds , for in those consist their greatest trust and strength . Diverse of his followers afterwards desired me to make haste again , that they might sack the Epuremei , and I asked them of what ? They answered , of their women for us , and their gold for you : for the hope of those many of women they more desire the war , then either for gold , or for the recovery of their ancient territories . For what between the subject's of Inga , and the Spaniards , those frontiers are grown thin of people , and also great numbers are fled to other nations farther ofF for fear of the Spaniards . 
 After I received this answer of the old man , we fell into consideration , whither it had be of better advice to have entered Macureguarai , and to have begun a war upon Inga at this time , yea or no , if the time of the year , and all things else had sorted . For mine own part ( as we were not able to march it for the rivers , neither had any such strength as was requisite , and durst not abide the coming of the Winter , or to tarry any longer from our ships ) I thought it were evil counsel to have attempted it at that time , although the desire of gold will answer many objections : but it would have been in mine opinion and utter overthrow to the enterprise , if the same should be hereafter by her Majesty attempted : for then ( whereas now they have herd we were enemies to the Spaniards & were sent by her Majesty to relieve them ) they would as good cheap have joined with the Spaniards at our 413 
 15951 , , , return , as to have yielded unto us , when they had proved that we came both for one errant , and that both sought but to sack & spoil them , but as yet our desire of gold , or our purpose of invasion is not known to them of the empire : and it is likely that if her Majesty undertake the enterprise , they will rather submit themselves to her obedience then to the Spaniards , of whose cruelty both themselves and the borderers have already tasted : and therefore till I had known her Majesties pleasure , I would rather have lost the sack of one or two towns ( although they might have been very profitable ) then to have defaced or endangered the future hope of so many millions , & the great good , & rich trade which England may be possessed of thereby . I am assured now that they will all die even to the last man against the Spaniards in hope of our succour and return : whereas otherwise if I had either laid hands on the borderers , or ransomed the lords , as Berreo did , or invaded the subject's of Inga , I know all had been lost for hereafter . 
 After that I had resolved Topiawari lord of Aromaia , that I could not at this time leave with him the companies he desired , and that I was contented to forbear the enterprise against the Epuremei till the next year , he freely gave me his only son to take with me into England , and hoped , that though he himself had but a short time to live , yet that by our means his son should be established after his death : and I left with him one Francis Francis Sparrow , a servant of Captain Gifford , ( who was Sparrow . desirous to tarry , and could describe a country with his pen ) and a boy of mine called Hugh Goodwin , to learn the language . I after asked the manner how the Epuremei wrought those plataeae of gold , and how they could melt it out of the stone ; he told me that the most of the gold which they made in plataeae and images , The lake of was not severed from the stone , but that on the lake of Manoa . Manoa , and in a multitude of other rivers they gathered it in grains of perfect gold and in pieces as big as small 414 
 stones , and that they put it to a part of copper , otherwise they could not work it , and that they used a great earthen pot with holes round about it , and when they had mingled the gold and copper together , they fastened canes to the holes , and so with the breath of men they increased the fire till the metal ran , & then they cast it into moulds of stone and clay , and so make those plataeae and images . I have sent your Honours of two sorts such as I could by chance recover , more to show the manner of them , then for the valve : For I did not in any sort make my desire of gold known , because I had neither time , nor power to have a greater quantity . I gave among them many more pieces ot gold , then I received , of the new money of 20 shillings with her Majesties picture to wear , with promise that they would become her servants thenceforth . 
 I have also sent your Honours of the over , whereof 
 I know some is as rich as the earth yields any , of S^-ore . 
 Most rich 
 which I know there is sufficient , if nothing else were to be hoped for . But beside that we were not able to tarry and search the hills , so we had neither pioneers , bars , ledges , nor wedges of iron to break the ground , without which there is no working in mines : but we saw all the hills with stones of the colour of gold and silver , and we tried them to be no Marquesite , and therefore such as the Spaniards call El madre del oro , or , The mother of gold , which is and undoubted assurance of the general abundance : and my self saw the outside of many mines of the Spar , which I know to be the same that all covet in this world , and of those , more then I will speak of . 
 Having learned what I could in Canuri and Aromaia , and received a faithful promise of the principallest of those provinces to become servants to her Majesty , and to resist the Spaniards , if they made any attempt in our absence , and that they would draw in the nations about the lake of Cassipa , and those Iwarawaqueri , I The lake of then parted from old Topiawari , and received his son C ™ 1 ? 0 - 
 415 
 for a pledge between us , and left with him two of ours as aforesaid . To Francis Sparrow I gave instructions to travel to Marcureguarai , with such merchandizes as I left with them , thereby to learn the place , and if it were possible , to go on to the great city of Manoa : which being done , we weighed anchor , and coasted the Guiana on the river on Guiana side , because we came upon the North Southside . side , by the lanes of the Saima and Wikiri . 
 There came with us from Aromaia a Cacique called Putijma , that commanded the province of Warapana , ( which Putijma slew the nine Spaniards upon Caroli before spoken of ) who desired us to rest in the Porte of his country , promising to bring us unto a mountain adjoining to his town that had stones of the colour of gold , which he performed . And after we had rested there one night , I went my self in the morning with most of the Gentlemen of my company , over land towards the said mountain , marching by a rivers Mana . side called Mana , leaving on the right hand a town called Tuteritona , standing in the Province of Tarracoa , of the which Wariaaremagoto is principali . Beyond it lies another town towards the South , in the valley of Amariocapana , which bears the name of the said valley , whose plains stretch themselves some sixtie miles in length , East and West , as fair ground , and as beautiful fields , as any man hath ever seen , with diverse copses scattered here and there by the rivers side , and all as full of deer as any forest or park in England , and in every lake and river the like abundance of fish and foul , of which Irraparragota is lord . 
 From the river of Mana , we crossed another river in Diana . the said beautiful valley called Oiana , & rested our selves by a clear lake , which lay in the middle of the said Oiana , and one of our guides kindling us fire with two sticks , we stayed a while to dry our shirts , which with the heat hung very wet and heavy on our shoulders . Afterwards we sought the ford to pass over towards the mountain called Iconuri , where 416 
 Putijma foretold us of the mine . In this lake we saw one of the great fish , as big as a wine pipe , which they call Manati , being most excellent and wholesome meat . But after I perceived , that to pass the said river would require half a days march more , I was not able my self to endure it , and therefore I sent Captain Keymis with sixe shot to go on , and gave him order not to return to the port of Putijma , which is called Chiparepare , but to take leisure , and to march down the said valley , as far as a river called Cumaca , where I promised to meet him again , Putijma himself promising also to be his guide : and as they marched , they left the towns of Emparepana , and Capurepana , on the right hand , and marched from Putijmas house down the said valley of Amariocapana , and we returning the same day to the rivers side , saw by the way many rocks , like unto gold over , and on the left hand , a round mountain which consisted of minerali stone . 
 From hence we rowed down the stream , coasting the province of Parino : As for the branches of rivers which I overpass in this discourse , those shall be better expressed in the description with the mountains of Ajo , Ara , and the rest , which are situate in the provinces of Parino and Carricurrina . When we were come as far down as the land called Ariacoa , ( where Orenoque divideth it self into three great branches , each of them being most goodly rivers ) I sent away captain Henrie Thin , and captain Greenevile with the galley , the nearest way , and took with me captain Gifford , captain Calfield , Edward Porter , and captain Eynos with mine own barge , and the two wherries , and went down that branch of Orenoque , which is called Cararoopana , which leads towards Emeria the province of Carapana , and towards the East sea , as well to find out captain Keymis , whom I had sent over land , as also to acquaint my self with Carapana , who is one of the greatest of all the lords of the Orenoqueponi : and when I came to the 
 X 417 2D 
 A.D. 
 * 595 - 
 Great fish called Manati most excellent meat . 
 river of Cumaca ( to which Putijma promised to conduct captain Keymis ) I left captain Eynos and master Porter in the said river to expect his coming , & the Emeria . rest of us rowed down the stream towards Emeria . 
 In this branch called Cararoopana were also many goodly Islands , some of sixe miles long , some of ten , and some of twenty . When it grew towards sunset , we entered a branch of a river that fell into Orenoque Winicapora . called Winicapora : where I was en formed of the mountain of Crystal , to which in truth for the length of the way , and the evil season of the year , I was not able to march , nor abide any longer upon the journey : we saw it afar off and it appeared like a white Church-A mighty cata - tower of and exceeding height . There falls over it a ract or overfall mjghty river which touches no part of the side of the ojviaer . mountain , but rushes over the top of it , and falls to the ground with so terrible a noise and clamor , as if a thousand great bells were knocked one against another . I think there is not in the world so strange and overfall , nor so wonderful to behold : Berreo told me that there Diamonds & were Diamonds and other precious stones on it , and that other precious shined very far off : but what it hath I know ' not , neither durst he or any of his men ascend to the top of the said mountain , those people adjoining being his enemies ( as they were ) and the way to it so impassable . 
 Upon this river of Winicapora we rested a while , and from thence marched into the country to a town called after the name of the river , whereof the captain was one Timitwara , who also offered to conduct me Wacarima . to the top of the said mountain called Wacarima : But when we came in first to the house of the said Timitwara , being upon one of their said feast days , we found them all as drunk as beggars , and the pots walking from one to another without rest : we that were weary , and hight with marching , were glad of the plenty though a small quantity satisfied us , their drink being very strong and heady , and so rested our selves 418 
 a while ; after we had fed , we drew our selves back to our boats , upon the river and there came to us all the lords of the country , with all such kind of victuali as the place yielded , and with their delicate wine of Pinas , and with abundance of hens , and other provisions , and of those stones which we call Spleen-stones . 
 we understood by the chieftains of Winicapora , that their lord Carapana was departed from Emeria which was now in sighed , & that he was fled to Cairamo , adjoining to the mountains of Guiana , over the valley called Amariocapana , being persuaded by those tenne Spaniards which lay at his house , that we would destroy him , and his country . 
 But after these Cassiques of Winicapora & Sapora-tona his followers perceived our purpose , and saw that we came as enemies to the Spaniards only , and had not so much as harmed any of those nations , no though we found them to be of the Spaniards own servants , they assured us that Carapana would be as ready to serve us , as any of the lords of the provinces , which we had passed ; and that he durst doe no other till this day but entertain the Spaniards , his country lying so directly in their way , and next of all other to any entrance that should be made in Guiana on that side . 
 And they farther assured us , that it was not for fear of our coming that he was removed , but to be acquitted of the Spaniards or any other that should come hereafter . For the province of Cairoma is situate at the mountain foot , which divideth the plains of Guiana from the countries' of the Orenoqueponi : by means whereof if any should come in . our absence into his towns , he would slip over the mountains into the plains of Guiana among the Epuremei , where the Spaniards durst not follow him without great force . 
 But in mine opinion , or rather I assure my self , that Carapana ( being a notable wise and subtle fellow , a man 
 419 
 of one hundred years of age , and therefore of great experience ) is removed , to look on , and if he find that we return strong he will be ours , if not , he will excuse his departure to the Spaniards , and say it was for fear of our coming . 
 we therefore thought it bootless to row so far down the stream , or to seek any farther of this old fox : and therefore from the river of Waricapana ( which lies at the entrance of Emeria ) we returned again , and left to the Eastward those foure rivers which fallen from the mountains of Emeria into Orenoque , which are Waracayari , Coirama , Akaniri , and Iparoma : below those foure are also these branches and mouths of Orenoque , which fallen into the East sea , whereof the first is Araturi , the next Amacura , the third Barima , the fourth Wana , the fift Morooca , the sixt Paroma , the last Wijmi : beyond them there fallen out of the land between Orenoque and Amazones 14 rivers which I forbear to name , inhabited by the Arwacas and Canibals . 
 It is now time to return towards the North , and we found it a wearisome way back from the borders of Emeria , to recover up again to the head of the river Carerupana , by which we descended , and where we parted from the galley , which I directed to take the next way to the port of Toparimaca , by which we entered first . 
 All the night it was stormy and dark , and full of thunder and great showers , so as we were driven to keep close by the banks in our small boats , being all heartily afraid both of the billow and terrible curent of the river . By the next morning we recovered the mouth of the river of Cumaca , where we left captain Eynos and Edward Porter to attend the coming of captain Keymis over land : but when we entered the same , they had herd no news of his arrival , which bred in us a great doubt what might become of him : I rowed up a league or two farther into the river , shooting ofF pieces all the way , that he might know of our being there . 
 420 
 1595-And the next morning we herd them answer us also with a piece : we took them aboard us , and took our leave of Putima their guide , who of all others most lamented our departure , and offered to send his son with us into England , if we could have stayed till he had sent back to his town : but our hearts were cold to behold the great rage and increase of Orenoque , and therefore departed , and turned towards the West , till we had recovered the parting of the three branches aforesaid , that we might put down the stream after the galley . 
 The next day we landed on the Island of Assapano ( which divideth the river from that branch by which we sent down to Emeria ) and there feasted our selves with that beast which is called Armadilla presented unto us before at Winicapora , and the day following we recovered the galley at anchor at the port of Topari - The port of maca , & the same evening departed with very foul Toparimaca . weather and terrible thunder , and showers , for the Winter was come on very far : the best was , we went no less then 100 miles a day , down the river ; but by the way we entered , it was impossible to return , for that the river of Amana , being in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , cannot be sailed back by any means , both the brize and current of the sea were so forcible : and therefore we followed a branch of Orenoque called Capuri , which entered into the sea Eastward of our ships , to the end we might bear with them before the wind , and it was not without need , for we had by that way as much to cross of the main sea after we came to the rivers mouth , as between Gravelyn and Dover , in such boats as your Hon. hath herd . 
 To speak of what passed homeward were tedious , either to describe or name any of the rivers , Islands , or villages of the Tivitivas which dwell on trees : we will leave all those to the generail map : and to be short , when we were arrived at the sea side , then grew our greatest doubt , and the bitterest of all our journey before - 
 421 
 passed , for I protest before God , that we were in a most desperate estate : for the same night which we ankored in the mouth of the river of Capun , where it falls into the sea , there arose a mighty storm , and the rivers mouth was at least a league broad , so as we ran before night close under the land with our small boats , and brought the Galley as near as we could , but she had as much a do to live as could be , and there wanted little of her sinking , and all those in her ; for mine own part I confess , I was very doubtful which way to take , either to go over in the pestered Galley , there being but sixe foot water over the sands , for two leagues together , and that also in the channel , and she drew five : or to adventure in so great a billow , and in so doubtful weather , to cross the seas in my barge . The longer we tarried the worse it was , and therefore I took Captain Gifford , Captain Calfield , and my cousin Greenevile into my barge ; and after it cleared up , about midnight we put our selves to Gods keeping , and thrust out into the sea , leaving the Galley at anchor , who durst not adventure but by daylight : And so being all very sober , and melancholy , one faintly cheating another to show courage , it pleased God that the next day about nine of the clock , we descried the Island of Trinidad , and steering for the nearest part of it , we kept the shore till we came to Curiapan , where we found our ships at anchor , then which there was never to us a more joyful sighed . 
 Now that it hath pleased God to send us safe to our ships , it is time to leave Guiana to the Sun , whom they worship , and steer away towards the North : I will therefore in a few words finish the discovery A rehearsal thereof . Of the several nations which we found upon y description this discovery I will once again make repetition , and timsandiivers ^°Ye are affected - At our first entrance into Amana , found in this which is one of the outlets of Orenoque , we left on the discovery . right hand of us in the bottom of the bay , lying directly against Trinidad , a nation of inhuman Canibals , which 
 422 
 inhabit the rivers of Guanipa and Berbeese ; in the same bay there is also a third river which is called Areo , which riseth on Paria side towards Cumana , and that river is inhabited with the Wikiri , whose chief town upon the said river is Sayma ; In this bay there are no more rivers , but these three before rehearsed , and the foure branches of Amana , all which in the Winter thrust so great abundance of water into the sea , as the same is taken up fresh , two or three leagues from the land . In the passages towards Guiana ( that is , in all those lands which the eight branches of Orenoque fashion into Hands ) there are but one sort of people called Tivitivas , but of two casts as they term them , the one called Ciawani , the other Waraweeti , and those war one with another . 
 On the hithermost part of Orenoque , as at Toparimaca , and Winicapora , those are of a nation called Nepoios , and are of the followers of Carapana , Lord of Emeria . Between Winicapora and the port of Morequito which stands in Aromaia , and all those in the valley of Amariocapana are called Orenoqueponi , and did obey Morequito , and are now followers of Topiawari . Upon the river of Caroli , are the Canuri , which are governed by a woman ( who is inheritrix of that Province ) who came far off to see our Nation , and asked me diverse questions of her Majesty , being much delighted with the discourse of her Majesties greatness , and wondering at such reports as we truly made of her Highness many virtues : And upon the head of Caroli , and on the lake of Cassipa , are the three strong Nations of the Cassipagotos . Right South into the land are the Capure-pani , and Emparepani , and beyond those adjoining to Macureguarai ( the first city of Inga ) are the Iwarawakeri : all these are professed enemies to the Spaniards , and to the rich Epuremei also . To the West of Caroli are diverse nations of Canibals , and of those Ewaipanoma without heads . Directly West are the Amapaias and Anebas , which are also marvelous rich in gold . The rest towards Peru we will omit . On the North of 
 423 
 Orenoque , between it and the West Indies are the Wikiri , Saymi , and the rest before spoken of , all mortali enemies to the Spaniardes . On the South side of the main mouth of Orenoque , are the Arwacas ; and beyond them the Canibals and to the South of them the Amazones . 
 To make mention of the several beasts , birds , fish , fruits , flowers , gums , sweet woods , and of their several religions and customs , would for the first require as many volumes as those of Gesnerus , and for the rest another bundle of Decades . The religion of the Epuremei is the same which the Ingas , Emperors of Peru used , which may be read in Cieza , and other Spanish stories , how they believe the immortality of the soul , worship the Sun , and bury with them alive their best beloved wives and treasure , as they likewise do in Pegu in the East Indies , and other places . The Orenoqueponi bury not their wives with them , but their jewels , hoping to enjoy them again . The Arwacas dry the bones of their Lords , and their wives and friends drink them in powder . In the graves of the Peruvians the Spaniards found their greatest abundance of treasure : the like also is to be found among these people in every Province . They have all many wives , and the Lords fivefold to the common sort : their wives never eat with their husbands , nor among the men , but serve their husbands at meals , and afterwards feed by themselves . Those that are passed their younger years , make all their bred and drink , and work their cotton beds , and do all else of service and labour , for the men do nothing but hunt , fish , play , and drink , when they are out of the wars . 
 I will enter no further into discourse of their manners , laws and customs : and because I have not my self seen the cities of Inga , I cannot avow on my credit what I have herd , although it be very likely , that the Emperor Inga hath built and erected as magnificent palaces in Guiana , as his ancestors did in Peru , which were for their 
 424 
 riches and rareness most marvellous and exceeding all in Europe , and I think of the world , China excepted , which also the Spaniards ( which I had ) assured me to be true , as also the Nations of the borderers , who being but Salvages to those of the inland , do cause much treasure to be buried with them : for I was informed of one of the Cassiques of the valley of Amariocapana which had buried with him a little before our arrival , a chair of gold most curiously wrought , which was made either in Macureguaray adjoining , or in Manoa : but if we should have grieved them in their religion at the first , before they had be taught better , and have dug up their graves , we had lost them all : and therefore I held my first resolution , that her Majesty should either accept or refuse the enterprise , ere any thing should be done that might in any sort hinder the same . And if Peru had so many heaps of gold , whereof those Ingas were Princes , and that they delighted so much therein ; no doubt but this which now lives and reigneth in Manoa , hath the same honour , and I am assured hath more abundance of gold , within his territory , then all Peru and the West Indies . 
 For the rest , which my self have seen , I will promise these things that follow , which I know to be true . Those that are desirous to discover and to see many nations , may be satisfied within this river , which brings forth so many arms and branches leading to several countries and provinces , above 2000 miles East and West , and 800 miles South and North , and of these , the most either rich in gold , or in other merchandizes . The common soldier shall here fight for gold , and pay himself in steed of pence , with plataeae of half a foot broad , whereas he breaks his bones in other wars for provant and penury . Those commanders and chieftains that shoot at honour and abundance , shall find there more rich and beautiful cities , more temples adorned with golden images , more sepulchres filled with treasure , then either Cortez found in Mexico , 
 425 
 Great riches . 
 Exceeding commendation of the river of Orenoque . 
 The holsome-nesse of the country . 
 Gold . 
 Brasil wood . 
 Excellent dies . 
 or Pizarro in Peru : and the shining glory of this conquest will eclipse all those so far extended beams of the Spanish nation . There is no country which yields more pleasure to the inhabitants , either for those common delights of hunting , hawking , fishing , fowling , or the rest , then Guiana does . It hath so many plains , clear rivers , abundance of Pheasants , Partridges , Quails , Rails , Cranes , Herons , and all other fowl : Dear of all sorts , Porks , Hares , Lions , Tigers , Leopards , and diverse other sorts of beasts , either for chase , or food . It hath a kind of beast called Cama , or Anta , as big as and English beef , and in great plenty . 
 To speak of the several sorts of every kind , I fear would be troublesome to the Reader , and therefore I will omit them , and conclude that both for health , good air , pleasure , and riches I am resolved it cannot be equaled by any region either in the East or West . Moreover the country is so healthful , as of and hundred persons & more ( which lay without shift most sluttishly , and were every day almost melted with heat in rowing and marching , and suddenly wet again with great showers , and did eat of all sorts of corrupt fruits , and made meals of fresh fish without seasoning , of Tortugas , of Lagartos or Crocodiles , and of all sorts good and bad , without either order or measure , and beside lodged in the open air every night ) we lost not any one , nor had one ill disposed to my knowledge , nor found any Calentura , or other of those pestilent diseases which dwell in all hight regions , and so near the Equinoctial line . 
 Where there is store of gold , it is in effect needless to remember other commodities for trade : but it hath towards the South part of the river , great quantities of Brasil-wood , and diverse berries that die a most perfect crimson and carnation : And for painting , all France , Italy , or the East Indies yield none such : For the more the skin is washed , the fairer the colour appears , and 426 
 The short , easy , and commodious navigation to Guiana . 
 THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA a.d. 
 ... * 595 - 
 with which , even those brown and tawny women spot themselves , and colour their cheeks . All places yield abundance of cotton , of silk , of balsamum , and of those Cotton , silk , kinds most excellent , and never known in Europe , of all sorts of gums , of Indian pepper : and what else and the countries may afford within the land we know not , neither had we time to abide the trial , and search . The soil beside is so excellent and so full of rivers , as it will carry sugar , ginger , and all those other commodities , which the West Indies have . 
 The navigation is short , for it may be sailed with and ordinary wind in sixe weeks , and in the like time back again , and by the way neither lee shore , enemies coast , rocks , nor sands , all which in the voyages to the West Indies , and all other places we are subject unto , as the channel of Bahama , coming from the West Indies , cannot well be passed in the Winter , & when it is at the best , it is a perilous and a fearful place . The rest of the Indies for calms , and diseases very troublesome , and the sea about the Bermudas a hellish sea for thunder , lightning , and storms . 
 This very yeere* there were seventeene sail of Spanish 1595. ships lost in the channel of Bahama , and the great Philip like to have sunk at the Bermudas was put back to Saint Juan de Puerto rico . And so it falls out in that Navigation every year for the most part , which in this voyage are not to be feared : for the time of year to leave England is best in July , and the Summer in Guiana is in October , November , December , Januarie , Februarie , and March , and then the ships may depart thence in Aprill , and so return again into England in June , so as they shall never be subject to Winter-weather , either coming , going , or staying there : which for my part , I take to be one of the greatest comforts and encouragements that can be thought on , having ( as I have done ) tasted in this voyage by the West Indies so many calms , so much heat , such outrageous gusts , foul weather , and contrary winds . 
 427 
 To conclude , Guiana is a country that hath yet her maidenhead , never sacked , turned , nor wrought , the face of the earth hath not be torn , nor the virtue and salt of the soil spent by manurance , the graves have not be opened for gold , the mines not broken with sledges , nor their Images pulled down out of their temples . It hath never be entered by any army of strength , and never conquered or possessed by any Christian Prince . It is beside so defensible , that if two forts be built in one of the Provinces which I have seen , the flood sets in so near the bank , where the channel also lies , that no ship can pass up but within a Pikes length of the artillery , first of the one , and afterwards of the other : Which two Forts will be a sufficient guard both to the Empire of Inga , and to and hundred other several kingdoms , lying within the said river , even to the city of Quito in Peru. 
 There is therefore great difference between the easiness of the conquest of Guiana , and the defence of it being conquered , and the West or East Indies : Guiana hath but one entrance by the sea ( if it hath that ) for any vessels of burden : so as whosoever shall first possess it , it shall be found unaccessible for any enemy , except he come in Wherries , Barges , or Canoas , or else in flat bottomed boats , and if he do offer to enter it in that manner , the woods are so thick two hundred miles together upon the rivers of such entrance , as a mouse cannot fit in a boat unhit from the bank . By land it is more impossible to approach , for it hath the strongest situation of any region under the sun , and is so environed with impassable mountains on every side , as it is impossible to victuali any company in the passage : which hath be well proved by the Spanish nation , who since the conquest of Peru have never left five years free from attempting this Empire , or discovering some way into it , and yet of three and twentie several Gentlemen , Knights , and Noble men , there was never any that knew which way to lead and army by land , or to con - 
 428 
 ... I595* dust ships by sea , any thing near the said country . Orellana , of whom the river of Amazones takes name , was the first , and DONE Antonio de Berreo ( whom we displanted ) the last : and I doubt much , whither he himself or any of his yet know the best way into the said Empire . Tt can therefore hardly be regained , if any strength be formerly set down , but in one or two places , and but two or three crumsters or galleys built , and furnished upon the river within : The West Indies have many ports , watering places , and landings , and nearer then three hundred miles to Guiana , no man can harbour a ship , except he know one only place , which is not learned in haste , and which I will undertake there is not any one of my companies that knoweth , whosoever harkened most after it . 
 Beside by keeping one good Fort , or building one town of strength , the whole Empire is guarded , and whatsoever companies shall be afterwards planted within the land , although in twentie several Provinces , those shall be able all to reunite themselves upon any occasion either by the way of one river , or be able to march by land without either wood , bog , or mountain : whereas in the West Indies there are few towns or Provinces that can succour or relieve one the other , either by land or sea : By land the countries are either desert , mountainous , or strong enemies : by sea , if any man invade to the Eastward , those to the West cannot in many months turn against the brize and Eastern wind , beside the Spaniards are therein so dispersed , as they are no where strong , but in Nueva Espanna only : the sharp mountains , the thorns , and poisoned prickles , the sandy and deep ways in the valleys , the smothering heat and air , and want of water in other places are their only and best defence , which ( because those nations that invade them are not victualed or provided to stay , neither have any place to friend adjoining ) do serve them in steed of good arms and great multitudes . 
 429 
 The West Indies were first offered her Majesties grandfather by Columbus a stranger , in whom there might be doubt of deceit , and beside it was then thought incredible that there were such and so many lands & regions never written of before . This Empire is made known to her Majesty by her own vassal , and by him that owes to her more duty then and ordinary subject , so that it shall ill sort with the many graces and benefits which I have received to abuse her Highness , either with fables or imaginations . The country is already discovered , many nations won to her Majesties love and obedience , and those Spaniardes which have latest and longest laboured about the conquest , beaten out , discouraged and disgraced , which among these nations were thought invincible . Her Majesty may in this enterprise employ all those soldiers and gentlemen that are younger brothers , and all captains and chieftains that want employment , and the charge will be only the first setting out in victualling and arming them : for after the first or second year I doubt not but to see in London a Contractation house of more receipt for Guiana , then there is now in Sivill for the West Indies . 
 And I am resolved that if there were but a small army a foot in Guiana , marching towards Manoa the chief city of Inga , he would yield to her Majesty by composition so many hundred thousand pounds yearly , as should both defend all enemies abroad , and defray all expenses at home , and that he would beside pay a garrison of three or foure thousand soldiers very royally to defend him against other nations : For he cannot but know , how his predecessors , yea how his own great uncles Guascar and Atabalipa sons to Guainacapa Emperor of Peru , were ( while they contended for the Empire ) beaten out by the Spaniards , and that both of late years and ever since the said conquest , the Spaniards have sought the passages and entrey of his country : and of their cruelties used to the 43° 
 * 595-borderers he cannot be ignorant . In which respects no doubt but he will be brought to tribute with great gladness , if not , he hath neither shot nor iron weapon in all his Empire , and therefore may easily be conquered . 
 And I farther remember that Berreo confessed to me and others ( which I protest before the Majesty of God to be true ) that there was found among prophecies in Peru ( at such time as the Empire was reduced to the Spanish obedience ) in their chiefest temples , among diverse others which foreshowed the loss of the said Empire , that from Inglatierra those Ingas should be again in time to come restored , and delivered from the servitude of the said Conquerors . And I hope , as we with these few hands have displanted the first garrison , and driven them out of the said country , so her Majesty will give order for the rest , and either defend it , and hold it as tributary , or conquer and keep it as Empress of the same . For whatsoever Prince shall possess it , shall be greatest , and if the king , of Spaine enjoy it , he will become unresistable . Her Majesty hereby shall confirm and strengthen the opinions of all nations , as touching her great and princely actions . And where the South border of Guiana reaches to the Dominion and Empire of the Amazones , those women shall hereby hear the name of a virgin , which is not only able to defend her own territories and her neighbours , but also to invade and conquer so great Empires and so far removed . 
 To speak more at this time , I fear would be but troublesome : I trust in God , this being true , will suffice , and that he which is King of all Kings and Lord of Lords , will put it into her heart which is Lady of Ladies to possess it , if not , I will judge those men worthy to be kings thereof , that by her grace and leave will undertake it of themselves . 
 