The Letter of George Burien Britton from the say the Canaries unto his cousin a Frenchman dwelling in S. Lucar , concerning El Dorado . 
 Sir , and my very good cousin , there came of late certain Letters from a new discovered country not far from Trinidad , which they write , hath Gold in great abundance : the news seems to be very certain , because it passes for good among the best of this City . Part of the information of the Discovery that went to his Majesty , goes enclosed in Alonsos letters ; it is a thing worth the seeing . 
 The report of Domingo Martinez of Jamaica concerning El Dorado . 
 HE say that that in 1593. being at Carthagena , there was a general report of a late discovery called 
 Nuevo Dorado , and that a little before his coming thither , there came a Frigate from the said Dorado , bringing in it the portraiture of a Giant all of Gold , of weight 47. kintals , which the Indians there held for their Idol . But now admitting of Christianitie and obedience to the king of Spaine , they sent their said Idol unto him in token they were become Christians , and held him for their King . The company coming in the said Frigate , reported Gold to be there in most abundance , Diamonds of inestimable valve , with great store of pearl . 
 [ The report 
 439 
 The report of a French man called Bountillier of Sherbrouke , concerning Trinidad and Dorado . 
 I591 - TO TE says that being at Trinidad in 1591. he had . L A of and Indian there a piece of Gold of a quarter of a pound in exchange of a knife ; the said Indian told him he had it at the head of that river which Paracoa . comes to Paracoa in Trinidad : and that within the River of Orenoque , it was in great abundance . Also in 1593. being taken by the Spanyardes , and brought prisoner into the Hand of Madera ( the place for his prison ) there came in this mean time a Bark of fortie Tons from a new Discovery , with two millions of Gold ; the company whereof reported Gold in that place to be in great abundance , and called it El Nuevo Dorado . This Frenchman passed from Spaine in the Bark , and having a cabben near a gentleman , one of the Discoverers that came from that place in the said Bark , had diverse times conference with him , and among other things , of the great abundance of Gold in the said Dorado , being as they said within the river of Orenoque . 
 Reports of certain Merchants of Rio de Hacha , concerning El Nuevo Dorado . 
 THey said ( advancing the kings great treasure in the Indies ) that Nuevo Reyno yielded very many Gold mines , and wonderful rich ; but lately was discovered a certain Province so rich in Gold , as the report thereof may seem incredible , it is there in such abundance , and is called El Nuevo Dorado : Antonio de Berreo made the said discovery . 
 440 
 The report of a Spanyard , Captain with Berreo in the discovery of El Nuevo Dorado . 
 THat the information sent to the King was in every point truly said , that the river Orenoque hath seven mouths , or outlets into the sea , called Las Siete bocas de dragon , that the said river runneth far into the land , in - many places very broad , and that And th . de Berreo lay at Trinidad , making head to go to conquer and people the said Dorado . 
 