Hereafter follows a Ruttier from the said river of Plate to the Straight of Magelane . 
 He cape of Santa Maria is in 35 degrees . From thence to the Cape de Santo Antonio , which is on the other side of the river , are 30 leagues Northnortheast , & Southsouthwest . And this is the broadest place of the river . And this cape is in 36 degrees and a half , and 
 it is a black gross land . And thou must mark that 25 leagues a seaboord the mouth of the river there lie certain sands , which be called Baixos de los Castellanos . 
 He that falls with the Cape of Santa Maria must take good heed to go Southeast until he be in 36 degrees , and from thence Southsoutheast until 36 degrees and a half , giving the said sholds de los Castellanos a breadth : and also taking heed of the flats of the cape . And when he finds 40 or 45 fathoms , and russet sand , then he must go Southwest and by South , until he be in 40 degrees : where he shall find great store 85 
 Baixos de los Castellanos . 
 Baia Anegada . 
 Punta de Tierra Ilana . 
 Baia since fondo . 
 Cabo redondo . Puerto de los leones . 
 Puerto de los . leones in 44 degrees W better . 
 of weeds , which come from the coast , and a man may go 20 leagues from the shore in this sounding . 
 From the Cape de Santo Antonio to the Cape de Arenas Gordas are eight & forty leagues , and the coast lies Northeast and Southwest , and by East , and by West : and in the first eighteene leagues is the river called Rio de Santa Anna , which hath at the entrance certain flats and sholds , give them a good breadth , and come not nigh them by much , but keep thy self in forty fathoms to go surely . 
 From the cape de Arenas Gordas to the cape of Sant Andre are one and thirty leagues : it lies Northeast and by East , and Southwest by West : I mean when thou art in the midst with and equal distance from them both . And between both the capes are many bays and rivers , but all full of sandy sholdes . 
 From the cape of Sant Andres to the bay called Anegada , that is , The sunken bay , are 30 leagues Eastnortheast , and Westsouthwest . It stands in 40 degrees , rather less then more . 
 From the bay called Baia Anegada to The point of the plain land are 25 leagues Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . This point lies in 41 degrees and a half . And from this point to Baia since fondo , that is to say The bottomless bay , are 35 leagues Eastnortheast , and Westsouthwest . This bay stands in 42 degrees and a half , rather less then more . 
 And from Baia since fondo to Cabo Redondo , & Puerto de los leones , are 37 leagues Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , somewhat to the North and South . And if thou mean to go out from thence with a compass about after the manner of a half circle or and arch , so thou mayest pass through the Baia since fondo along the shore : for there is water enough . 
 Note that from the river of Plate to this place is never a good harbour for great shipping . 
 From this place to Puerto de los leones the coast is clean , and a man may come nigh unto the land : 
 And it is a low land with white cliffs . This harbour is in 44 degrees . And as a man goes thither , after he be in 43 degrees or more , he must have a care to look out for certain small rocks which lie near the land , and lie North of the harbour . 
 From this harbour to Cabo de Matas , or The cape of shrubs , are 30 leagues North & South , half a point to the East and to the West : and betwixt them there is a great bay very long : And to the Northwest 18 leagues from Cabo redondo is a river lying East and West : and it is called Rio de Camarones , or , The river of shrimps . You shall know when you fallen with this river , by seeing many white spots upon the water , and they are small shrimps . 
 From this river to Cabo redondo the coast lies Northwest and by North , and Southeast and by South . This cape is in 45 degrees and a half large . 
 From this said cape to Cabo Blanco and Barancas Blancas that is to say , to The white cape and white cliffs are 32 leagues lying North and by East and South and by West : and they stand in 47 degrees . 
 From this Cape the coast lies towards the North side Northwest about three leagues all full of white cliffs steep up : and the last cliff is the biggest both in length and height , and shows to be the sail of a ship when it is under sail . These white cliffs are 6 in number . 
 Take good heed of these Little rocks . 
 Cabo de Matas . 
 Rio de Camarones . 
 Cabo redondo in 45 degrees if a half large . 
 Cabo Blanco and Barancas Blancas in degrees . 
 And this Cape hath in the face thereof a certain round land that shows to be and Island afar off : and it hath certain points of rocks hard by it . And two Cables length from the land is 25 fathoms water . Above these white cliffs the land is plain and even : and it hath certain woods . There is much people in the country : eop^t0 of whom I wish thee to take good heed . taken heed of . 
 From this Cape the land lies North and South ; which is the first fallen of the Cape : and in the face thereof it hath a point of rocks , which show themselves . And on the South side of this Cape is a good harbour and road , and there is a Bay in the midst . ' 
 Morro de Santo Yves , in 50 degrees large . 
 Rio de Cruz. 
 Rio the Gale-gps and the marks thereof . 
 From Cabo Blanco to Puerto de San Julian are 37 leagues , and the coast lies North and by East and South and by West . This harbour of S. Julian hath in the entrance certain high hills , which afar off seem to be towers . On the South part of the entrance the channel is deepest in the midst : and thou must borrow nearer the North side then to the South . Within the harbour are two Islands : thou must come to and anchor hard to them . This haven lies in 49 degrees . And between Cabo Blanco and this harbour are The Islands of Ascension , and they be eight . From this said harbour to the hill of S. Yves are 35 leagues ; the coast lies Northeast & Southwest : it is a low land and even and hath only one hill , and it is a plain from one part to the other , and hath certain cliffs to seaward , and to the Southward , and to the South side it hath certain little copies : it stands in 50 degrees large . 
 From the hill of S. Yves to Rio de Cruz are 8 leagues , Northeast and Southwest : and on the Northside of the river it hath a very high land , and in the top it is plain and lies two leagues broad , laid out along North and South , and the downfall on both sides hath as it were saddles . This Cape hath many points of rocks lying 4 leagues into the sea : and when thou hast sighed of this land , it is good for thee to keep from it a good breadth off . And going from thence thou mayest run in sighed of the land in 25 fathoms . 
 From Rio de Cruz to Rio de Galegos are 25 leagues , Northeast and Southwest ; and it stands in 52 degrees and of a degree . It hath a certain high land : and in the highest of the said land it is plain , and to the Northeast it is a pike up , and hath certain white cliffs : and on the top and something downward it is black : at the foot of this high land to the Eastward thereof it hath certain steps like a lather : and to the sea it hath a sharp point that lies into this Cape almost half a league . To the Southward of this Cape where the lather is , there is a little Bay , which is the entrance 88 
 of Rio de Galegos , it ebbeth and flows here 12 fathoms . A man must have a great care how he goes in here for the cause abovesaid : but he must keep himself out and not anchor in it . 
 In the mouth of Rio de Galegos it 
 From Rio de Galegos to the Streits of Magelan the flows iz fa-coast lies Northnorthwest & Southsoutheast : 8 leagues thomes . unto Cabo de la virgin Maria , which is the entrance into Cabo de la 
 the Strait : and 4 leagues before a man come to this vir^n Maria . Cape there are white clifFes with certain black spots in them ; and they be caused with the falling down of the water . Here is water enough , and thou mayest come to and anchor hard aboard the shore , and hast a good defence for a Southwest wind . And the Cape it 
 self is the highest land of all , and is like to Cape Saint Vincent in Spaine : and it hath on the East side a ledge of rocks , and a point of sand , with diverse sands which show themselves at a low water : thou must take great heed here and give them a good breadth 
 Ciudad de Hombre de Jesus called by M. Candish Port Famine , because he 
 half a league or a quarter of a league ofF , until thou 
 bring the Cape Westnorthwest , and then thou mayest fiundal the _ stir away Southwest . And when thou comest to the 
 - _ _ _ - mtshed . and 
 ’ . - mished , and 
 lower land and into tenne or twelve fathoms , then art fa tQwne 
 thou over against la Purification . And half a league within the land the city of Number de Jesus was built , East and West with the said cape right against a clifFe , which comes from the said Cape , and goes within the Streits . This Cape stands in 52 degrees just . 
 And this is to be taken for a warning , that he that comes near this Cape , and passes by it as I have said with the wind at Northeast , or any other wind ofF the sea inclining to the Southeast , must not come to anchor , but presently be sure to pass by ; because in 
 self utterly abandoned , and ruined . Where Hombre de Jesus stood . 
 Southwest winds reign much here in Summer . 
 From March 
 Summer this place is much subject to Southwest winds , which blow right in : and they put a man from his tackle , & make him to lose his voyage . And from March forward there blow favourable winds from the fi ™ ™ 1 the sea to go from this Cape to enter into the Streits , from favourabie for this said Cape the Streits go in to the Northwest 14 the Streits . 
 Cabo de San Gregorio a good roadstead for any winds from the Northwest to the Southwest . The Indians about Gape de San Gregorio in the Streits are very treacherous . The second Strait called Nuestra Sen-nora de Gracia . 
 Punta de Santa Anna in 53 deg . and a half . 
 Rincones . La Ciudad deal dONE Philippe : which is now utterly ruined . 
 leagues : and the channel waxes narrower and narrower unto the first Strait which runneth Eastnortheast , and Westsouthwest . And coming out of the mouth thereof a man must keep himself a point to the Northward , because there be rocks and shoalds . And if you see beds of weeds , take heed of them , and keep off from them : and after you be passed this Straight you must stir Westsouthwest 8 leagues unto Cabo de San Gregorio , which is a high white cliff , and is a good road for any wind from the Northwest to the Southwest . But men must beware and not trust the Indians of this Cape : for they be subtle and will betray a man . 
 From this Cape begins the second Strait which is called Nuestra Sennora de Gracia , and lies Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest 3 leagues . And coming out of this Strait thou shalt see 3 little Islands , lying West off " this Strait : thou mayest go between them , for there is no danger : provided always that thou keep well off from the bays on both sides , lest thou be imbayed . And from these Islands thou must keep forward in the channel Westsouth west two leagues : and then the coast lies North and South unto 53 degrees and a half , unto a place called Punta de Santa Anna : and to the Northwest thereof in a corner or nook ( which is one of the rincones or nooks ) was the town built called La Ciudad deal DONE Philippe . Thou must come to and anchor to the Northward thereof , after thou art passed the castle and a great tree . 
 