A brief relation of a voyage of The Delight a ship of Bristoll one of the consorts of M. John Chidley esquire and M. Paul Wheel , made unto the Straight of Magellan : with diverse accidents that happened unto the company , during their 6. weeks abided there : Begun in the year 1589. Written by W. Magoths . 
 He fift of August 1589. the worshipful M. John Chidley of Chidley in the county of Devon esquire , with M. Paul Wheel and Captain Andrew Mericke set forth from Plimmouth with three tall ships , the one called The wild man of three hundred tons , wherein went 
 for General the aforesaid M. John Chidley and Benjamin Wood as Master , the other called The white Lion , whereof M. Paul Wheel was captain and John Ellis Master , of the burden of 340. tons : the third The Delight of Bristol , wherein went M. Andrew Merick as Captain , and Robert Burnet Master , with two pinnaces of 14. or 15. tons a piece . The general in his ship had 180. persons : M. Paul Wheel had 140 , in our own ship we were 91. men and boys . Our voyage was intended by the Straight of Magellan for 381 
 M. Chidleys voyage intended partly for Arauco in 
 Chili . 
 Cabo Blanco . 
 The Delight loses the company of the rest of the Fleet. 
 Port desire . 
 Two springs of fresh watet found at Port desire . 
 They enter into the Straight of . Magelan . 
 The South Sea , and chiefly for the famous province of Arauco on the coast of Chili . We kept company together to the isles of the Canaries and so forward to Cape Blanco standing near the Northerly latitude of 20. degrees on the coast of Barbarie , where some of our people went on shore finding nothing to their content . Within 12. days after our departure from this place The Delight , wherein I William Magoths was , lost the company of the other two great ships , and the two small pinnaces . Howbeit we constantly kept our course according to our directions along the coast of Brasil , and by the River of Plate , without touching any where on land until we came to Port desire in the latitude of 48 degrees to the Southward of the Equinoctial . Before we arrived at this place there died of our company by Gods visitation of sundry diseases 16. persons . we stayed in this harbour 17. days to grave our ship & refresh our wearied people , hoping here to have met with our consorts : which fell out contrary to our expectations . During our abided in this place we found two little springs of fresh water , which were upon the Northwesterly part of the land , & lighted upon good store of seals both old and young . From hence we sailed towards the Straight of Magelan , and entered the same about the first of January . And coming to Penguin island within the Straight we took and salted certain hogsheads of Penguins , which must be eaten with speed : for we found them to be of no long continuance ; we also furnished our selves with fresh water . And here 
 at the last sending off - our boat to the island for the rest They lose 15. of our provision , we lost her and 15. men in hereby of their men force of foul weather ; but what became of them we by tempest . could not tell . Here also in this storm we lost two anchors . From hence we passed farther into the Straight , A Spaniard and by Port famine we spoke with a Spaniard , who told taken at Port - Us that he had lived in those parts 6. years , and that he famtne . was one of the 4OO . men that were sent 
 king of Spain in the year 1582. to fortify and inhabit 382 
 there , to hinder the passage of all strangers that way into the South sea . But that and the other Spanish colony being both destroyed by famine , he said he had lived in and house by himself a long time , and relieved himself with his caliver until our coming thither . Here we made a boat of the boards of our chests ; which being finished we sent 7. armed men in the same on land on the North shore , being wafted on land by the Savages with certain white skins ; who as soon as they came on shore were presently killed by and 100. of the wild people in the sighed of 2. of our men , which rowed them on shore , which two only escaped back again to us with the boat . After this traitorous slaughter of our men , we fell back again with our ship to the Northeastward of Port famine to a certain road , where we refreshed our selves with muscles , and took in water & wood . At this time we took in the Spaniard aforesaid , and so sailed forward again into the Straight . we passed 7. or 8. times 10. leagues Westward beyond Cape Froward , being still encountered with mighty Northwest winds . These winds and the current were so vehement against us , that they forced us back as in two hours , as we were getting up in 8. hours . Thus after we had spent 6. weeks in the Straight striving against the fury of the elements , and having at sundry times partly by casualty , and partly by sickness lost 38. of our best men , and 3. anchors , and now having but one anchor left us , and small store of victuals , and , which was not the least mischief , diverse of our company raising dangerous mutinies : we consulted , though somewhat with the latest , for the safeguard of our lives to return while there was some small hope remaining : and so set sail out of The Straight homeward about the 14. of Februarie 1590. We returned back again by The river of Plate ; and sailing near the cost of Brasill we met with a Portugal ship of 80. tons , which road at and anchor upon the coast , who as soon as she descried us to chase her , incontinently weighed , & ran her self on ground between 383 
 A.D. 
 1590. 
 Seven of our men killed by the treason of the Savages on the North shore . 
 They passed 7. or 8. times ten leagues Westward of Cape Froward . 
 They return homeward . 
 The isle ofS . Sebastian in 24. degr . of southerly latitude on the coast of Branl . 
 They land at Manville de Hage 8. miles West of Cherbourg . 
 the island of S. Sebastian and the main land . But we for want of a good boat , and by reason of the foul weather , were neither able to board her , nor to go on shore . Thence in extreme misery we shaped our course for the isles of Cape Verde , and so passing to the isles of The Azores , the Canaries being something out of our course ; the first land that we met withal in our Narrow sea was The isle of Alderney . And having now but sixe men of all our company left alive , the Master and his two mates and chief Mariners being dead , we ran in with Monville de Hage eight miles to the west of Cherbourg in . Normandie . Where the next day after our coming to and anchor , having but one in all left , being the last of August 1590. by the foul weather that rose the anchor came home , and our ship drave on the rocks : And the Normans which were commanded by the governor of Cherbourg ( who came down to us that 
 night ) to have laid out another anchor for her , neglect-The wrack of ing his commandment , suffered her miserably to be the ship by the split , with desire to enrich themselves by her wrack . malice of thee Within few daves after this last mischance fnnre nf ns 
 Within few days after this last mischance foure of us 
 Normans . 
 They arrive in England . 
 being Englishmen departed from Cherbourgh , and passed home for England in a bark of Weymouth , leaving the two strangers there behind us . 
 The names of us sixe that returned of all our company were these . 
 f 1 William Magoths of Bristol . 
 J 2 Richard Bush. 
 A 3 John Reade . 
 ^4 Richard Hodgkins of Westburie near Bristol . The two strangers . 
 J 5 Gabriel Valerosa a Portugal . 
 J 6 Peter , a Briton . 
 