Examen de los maestros y Pilotos , que navegan en las flotas de Espanna para las Indias deal mar oceano , escrito por Pedro Dias Piloto , natural de la Isla de la Palma , 1586. 
 Alonn de Chiavez Piloio mayor . 
 Rimeramente pide all Piloto mayor , que es all present Alonso de Chiavez , que lo admita all examen , por quanto es natural y sufficient para ello . 
 Manda el Piloto mayor , que haga enformacion , de como es marinero , y platico de aquella parte , de que se quiere 
 examinar . Luego presenta cinco o seis testigos de los Pilotos examinados , de como es buen marinero , y suf-448 
 ficiente para ser Piloto , y como es natural de los Reynos de Espanna ; y que no es de casta de Moro , ni Judeo , ni Negro . 
 Y hecha la enformacion , presenta la all Piloto mayor . Y visto el Piloto mayor la enformacion ser buena , manda que el Cathedratico Rodrigo Zamorano lo admita a la Cathedra . Y alii se j untan a vezes quatorze oh quinze que pretenden examinarse , y acuden alii a una casa , que El Cathedratico tiene para aquello efeto , a las ocho de la mannana , y estan dos oras , y otras dos a la tarde . El Cathedratico tiene por costumbre de leer en la Cathedra una ora , y otra ora ocupan en preguntarse los unos a los otros much cosas convenientes a la art de navegar en presencia del Cathedratico . Y el que no respond a proposito , El Cathedratico le emienda , y le dize de la manera que es cade cosa . Y este estudio dura nos meses , en los quales no would de faltar de ir dos vezes all dia , como tengo dicho . 
 Y despues de aver oido la Cathedra estos dos meses , van a la Sala del Examen , que es en la Contratacion . Y alii esta el Piloto mayor , y los de mass pilotos , qui son por lo menos veinte cinco : y alii estando todos assentados por sum orden , manda el Piloto mayor , que lean las enformaciones ; y despues de aver leidas las enformaciones o testimonios , pregunta el piloto mayor all piloto y maestro , que se quiere examinar , de que part de las Indias se quiere examinar ? Y luego el piloto respond , que de Nueva Espanna , o de Number de Dios. Y otros , que no son platicos de estas tierras , dizen , que de Santo Domingo , y Puerto rico , y Cuba y luego demanda el Piloto mayor , que tienda la carta en la mesa , y en presencia de los demas pilotos parta de la barra de San Lucar para las Islas de Canaria , y de alii para las Indias , hasta Hegar a aquella parte de donde se examina , y buelve para Espanna , a tornar , a la Barra de San Lucar , de donde partio . 
 Y el Piloto mayor le preguntas Que si yendo nave-gando por la mar le diese un viento contrario , que xi 449 2 f 
 Rodrigo Zamorano Cathedratico . 
 La Sala deal examen . 
 remedio haria para que sum nao no trabajasse tanto en la mar ? Y el le respond lo mejor que entiende . Luego le pregunta uno de los pilotos por las reglas del Sol , y de la Estrella deal norte , y que cuenta le hara en todo tiempo del anno ? A lo qual would de responder el piloto que se examina a todo aquello que le preguntaren . Y luego le pregunta otro por las senna's de las tierras que estuvieren en el camino , hasta llegar all puerto de donde se examina . Y luego pregunta otro , que si con tormenta se le quebrasse los arboles , Que remedio haria ? Y otros le preguntan , Que si la nao abriesse un agua , a donde peligrassen las vidas , que remedio haria para tomaria con menos riesgo ? Y otros le preguntan , que si le faltasse el timon , que remedio haria ? Y otros le preguntan por la cuenta de la Luna , y de las mareas . Y otros le preguntan , Que si lo tornasse un corsario , y lo dexasse since carta y since astrolabio , y otros instrumentos para tomar la altura del Sol y de la Estrella deal norte , que orden tendria para hazer los ? Otros le preguntan otras preguntas necessarias a un marinero , que quiere ser piloto . A todo esto esta attento , respondiendo a todo . Y despues que todos le and preguntado todo lo necessario , le mandan , que saiga fuera de la sala , paraque a solas de cada uno sum boto debaxo de juramento en un libro , que prometen La manera de j Jezir verdad . Y luego ponen dentro de un vaso de maestros , y piata , que alii esta para aquel ereto , tantas navas , y 
 pilotos . tantos garvanzos , common ai pilotos dentro de la sala : y va 
 cada uno por sum orden ; y el que le parece que es sufficient , saca una have , y el que le parece , que no lo es , saca un garvanzo . Y despues que todos an sacado , mira el piloto mayor los botos que tiene ; y si halla que tiena tantos botos en sum favour common en contrario , manda que haga otro viaje : y si tiene mass botos en sum ex~ favour , que en contrario , luego le dan una carta del ' examen firmada del piloto mayor , y del Cathedratico , y del Escrivano , y sellada con el sello de la Contratacion . Y teniendo esta carta , luego da de present all piloto 
 45° 
 mayor , y all Cathedratico para guantes y gallinas , conform que cada uno puede , que es de ordinario dos oh tres ducados . Y luego se puede concertar por piloto en qualquier navio que quisiere , para aquella parte dedonde se examino . Y si hallare en las Indias algun navio que tenga piloto no examinado , lo puede botar fuera , y venir el piloto examinado en el navio por el mismo concierte , que el otro piloto tenia hecho . 
 Suelen llevar los pilotos de partido y concierte por un viaje de yr y bolver , conform que es el navio . Si es de ciento tonelladas , dozientos ducados , y dozientos y cinquenta ; y si es de quatrocientas o de quinientas , lleva de partido ; y mass , todos los dias que estuviere en tierra , quatro reales para sum comida . Y las naos grandes siempre llevan los pilotos mass viejos , porque el son mass experimentados y mejores pilotos que los manzebos , que comienzan a navegar , y a ser pilotos . 
 El piloto no tiene mass trabajo ni mass cuidado que en la navegacion : porque los maestros de los navios tienen cuidado de fretar , y aderezar sus naos , y pagar a los marineros , y hazer todo lo que es menester para sum nao : porque el piloto no viene a la nao , si no es quando los visitadores vienen a visitaria , si tiene todo lo necessario para el voyage . 
 Los visitadores son quatro hombres qui estan puestos por el rey , y estos son hombres muy entendidos , y vienen a visitar los navios , ants que tomen carga , por ver si estan bien aderezados para hazer el voyage . Y despues que estan los navios cargados , buelven otra vez a visitarlos , por ver si tienen todas las cosas necessarias , conform a la Prematica ; y si tienen todos los marineros , y bastimentos , y polvere , y artilleria , y balas , y todo lo de mass necessario para el viaje . Y si alguna cosa les falta , les mandan con graves penas que lo compren , ants que salgan deal puerto . 
 Suelen llevar los navios que van a las Indias un escrivano que tiene cargo de tomar por memoria todas las mercaderias que se cargan en la nao , y tomar las 
 451 
 Sueldo de los pilotos . 
 Maestros y sus officios . 
 Los quatro visitadores , y sum officio . 
 Prematica . 
 Escrivano y sum officio . 
 Segundo navis de aviso . 
 Dos nass de guerra . 
 marcas , para por ellas entregar la carga a sus duennos , despues de aver acabado sum viaje : y sirve tanbien , si un hombre caesse enfermo , para hazer testamiento y otros recaudos que se suelen hazer delante un escrivano : y gana por sum sueldo en un viaje tanto common dos marineros . 
 Tiene el general de las flotas por costumbre , despues que llega a las Indias , the embiar un navio de aviso , para dar relation all rey , de como would llegado . Y despues que estan prestas para partir despacha otrio navio de aviso , para hazer relation , de como estan ya prestas para partir , con otras particularidades . 
 Van en las flotas dos naos grandes , la una por Capitana , y la otra por Almiranta , cada una de seiscientas y de sietecientas tonelladas , que no llevan mass que bastimentos y soldados para defensa de la defensa de la demas flota : y lleva cada una common docientos soldados : y estas se pagan de las mercaderias que vienen en la flota a uno por ciento , y algunas vezes a uno y medio por ciento . 
 Ay en la casa de la Contratacion de Sevilla una tabla que sirve de Aranzel , escrita con letras de oro ; en que stan avaliadas todas las mercaderias que se embarcan para las Indias . 
 EN esta tabla se puede saber quantas botijas hazen una tonellada de vino y quantos quintales y quantos bariles , y quantos coffres sea una tonellada . 
 Y todas mercaderias estan alii taxadas , para pagar los derechos all rey , y el fleet all maestro . 
 Y alii esta puesto que ningun maestro puede Uevar a las Indias ningun passagero , ni frail , ni clerigo , ni otras personas , ni estranieros de los reynos de Espanna , since licencia del Rey. 
 Y mass , que no puerde llevar mercaderias fuera de la Prematica , y todo lo que llevaren , lo lleven registrado , so pena de la vida . 
 Y mass , que ningun maestro ni piloto puede llevar 
 452 
 EXAMINATION OF SPANISH PILOTS a.d. 
 .. 1586. 
 instrumentos que no sean firmados por el piloto mayor Alonzo de Chiaves , y el cosmografo Cathedratico Roderigo Zamorano : common son la carta , el astrolabio , la balestilla , y el regimiento . 
 Y mass , que yendo en la compannia de la flota , obe-descan all General , y no hagan mass de lo que el mandare , so pena de la vida . 
 The same in English . 
 The examination of the Master's and Pilots which sail in the Fleets of Spaine to the West Indies : Written in the Spanish tongue by Pedro Dias a Spanish pilot taken by Sir Richard Grinville 1585. 
 First they make suit unto the Pilot major ( who at this present is called Alonzo de Chiavez ) that he would admit them to examination , because they are natural Spaniards , and sufficient for the same . 
 Hereupon the Pilot major commands the party to The witness be examined , to give information that he is a mariner , °ffive or , ixe and well practised in those parts , about which he desires ° x‘ to be examined . And then immediately he brings five or sixe pilots before examined to give testimony that he is a good mariner , and sufficient to become a pilot , that he is a Spaniard born , and that he is not of the raze of the Moors , Jewes or Negroes . 
 Having made this information , he presents it unto The pilots ad-the Pilot major . And the Pilot major seeing the information to be good , wills the Kings public reader Kings reader . of navigation ( who is now Roderigo Zamorano ) to admit him to his lectures . Whither there do resort foureteene or fifteene persons that desire to be examined : and they They hear the come to a certain house which the kings reader hath rea^eri appointed unto him for the same purpose , at eight of the clock in the morning : and then they stay two hours , for two and two hours likewise in the afternoon : in one of mrneths . 
 453 
 Their disputations of the art of navigation before the Kings reader who is their moderator . 
 The hall of examination . 
 The manner oj the young pilots examination . 
 which hours Zamorano readeth unto them , and in the other they ask one another many particulars concerning the art of navigation in the presence of the said kings reader : and him that answereth not to the purpose the said reader instructeth more perfectly , and telleth him how everything is . And this exercise continueth two months , during which time the examinates must not fail to be present twice in a day , as is aforesaid . 
 And having herd the kings reader those two months , they resort then unto the hall of examination which is in the Contractation house , where there are assembled the Pilot major and diverse other pilots , to the number of 25 at the least ; who all sitting there in order , the Pilot major demandeth of him that would be examined , of what part of the Indies he desires to be examined : Whereto the examinate answereth , that he would be examined concerning Nueva Espanna , or of Number de Dios and Tierra Firma . And others that are not experienced in those parts , crave to be examined of Santo Domingo , Puerto rico , and Cuba . 
 Then the Pilot major commands the examinate to spread a sea-chart upon the table , and in the presence of the other pilots to depart or show the course from the bar of Sant Lucar to the Canarie-Islands , and from thence to the Indies , till he come to that place whereof he is to be examined , and then also to return back to the bar of Sant Lucar in Spaine , from whence he departed . Also the Pilot major asks him , if when he saileth upon the sea , he be taken with a contrary wind , what remedy he is to use , that his ship be not too much turmoiled upon the sea ? And the examinate answereth him aswell as he can . 
 Then one of the other pilots opposeth him about the rules of the Sun and of the North-star , and how he ought to use the declination of the Sun at all times of the year : whom the examinate is bound to answer in every thing that he demandeth . Then another asks him of the signs and marks of those 454 
 lands which lie in his way to that haven whereof he is examined . And then another demandeth , that if his masts should be broken by tempest , what remedy he would use ? Others ask him , if his ship should take a leak , to the hazarding of the lives of himself and his company , what remedy he would find to stop the same with least danger ? Others ask him , what remedy , if his rudder should chance to fail ? Others oppose him about the account of the Moon and of the tides ? Others ask him if a Pirate should take him and leave him destitute of his Chart , his Astrolabe , and his other instruments serving to take the height of the Sun and of the star , what course he would take in that extremity ? Others demand other questions needful for a mariner to know , which desires to be a pilot . Unto all which the examinate is very attentive , and answereth to every particular . 
 After they have all asked him so much as they think expedient , they bid him depart out of the hall , to the end that every one of them may severally be sworn upon a book , that they will speak the truth . Then they put into a certain vessel of silver standing there for the same purpose so many beans , and so many peason as there are pilots within the hall : and every one putting his hand into the vessel in order , he that thinketh the party examined to be sufficient , takes up a bean , and he that thinketh him not sufficient , takes up a peas . And after that all have taken out what they please , the Pilot major looks what voices the examinate hath : and if he find him to have as many voices for him as against him , he commands him to make another voyage : but if he hath more voices for him then against him , then they give him letters testimoniali of his examination signed by the Pilot major , by the1 kings reader , and the secretary , and sealed with the seal of the Contractation house . And upon the receipt of these letters testimoniali , the new pilot gives a present unto the Pilot major , and the kings reader , for their gloves and hens , every one 455 
 The manner of their election . 
 Letters testimoniali of every new pilots examination and approbation , under the hands of the Pilot major , the kings reader , and the secretary , and seal of the Contractation house . 
 The order of the Contracta-tion house . 
 according to his ability , which is ordinarily some two or three ducats . # 
 And then he may take upon him to be pilot in any ship whatsoever , unto that place for which he was examined : and if he find in the Indies any ship under the charge of a pilot not before examined , he may put him out of his office , and may himself take charge of that ship for the same wages that the other pilot agreed for . 
 The pilots wages for making a voyage outward and homeward is according to the burden of the ship . If she be of 100 tons , he hath 200 or 250 ducats : and if she be of 400 or 500 tons , he takes for his wages 500 or 550 ducats : and if she be bigger , he hath a greater allowance : over and beside all which , he hath every day while he remains on land , foure reals for his diet . And the greater ships are always committed unto the more ancient pilots , because they are of greater experience and better skill , then the younger sort which newly take upon them to be pilots . 
 The pilot undertaketh no farther travel nor care , but in directing the course or navigation : for the master's of the ships take charge of the freighting and preparing their ships , and to pay the mariners , and to do all things needful for the ship ; for the pilot comes not unto the ship , until the visitors come to visit the same , to see whither he hath all things necessary for the voyage . 
 The visitors are foure men which are appointed by the king , and these are men of great understanding : and they come to visit the ships before they take in their lading , to see whither they be well prepared to make the voyage . And after the ships be laden , they return again to visit them the second time , to see whither they have all things necessary , according to the order , of the Contractation house : and whither they have all their mariners , victuals , powder , shot , and ordinance , and all other things necessary for the voyage . And if they want any thing , they charge them upon grievous penalties , , to provide the same before they set out of the haven . 
 456 
 EXAMINATION OF SPANISH PILOTS A.D. 
 .. 1586. 
 The ships that go to the Indies are wont eke of them to have with them a Notary , whose charge is to keep a note of remembrance of all the merchandise which is laden in the ship , and to take the marks thereof , thereby to deliver the commodities in the ship to their particular owners , after they have finished their voyage , and he serves likewise to make wills , and other instruments , which are wont to be made by a Notary , if any man chanceth to fallen sick . And his wages in eke voyage is as much as the wages of two mariners . 
 The general of the fleets uses continually , after Thefirstbarke he is arrived in the Indies , to send into Spaine a bark °f Aviso . of Aviso , to advertise the king of the state of his arrival ; 
 And after the fleets be ready to come home , he dis-patcheth another pinnace of Aviso to certify them how secon^ the fleets are now ready to set sail , with other particularities . There go with the fleets two great ships , ' the one as Admiral , the other as Viceadmiral , of the burden of 400 or 500 tons , which carry nothing but victuals and soldiers for the wafting of the rest of the fleet , and these are paid out of the merchandise which come in the fleet , after the rate of one in the hundred , and sometime at one and and half in the hundred . 
 There is in the Contractation house of Sivil a table which serves for and Aranzel , or table of rate or taxation , written in letters of gold , wherein the value's of all kind of merchandise , which are embarked for the Indies , are set down . 
 lie this table a man may know how many Botijas g® or jars make a tun of wine , or how many packs , or how many quintals , or how many 
 barrels , or how many chests make a tun . 
 And all merchandise have their rates set down , to pay the king his customs and the Master his due fraught . 
 A table of rates , etc. set up in the Contractation house . 
 457 
 And therein is set up in writing that no Master may carry any passenger to the Indies , without licence , especially not learned men , nor any fryer , or clergyman , nor any body else without licence of the king : nor any strangers not born in the kingdoms of Spaine . 
 Moreover , that they may not carry away any merchandise not comprised in the foresaid order , under pain of death : and that all goods which they carry with them , they ought to carry the same registered ; under pain of death . 
 Furthermore , that no Master nor Pilot may carry any Chart , nor Astrolabe , nor Cross-staff , nor regiment , without they be signed and sealed by the Pilot major Alonzo de Chiavez , and the Cosmographer the kings reader Rodrigo Zamorano . 
 Moreover , that going in company with the fleet , they do and obey all such things , as their general shall command them , under pain of death . 
 Written by me Pedro Dias born in the Isle of ' Palma one of the Canaries , upon the request and gratification of M. Richard Hakluyt , in February 1586. 
 END OF VOLUME XI . 
 