a chronicle of the king of man , take out of m. camdens chorography . 
 n the year of our lord 1066. Edward king of England , of famous memory decease , who Harald son of Godwin succeed in his kingdom ; against which Harald the king of Norwaie call Harald Harfager fight a battle at Stainford bridge , where the english win the 
 field put all the norwegian to flight : out of which flight one Godredus surname Crovan ( the son of Harald the black , who have before time flee out of island ) repair unto godr son of Syrric , who then reign in man , and be right friendly and honourable entertain by he . 
 in the very same year William the conqueror subdue England , and godr the son of Syrric , king of man , decease , after who succeed his son Fingal . Fingal . 
 in the year 1066. Godredus Crovan gather a fleet of ship , and sail unto man , and give battle unto the people of the country , be vanquish and put to flight . the second time also have gather his army and ship together , he come unto man , fight with the inhabitant , lose the victory , and be chase away . yea , the three time he assemble a great multitude , and come by night unto the port which be call Ramsa , hide 300. of his man in a wood stand upon the side of the hill call Scacafel . the sun be no soon up , but the mannians arrange themselves and with great fury set upon godred . 
 boat have not pass three iron nail in they . 
 and in the midst of the skirmish , the foresay 300. man rise out of their ambush , and come upon the back of the mannians , molest they so sore , that they be enforce to fly . but when they see you they be overcome and have no place of refuge to retire unto ( for the tide of the sea have fill the chanel of the river of Ramsa ) and see the enemy so fierce pursue they on the other side , they which remain , with lamentable outcry beseech godred to spare their life . than he be move with compassion , and pity their extreme calamity , because he have be of late sustain and nourish among they , sound a retreat and forbid his soldier to make any long pursuit . the day follow godred put his soldier to their choice , whether they will divide man among themselves and inhabit it , or whether they will take the wealth of the country , and so return unto their own home . howbeit , it please they better to waste the whole island and to enrich themselves with the commodity thereof , and so to return from whence they come . now godr himself with a few islander which have remain with he , take possession of the south part of the island , and unto the remnant of the mannians he grant the north part thereof , upon condition , that none of they shall at any time afterward dare once to challenge any parcel of the say ground by title of inheritance . whereupon it comes to pass , that unto this day the whole island be the king own fee-simple , and that all the revenue thereof pertain unto he . also Godredus subdue Dublin unto himself and a great part of lainestir . and he so tame the Scot , that none of they dare build a ship or a boat , with above three iron nail in it . he reign 16. year and die in the island call isle . he leave behind he three son , Lagman , Harald , and Olavus . Lagman be the old challenge the kingdom and reign seven year . howbeit Harald his brother rebel against he a long time , but be at length take by Lagman , he be geld and have his eye put out . after-26 
 ward Lagman repent he that he have put out the eye of his brother , do of his own accord relinquish his kingdom , and take upon he the badge of the cross , he go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem , in which journey also he die . 
 in the year 1075. all the principali man of the island have intelligence of the death of Lagman , send messenger unto Murecardus O-Brien king of Irland , request he that he will send some well-disposed person of his own kindred and blood royal , until Olavus son of godr be come to full age . the king most willing [ i . 11 . i condescend unto their request , and send unto they one Dopnald the son of Tade , charge and command he that with all meekness and modesty , he shall govern that kingdom , which of right belong not unto he . howbeit he , after he have once attain unto the kingdom , neglect the commandment of his lord , usurp the government with great tyrannic , commit many heinous crime , and so he reign very disorderly for the space of three year . than all the prince of the island make a generail conspiracy , band themselves against he , and expel he out of their dominion . and he fly into Irland return no more unto they . 
 in the year 1077. one Ingemundus be send from the king of Norway , to take possession of the kingdom of the island . And be come unto the island of Leodus , Lewis . he send messenger unto all the prince of the island to come unto he , command they to assemble themselves , and to appoint he to be their king . in the mean season he and his companion spend their time in rob and riot , ravish woman and virgin , and addict themselves to filthy pleasure and to the lust of the flesh . and when these thing be report unto the prince of the island , who have assemble themselves to choose he king , be mighty incense thereat , they make haste towards he , and come upon he in the night , they burn the house wherein he be , and slay 
 both he and the rest of his company , partly with sword , and partly with fire . 
 in the year 1098. the abbey of saint Maries at Cistertium be found . in the same year also Antiochia be take by the christian , and a comet appear . 
 moreover , the same year there be a battle fight between the inhabitant of man , at Santwat , and they of the north obtain the victory . in which battle be slay earl othor and mac-maras , chieftain of both part . 
 the same year magnus king of Norway , son of Olavus , son of Harald Harfagre , be desirous to view the corpse of saint Olavus king and martyr , give commandment that his monument shall be open . but the bishop and the clergy withstand this his attempt , the king go very bold and by his kingly authority , cause the cophin ' to be open . and when he have see with his eye , and handle with his hand the incorrupt body of the foresay king and martyr , a sudden fear come upon he , and he depart with great haste . the night follow Olavus king and martyr appear unto he in a vision , say : choose ( i say ) unto your self one of these two , either within 30. day to lose your life with your kingdom , or else to depart from Norway and never to see it again . the king so soon as he be awake out of sleep , call his prince and senator , and expound the foresay vision unto they . and they also be astonish thereat give he this counsel , that with all speed he shall depart out of Norway . than he without any further delay cause a navy of 160. ship to be provide , and so sail unto the island of Orkney , which he present subdue , and pass along through all the island and conquer they , at length he come unto the isle of man , where he be no soon arrive , but he go unto the isle of S. Patric to see the place of battle , where the inhabitant of man have of late fight , because many of the dead body be as yet unbury . And see that it be a 28 
 most beautiful island , it please he exceed well , and therefore he make choice to inhabit therein his own self , and build fort there which be at this day call by his own name . he have the people of Galway in such awe , that he constrain they to cut down their own timber , and to bring it unto his shore for the build of his fort . he sail on further unto the isle of Anglesey near unto wale , and find two earl therein ( either of they be call by the name of Hugo ) he slay the one , and the other he put to flight , and so subdue the island . but the Welshman present many gift unto he , and so bid they farewell he return unto man unto Murecard king of Irland he send his shoe , command he that he shall carry they on his shoulder , upon the birthday of our lord through the midst of his palace , in the sight of his ambassador , that thereby it may appear unto they , that he be subject unto king magnus . which when the Irishman hear , they take it grievous and disdain much thereat . but the king be better advise , i have rather ( say he ) not only bear his shoe , but eat his shoe , than that king Magnus shall destroy any one province in Irland . wherefore he fulfil his commandment , and honourable entertain his ambassador . many gift also he send unto king magnus by they , and conclude a league . but the messenger return unto their lord , tell he of the situation of Irland , of the beauty thereof , of the fruitfulness of the soil , and of the holesomnesse of the air . Magnus hear these thing be full resolve to conquer all Irland unto himself . and for the same purpose he command that a fleet shall be make ready . but he take his voyage with sixteen ship , and be desirous to view the land , when he have undiscreet depart from his navy , he be sudden environ by the irish , and be himself slay , together with all that be with he almost . he be inter near unto the church of S. Patric in Armagh . he six year . after his death the prince of the 29 
 A.D. 
 1098. 
 island send for Olavus the son of Godredus Crovan , who live in the court of Henry king of England son unto William the conqueror . 
 in the year 1102. Olavus son of Godredus Crovan begin his reign and reign fourty year : he be a peaceable man be in league with all the king of Scotland and Irland in his time . he take to wife Africa the daughter of Fergusius of Galway , of who he beget Godredus . of his concubine he beget Regnaldus , Lagmannus , and Haraldus , and many daughter , whereof | | Argile , one marry unto Sumerledus king of two herergaidel , which afterward occasion the overthrow of the whole kingdom of the island . he beget four son by she , namely Dulgallus , Raignaldus , Engus , and Olavus . 
 in the year 1134. Olavus give unto yvo the abbot of furne a portion of his own ground in man to build a abbey in the place which be call Russin . also he enrich with revenue and endue with privilege all place of religion within his island . 
 in the year 1142. Godredus the son of Olavus sail unto the king of Norway call hinge , and do he homage unto he he remain with he , and be by he honorable entertain . the same year the 3. son of Harald brother unto Olavus , who be bring up at the city of Dublin , gather together a great multitude of people , and all the fugitive and vagabond of the kingdom resort unto man , and demand of the say king the one half of all the kingdom of the island . which thing when the king hear , be desirous to pacific they , he answer that he will consult about that matter . and a day and place be appoint , where the consultation shall be keep , in the mean time those miscreant conspire together , about the murder of the king . and when the day appoint be come , both company assemble themselves unto the haven town call Ramsa , and they sit in order , the king with his nobility on the one side , and they with their confederate on the other side . howbeit Regnaldus who have a 
 intention to slay the king , stand aside in the midst of the house talk with one of the prince of the land . And be call to come unto the king he turn himself about as if he will have salute he , and lift up his glitter axe , he chop the king head quite off at a blow . now 1143 • have commit this outrageous villainy , within a short space they divide the island between themselves , and gather a army together sail unto Galway , intend to subdue that also ; howbeit the people of Galway assemble themselves , and with great fury encounter with they . than they immediate turn their back with great confusion flee unto man and as touch all the galwedian which inhabit in the say island , some of they they slay , and the residue they banish . 
 in the year 1143. Godredus son of Olavus return out of Norway be create king of man ; who in revenge of his father death , put out the eye of two of Harald son and slay the third . 
 in the year 1144. Godredus begin his reign , and he reign thirty year . in the third year of his reign the citizen of Dublin send for he and create he king of Dublin , against who Murecardus king of Irland make war , and encamp himself at the city call Coridelis , he send his brother Osibel with 3000. horseman unto Dublin , who be slay by godred and the dubliner , the rest of his company be put to flight . Theise thing be thus finish , Godredus return unto man , and begin to exercise tyrannic , disinherit certain of his noble , of who one call Thorfinus the son of oter , be mighty than the rest , go unto Sumerledus , and name Dubgal the son of Sumerledus , king of the island , and subdue many of the say island on his behalf . whereof when godr have intelligence by one Paulus , provide a navy , he go to meet Sumerledus come against he with 80. ship : and in the year 1156. upon the night of the feast of Epiphanie , there be 1156. of sea-battell fight , and many be slay on both part , the day follow they be pacify , and divide the 
 kingdom of the island among themselves , and it continue two kingdom from that day unto this present time . and this be the cause of the ruin of the monarchic of the island , from which time the son of Sumerled enjoy the one half thereof . 
 in the year 1158. Sumerled come unto man with 53. ship , put godred to flight and waste the island : and godred sail unto Norway to seek for aid against Sumerled . in the year 1164. Sumerled gather a fleet of 160. ship together ; and arrive at rhinfrin , intend to subdue all Scotland unto himself : howbeit , by God just judgement be overcome by a few , together with his son , and a innumerable multitude of people , he be slay . the very same year there be a battle fight at Ramsa , between Reginald the brother of godred , and the inhabitant of man , but by the stratagem of a certain earl the mannians be put to flight . then begin Reginald to usurp the kingly authority . howbeit his brother godr within four day after , come out of Norway with a great power of arm man , apprehend his brother Reginald , geld he , and put out his eye . the same year decease Malcolme the king of Scot , and his brother William succeed in the kingdom . 
 in the year 1166. two comet appear in the month of August , before the rise of the sun , one to the south and another to the north . 
 in the year 1171. Richard earl of Penbroke sail into Irland , and subdue Dublin with a great part of Irland . 
 in the year 1176. John Curcy conquer Ulster unto himself . and at the same time also Vivianus legate from the sea of Rome come into man , and cause king godred to be lawful wed unto his wife Phingola , daughter of Maclotlen son of Murkartac king of Irland , mother of Olavus , who be then 3. year old . Silvanus the abbot marry they , unto who the very same day , king godred give a portion of ground in Mirescoge , where he 32 
 build a monastery : howbeit , in process of time , the say land with the monk , be grant unto the abbey of Russin . 
 in the year 1172. Reginaldus the son of eacmarcat ( a man descend of the blood royal ) come into man with a great multitude of people , in the absence of the king , at the first conflict he put to flight certain watchman which keep the shore , and slay about 30. person . whereupon the very same day the mannians arrange themselves put he , and almost all his follower to the sword . 
 in the year 1183. o-fogolt be viscount of man 
 in the year 1185. the sun be eclipse upon the feast of saint Philip and Jacob. 
 in the year 1187. decease godred king of the island , upon the 4. of the ides of November , and the next summer his body be translate unto the island of Hy. he leave 3. son behind he , Reginaldus , Olavus , and Yvarus . in his life time he ordain his son Olavus to be his heir apparent , because he only be bear legitimate . but the mannians , when Olavus be scarce ten year old , send unto the island for Reginald and create he king . 
 in the year 1187. begin Reginald the son of godred to reign over the island : and murchardus a man of great power throughout all the kingdom of the island be put to death . 
 in the year 1192. there be a battle fight between Reginald and Engus the two son of Sumerled : but Engus obtain the victory . the same year be the abbey of Russin remove unto Dufglas , howbeit within four year after the monk return unto Russin . 
 in the year 1203. Michael bishop of the island decease at Fontanas , and Nicholas succeed in his room . 
 in the year 1204. Hugo de Lacy invade Ulster with a army and encounter with John de Curcy , take he prisoner and subdue Ulster unto himself . afterwards he permit the say John to go at liberty , who come unto king Reginald be honourable entertain by he , i 33 c 
 king John pass into Irland with 500 sail . 
 because he be his son in law , for John de Curcy have take to wife Africa the daughter of Godredus , which found the abbey of saint mary de jugo domini , and be there bury . 
 in the year 1205. John de Curcy and Reginald king of the island invade Ulster with a hundred ship at the port which be call stranfeord do negligent besiege the castle of Rath : but Walter de Lacy come upon they with his army , put they to flight , and from that time Curcy never recover his land . in the year 1210. Engus the son of sumerl and his 3. son be slay . 
 at the same time John king of England conduct a fleet of 500 ship into Irland , and subdue it unto himself : and send a certain earl name Fulco , unto the isle of man , his soldier almost utter waste it in the space of 15. day , and have take pledge they return home into their own country . king Reginald and his noble be at this time absent from man 
 in the year 1217. decease Nicolas bishop of the island , and be bury in Ulster , in the house of benchor , who Reginald succeed . 
 i think it not amiss to report somewhat more concern the two foresay brethren Reginaldus and Olavus . 
 REginald give unto his brother Olavus , the island call lodhus or Lewes , which be say to be large than the rest of the island , but almost destitute of inhabitant , because it be so full of mountain and quarrei , be almost no where fit for tillage . howbeit the inhabitant thereof do live for the most part upon hunt and fish . Olavus therefore go to take possession of this island , and dwell therein lead a poor life : and when he see that it will by no mean suffice for the sustentation of himself and his follower , he go bold unto his brother Reginald , who as then remain in the island , and speak on this wise unto he . my brother ( say he ) and my lord and king , you know that the 
 1223-kingdom of the island pertain unto i by right of inheritance , howbeit because the lord have choose you to bear the sceptre , i do not envy that honour unto you , neither do it any whit grieve i that you be exalt unto this royal dignity . now therefore i beseech you to provide i some portion of land in the island , whereby i may honest live . for the island of Lewis which you give i be not sufficient for my maintenance . which his brother Reginald hear say that he will consult about the premise . and on the morrow , when Olavus be send for to parley , Reginald command he to be attach , and to be carry unto William king of Scotland , and with he to remain prisoner : and Olavus remain in prison almost for the space of 7. year . but at the 7. year end William king of Scot decease , and Alexander his son reign in his stead . the foresay William , before his death , command that all prisoner shall be set at liberty . Olavus therefore be at liberty come unto man , and immediate with a great company of noble take his journey unto saint James : and his brother Reginald cause the say Olavus to take unto wife , the daughter of a certain noble man of Kentyre , cousine germane unto his own wife , and by name be call Lavon , and he grant unto he the possession of Lewis . after a few day Reginald the bishop of the island have gather a synod , separate Olavus and godr his son , and Lavon his wife , namely because she be cousin germane unto his former wife . afterwards Olavus marry Scristina daughter unto Ferkarus earl of Rosse . 
 hereupon the wife of Reginald queen of the island be incense , send letter unto the island of sky in king Reginald his name to her son godred will he to take Olavus . which commandment godred put in practice , and enter the isle of Lewis for you same purpose , Olavus flee in a little skiff unto his father in law the earl of Rosse , and in the mean time godred waste the isle of Lewis . at the very same time Pol the son of book 35 
 the isle of man advanced to a kingdom . 
 viscount of sky , be a man of power in all the island , because he will not consent unto godred , flee , and dwell together with Olavus in the dominion of the earl of Rosse , and make a league with Olavus , they go both in a ship unto sky . to be short , send certain spy , they be inform that godred remain secure with a small company in a certain isle call you isle of saint Columba . And unite unto themselves their friend and acquaintance , and other that will go voluntary with they , in the dead of the night , have launch 5. ship from the next seashore , which be distant about the space of 2. furlong from the foresay island , they environ the say island on all side . now godred and his company rise early in the morning , and see themselves beset with their enemy on all side , they be utter astonish . howbeit arm themselves they begin stout to make resistance , but altogether in vain . for about 9 of the clock in the morning , Olavus and the foresay viscount Pol , with all their soldier , enter the island , and have slay all who they find without the precinct of the church , they apprehend godred , gelding he , and put out his eye . unto which action Olavus give not his consent , neither can he withstand it , by reason of the forename viscount the son of book . this be do in the year of Christ 1223. the next summer follow Olavus have receive pledge from all the chief man of the island , with a fleet of 32. ship sail unto man , and arrive at Rognolfwaht . at the same time Reginald and Olavus divide the kingdom of the island between themselves , man be grant unto Reginald , and beside his portion the name of a king also . Olavus have receive certain victual of the people of man , return , together with his company , unto his own portion of island . the year follow Reginald take unto he Alanus lord of Galway , together with his subject of man , sail unto the island , that he may take away that portion of ground from his brother Olavus , which he have grant unto he , and subdue it unto himself . How - 
 1228. , beit , by reason that the people of man have no list to fight against Olavus or the islander , because they bear good will towards they , Reginald and Alanus lord of Galway be defeat of their purpose , return home unto their own . within a short space after Reginald , under pretense of go unto the court of his lord the king of England , receive a 100 mark of the people of man , and take his journey unto Alanus lord of Galway . which the people of man hear take great indignation thereat , insomuch that they send for Olavus , and appoint he to be their king . 
 in the year 1226. Olavus recover his inheritance , that be to say the kingdom of man and of the island , which Reginald his brother have govern for the space of 38. year , and he reign two year in safety . 
 in the year 1228. Olavus with all his noble of man , and the strong part of his people , sail unto the island . a short space after Alanus lord of Galway , Thomas earl of Athol , and king Reginald come unto man with a mighty army , and waste all the south part of man , spoil the church , and slay all the man who they can take , insomuch , that the south part of the say island be bring almost into desolation . and then Alanus return with his army into his own land , leave behind he bailiff and substitute in man , which shall gather up and render unto he the tribute of the country . howbeit king Olavus come sudden upon they , chase they away and recover his kingdom . and the mannians which of late be disperse and scatter abroad , begin to unite themselves , and to inhabit without fear . the same year , in the time of winter , upon the sudden , and in the very dead of the night come king Reginald out of Galway with five ship , and burn all the ship of his brother Olavus , and of the noble of man , at the isle of S. Patric , and conclude a peace with his brother , remain at the port of Ragnolwath 40. day : in the mean while he allure unto himself all the islander upon the south part of man , who swear , that 
 they will adventure their life , until he have get the one half of his kingdom : contrariwise Olavus join unto himself they of the north part , and upon the 14. of February in the place call Tingvalla , a field be fight between the two brother , wherein Olavus get the victory , and Reginald the king be by certain soldier slay without the knowledge of his brother . also certain pirate come to the south part of man , waste and spoil it . the monk of Russin convey the body of king Reginald , unto the abbey of saint mary of furnace , and there he be inter in the place , which his own self have choose for the purpose . after these thing Olavus travel unto the king of Norway , but before he be arrive there , Haco king of Norway appoint acertaine noble man name Husbac the son of Owmund , to be king of the island of the Hebrides and call his name Haco . then come the say Haco with Olavus and godred don the son of Reginald , and a multitude of norwegian , unto the island : and while they be give a assault unto a castle in the island of both , Haco be hit with a stone die , and be bury in Iona . 
 in the year 1230. come Olavus , with Godredus don , and certain norwegian unto man , and they part the kingdom among themselves , Olavus still retain man godr as he be go unto the island , be slay in the isle of Lewis , and Olavus enjoy the kingdom of the island also . 
 in the year 1237. upon the 12. of the kalend of June , Olavus son of godr king of man decease in the isle of saint Patric , and be inter in the abbey of Russin . he reign 11. year , two while his brother be alive , and nine after his death . 
 Haraldus his son be of the age of 14. year , succeed , and he reign 12. year . the first year of his reign take his journey unto the island , he appoint one Loglen his kinsman to be his deputy in man the autumn follow Haraldus send the three son of Nell , namely Dufgaldus , Torquellus , and Molmore , and his friend 3 » 
 Joseph unto man , that they may enter into consultation together . wherefore the 25. day they assemble themselves at Tingvalla : and malice grow between the son of Nell , and Loglen , they fall to blow and skirmish sore on both part , Molmore , Dufgald , and the foresay Joseph be all slay in the fray . the spring follow , king Harald come into the isle of man , and Loglen flee into wale , be himself , together with godred the son of Olavus his pupil , and 40. other , drown by shipwreck . 
 in the year 1238. Gospatricius and gillescrist son of mac-kerthac come from the king of Norway unto man , expelling Harald out of the say island , and take tribute on the behalf of the Norwegian king , because the say Harald refuse to come unto his court . 
 in the year 1240. Gospatricius decease and be bury in the abbey of Russin . 
 in the year 1239. Haraldus go unto the king of Norway , who within two year confirm unto he , his heir and successor , under seal , all the island which his predecessor enjoy . 
 in the year 1242. Haraldus return out of Norway unto man , and be honourable receive by the inhabitant , he live in peace with the king of England and Scotland . 
 in the year 1247. Haraldus ( like as his father also before he ) be knight by the king of England , and so be reward with many gift , he return home . the same year he be send for by the king of Norway , and he marry his daughter . and in the year 1249. as he be return home with his wife , with Laurence the elect of man , and with many other noble , near unto the confine of Radland , he be drown in a tempest . 
 in the year 1249. Reginald the son of Olavus , and brother unto Harald begin to reign the day next before the nonce of May : and upon the 30. day of the same month he be slay by Yvarus a soldier , and other of his complice , in the south part of a certain meadow , 
 39 
 A.D. 
 X249 . 
 near unto the church of the holy Trinity , and he be bury at the church of S. marry at Russin . 
 the same year Alexander king of Scot provide a great navy of ship , that he may conquer the island unto himself : howbeit fall into a ague at the isle of ker-wary , he decease . 
 then Haraldus the son of godr don usurp the name of a king over the island , he banish also all the prince of Harald the son of Olavus , and ordain his fugitive to be prince and noble in their stead . 
 in the year 1250. Haraldus the son of godr don be summon by letter go unto the king of Norway , who detain he in prison because he have unjust possess the kingdom . the same year magnus the son of Olavus , and John the son of Dugalt arrive at Roghalwaht , which John name himself king , but the mannians take it grievous , that Magnus be not nominate , drive they from their shore , and many of the company perish by shipwreck . 
 in the year 1252. come Magnus the son of Olavus unto man , and be ordain king . the year follow he take his journey unto the king of Norway , and there he remain one whole year . 
 in the year 1254. Haco king of Norway ordain Magnus the son of Olavus king of the island , confirm they to he and to his heir , and by name unto Harald his brother . 
 in the year 1256. Magnus take his journey into England , and be by the king of England create knight . 
 in you year 1257. the church of S. Maries of Russin be dedicate by Richard bishop of Soder . 
 in the year 1260. Haco king of Norway come into the part of Scotland , and without achieve aught , turn his course towards the Orcades he there decease at kir-was , and be bury at Bergen . 
 in the year 1265. Magnus the son of Olavus king of man and of the island die at the castle of Russin , and be bury at the church of S. marry at Russin . 
 in the year 1266. the kingdom of the island be translate unto Alexander king of Scot . 
 that which follow be write in a new character or letter , and of a diverse kind from the former . 
 in the year 1270. upon the seven day of October the fleet of Alexander king of Scot arrive at Roghalwath , and the next day before the sun rise there be a battle fight between the mannians and the Scot , in the which conflict there be slay 535. mannians : whereupon a certain versifier write to this effect : 
 five hundred fourty man be slay : against ill hap , 
 you mannians arm your self , for fear of afterclap . 
 in the year 1313. Robert king of Scot besiege the castle of Russin , which dingaway Dowil hold against he , howbeit at the last the king take the castle . 
 in the year 1316. upon the feast of ascension , Richard le Mandevile and his brethren , with diverse great personage of Irland arrive at Ramaldwath , demand to have victual and money minister unto they , because they have be spoil by their enemy , which make continual war upon they . but when the whole company of the mannians answer that they will give nothing , they proceed against they in warlike manner with two band , till they be come under the side of the hill call Warthfel , in the field where John Mandevile remain , and there have fight a battle , the irish overcome the people of man , and spoil the island and the abbey of Russin also : and when they have revel a whole month in the island , lade their ship they return home . 
 41 
 