the navigation of king Edgar , take out of Florentius Wigorniensis , Hoveden , and m. Dee his discourse of the british monarchic , page . 54 , 55 , etc 
 have often time ( say he ) and many way look into the state of earthly kingdom , general the whole world over ( as far as it may be yet know to christian man common ) be a study of no great difficulty , but rather a purpose somewhat answerable to a perfect Cosmo - 
 grapher , to find himself Cosmopolites , a citizen and member of the whole and only one mystical city universali , and so consequent to meditate of the cosmopolitical government thereof , under the king almighty , pass on very swift towards the most dreadful and most comfortable term prefix . 
 and i find ( say he ) that if this british monarchic will heretofore have follow the advantage which they have have onward , they may very well , year this , have surpass by justice , and godly sort , any particular monarchic else , that ever be on earth since man creation : and that to all such purpose as to God be most acceptable , and to all perfect common wealth , most honourable , profitable , and comfortable . 
 but yet ( say he ) there be a little lock of lady occasion flicker in the air , by our hand to catch hold on , whereby we may yet once more ( before all be utter pass , and for ever ) discreet and valiant recover and enjoy , if not all our ancient and due appurtenance to this 16 
 imperiali british monarchic , yet at the least some such notable portion thereof , as ( all circumstance due and just appertain to peace and amity with foreign prince be offer and use ) this may become the most peaceable , most rich , most puissant , and most flourish monarchic of all else ( this day ) in Christendom . peaceable , i say , even with the most part of the self same respect that good king Edgar have ( be but a saxon ) and by sundry such mean , as he chief in this empire do put in proof and ure triumphant , whereupon his surname be Pacificus , most apt and just . this peaceable king Edgar have in his mind about six hundred year past , the representation of a great part of the self same idea , which from above only , and by no man devise have stream down into my imagination , be as it become a subject careful for the godly prosperi tie of this british empire under our most peaceable queen Elizabeth . 
 for , jEdgarus pacificus , Regni svi prospiciens utilitati , flores pariter and quieti , quatuor millia octingentas sibi ’ robustas historiarum . congregavit nave e quibus mille ducentas , in plaga angliae orientali , mille ducentas in occidentali , mille ducentas in pelago con 
 stituit , ut ad defensionem regni svi , contra extera nationes , bellorum discrimina sustinerent . 
 o wisdom imperiali , most diligent to be imitate , videlicet , prospicere , to foresee . o charitable kingly parent , that be touch with ardent zeal , for procure the public profit of his kingdom , yea and also the peaceable enjoy thereof . o , of a incredible mass of treasure , a kingly portion , yet , in his coffer remain : if then he have , ( or late before ) any war , see no notable tax , or contribution public be historical mention to have be for the charge levy : if in peace he himself flourish so wealthy : oh marvellous political ! , and princely prudency , in time of peace to foresee , and prevent , ( and that most puissant , and invincible ) all possible malice , fraud , force , and mischief foreign . o most discreet liberali tie to such 
 1 17 b 
 australi , mille ducentas in septentrionali 
 excellent use , pour out his treasure so abundant . o faithful english people ( than , ) and worthy subject , of such a imperiali and godly governor . o your true , and willing heart , and bless ready hand ( than , ) so to impart such abundance of victual for those huge navy maintenance : so ( i say ) as neither dearth of famine , seem ( fond ) to be fear of you , for any intolerable want likely to ensue thereby , nor price of victual complain of to be unreasonable enhance by you , find for their great sale so good , and rare opportunity . 
 this peaceable king Edgar , be one of the perfect Imperiali monarch of this british empire , and therefore thus his fame remain ( for ever ) record . 
 anglici orbis Basileus , flos , and Decus TEdgarus , non minus memorabilis Anglis , quam Cyrus Persis , Romulus Romanis , Alexander macedonibus , Arsaces parthis , Carolus Francis , anno vitae 37. Regni svi cum fratre , and post 21. idibus Julii obiit , and apud Glascon sepelitur . 
 o Glastonbury , Glastonbury , the treasury of the carcase of so famous , and so many person ( quae olim mater sanctorum dicta es , and ab aliis , tumulus sanctorum , quam ab ipsis discipulis domini , aedificatam fuisse venerabilis habet antiquorum authoritas ) how lamentable be thy case now ! how have hypocrisy and pride wrought thy desolation encage though i omit here the name of very many other , both excellent holy man , and mighty prince , who carcase be commit to thy custody , yet that apostolic Joseph , that triumphant british Arthur , and now this peaceable and provident saxon king Edgar , do force i with a certain sorrowful reverence , here to celebrate thy memory . 
 this peaceable king Edgar ( as by ancient record may appear ) his summer progress , and yearly chief pastime be , the sail round about this whole isle of Albion , guard with his grand navy of 4000 sail at the least , part into 4. equal part of petty navy , 18 
 each one be of 1000 ship , for so it be ancient record . 
 idem quoque jEdgarus , 4000 nave congregavit , ex Ranulphus quibus omni anno , post festum Paschale , 1000 cest , ens , s-nave ad quamlibet angliae partem statuit , sic , aestate insulam circumnavigavit : hyeme vero , judicia in Provincia exercuit : and haec omnia ad svi exercitium , and ad hostium fecit terrorem . 
 can , and will that peaceable and wise king Edgar , before need , as be in peace and quiet with all nation about he , and notwithstanding mistrust his possible enemy , make his pastime so royal , political , and triumphant , with so many thousand ship , and at the least with ten time so many man as ship , and that yearly ? and shall we be not assure of such neighbour friendship , as may become to we as cruel and tyrannical enemy as never king Edgar need to dread the like , and they as many and mighty prince , as never king Edgar cope with the like , shall we ( say he ) not judge it some part of wisdom , to imitate careful in some little proportion ( though not with so many thousand ) the prosperous pastime of peaceable king Edgar , that saxonicall Alexander ? yea , prosperous pastime these may be just count , by which he also make evident to the whole world , that as he wise know the ancient bound and limit of this british empire , so that he can and will royal , just , and trium - [ i . 8. i phant enjoy the same , spite of the devil , and maugre the force of any foreign potentate . and all that , so high and faithful to the glory of God final intend and bring to pass , as the wise and godly prelate and counsellor of those day ( so count of and record ) can best advise and direct he , or perchance , but sincere commend and duetifiil encourage he in , he be of himself so bend , as purpose first invincible to fortify the chief and uttermost wall of his islandish monarchic , against all foreign encumbrance possible . and in that fortification further and assure to trust best his own 
 oversight and judgement , in yearly view the same in every quarter thereof , and that as it be for his pastime Imperiali , also in summer time , to the end that afterward in all security , he may in winter time ( vacare ) be at convenient leisure on land , chief to set forth God due honour , and second to understand , and diligent to listen to the cause and complaint of his commons . for as Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis of he to his Imperiali commendation have leave we a remembrance . 
 habebat autem praeterea consuetudinem , per omnes Regni provincias transire , ut intelligeret quomodo legum jura , and suorum statuta decretorum , i principibus observarentur , and ne paupere a potentibus praejudicium passi , opprimerentur , diligenter investigare solebat : in uno fortitudini , in altero justitiae studens , and Reipub. regnique utilitati consulens in utroque . hinc hostibus circumquaque timor , and amor omnium erga eum excreverat subditorum . 
 thus we see how in opportunity , this peaceable Edgar procure to this empire such prosperous security , that his true and faithful subject , all manner of way ( that be at home and also at sea , both outward and inward ) may peaceable , safe and secure employ their wit and travel for the marvelous enrich of this kingdom , and pleasure very many other , carry forth the natural commodity of this land , abound here above our necessary use ( and due store reserve ) and likewise again furnish the same with all necessary and not superfluous foreign commodity , fetch from far or foreign country . this be in deed ( as before be record ) a kingly providence , Reipub. regmque utilitati consulens , etc beside with great utility and profit public foresee , and by his mean enjoy , he himself use most glad the advantage of that security , in minister of justice , or cause the same to be execute all his kingdom over , not squemish , frown or skorneful shun the 
 ragged and totter sleeve of any suppliant , hold up to he a simple soil bill of complaint or petition , and that homely contrive , or afraid at , and timorous haste from the sickly pale face or feeble lim suitor , extreme constrain so to speak for himself , nor parcial smother he own conscience , to favour or maintain the foul fault and trespass unlawful of any his subject , how mighty or necessary soever , they ( else ) be , but diligent make search , least paupere a potentibus praejudicium passi , opprimerentur . 
 thus do public security from foreign foe abroad , and true love of his own subject , guard he at home , and the heavenly spirit direct all his good purpose , cause justice and equity in all quarter of this Albion to flourish . for which his peaceable and prosperous benefit at the eternal king his hand obtain , he become not insolent or decline to tyrannical regiment ( as some prince in other country have make their life comicotragical ) but with all his foresay invincible seaforce , abundant wealth , triumphant peace , with security and justice over all his monarchic prevail , his heart be continual , and most zealous bend to set forth the glory , laud and honour of the almighty creator , the heavenly and everlasting king , by such principali and princely mean , as ( then ) be deem to God most acceptable , as many monument yet to our day remain , do of he undoubted testify : as this , for one . 
 altitonantis dei largiflua dementia , qui est rex regum , ex charta ego jEdgarus anglorum Basileus omniumque f^^nis regum , insularum , oceanique britanniam circum - qat^raiis jacentis , cunctarumque nationum quae infra earn wigarnia . includuntur , imperator , and dominus , gratias ago ipsi deo omnipotenti , regi meo , qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit , and exaltavit super regnum patrum meorum : qui licet Monarchiam totius angliae adepti sunt i tempore athelstani ( qui primus regnum anglorum , and omnes nationes , 
 fundatio 
 Ecclesiae Cathedralls Eliensis . 
 quae britanniam incolunt , sibi armis subegit ) nullus tamen eorum ultra ejus fine imperium suum dilatare aggressus est . mihi autem concessit propitia divinitas , cum anglorum Imperio , omnia regna insularum oceani , cum suis ferocissimis regibus , usque noruegiam , maximamque partem hyberniae , cum sva nobilissima civitate Dublinia , anglorum regno subjugare : quos etiam omnes , meis imperiis colla subdere ( dei favente gratia ) coegi . quapropter and ego christi gloriam , and laudem exaltare , and ejus servitium amplificare devotus disposui , and per meos fideles fautores , Dunstanum viz. Archiepiscopum , Athelwoldum , and Oswaldum episcopos ( quos mihi patres spirituales , and consiliatore elegi ) magna ex parte , secundum quod disposui , effeci , etc 
 and again this in another monument . 
 omnipotentis dei , etc Ipsius nutu and gratia suffultus , ego / Edgarus Basileus dilectae insulae albionis , subditis nobis sceptris scotorum , Cumbrorum , ac Brytonum , and omnium circumcirca regionum , quieta pace perfruens , studiosus solicit de laudibus creatoris omnium occupor addendis : ne nunc inertia , nostrisque diebus ( plus aequo ) servitus ejus tepescere videatur , etc 18. mei terreni Imperii anno , etc anno incarnationis Dominicae , 973. 
 ego TEdgarus totius albionis Basileus hoc privilegium ( tanta roboratum authoritate ) crucis Thaumate confirmavi . 
 so that by all these rehearse record , it be most evident that the peaceable king Edgar , be one of those monarch , in who hand ( if life have suffice ) the incredible value and privilege grant by God and nature unto this british monarchic , may have be peaceable purchase in such sort , as the very blessing and favour of the divine Trinity have lay mean for our industry to attain to , and enjoy the same by . 
 and though sundry other valiant prince and king of this land i can recite , which in time pass have either by intent go about , or by wise and valiant exploit , have meet well prosper towards this islandish appropriate supremacy attain , yet never any other reasonable mean be use , or by humane wit , or industry can be contrive , to all purpose sufficient , but only by our sea force prevail , and so by our invincible enjoy all within the sea limit of our british royalty contain . 
 to which incredible political mystery attain , no easy , ready , or perfect plat and introduction , be ( as yet ) come to my imagination , then be the present and continual service of threescore good and tall warlike ship , with twenty smaller। bark , and those 80. ship ( great and small ) with 6660. apt man furnish , and all singular well appoint for service both on sea and land , faithful and diligent to be do in such circumspect and discreet order , as partly i have in other place declare , and further ( upon good occasion offer ) may declare . 
 this grand navy of peaceable king Edgar , of so many thousand ship , and they furnish with a hundred thousand man at the least , with all the final intent of those sea force , so invincible , continual maintain , the order of the execution of their service , the godly and imperial success thereof , be in a manner kingly lesson and prophetical encouragement to we leave , even now to be as provident for public security as he be , to be as skilful of our sea right and royal limit , and wise to find our self as able to recover and enjoy the same as he be , who can not choose , but with the pass and yearly sail about this british Albion , with all the lesser isle next adjacent round about it , he can not choose i say , but by such full and peaceable possession , find himself ( according to right , and his heart desire ) the true and sovereign monarch of all the british ocean , environ any way his empire of Albion and Ireland , with the lesser island next adjacent : with memorial whereof , as witone very precious jewel imperial , he adorn the title and crown of his regality , as with the testimony annex of the state and noble of his empire , to commit to perpetuali memory , the stile of his chief worldly dignity , in this very tenor of word before also remember . 
 ego TEdgarus anglorum Basileus , omniumque regum , insularum , oceanique britanniam circumjacentis , cunctardmque nationum , quae infra eam includuntur , imperator , and dominus . 
 note the queen majesty royalty over the british ocean sea , round about the british empire . 
 