the long and wonderful voyage of Frier John de Plano Carpini , send ambassador by pope Innocentius the four . An. do. 1246 to the great can of Tartary ; wherein he pass through Bohemia , Polonia , Russia , and so to the city of Kiow upon Boristhenes , and from thence ride continual post for the space of six month through Comania , over the mighty and famous river of Tanais , Volga , and laic , and through the country of the people call Kangittae , bisermini , karakitay , Naimani , and so to the native country of the mongal or Tartar , situate in the extreme northeaster ne part of all Asia : and thence back again the same way to Russia , and Polonia , and so to roam ; spend in the whole voyage among the say Tartar one whole year and above four month : take out of the 32. book of Vincentius Beluacensis his speculum historial . 
 libri xxxii . 
 Ascelinus . 
 tartarorum species . 
 Tonsura . 
 Habitus . 
 1 97 oh 
 temperantia . 
 Castitas . 
 sorde , 
 Temulentia , 
 101 
 25 - 
 102 
 103 
 Chingis salutatur imperator . Cathaynorum light ree and religio . 
 104 
 105 
 Burithabeth regio . 
 107 
 Interitus . 
 nepotes . 
 duces . 
 109 
 Barchin civitas . 
 51 videmecho-vium , lib . 1. ca. 3. 
 110 
 + impugnare : nec postea reversion sunt in terram svam usque 
 tartarorum militaris disciplina . 
 1 113 h 
 tartaros 
 Ferri temperamentum . 
 Lituani . 
 117 
 legationis mandata . 
 [ i - +7-1 
 118 
 qualiter recepti sunt apud bathy magnum principem . Cap. 22. 
 119 
 bathy audit legatos . 
 120 
 qualiter recedentes a bathy per terram comanorum 
 121 
 A.D. 
 I246 . 
 Burin . 
 Oceanus ab aquilone . Syban , frater bathy . 
 Nigri Cathayni . 
 mare parvum . 
 plures insula . 
 terra 
 125 
 qualiter in imperium sublimatus fuit . Cap. 27. 
 126 
 127 
 studium 
 1 129 1 
 Chingay internuntius . 
 i3i 
 Novemb. 13. 
 bathy . 
 133 
 [ the voyage 
 the voyage of Johannes de Plano Carpini unto the north-east part of the world , in the year of our lord , 1246. 
 of the first send of certain friar predicants and minorite unto the Tartar , take out of the 32. book of Vincentius Beluacensis his speculum historial : begin at the second chapter . 
 Ascellinus . 
 [ i - 54-1 
 bout this time also , pope Innocentius the four send Frier Ascelline be one of the order of the predicants , together with three other friar ( of the same authority whereunto they be call ) consort with he out of diverse coven of their order , with letter apostolical unto the tar 
 tar camp : wherein he exhort they to give over their bloody slaughter of mankind , and to receive the christian faith . and i , in very deed , receive the relation concern the deed of the Tartar only , ( which , accord to the congruence of time , i have above insert into this my work ) from a friar minorite , call Simon de Sanct. Quintin , who late return from the same voyage . and at that very time also , there be a certain other friar minorite , namely friar John de Plano Carpini , send with certain associate unto the Tartar , who likewise ( as himself witness ) abide and converse with they a year and three month at the least . for both he and one friar Benedict a polonian be of the same order , and a partaker of all his misery and tribulation , receive straight commandment from the pope , that both of they shall diligent search out all thing that concern the state of the Tartar . and therefore this friar John have write a little Historic ( which be come to our hand ) of such thing , as with his own eye he see among the Tartar , or which he hear from diverse Christians worthy of credit , remain there in captivity . out of which history i 
 134 
 think good by way of conclusion , to insert somewhat for the supply of those thing which be want in the say friar Simon . 
 of the situation and quality of the Tartar land , by Johannes de Plano Carpini . Chap. 3. 
 there be towards the east a land which be call mongal or Tartary , lie in that part of the world which be think to be most north easterly . on the east part it have the country of Kythay and of the people call Solangi : on the south part the country of the Saracen : on the south east the land of the Huini : and on the west the province of Naimani : but on the north side it be environ with the ocean sea in some part thereof it be full of mountain , and in other place plain and smoothe ground , but every where sandy and barren , neither be the hundred part thereof fruitful . for it can bear fruit unless it be moisten with river water , which be very rare in that country . whereupon they have neither village , nor city among they , except one which be call Cracurim , and be say to be a proper town . we our self see not this town , but be almost within half a day journey thereof , when we remain at Syra orda , which be the great court of their emperor . and albeit the foresay land be otherwise unfruitful , yet be it very commodious for the bring up of cattle . in certain place thereof be some small store of tree grow , but otherwise it be altogether destitute of wood . therefore the emperor , and his noble man and all other warm themselves , and dress their meat with fire make of the dung of ox , and horse . the air also in that country be very intemperate . for in the midst of summer there be great thunder and lightning , by the which many man be slay , and at the same time there fall great abundance of snow . there be also such mighty tempest of cold wind , that sometime man be not able to sit on horseback . whereupon , be 
 a description of Tartary . 
 the north ocean . 
 the intemperature of the air . 
 what orda 
 near unto the orda ( for by this name they call the signify . 
 * 35 
 like unto frobishers man . 
 their tabernacle . 
 habitation of their emperor and noble man ) in regard of the great wind we be constrain to lie grovel on the earth , and can not see by reason of the dust . there be never any rain in winter , but only in summer , albeit in so little quantity , that sometime it scarce suffice to allay the dust , or to moisten the root of the grass . there be often time great store of hail also . insomuch that when the emperor elect be to be place in his imperial throne ( my self be then present ) there fall such abundance of hail , that , upon the sudden melt thereof , more than 160. person be drown in the same place : there be many tent and other thing also carry away . likewise , in the summer season there be on the sudden extreme heat , and sudden again intolerable cold . 
 of their form , habit , and manner of live . Chap. 4. 
 the mongal or Tartar , in outward shape , be unlike to all other people . for they be broad between the eye , and the ball of their cheek , than man of other nation be . they have flat and small nose , little eye , and eye lid stand straight upright , they be shave on the crown like priest . they wear their hair somewhat long about their ear , then upon their forehead : but behind they let it grow long like woman hair , whereof they bray two lock bind each of they behind either ear . they have short foot also . the garment , as well of their man , as of their woman be all of one fashion . they use neither cloak , hat , nor cap . but they be jacket frame after a strange manner , of buckram , scarlet , or baldakine . their shoube or gown be hairy on the outside , and open behind , with tail hang down to their ham . they use not to wash their garment , neither will in any wise suffer they to be wash , especial in the time of thunder . their habitation be round and cunning make with wicker and staff in manner of 136 
 a tent . but in the midst of the top thereof , they have a window open to convey the light in and the smoke out . for their fire be always in the midst . their wall be cover with felt . their door be make of self also . some of these tabernacle may quick be take asunder , and set together again , and be carry upon beast back . other sum can be take insunder , but be stow upon cart . and whithersoever they go , be it either to war , or to any other place , they transport their tabernacle with they . they be very rich in cattle , as in camel , ox , sheep , and their cattle . goat . and i think they have more horse and mere then all the world beside . but they have no kine nor other beast . their emperor , duke , and other of their noble do abound with silk , gold , silver , and precious stone . their victual be all thing that may be eat : their for we see some of they eat lice . they drink milk in victual . great quantity , but especial mere milk , if they have 55-1 it : they see mill also in water , make it so thin , that they may drink thereof . every one of they drink off a cup full or two in a morning , and sometime they eat nought else all the day long . but in the evening each man have a litde flesh give he to eat , and they drink the broth thereof . howbeit in summer time , when they have mere milk enough , they seidome eat flesh , unless perhaps it be give they , or they take some beast or bird in hunt . 
 of their manner both good and bad . Chap. 5. 
 their manner be partly praiseworthy , and partly their detestable : for they be more obedient unto their obedience . 
 lord and master , than any other either clergy or laie-people in the whole world . for they do high reverence they , and will deceive they , neither in word nor deed . they seidome or never fall out among themselves , and , as for fighting or brawling , wound or manslaughter , they never happen among they . there their be neither thief nor robber of great riches to be d ” ttr > ence . 
 137 
 their insolency against stranger . 
 find , and therefore the tabernacle and cart of they that have any treasure be not strengthen with lock or bar . if any beast go astray , the finder thereof either let it go , or drive it to they that be put in office for the same purpose , at who hand the owner of the say beast demand it , and without any difficulty receive it again . one of they honour another exceed , and bestow banquet very familiar and liberal , notwithstanding that good victual be dainty and scarce among they . they be also very hardy , and when they have fast a day or two without any manner of sustenance , they sing and be merry as if they have eat their belly full . in ride , they endure much cold and extreme heat . there be , in a manner , no contention among they , and although they use common to be drunken , yet do they not quarrel in their drunkenness . Noe one of they despise another but help and further he , as much as convenient he can . their woman be chaste , neither be there so much as a word utter concern their dishonesty . some of they will notwithstanding speak filthy and immodest word . but towards other people , the say Tartars be most insolent , and they scorn and set nought by all other noble and ignoble person whatsoever . for we see in the emperor court the great duke of Russia , the king son of Georgia , and many great sultans receive no due honour and estimation among they . so that even the very Tartar assign to give attendance unto they , be they never so base , will always go before they , and take the upper hand of they , yea , and sometime will constrain they to sit behind their back . Moreover they be angry and of a disdainful nature unto other people , and beyond all measure deceitful , and treacherous towards they . they speak fair in the beginning , but in conclusion , they sting like scorpion . for crafty they be , and full of falsehood , circumvent all man who they be able , by their sleight . whatsoever mischief they intend to practise against a man , they 
 138 
 keep it wonderful secret , so that he may by no mean provide for himself , nor find a remedy against their conspiracy . they be unmannerly also and unclean in take their meat and their drink , and in other action . drunkenness be honourable among they , and when any of they have take more drink than his stomach can well bear , he cast it up and fall to drink again . they be most intolerable exacter , most covetous possessor , and most niggardly giver . the slaughter of other people be account a matter of nothing with they . 
 of their law and custom . Chap. 6. 
 moreover , they have this law or custom , that punishment whatsoever man or woman be manifest take °f adultery . 
 in adultery , they be punish with death . a virgin likewise that have commit fornication , they slay together with her mate . whosoever be take in of theft . robbery or theft , be put to death without all pi tie . also , of secret if any man disclose their secret , especial in time of disclose . war , he receive a hundred blow on the back with a bastinado , lay on by a tall fellow . in like sort when any inferior offend in aught , they find no favour at their superior hand , but be punish with grievous stripe . 
 they be join in matrimony to all in general , yea , law of even to their near kinsfolk except their mother , matrimome-daughter and sister by the mother side . for they use to marry their sister by the father side only , and also the wife of their father after his decease . the young brother also , or some other of his kindred , be bind to marry the wife of his elder brother decease . for , at the time of our abode in the country , a certain duke of Andreas duke Russia name Andreas , be accuse before duke Baty for °f^ussia-conveying the Tartar horse out of the land , and for sell they to other : and although it can not be prove , yet be he put to death . his young brother and the wife of the party decease hear this , come and make their supplication unto the forename duke , that 
 139 
 the dukedom of Russia may not be take from they . but he command the youth to marry his decease brother wife , and the woman also to take he unto her husband , accord to the custom of the Tartar . she answer , that she have rather die , than so heinous transgress the law . howbeit , he deliver she unto he , although they both refuse as much as they can . wherefore carry they to bed , they constrain the youth , lament and weep , to lie down and commit incest with his brother wife . to be short , after the death of their husband , the Tartar wife use very seidome to marry the second time , unless perhaps some man take his brother wife or his stepmother in marriage . they make no difference between the son of their wife and of their concubine , but the father give what he please unto each one : for of late the king of Georgia have two son , one lawful beget call Melich ; but the other David , bear in adultery , at his death leave part of his land unto his base son . hereupon Melich ( unto who the kingdom fall by right of his mother , because it be govern before time by woman ) go unto the emperor of the Tartar , David also have take his journey unto he . now both of they come to the court and proffer large gift , the son of the harlot make suit , that he may have justice , accord to the custom of the Tartar . well , sentence pass against Melich , that David be his elder brother , shall have superiority over he , and shall quiet and peaceable possess the portion of land grant unto he by his father . whensoever a tartar have many wife , each one of they have her family and dwell place by her self . and sometime the tartar eat , drink and lie with one , and sometime with another . one be account chief among the rest , with who he be often conversant , then with the other . and notwithstanding ( as it have be say ) they be many , yet do they seidome fall out among themselves . 
 140 
 of their superstitious tradition . Chap. 7. 
 but by reason of certain tradition , which either they or their predecessor have devise , they account some thing indifferent to be fault . one be to thrust a knife into the fire , or any way to touch the fire with a knife , or with their knife to take flesh out of the cauldron , or to hew with a hatchet near unto the fire . for they think by that mean to take away the head or force from the fire . another be to lean upon the whip , wherewith they beat their horse : for they ride not with spur . also , to touch arrow with a whip , to take or kill young bird , to strike a horse with you rain of their bridle , and to break one bone against another . also , to power out milk , meat , or any kind of drink upon the ground or to make water within their tabernacle : which whosoever do willing , he be slay , but otherwise he must pay a great sum of money to the enchanter to be purify . who likewise must cause the tabernacle with all thing therein , to pass between two fier . before it be on this wise purify , no man dare once enter into it , nor convey any thing thereout . beside , if any man have a morsel give he , which he be not able to swallow , and for that cause cast it out of his mouth , there be a hole make under his tabernacle , by which he be draw forth and slay without all compassion . likewise , whosoever tread upon the threshold of any of their duke tabernacle , he be put to death . many other thing there be , like unto these , which they take for heinous offence . but to slay man , to invade the dominion of other people , and to rifle their good , to transgress the commandment and prohibition of God , be with they no offence at all . they know nothing concern eternal life , and everlasting damnation , and yet they think , that after death they shall live in another world , that they shall multiply their cattle , that they shall eat and drink and doe other thing which live man perform here upon earth . at a new moon , or a full moon , they begin all enterprise 
 141 
 A.D. 
 I246 . 
 ridiculous tradition . 
 the Tartar 
 ■ worship the moon . 
 that they take in hand , and they call the moon the great emperor , and worship it upon their knee . all man that abide in their tabernacle must be purify with their custom fire : which purification be on this wise , they kindle two of purify . flresj anj pitch two javelin into the ground near unto 
 the say fire , bind a cord to the top of the javelin . and about the cord they tie certain jag of buckram , under which cord , and between which fire , man , beast , and tabernacle do pass . there stand two woman also , one on the right side , and another on the left cast water , and repeat certain charm . if any man be slay by lightning , all that dwell in the same tabernacle with he must pass by fire in manner aforesaid . for their tabernacle , bed , and cart , their felt and garment , and whatsoever such thing they have , be touch by no man , yea , and be abandon by all man as thing unclean . and to be short , they think that all thing be to be purge by fire . therefore , when any ambassadors , prince , or other personage whatsoever come unto they , they and their gift must pass between two fire to be purify , lest peradventure they have practise some witchcraft , or have bring some poison or other mischief with they . 
 [ i . 57-1 
 the people of Tartary . 
 the original in the exploit of Chingis . 
 of the beginning of their empire or government . Chap. 8. 
 the east country , whereof we have entreat , which be call Mongal , be report to have have of old time four sort of people . one of their companion be call Yeka Mongal , that be the great mongal . the second company be call Sumongal , that be , the water-mongals , who call themselves Tartar of a certain river run through their country name Tartar . the three be call Merkat , and the four metrit . all these people have one and the same person , attire of body and language , albeit they be divide by prince and province . in the province of Yeka Mongal , there be a certain man call Chingis . this man 
 142 
 become a mighty hunter . for he learn to steal man , and to take they for a prey . he range into other country take as many captive as he can , and join they unto himself . also he allure the man of his own country unto he , who follow he as their captain and ringleader to do mischief . then begin he to make war upon the sumongal or Tartar , and slay their captain , and after many conflict , subdue they unto himself , and bring they all into bondage . afterwards he use their help to fight against the merkat , dwell by the Tartar , who also he vanquish in battle . proceed from thence , he fight against the metrite , and conquer they also . the TheNaimani . Naimani hear that Chingis be thus exalt , great disdain thereat . for they have a mighty and puissant emperor , unto who all the foresay nation pay tribute . who son , when he be dead , succeed he in his empire . howbeit , be young and foolish , 
 they know not how to govern the people , but be the discord of divide , and fall at variance among themselves . now brethren . Chingis be exalt , as be aforesaid , they nevertheless invade the forename country , put the inhabitant to the sword , and carry away their good for a prey . which Chingis have intelligence of , gather all his subject together . the Naimani also , and the people call karakitay assemble and band themselves at a certain straight valley , where , after a battle fight they be vanquish by the mongal . And be thus vanquish , they be , the great part of they , slay ; and other , which can not escape , be carry into captivi tie . in the land of the foresay karakytayans , occoday cham , the son of Chingis Cham , after he be occoday create emperor , build a certain city , which he call cham-chanyl . near unto which city , on the south side , there be a huge desert , wherein wild man be certain report to inhabit , which can speak at all , and be destitute of joint in their leg , so that if they fall , they can rise alone by themselves . howbeit , they be of 
 143 
 discretion to make felt of camel hair , wherewith they clothe themselves , and which they hold against the wind . and if at any time , the Tartar pursue they , chance to wound they with their arrow , they put herb into their wound , and fly strong before they . 
 of the mutual victory between they , and the people of Kythay . Chap. 9 
 hey than and t ) ut the mongal return home into their own Paulus jj country , prepare themselves to battle against the vthemus Cal1 * kythayans : which their emperor hear , set forward * cathayans . against they with his army , and they fight a cruel battle , wherein the mongal be overcome , and all their noble in the army , except seven , be slay . and for this cause , when they , purpose to invade any region , be threaten by the inhabitant thereof to be slay , they do , to this day , answer : in old time also our whole number beside be slay , we remain but seven of we alive , and yet notwithstanding we be now grow unto a great multitude , think not therefore to daunt we with such brag . but Chingis and the residue that remain alive , flee home into their country : and have breathe 
 new victory , he a little , he prepare himself to war , and go forth against the people call Huyri : these man be Chris - 
 letter . tian of the sect of Nestorius . and these also the mongal overcome , and receive letter or learning from they : for before that time they have not the art of writing , and now they call it the hand or letter of the mongal . immediate after , he march against the country of saruyur , and of the karanite , and against the land of hudirat ; all which he vanquish . then return he home into his own country , and breathe himself . afterwards , assemble his warlike troop , they march with one accord against the kythayans , and wage war with they a long time , they conquer a great part of their land , and shut up their emperor into his great city : which city they have so long time besiege , that they begin to want necessary provision for their 
 144 
 army . and when they have no victual to feed upon , Chingis Cham command his soldier , that they shall eat every ten man of the company . but they of the city fight manful against they , with engine , dart , and arrow , and when stone want they throw silver , and especial melt silver : for the same city abound with great riches . also , when the mongal have fight a long time and can not prevail by war , they make a great trench underneath the ground from the army unto the midst of the city , and there issue forth they fight against the citizen , and the remnant also without the wall fight in like manner . at last , break open the gate of the city , they enter , and put the emperor , with many other to the sword , they take possession thereof and convey away the gold , silver , and all the riches therein . and have appoint certain deputy over the country , they return home into their own land . this be the first time , when the emperor of the kythayans be vanquish , Chingis cham obtained the empire . but some part of the country , because it lie within the sea , they can by no mean conquer unto this day . the man of kytay be pagan , have a speciali kind of write by themselves , and ( as it be report ) the scripture of the old and new testament . they have also record in history the life of their forefather : and they have eremite , and certain house make after the rftanner of our church , which in those day they great resort unto . they say that they have diverse saint also , and they worship one God . they adore and reverence Christ Jesus our lord , and believe the article of eternal life , but be not baptize . they do also honourable esteem and reverence our scripture . they love christian , and bestow much alm , and be a very courteous and gentle people . they have no beard , and they agree partly with the mongal in the disposition of their countenance . in all occupation which man practise , there be not better artificer in the whole world . 
 i 145 king 
 silver cast at the enemy in stead of stone . 
 part of Cathay in the sea . 
 the letter , bl the religion of the cathayans . 
 their excellent workmanship . 
 their country be exceed rich , in corn , wine , gold , silk , and other commodity . 
 thossut can son of chinas . 
 the stratagem of the king of India . 
 of their war against India major and minor . Chap. 10. 
 a nd when the mongal with their emperor Chingis Cham have a while rest themselves after the foresaid victory , they divide their army . for the emperor send one of his son name thossut ( who also they call can , that be to say , emperor ) with a army against the people of Comania , who he vanquish with much war , and afterward return into his own country . but he send his other son with a army against the Indians , who also subdue India minor . Theise Indians be the black Saracen , which be also call / ethiopian . but here the army march forward to fight against Christians dwell in India major . which the king of that country hear ( who be common call presbyter John ) gather his soldier together , and come forth against they . And make man image of copper , he set each of they upon a saddle on horseback , and put fire within they , and place a man with a pair of bellows on the horse back behind every image . and so with many horse and image in such sort furnish , they march on to fight against the mongal or Tartar . And come near unto the place of the battle , they first of all send those horse in order one after another . but the man that sit behind lay i wot not what upon the fire within the image , and blow strong with their bellows . whereupon it come to pass , that the man and the horse be burn with wild fire , and the air be darken with smoke . then the indian cast dart upon the Tartar , of who many be wound and slay . and so they expel they out of their dominion with great confusion , neither do we hear , that ever they return thither again . 
 146 
 how be repel by monstrous man shape like dog , they overcome the people of burithabeth . Chap. 11. 
 but return through the desert , they come into a certain country , wherein ( as it be report unto we in the emperor court , by certain clergy man of Russia , and other , who be long time among they , and that by strange strong and steadfast affirmation ) they find certain report of cer-monster resemble woman : who be ask by many wman a „ d interpreter , where the man of that land be , they dog . answer , that whatsoever woman be bear there , be endue with the shape of mankind , but the male be like unto dog . And delay the time , in that country they meet with the say dog on the other side of the river . and in the midst of sharp winter , they cast themselves into the water : afterwards they wallow in the dust upon the main land , and so the dust be mingle with water , be freeze to their back , and have often time so do , the ice be strong freeze upon they , with great fury they come to fight against the Tartar . and when the Tartar throw their dart , or shoot their arrow among they , they rebound back again , as if they have light upon stone . and the rest of their weapon can by no mean hurt they . howbeit , the dog make a assault upon the Tartar , and wound some of they with their tooth , and slay other , at length they drive they out of their country . and thereupon they have a proverb of the same matter , as yet rife among they , which they speak in jest sort one to another ; my father or my brother be slay of dog . the woman which they take , they bring into their own country , who remain there till their die day . and in travel homewards , the say army of the mongal come unto theregion of the land of Burithabeth ( the inhabitant whereof be burtthabeth-pagans ) and conquer the people in battle . Theise people have a strange or rather a miserable kind of 
 custom . for when any man father decease , he the manner assemble all his kindred , and they eat he . Theise of the people . man have no beard at all , for we see they carry a certain iron instrument in their hand , wherewith , if any hair grow upon their chin , they present pluck they out . they be also very deform . from thence the Tartar army return to their own home . 
 another expedition of chinas . 
 how they have the repulse at the caspian mountains , and be drive back by man dwell in cave . Chap. 12. 
 moreover Chingis cham , at the same time when he send other army against the east , he himself march with a power into the land of Kergis , which notwithstanding , he conquer not in that expedition , and as it be report unto we , he go on forward even to the caspian mountain . but the mountain on that part where they encamp themselves , be of adamant , and therefore they draw unto they their arrow , and weapon of iron . and certain man contain within those caspian mountain , hear , as it be think , the noise of the army , make a breach through , so that when the Tartar return unto the same place ten year after , they find the mountain break . And attempt to go unto they , they can not : for there stand a cloud before they , beyond which they be not able to pass , be deprive of their sight so soon as they approach thereunto . but they on the contrary side think that the Tartar dare not come nigh they , give the assault , and when they come at the cloud , they can not proceed for the cause aforesaid . also the Tartar , before they come unto the say mountain , pass for the space of a month and more , through a vast wilderness , and depart thence towards the east , they be above a month travel through another huge desert . at length , they come unto a land wherein they see beat way , but can not find any people . howbeit , at the last , diligent seek , they find a man and his wife , who they present before 
 148 
 Chingis cham : and demand of they where the people of that country be , they answer , that the people inhabit under the ground in mountain . then Chingis Cham keep still the woman , send her husband unto they , give they charge to come at his command . And go unto they , he declare all thing that Chingis Cham have command they . but they answer , that they will upon such a day visit he , to satisfy his desire . and in the mean season , by blind and hide passage under the earth , assemble themselves , they come against the Tartar in warlike manner , and sudden issue forth , they slay a great number of they . this people be not able to endure the terrible noise , which in that place the sun make at his uprise : for at the time of the sun rise , they be enforce to lay one ear upon the ground , and to stop the other close , lest they shall hear that dreadful sound . neither can they so escape , for by this mean many of they be destroy . Chingis cham therefore and his company , see that they prevail not , but continual lose some of their number , flee and depart out of that land . but the man and his wife aforesaid they carry along with they , who all their life time continue in the Tartar country . be demand why the man of their country do inhabit under the ground , they say , that at a certain time of the year , when the sun rise , there be such a huge noise , that the people can endure it . Moreover , they use to play upon cymbal , drum , and other musical instrument , to the end they may not hear that sound . 
 a fabulous narration of the sun rise . 
 of the statute of Chingis Cham , of his death , of his son , and of his duke . Chap. 13. 
 but as Chingis Cham return out of that country , his people want victual , and suffer extreme famine . 
 then by chance they find you fresh entrail of a beast : which they take , and cast away the dung thereof , cause it to be sodden , bring it before Chingis cham , and do the tawe eat thereof . and hereupon Chingis cham enact ; that Chingis . 
 149 
 neither the blood , nor the entrail , nor any other part of a beast which may be eat , shall be cast away , save only the dung . wherefore he return thence into his own land , and there he ordain law and statute , which the Tartar do most strict and inviolable observe , the death of of the which we have before speak . he be afterward Chingis . slay by a thunderclap . he have four son : the first ts son . call occoday , the second thossut can , the three 
 thiaday : the name of the four be unknown . from these four descend all the duke of the mongal . the his grand - first son of occoday be cuyne , who be now emperor : child . h ; s brother be cocten and chyrinen . the son of 
 thossut can be bathy , ordu , Siba , and Bora. Bathy , next unto the emperor , be rich and mighty than all the rest . but ordu be the seignior of all the duke . the son of Thiaday be Hurin and Cadan . the son of Chingis Cham his other son , who name be unknown , be mengu , Bithat , and certain other . the mother of Mengu be name Seroctan , and of all other most honour among the Tartar , except the emperor mother , and mighty than any subject except bathy . the tar - Theise be the name of the duke : ordu , who be in 
 tarian duke . Poland and in Hungary : Bathy also and Hurin and Cadan , and Siban , and ovygat , all which be in Hungary . in like manner Cyrpodan , who be as yet beyond the sea , make war against certain sultan of the Saracen , and other inhabitant of far country . other remain in the land , as namely Mengu , chyrinen , Hubilai , Sinocur , cara , gay , Sybedey , Bora , Berea , corrensa . there be many other of their duke , who name be unknown unto we . 
 of the authority of the emperor , and of his duke . Chap. 14. 
 the absolute r “ 
 and lordly A that Oreo ver , the emperor of the Tartar have a 
 ‘ Tartarian^ dominion over all his subject . for no 
 emperor over man be abide in any place , unless he have assign he his subject . to be there . also he himself appoint to his duke 
 150 
 where they shall inhabit . likewise the duke assign place unto every millenary , or conductor of a thousand soldier , the millenary unto each captain of a too . the captain unto every corporali of ten . whatsoever be give they in charge , whensoever , or wheresoever , be it to fight or to lose their life , or howsoever it be , they obey without any gainsay . for if he demand any man daughter , or sister be a virgin , they present deliver she unto he without all contradiction : yea , often time he make a collection of virgin throughout all the Tartar dominion , and those who he mean to keep , he retain unto himself , other he bestow upon his man . also , whatsoever messenger he send , or whithersoever , his subject must without delay find they horse and other necessary . in like sort , from what country soever tribute payer , or ambassador come unto he , they must have horse , carriage , and expense allow they . notwithstanding ambassador come from other place do suffer great misery , and be in much want both of victual , and of apparel : especial when they come to any of the duke , and there they be constrained to make some linger abode . than ten man their be allow so little sustenance , that scarce two can barbarous live thereof . likewise , if any injury be otter they , towar^s they can without danger make complaint . many gift ambassador . also be demand of they , both by duke and other , which if they do not bestow , they be base esteem , and set at nought . and hereupon , we be of necessity enforce to bestow in gift a great part of those thing which be give we by well dispose people , to defray our charge . to be short , all thing be so in the power and possession of the emperor , that no man dare say , this be i , or , this be my neighbour ; but all , both good , cattle and man be his own . concern this matter also he publish a statute of late . the very same authority and jurisdiction , do the duke in like sort exercise upon their subject . 
 I51 
 the title of Barchin . 
 [ i . 61. i Orna . 
 of the election of emperor occoday , and of the expedition of duke bathy . Chap. 15. 
 after the death of Chingis Cham aforesaid , the duke assemble themselves and choose occoday his son to be their emperor . and he , enter into consultation with his noble , divide his army , and send duke Bathy his nephew against the country of altisoldan , and against the people call bisermini , who be Saracen , but speak the language of Comania . the Tartar invade their country , fight with they and subdue they in battle . but a certain city call Barchin resist they a long time . for the citizen have cast up many ditch and trench about their city , in regard whereof the Tartar can not take it , till they have fill the say ditch . but the citizen of sarguit hearing this , come forth to meet they , yield themselves unto they of their own accord . whereupon their city be not destroy , but they slay many of they and other they carry away captive , and take spoil , they fill the city with other inhabitant , and so march forth against the city of Orna . this town be very populous and exceed rich . for there be many Christians therein , as namely gasarian , russian , and alanians , with other , and Saracens also . the government of the city be in the Saracen hand . it stand upon a mighty river , and be a kind of port town , have a great mart exercise therein . and when the Tartar can not otherwise overcome it , they turn the say river , run through the city , out of his channel , and so drown the city with the inhabitant and their good . which be do , they set forward against Russia , and make foul havoc there , destroy city and castle and murdering the people . they lay siege a long while unto Kiow the chief city of Russia , and at length they take it and slay the citizen . whereupon , travel through that country , we find a innumerable multitude of dead man skull and bone lie upon the earth . for it be 
 a very large and a populous city , but it be now in a manner bring to nothing : for there do scarce remain 200. house , the inhabitant whereof be keep in extreme bondage . Moreover , out of Russia and Comania , they proceed forward against the hungarian , and the polonians , and there many of they be slay , as be aforesaid : and have the hungarian manful withstand they , the Tartar have be confound and drive back . return from thence , they invade the country of the morduans be pagan , and conquer the they in battle . than they march against the people morduans-called Byleri , or Bulgaria magna , and utter waste the Bulgaria country . from hence they proceed towards the mag ™ - north against the people call Bastarci or Hungaria Hungaria magna , and conquer they also . and so go on make ™ - further north , they come unto the Parossitae , who have Parossita - . little stomach and small mouth , eat not any thing at all , but seethe flesh they stand or sit over the pot , and receive the steam or smoke thereof , be therewith only nourish , and if they eat any thing it be very little . from hence they come to the Samogetae , who live Samogeta : . only upon hunt , and use to dwell in tabernacle only , and to wear garment make of beast skin . from thence they proceed unto a country lie upon the ocean sea , where they find certain monster , who in the north all thing resemble the shape of man , save that their ocean-feete be like the foot of a ox , and they have in deed man head but dog face . they speak , as it be , northern two word like man , but at the three they bark like monster . dog . from hence they retire into Comania , and there some of they remain unto this day . 
 of the expedition of duke Cyrpodan . Chap. 16. 
 at the same time occoday can scent duke Cyrpodan kergl . 
 with a army against Kergis , who also subdue they in battle . Theise man be pagan , have no beard at all . they have a custom when any of their father die , for grief and in token of lamentation to 
 153 
 draw as it be , a leather thong overthwart their face , from one ear to the other . this nation be conquer , duke Cyrpodan march with his force southward against the armenian . And travail through certain desert place , they find monster in the shape of man , which have each of they but one arm and one hand grow out of the midst of their breast , and but one foot . two of they use to shoot in one bow , and they run so swift , that horse can not overtake they . they run also upon that one foot by hop and leap , and be weary of such walk , they go upon their hand and their foot , turn themselves round , as it be in a circle . And be weary of so do , they run again accord to their wont manner . Isidore cyclopede . call they cyclopede . and as it be tell we in court , by the clergy man of Russia , who remain with the foresay emperor , many ambassador be send from they unto the emperor court , to obtain peace . from thence they proceed forth into Armenia , which they Armenia 13 conquer in battle , and part also of Georgia . and the Georgia other part be under their jurisdiction , pay as yet every 
 conquer . year unto they for tribute , 20000 piece of coin call 
 yperpera . from thence they march into the dominion of the puissant and mighty sultan call Deurum , who also they vanquish in fight . and to be short , they go on far sack and conquer , even unto they the sultan of sultan of Aleppo his dominion , and now they have subdue that land also , determine to invade other country ’ beyond it : neither return they afterward into their own land unto this day . likewise the same army the caliph of march forward against the caliph of Baldach his Baldach . country , which they subdue also , and exact at his hand the daily tribute of 400. byzantine , beside baldakine and other gift . also every year they send messenger unto the caliph move he to come unto they . who send back great gift together with his tribute beseech they to be favourable unto he . howbeit the tartarian emperor receive all his gift , 
 * 54 
 and yet still nevertheless send for he , to have he come . 
 how the Tartar behave themselves in war . Chap. 17. 
 / ^•Hingis I|be divide his Tartars by captain of the military ten , captain of a 100 and captain of a 1000 discipline of 
 and over ten millenary or captain of a 1000 , he tfie artars‘ place , as it be , one colonel , and yet notwithstanding over one whole army he authorise two or three duke , but yet so that all shall have especial regard unto one of the say duke . and when they join battle against any other nation , unless they do all with one consent give back , every man that fly be put to death . and if one or two , or more of ten proceed manful to the battle , but the residue of those ten draw back and follow not the company , they be in like manner slay . also , if one among ten or more be take , their fellow , if they rescue they not , be punish with death . Moreover they be enjoin to have these weapon follow . two long bow or one their good one at the least , three quiver full of arrow , and one weapon . axe , and rope to draw engine withal . but the rich sort have single edge sword , with sharp point , and somewhat crooked . they have also arm horse with their shoulder and breast defence , they have helmet and brigandine . some of they have jack , and caparison for their horse make of leather artificial double or treble upon their body . the upper part of their helmet be of iron or steel , but that part which com-passeth about the neck and the throat be of leather . howbeit some of they have all their foresay furniture of iron frame in manner follow . they beat out many thin plate a finger broad , and a handful long , and make in every one of they eight little hole , they put thereunto three strong and strait leather thong . so they join the plate one to another , as it be , ascend by degree . than they tie the plate 
 155 
 their experience and cunning in warn . 
 their manner of pass over river . 
 unto the say thong , with other small and slender thong , draw through the hole aforesaid , and in the upper part , on each side thereof , they fasten one small double thong unto another , that the plate may firm be knit together . Theise they make , as well for their horse caparison , as for the armour of their man : and they skowre they so bright that a man may behold his face in they . some of they upon the neck of their lance have a hook , wherewithal ! they attempt to pull man out of their saddle . the head of their arrow be exceed sharp cut both way like a two edge sword , and they always carry a file in their quiver to whet their arrowhead . they have target make of wicker , or of small rod . howbeit they do not ( as we suppose ) accustom to carry they , but only about the tent , or in the emperor or duke guard , and that only in the night season . they be most politic in war , have be exercise therein with other nation for the space of these 42. year . when they come at any river , the chief man of the company have a round and light piece of leather , about the border whereof make many loop , they put a rope into they to draw it together like a purse , and so bring it into the round form of a ball , which leather they fill with their garment and other necessary , truss it up most strong . but upon the midst of the upper part thereof , they lie their saddle and other hard thing , there also do the man themselves sit . this their boat they tie unto a horse tail , cause a man to swim before , and to guide over the horse , or sometime they have two oar to row themselves over . the first horse therefore be drive into the water , all the other horse of the company follow he , and so they pass through the river . but the poor sort of common soldier have every man his leather bag or satchel well sow together , wherein he pack up all his trinket , and strong truss it up hang it at his horse tail , and so pass over , in manner aforesaid . 
 t56 
 how they may be resist . Chap. 18. 
 ideeme not any one kingdom or province able to resist they : because they use to take up soldier out of every country of their dominion . and if so be the neighbour province which they invade , will not aid they , utter waste it , with the inhabitant thereof , who they take from thence with they , they proceed on to fight against another country . And place their captive in the forefront of the battle , if they fight not courageous , they put they to the sword . wherefore , if Christians will withstand they , it be expedient , that the province and governor of country shall agree in one , and so by common counsel , shall give they resistance . their soldier also must be furnish with strong hand-bowe and crossbow , which they great dread , and with sufficient arrow , with mace also of good iron , or a axe with a long handle or staff . when they make their arrow head , they must ( accord to you Tartar custom ) dip they redhot into water mingle with salt , that they may be strong to pierce the enemy armour . they that will may have sword also and lance with hook at the end , to pull they from their saddle , out of which they be easy remove . they must have helmet likewise and other armour to defend themselves and their horse from 
 counsel how to wage war against the Tartar . 
 a notable temper of iron or steel . 
 the Tartar weapon and arrow , and they that be unarm , must ( accord to you Tartar custom ) march behind their fellow , and discharge at the enemy with long bow and crossbow . and ( as it be above say of the Tartar ) they must orderly dispose their band and troop , and ordain law for their soldier . whosoever run to the prey or spoil , before the victory be achieve , must undergo a most severe punishment . for such a fellow be put to death among the Tartar without all pity or mercy . the place of battle must be choose , if it be possible , in a plain field , where they may see round about , neither must 
 * 57 
 all be in one company , but in many and several band , not very far distant one from another . they which give the first encounter must send one band before , and must have another in a readiness to relieve and second the former in time convenient . they must have spy also on every side to give they notice when the rest of the enemy band approach . for therefore ought they always to send forth band against band and troop against troop , because the tartar ever practise to get his enemy in the midst and so to environ he . let our band take this caveat also , if the enemy retire , not to make any long pursuit after he , lest peradventure ( accord to his custom ) he may draw they into some secret ambush : for the tartar fight more by policy then by main force . and again , lest our horse be tire : for we be not so well store with horse as they . those horse which the Tartar use one day , they ride not upon three or four day after . Moreover , if the Tartar draw homeward , our man must not therefore depart and casseir there band , or separate themselves asunder : because they do this upon policy , namely to have our army divide , that they may more secure invade and waste the country . and in very deed , our captain ought both day and night to keep their army in a readiness : and not to lie out of their armour , but at all assay , to be provide for battle . for the Tartar like devil be always watch and devise how to practise mischief . Furthermore , if in battle any of the Tartar be cast off their horse back , they must present be lay hold on and take , for be on foot they shoot strong , wound and kill both horse and man . 
 * Johannes de of the journey of friar * John unto the first 
 plano Carpini guard of the Tartar < chap 
 we therefore by the commandment of the sea apostolic set forth towards the nation of the east , choose first to travel unto the Tartar , because 158 
 we fear that there may be great danger imminent the journey of upon the church of God next unto they , by their frfr invasion . proceed on therefore , we come to the Legate° ™ king of Bohemia , who be of our familiar acquaintance , advise we to take our journey through Polonia and Russia . for we have kinsfolk in Polonia , by who assistance , we may enter into Russia . have give we his letter , he cause our charge also to be defray , in all his chief house and city , till we 
 come unto his nephew Boleslaus duke of Slesia , who Boleslaus duke also be familiar and well know unto we . the like favour he show we also , till we come unto Conradus duke of * Lautiscia , unto who then ( by God especial * Mazovla . favour towards we ) lord Wasilico duke of Russia be come , from who mouth we hear more at large concern the deed of the Tartar : for he have send ambassador thither , who be return back unto he . 
 wherefore , it be give we to understand , that we must bestow gift upon they , we cause certain skin of beaver and other beast to be buy with part of that money , which be give upon alm to succour we by the way . which thing duke Conradus and the * duchess grlmslaua . of Cracow , and a bishop , and certain soldier be advertise of , give we likewise moor of the same skin . and to be short , duke Wasilico be earnest request by the duke of Cracow , and by the bishop and baron , on our behalf , conduct we with he , unto his own land , and there for certain day , entertain we at his own charge , to the end that we may refresh our self a while . and when , be request by we , he have cause his bishop to resort unto he , we read before they the pope letter , admonish they to return unto the unity of the church . 
 to the same purpose also , we our self admonish they , and to our ability , induce as well the duke as the bishop and other thereunto . howbeit because duke Daniel the Daniel brother of Wasilico aforesaid ( have as then take his brother unto journey unto Baty ) be absent , they can not at that time , ast tc° ' make a final answer . after these thing duke wasilico 
 159 
 send we forward with one of his servant as far as Kiow the chief city of Russia . howbeit we go always in the danger of our life by reason of the lituanians , who do lithuanians . often invade you border of Russia , even in those very place by which we be to pass . but in regard of the foresay servant , we be out of the russian danger , the great part of who be either slay , or carry into captivity by the Tartar . Moreover , at Danilon we be feeble even unto the death . ( notwithstanding we cause our self to be carry in a waggon through the snow and extreme cold . ) And be come unto Kiow , we consult with the millenary , 8c other noble man there concern our journey . they tell we , that if we carry those horse , which we then have , unto the Tartar , great store of snow lie upon the ground , they will all dye : be because they know not how to dig up the grass under the fodder of the snow , as the tartarian horse do , neither can there the tartarian bee ought found for they to eat , the Tartar have neither horse . hay nor straw , nor any other fodder . we determine therefore to leave they behind at Kiow with two servant appoint to keep they . and we be constrain to bestow gift upon the millenary , that we may obtain his favour to allow we post horse and a guide . wherefore beginning our journey the second day after the feast of the purification , we arrive at the town of Canow , which be immediate under the dominion of the Tartar . the governor whereof allow we horse and a guide unto Mich^as the another town , wherein we find one Michaeas to be ma iduus . governor , a man full of all malice and despite . who 
 notwithstanding , have receive gift at our hand , accord to his manner conduct we to the first guard of the Tartar . 
 how he and his company be at the first receive of the Tartar . Chap. 20. 
 wherefore , the first Saturday next after ash Wednesday , have about the sun go down , take up our place of rest , the arm Tartars come rush upon 160 
 we in uncivil and horrible manner , be very inquisitive of we what manner of person , or of what condition we be : and when we have answer they that we be the pope legate , receive some victual at our hand , they immediately depart . Moreover in the morning rise and proceed on our journey , the chief of they which be in the guard meet with we , demand why , or for what intent and purpose we come thither ? and what business we have with they ? unto who we answer , we be the legate of our lord the pope , who be the father and lord of the Christians . he have send we as well unto your then content . emperor , as to your prince , and all other Tartar for °fthe this purpose , because it be his pleasure , that all Christians shall be in league with the Tartar , and shall have peace with they . it be his desire also that they shall become great or in favour with God in heaven , therefore he admo-nisheth they aswell by we , as by his own letter , to become Christians , and to embrace the faith of our lord Jesus Christ , because they can not otherwise be save . Moreover , he give they to understand , that he much mar-veileth at their monstrous slaughter and massacre of mankind , and especial of Christians , but most of all of Hungarians , mountaineir , 8c polonians , be all his subject , have not injury they in aught , nor attempt to do they injury . and because the lord God be grievous offend thereat , he advise they from henceforth to beware of such deal , and to repent they of that which they have do . he request also , that they will write a answer unto he , what they purpose to do hereafter , and what their intention be . all which thing be hear and understand , the Tartar say that they will appoint we post horse and a guide unto corrensa . And immedi - corrensa . ate demand gift at our hand , they obtain they . 
 then receive the same horse , from which they dismount , together with a guide we take our journey unto corrensa . but they ride a swift pace , send a * messenger before unto the say duke corrensa , to signify the message , which we have deliver unto they . this march . 
 1 161 l 
 the manner of salute the tartarian prince . 
 [ i . 65. i 
 duke bathy in his power . 
 duke be governor of all they , which lie in guard against the nation of the west , lest some enemy may on the sudden and at unaware break in upon they . and he be say to have 60000. man under he . 
 how they be receive at the court of corrensa . Chap. 21. 
 be come therefore unto his court , he cause our tent to be place far from he , and send his agent to demand of we with what we will incline unto he , that be to say , what gift we will offer , in do our obeisance unto he . unto who we answer , that our lord the pope have not send any gift at all , because he be not certain that we shall ever be able to come at they : for we pass through most dangerous place . notwithstanding , to our ability , we will honour he with some part of those thing , which have be , by the goodness of God , and the favour of the pope , bestow upon we for our sustenance . have receive our gift , they conduct we unto the orda or tent of the duke , and we be instruct to bow thrice with our left knee before the door of the tent , and in any case to beware , lest we set our foot upon the threshold of the say door . and that after we be enter , we shall rehearse before the duke and all his noble , the same word , which we have before say , kneel upon our knee . then present we the letter of our lord the pope : but our interpreter who we have hire and bring with we from Kiow be not sufficient able to interpret they , neither be there any other esteem to be meet for the same purpose . here certain post horse and three Tartar be appoint for we to conduct we from hence with all speed unto duke bathy . this bathy be the mighty prince among they except the emperor , and they be bind to obey he before all other prince . we begin our journey towards his court the first Tuesday in Lent , and ride as fast as our horse can trot ( for we have fresh horse almost thrice or four time a day ) we post from morning till night , yea very often in 
 162 
 the night season also , and yet can we not come at he before Maundie Thursday . all this journey we go through the land of Comania , which be all plain ground , and have four mighty river run through it : the first be call i neper , on the side whereof towards Russia , duke corrensa and Montii march up and down , which 
 Montii on the other side upon the plain be great than he . the second be call i don , upon the bank whereof t Tanais . march a certain prince have in marriage the sister of 
 Baty , his name be Tirbon . the three be call i Volga , which be a exceed great river , upon the bank whereof duke Bathy march . the four be call i laec , upon which two millenary do march , on each side of the river one . all these , in the winter time , descend down to the sea , and in summer ascend back by the bank of the say river up to the mountain . the sea last name be the two great sea , out of which the arm of saint George proceed , which run by Constantinople . Theise river do abound with plenty of fish , but especial Volga , and they exon - 
 \bha . 
 | | Pontus Euxinus . he be deceive , 
 erate themselves into the grecian sea , which be call mare neper y don 
 major . over neper we go many day upon the ice . run into mare along the shore also of the grecian sea we go very dan - 
 gerous upon the ice in sundry place , and that for many int0 day together . for about the shore the water be freeze three league into the sea . but before we come unto 
 caspian sea . 
 bathy , two of our Tartar ride afore , to give he intelligence of all the say which we have utter in the presence of corrensa . 
 how we be receive at the court of the great prince bathy . Chap. 22. 
 moreover , when we come unto bathy in the land of Comania , we be seat a good league distant from his tabernacle . and when we shall be conduct unto his court , it be tell we that we must pass between two fire . but we will by no mean be induce thereunto . howbeit , they say unto we : you may pass through without all danger : for we will have you to do it for 163 
 a ceremony of pass between two fier . 
 none other cause , but only that if you intend any mischief against our lord , or bring any poison with you , fire may take away all evil . unto who we answer , that to the end we may clear ourselves from all suspicion of any such matter , we be content to pass through . when therefore we be come unto the orda , be demand 
 eye gay . by his agent eldegay with what present or gift we will 
 do our obeisance ? we give the sameanswere which we do at the court of corrensa . the gift be give and receive , the cause of our journey also be hear , they bring we into the tabernacle of the prince , first bow our self at the door , and be admonish , as before , 
 bathy hear not to tread upon the threshold . And be enter , we the legate . speak unto he kneel upon our knee , and deliver he our letter , and request he to have interpreter to translate they . who accord on good Friday be send unto we , and we together with they , diligent translate our say letter into the russian , tartarian , and sarazen language . this interpretation be present unto bathy , which he read , and attentive note . at length we be conduct home again unto our own lodging , howbeit no victual be give unto we , except it be once a little millet in a dich , the first night of our 
 he behave come . this bathy carry himself very stately and himself hke magnificent , have porter and all officer after the a , n ' manner of the emperor , and sit in a lofty seat or throne together with one of his wife . the rest , namely , as well his brethren and son , as other great personage sit underneath he in the midst upon a bench , and other sit down upon the ground , behind he , but the man on the right hand and the woman on the left . he have very fair and large tent of linen cloth also , which be once the king of Hungaria . neither dare any man come into his tent ( beside they of his own family ) unless he be call , be he never so mighty and great , except perhaps it be know that it be his pleasure . we also , for the same cause , sit on the left hand ; for so do all ambassador in go : but in return from the emperor , we be 
 164 
 always place on the right hand . in the midst stand his table , near unto the door of the tent , upon the which there be drink fill in golden and silver vessel . neither do bathy at any time drink , nor any other of the tartarian prince , especial be in a public place , but they have sing and minstrilsie before they . and always , when he ride , there be a canopy or small tent carry over his head upon the point of a javelin . and so do all the great prince of the Tartar , and their wife also . the say bathy be courteous enough unto his own man , and yet be he have in great awe by they : he be most cruel in fight : he be exceed prudent and politic in war , because he have now continue a long time in martial affair . 
 ‘ their custom of drink at the sound of music . 
 how depart from bathy , they pass through the land of Comania , and of the kangitta . 
 Chap. 23. 
 moreover , upon easter even we be call unto the tent , and there come forth to meet we the foresay agent of bathy , say on his master behalf , that we shall go into their land , unto the emperor Cuyne , detain certain of our company with this pretence , that they will send they back unto the pope , to who we give letter of all our affair to deliver unto he . but be come as far as duke Montii aforesaid , there they be keep until our return . upon Easter day , have say our prayer , and take a slender breakfast , in the company of two Tartar , which be assign unto we by corensa we depart with many tear , not know whether we go to death or to life . and we be so 
 they travel post from easter day to the 22. of July eastward of Volga . 
 feeble in body , that we be scarce able to ride . for all that lend through , our meat be Millet only with a little water and salt . and so likewise upon other fast day . neither have we aught to drink , but snow melt in a skillet . And pass through Comania we ride most earnest , have change of horse five time or often in a day , except when we go through desert , for i65 
 the land of the Kangitta . 
 Jeroslaus duke of Russia . 
 than we be allow better and strong horse , which can undergo the whole labour . and thus far have we travail from the begin of Lent until eight day after easter . the land of Comania on the north side immediate after Russia , have the people call Morduyni Byleri , that be , Bulgaria magna , the Bastarci , that be , Hungaria magna , next unto the Bastarci , the Parositae and the Samogetae . next unto the Samogetae be those people which be say to have dog face , inhabit upon the desert shore of the ocean . on the south side it have the Alani , the circassi , the Gazari , Greece and Constantinople ; also the land of Iberia , the cathe , the brutache who be say to be Jew shave their head all over , the land also of Scythia , of Georgia , of Armenia , of turquoise . on the west side it have Hungaria , and Russia . also Comania be a most large and long country . the inhabitant whereof call Comani the Tartar slay , some notwithstanding flee from they , and the rest be subdue under their bondage . but most of they that flee be return again . afterwards we enter the land of the kangittae , which in many place have great scarcety of water , wherein there be but few inhabitant by reason of the foresay defect of water . for this cause diverse of the servant of Jeroslaus duke of Russia , as they be travel towards he into the land of Tartary , die for thirst , in that desert . as before in Comania , so likewise in this country , we find many skull and bone of dead man lie upon the earth like a dunghill . through this country we be travel from the eight day after easter until ascension day . the inhabitant thereof be pagan , and neither they nor the comanians use to till the ground , but live only upon cattle , neither build they any house but dwell in tent . Theise man also have the Tartar root out , and do possess and inhabit their country , howbeit , those that remain be reduce into their bondage . 
 166 
 how they come unto the first court of the new emperor . Chap. 24. 
 moreover , out of the land of the kangitta , we enter thelandofthe into the country of you bisermini , who speak the bisermini . 
 language of Comania , but observe the law of the Saracen . in this country we find innumerable city with castle ruin , and many town leave desolate . the lord of this country be call sultan alti , who with all his progeny , alti Soldanus . be destroy by the Tartar . this country have most huge mountain . on the south side it have Jerusalem huge moun-and Baldach , and all the whole country of the Saracen . tamesIn the next territory adjoin doe inhabit two carnail brother duke of the Tartar , namely , Burin and Cadan , Burin and the son of Thyaday , who be the son of Chingis cadan-can . on the north side thereof it have the land of the 
 black kythayans , and the ocean . in the same country Syban the brother of bathy remain . through this country we be travel from the feast of ascension , until eight day before the feast of saint John Baptist . and then we enter into the land of the black kythayans , in which the emperor build a house , where we be call in to drink . also the emperor deputy in that place cause the chief man of the city and his two son to 
 the north ocean . 
 syban brother unto bathy . 
 the black kythayans . 
 dance before we . depart from hence , we find a certain small sea , upon the shore whereof stand a little a small sea . mountain . in which mountain be report to be a hole , from whence , in winter time such vehement tempest of wind do issue , that traveller can scarce , and with great danger pass by the same way . in summer time , the noise in deed of the wind be hear there , but it pro-ceedeth gentle out of the hole . along the shore of the foresay sea we travail for the space of many day , which many day . although it be not very great , yet have it many island , and we pass by leave it on our left hand . in this 
 land dwell ordu , who we say to be ancient orducap . 13. unto all the tartarian duke . and it be the orda or 
 court of his father which he inhabit , and one of his 167 
 the first court of the emperor . 
 the land of it Naymani . 
 the 22. of July . 
 wife bear rule there . for it be a custom among the Tartar , that the court of prince or of noble man be not dissolve , but always some woman be appoint to keep and govern they , upon who certain gift be bestow , in like sort as they be give unto their lord . and so at length we arrive at the first court of the emperor , wherein one of his wife dwell . 
 how they come unto Cuyne himself , who be forthwith to be choose emperor . Chap. 25 - 
 but because we have not as yet see the emperor , they will not invite we nor admit we into his orda , but cause good attendance and entertainment , after the Tartar fashion , to be give unto we in our own tent , and they cause we to stay there , and to refresh our self with they one day . depart thence upon the even of saint Peter and saint Paul , we enter into the land of the Naymani , who be pagan . but upon the very feast day of the say apostle , there fall a mighty snow in that place , and we have extreme cold weather . this land be full of mountain , and cold beyond measure , and there be little plain ground to be see . Theise two nation last mention use not to till their ground , but , like unto the Tartar , dwell in tent , which the say Tartars have destroy . through this country we be travail many day . then enter we into the land of the mongal , who we call Tartars . through the Tartar land we continue our travail ( as we suppose ) for the space of some three week , ride always hasty and with speed , and upon the day of Marie Magdalene we arrive at the court of Cuyne the emperor elect . but therefore do we make great haste all this way , because our tartarian guide be straight command to bring we unto the court Imperiali with all speed , which court have be these many year , ordain for the election of the emperor . wherefore rise early , we travail until night without eat of any thing , and oftentimes we 
 168 
 come so late unto our lodging , that we have no time to eat the same night , but that which we shall have eat over night , be give we in the morning . and often change our horse , we spare no horseflesh , but ride swift and without intermission , as fast as our horse can trot . 
 how Cuyne entertain the minorite friar . Chap. 26. 
 but when we be come unto the court of Cuyne , he cause ( after the Tartar manner ) a tent and all expense necessary to be provide for we . and his people entreat we with more regard and courtesy , than they do any other ambassador . howbeit we be not call before his presence , because he be not as yet elect , nor admit unto his empire . notwithstanding , the interpretation of the pope letter , and the message which we deliver , be send unto he by the foresay bathy . and have stay there five or six day , he send we unto his mother , under who there be maintained a very solemn and royal court . And be come thither , we see a huge tent of fine white cloth pitch , which be , to our judgement , of so great quanti tie , that more than two thousand man may stand within it , and round about it there be a wall of plank set up , paint with diverse image . we therefore with our Tartar assign to attend upon we , take our journey thither , and there be all the duke assemble , each one of they ride up and down with his train over the hill and dale . the first day they be all clad in white , but the second in scarlet robe . then come Cuyne unto the say tent . Moreover , the three day they be all in blue robe , and the four in most rich robe of Baldakin cloth . in the wall of board , about the tent aforesaid , be two great gate , by one of the which gate , the emperor only be to enter , and at that gate there be no guard of man appoint to stand , although it stand continual open , because none dare go in or come out the same way : all that be admit , enter by another gate , 169 
 the courtesy of Cuyne towards ambassador . 
 the tent royal . 
 a general assembly . 
 at which there stand watchman , with bow , sword , and arrow . and whosoever approach unto the tent beyond the bound and limit assign , be catch , be beat , but if he flee , he be shoot at with arrow or iron . there be many that to our judgement , have upon their bridle , trapper , saddle , and such like furniture , to the value of 20. mark in pure gold . the foresay duke ( as we think ) commune together within the tent , and consult about the election of their emperor . but all the residue of the people be place far away without the wall of board , and in this manner they stay almost till noon . the banquet of then begin they to drink mare milk , and so continue the noble . drink till even tide , and that in so great quantity , as it 
 be wonderful . and they call we in unto they , and give we of their ale , because we can not drink their mare milk . and this they do unto we in token of great honour . but they compel we to drink so much , that in regard of our customary diet , we can by no mean endure it . whereupon , give they to under - stand , that it be hurtful unto we , they cease to compel jenslausduke we any more . without the door stand duke Jeroslaus ofSusdal . of Susdal , in Russia , and a great many duke of the 
 kythayans , and of the Solangi . the two son also of the king of Georgia , the ligier of the caliph of Baldach , who be a sultan , and ( as we think ) above ten sultan ambassador of the Saracen beside . And , as it be tell we by the of sundry na - agent , there be more than 4000 ambassador , partly tims ' of such as pay tribute , and such as present gift , and other sultan , and duke , which come to yield themselves , and such as the Tartar have send for , and such as be governor of land . all these be place without the list , and have drink give unto they . but almost continual they all of they give we and duke Jeroslaus the upper hand , when we be abroad in their company . 
 170 
 how he be exalt to his empire . Chap. 27. 
 a nd to our remembrance , we remain there , about 
 the space of four week . the election be to our thebegynning think there celebrate , but it be not publish and °f cuyne his proclaim there . and it be great suspect so to be , because always when Cuyne come forth out of the tent , he have a noise of music , and be bow unto , or honour with fair wand , have purple wool upon the top of they , and that , so long as he remain abroad : which service be perform to none of the other duke . 
 the foresay tent or court be call by they Syra orda . sir a orda . depart thence , we all with one accord ride 3. or 4. league unto another place , where , in a goodly plain , by a river side , between certain mountain , there be another tent erect , which be call the golden orda . for ‘ the golden there be cuyne to be place in the throne imperial , Crda . upon the day of the assumption of our lady . but , for t5-the abundance of hail which fall at the same time , as be above say , the matter be defer . there be also a tent erect upon pillar , which be cover with plate of gold , and be join unto other timber with golden nail . it be cover above with Baldakin cloth , but do . there be other cloth spread over that , next unto the air . we abide there unto the feast of saint Bartholomew , what time there be assemble a huge multitude stand with their face towards the south . and a certain number of they be a stone cast distant from the residue , make continual prayer , and kneel upon their knee , proceed far and far towards the south . howbeit we , not know whether they use enchantment , or whether they bow their knee to God or to some other , will not kneel upon the ground with they . and have do so a long time , they return to the tent , and place cuyne in his throne imperiali , and his duke bow their knee before he . afterward the whole multitude kneel down in like manner , except our self , for we be none of his subject . 
 171 
 of his age and demeanour , and of his seal . Chap. 28. 
 this emperor , when he be exalt unto his government , seem to be about the age of forty or forty five year , he be of a mean stature , very wise and politic , and pass serious and grave in all his demeanour . a rare thing it be , for a man to see he laugh or behave himself light , as those Christians report , which abide continual with he . certain Christians of his family earnest and strong affirm unto we , that he himself be about to become a christian . a token and argument whereof be , that he retain diverse clergy man of the Christians . he have likewise at all time a chapel of Christians , near unto his great tent , where the clerk ( like unto other Christians , and accord to the custom of the grecian ) do sing public and open , and ring bell at certain hour , be there never so great a multitude of Tartar , or of other people in presence . and yet none of their duke do the like . it be the manner of the emperor never to talk his own self with a stranger , though he be never so great , but hear and answer by a speaker . and when any of his subject ( how great soever they be ) be in propound any matter of importance unto he , or in hear his answer , they continue kneel upon their knee unto the end of their conference . neither be it lawful for any man to speak of any affair , after they have be determine of by the emperor . the say emperor , have in his affair both public and private , a agent , and secretary of estate , with scribe and all other officials , except advocate . for , without the noise of plead , or sentence give , all thing be do according to the emperor will and pleasure . other tartarian prince do the like in those thing which belong unto they . but , be it know unto all man , that while we remain at the say emperor court , which have be ordain and keep for these many year , the 172 
 say Cuyne be emperor new elect , together with all his prince , erect a flag of defiance against the church of God , and the roman empire , and against all christian war ™ in - . kingdom and nation of the west , unless peradventure ^iq^tians ( which God forbid ) they will condescend unto those j thing , which he have enjoin unto our lord the pope , l and to all potentate and people of the christian , namely , that they will become obedient unto he . for , except Christendom , there be no land under heaven , which they stand in fear of , and for that cause they prepare themselves to battle against we . this emperor father , namely occoday be poison to death , which be the cause why they have for a short space abstain from war . but their intent and purpose be ( as i have above say ) to subdue the whole world unto themselves , as they be command by Chingis can . hence it be that the emperor in his letter write after this manner : the power of God , and emperor of all man . also , upon his seal , there be this posy engrave : God in heaven , and cuyne can upon earth , the power of God : the seal of the emperor of all man . 
 of the admission of the friar and ambassador 
 unto the emperor . Chap. 29. 
 in the same place where the emperor be establish cuynehear into his throne , we be summon before he . and the legate . 
 Chingay his chief secretary have write down our name , and the name of they that send we , with the name of the duke of Solangi , and of other , cry out with a loud voice , rehearse the say name before the emperor , and the assembly of his duke . which be do , each one of we bow his left knee four time , and they give we warning not to touch the threshold . and after they have search we most diligent for knife , and can not find any about we , we enter in at the door upon the east side : because no man dare presume to enter at the west door , but the emperor only . in like manner , every tartarian duke enter on the west side into his tent . howbeit the inferior sort do not 
 173 
 great regard such ceremony . This therefore be the first time , when we enter into the emperor tent in his presence , after he be create emperor . likewise all other ambassador be there receive by he , but very few be admit into his tent . and there be pregift presen - scent unto he such abundance of gift by the say t unto he . ambassador , that they seem to be infinite , namely in 
 samite , robe of purple , and of Baldakin cloth , silk girdle wrought with gold , and costly skin , with other gift also . likewise there be a certain sun canopy , or small tent ( which be to be carry over the emperor head ) present unto he , be set full of precious stone . and a governor of one province bring unto he a company of camel cover with Baldakins . they have saddle also upon their back , with certain other instrument , within the which be place for man to sit upon . also they bring many horse and mule unto he furnish w‘ trapper and caparison , some be make of leather , and some of iron . and we be demand whether we will bestow any gift upon he or no ? but we be not of ability so to do , have in a manner spend all our provision . there be also upon a hill stand a good distance from the tent , 500 cartsful more than 500 cart , which be all full of silver and of of treasure . gold , and silk garment . and they be all divide be - 
 between the emperor and his duke , and every duke bestow upon his own follower what please he . 
 of the place where the emperor and his mother take their leaf one of another , and of Jeroslaus duke of Russia . Chap. 30. 
 a tent of t'xepart thence , we come unto another place , where purple . a wonderful brave tent , all of red purple , give by 
 the kythayans , be pitch . we be admit into that also , and always when we enter , there be give unto we ale and wine to drink , and sodden flesh ( when we will ) to eat . there be also a lofty stage build of board , where the emperor throne be place , be 174 
 very curious wrought out of ivory , wherein also there thnne of be gold and precious stone , and ( as we remember ) lvme-there be certain degree or stair to ascend unto it . 
 and it be round upon the top . there be bench place about the say throne , whereon the lady sit toward the left hand of the emperor upon stool , ( but none sit aloft on the right hand ) and the duke sit upon bench below , the say throne be in the midst . certain other sit behind the duke , and every day there resort great company of lady thither . the three tent whereof we speak before , be very large , but the emperor his wife have other great and fair tent make of white felt . this be the place where the emperor part company with his mother : for she go into one part of the land , and the emperor into another to execute justice . for there be take a certain concubine of this emperor , which have poison his father to death , at the same time when the Tartar army be in Hungary , which , for the same cause return home . Moreover , upon the foresay concubine , and deatjl of many other of her confederate sentence of judgement be Gccoda^ re~ pronounce , and they be put to death . at the same 6 ' time Jeroslaus the great duke of Soldal , which be a part or of Russia , decease . for be ( as it be for honour sake ) invite to eat and drink with the emperor mother , and immediate after the banquet , return unto his lodging , he fall sick , and within seven day , die . and after his death , his body be of a strange blue colour , and it be common report , that the say duke be poison , to the end that the Tartar may free and total possess his dukedom . 
 how the friar come at length unto the emperor , give , and receive letter . 
 Chap. 31. 
 to be short , the Tartar bring we unto their emperor , who when he have hear of they , that we be come unto he , command that we shall 175 
 cuyne dissem-bleth with the legate . 
 return , unto his mother . for he be determine the next day , ( as it be abovesaid ) to set up a flag of defiance against all you country of the west , which he will have we in no case to know . wherefore return , we stay some few day with his mother , and so return back again unto he . with who we continue for the space of one whole month in such extreme hunger and thirst , that we can scarce hold life and soul together . for the provision allow we for four day , be scant sufficient for one day . neither can we buy we any sustenance , because the market be too far off . howbeit the lord provide for we a russian goldsmith , name Cosmas , who be great in the emperor favour , procure we some sustenance . this man show unto we the throne of the emperor , which he have make , before it be set in the proper place , and his seal , which he also have frame . afterwards the emperor send for we , give we to understand by Chingay his chief secretary , that we shall write down our message and affair , and shall deliver they unto he . which thing we perform accord . after many day he call for we again , demand whither there be any with our lord the pope , which understand the russian , the sarracen , or the tartarian language ? to who we answer , that we have none of those letter or language . howbeit , that there be certain Saracen in the land , but inhabit a great distance from our lord the pope . and we say , that we think it most expedient , that when they have write their mind in the tartarian language , and have interpret the meaning thereof unto we , we shall diligent translate it into our own tongue , and so deliver both the letter and the translation thereof unto our lord the pope . then depart they from we , and go unto the emperor . and after the day of saint Martine , we be call for again . then Kadac principal agent for the whole empire , and Chingay , and Bala , with diverse other scribe , come unto we , and interpret the letter word for word . and have write 
 176 
 it in latin , they cause we to interpret unto they each sentence , to wit if we have err in any word . and when both letter be write , they make we to read they over twice more , lest we shall have mistake aught . for they say unto we : take heed that you understand all thing thorough , for if you shall not understand the whole matter aright , it may breed some inconvenience . they write the say letter also in the sarazen tongue , that there may be some find in our dominion which can read and interpret they , if need shall require . 
 how they be license to depart . Chap. 32. 
 a nd ( as our Tartar tell we ) the emperor be purpose to send his ambassador with we . howbeit , he be desirous ( as we think ) that we our self shall crave that favour at his hand . and when one of our Tartar be a ancient man , exhort we to make the say petition , we think it not good for we , that the emperor shall send his ambassador . wherefore we give he answer , that it be not for we to make any such petition , but if it please the emperor of his own accord to send they , we will diligent ( by God assistance ) see they conduct in safety . howbeit , we think it expedient for we , that they shall not go , and that for diverse cause . first , because we fear , lest they , see the dissension and war which be among we , shall be the more encourage to make war against we . second , we fear , that they will be instead of spy and intelligencer in our dominion . third , we misdoubt that they will be slay by the way . for our nation be arrogant and proud . for when as those servant ( which at the request of the Cardinali , attend upon we , namely the legate of almain ) return unto he in the Tartar attire , they be almost stone in the way , by the dutch , and be compel to put off those garment . and it be the Tartar custom , never to be reconcile unto such as have slay their ambassador , till they have revenge themselves . four , lest they shall be take from we 
 i 177 m 
 the legate be loath to have any ambassador send from the Tartar to the Christians . 
 they be reward with 
 the sore journey of the legate in return . 
 bathy . 
 by main force . five , because there can come no good by their ambassade , for they be to have none other commission , or authority , but only to deliver their emperor letter unto the pope , and to the prince of Christendom , which very same letter we our self have , and we know right well , that much harm may ensue thereof . wherefore , the three day after this , namely , upon the feast of saint Brice , they give we our passport and a letter seal with the emperor own seal , send we unto the emperor mother , who give unto each of we a gown make of foxe-skinne , with the fur on the outside , and a piece of purple . and our Tartar steal a yard out of every one of they . and out of that which be give unto our servant , they steal the better half . which false deal of they , we know well enough , but will make no word thereof . 
 how they return homeward . Chap. 33. 
 than take our journey to return , we travail all 
 winter long , lie in the desert oftentimes upon the snow , except with our foot we make a piece of ground bear to lie upon . for there be no tree , but the plain champion field . and oftentimes in the morning , we find our self all cover with snow drive over we by the wind . and so travail till the feast of our lord ascension , we arrive at the court of bathy . of who when we have inquire , what answer he will send unto our lord the pope , he say that he have nothing to give we in charge , but only that we shall diligent deliver that which the emperor have write . And , have receive letter for our safe conduct , the thirteenth day after Pentecost , be Saturday , we be proceed as far as Montii , with who our foresay associate and servant remain , which be withhold from we , and we cause they to be deliver unto we . from hence we travail unto corrensa , to who , require gift the second time at our hand , we give none , because we have not wherewithal ! . and he appoint we two 
 178 
 comanians , which live among the common people of the Tartar , to be our guide unto the city of Kiow in Russia . howbeit one of our Tartar part not from we , till we be past the utmost guard of the Tartar . but the other guide , namely the comanians , which be give we by corrensa , bring we from the last guard unto the city of Kiow , in the space of six day . and there we arrive fifteen day before the feast of saint John Baptist . Moreover , the citizen of Kiow have intelligence of our approach , come forth all of they to meet we , with great joy . for they rejoice over we , as over man that have be rise from death to life . so like wise they do unto we throughout all Russia , Polonia , and Bohemia . Daniel and his brother Wasilico make we a royal feast , and entertain we with they against our will for the space of eight day . in the mean time , they with their bishop , and other man of account , be in consultation together about those matter which we have propound unto they in our journey towards the Tartar , answer we with common consent , say : that they will hold the pope for their speciali lord and father , and the church of Rome for their lady and mistress , confirm likewise all thing which they have send concern this matter , before our come , by their Abbate . and for the same purpose , they send their ambassador and letter by we also , unto our lord the pope . 
 