a brief relation of William esturmy , and John Kington concern their ambassage into Prussia , and the hans-towne . 
 inprimis , that in the month of July , and in the 1403. year of our lord 1403 , and the five year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king that now be , there come into England the ambassador of the mighty lord fr : Conradus de Jungingen , be then master general of Prussia , with his letter direct unto our foresaid sovereign lord the king , require amends and recompense for certain injury unjust offer by english man unto the subject of the say master generail , write in 20. article , which amount unto the sum of 19120. noble and a half etc 
 item , that the three day of the month of October , in the year of our lord abovewritten , and in the five year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king , between the reverend father in God , Henry then bishop of Lincoln lord chancellor , and William lord de Roos high treasurer of England , on the one party and the say ambassador on the other party , it be ( accord to their petition ) among other thing ordain : namely that the liege people of our sovereign lord the king shall free be permit , until the feast of easter then next after ensue to 
 remain in the land of Prussia , and from thence with their good and merchandise to return unto their own home : and also , that the subject of the say master general in the kingdom or England shall have licence and liberty to do the like . provide always , that after the time above limit , neither the english merchant in the land of Prussia , nor the prussian merchant in the realm of England shall use any traffic of merchandise at all , unless in the mean space it be otherwise agree and conclude by the say king and the say master general . 
 item , immediate after our say sovereign lord the king send his letter by John brown merchant of Lin unto the foresay master generail , for to have mutual conversation and intercourse of deal to continue some certain space , between the merchant of England and of Prussia : promise in the same letter , that he will in the mean season send unto the foresay master his ambassador to entreat about the pretend injury aforesaid : which letter the foresay master , for diverse cause , refuse to yield unto , as in his letter send unto our lord the king , bear date the 16. day of the month of July , in the year of our lord 1404. moor plain appear . 
 item , that after the receit of the letter of the master aforesaid , which be next above mention , our say king , accord to his promise , send William esturmy knight , m. John Kington clerk , and William Brampton citizen of London , from his court of parliament hold at Coventrie , very slight inform , as his ambassador into Prussia . 
 item , before the arrival of the say ambassador in Prussia , all intercourse of traffic between the english and the Prussians , in the realm of England , and in the land of Prussia be altogether restrain and prohibit : and in the same land it be ordain and put in practice , that in whatsoever port of the land of Prussia any english merchant have arrive with his good , he 28 
 1406. be not permit to convey the say good , out of that port , unto any other place of the land of Prussia , either by water , or by land , under the pain of the forfeit of the same : but be enjoin to sell they in the very same port , unto the Prussians only and to none other , to the great prejudice of our english merchant . 
 item , that after the arrival of the say english ambassador in the land of Prussia , it be ordain , that from the eight day of the month of October , in the year of our lord 1405 , all english merchant what - 1405. soever shall have free liberty to arrive with all kind of their merchandise in whatsoever port of the land of Prussia , and to make sale of they in the say land , as have heretofore from ancient time be accustom . 
 also sundry other commodious privilege unto the realm of England be then ordain and establish : as in the indenture make for this purpose it do moor manifest appear . 
 item , the say english ambassador be arrive in the land of Prussia , demand of the say master general , a reformation and amends , for the damage and injury offer by the Prussians unto the liege people of our sovereign lord and king , write in fifteen article , which loss amount unto the sum of 4535. noble . 
 item , the say master general , beside the article exhibit unto our sovereign lord the king ( as it be above mention ) deliver unto the say ambassador diverse other article of certain injury offer ( as he say ) unjust by english man , unto his subject , which amount unto the sum of 5100. noble . 
 item , it be afterward conclude , that upon the first 1406. of may next than ensue , namely in the year of our lord 1406. or within the space of one year immediate follow there shall be make a convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction , for all molestation unjust offer on both part , as well on the behalf of our sovereign 
 lord the king , as of the foresay master general . which satisfaction not be perform , the Prussians with their good and merchandise , within three month after the end of the say year next follow , be without molestation or impediment , enjoin to depart out of the realm of England with their ship and good , and the english man likewise , out of the territory and dominion of the say master general , and both of they , without any further admonition , to abstain and separate themselves , from both the country aforesaid . for the performance of which premise , the ambassador on both part be sufficient instruct , be appoint to meet the first day of May , at the town of dordract in holland . 
 item , that the say William esturmy and John Kington in their return homeward from Prussia towards England pass through the chief city of the Hans , and treat in such sort with the burgomaster of they , that there be send messenger and agent , in the behalf of the common society of the Hans merchant , unto the town of dordract , to confer with the ambassador of England , about the redress of injury attempt on both part : where diverse agreement be set down between the say ambassador , and messenger , as in the indenture make for the same purpose it do moor manifest appear . 
 item , that the meeting appoint at the town of dordract , upon the first of May , be by the letter of the foresay ambassador , prorogue unto the first of August then next ensue , and afterward by virtue of the king letter unto the first day of march next follow : and there be another day of prorogation also . 
 item , that after the prorogation aforesaid , the ambassador of England , and the messenger and commissioner of Prussia meet together at the town of Hage in holland , the 28. day of August , in the year of our lord 1407. and there be a treaty between they concern the sum 25934. noble and a half , 
 demand on the behalf of the say master general for amends and recompense in consideration of wrong offer unto himself and unto his subject of Prussia , as be aforesaid . also the say master and his Prussians , beside the sum not yet declare in the article , which be very small , be to rest content and satisfy with the sum of 8957. noble , in lieu of all the damage aforesaid : no time of payment be then assign or limit , but afterward to be reasonable limit and assign , by our say sovereign lord the king . insomuch , that our say sovereign lord the king be to write his full intention 8c determination concern this matter , in his letter to be deliver the 16. day of march , unto the aiderman of the merchant of the Hans reside at Bruges . otherwise , that from thenceforth all league of friendship shall be dissolve between the realm of England and the land of Prussia . 
 also it be far to be note , that in the appointment of the sum next before write to be disburse out of England , this condition be add in writing , namely , that if by lawful testimony it may sufficient and effectual be prove , concern the chief article abovewritten , or any part of they , that satisfaction be make unto any of those party , to who it be due : or that the good , of and for the which complaint be make on the behalf of Prussia , in the say article , do or do pertain unto other , or that any other just , true , or reasonable cause may lawful be prove 8c allege , why the foresay sum or any of they ought not to be pay : that then in the sum contain in the article abovemention , so much only must be cut off , or stop , as shall find , either to have be pay already , or to appertain unto other , or by any true , just , and reasonable cause allege , not to be due . neither be it to be doubt , but for the great part of the sum due unto the Prussians , that not our lord the king , but other ( which will in time be nominate ) be , by all equity and justice , to be compel to make satisfaction . 
 31 
 A.D. 
 ho ? . 
 also , at the day and place above mention it be appoint and agree upon , that our lord the king and his liege subject , for the say 4535. noble demand off the english in consideration of recompense to be make for injury offer unto the Prussians , be to discharge and pay the sum of 764. noble , which be not as yet disburse : but they have reserve a petition to they , unto who the say sum be due , or if they please , there shall|be make satisfaction : which will be very hard and extreme deal . 
 item , that in the last assembly of the say ambassador of England and messenger of Prussia , hold at Hage , make as be aforesaid , for the behalf of England , there be exhibit anew certain article of injury against the Prussians . the value of which loss amount unto the sum of 1825. noble and three shilling . 
 item , on the contrary part for the behalf of the Prussians the sum of 1355. noble , eight shilling and six penny . 
 item , forasmuch as diverse article propound , as well on the behalf of England , as of Prussia , and of the city of the Hans , both heretofore and also at the last convention hold at Hage , be so obscure , that in regard of their obscurity , there can not resolute answer be make unto they : and other of the say article exhibit , for want of sufficient proof , can not clear be determine upon : it be appoint and conclude , that all obscure article give up by any of the foresay party whatsoever , aught before the end of easter then next ensue , and within one whole year after , to be declare before the chancellor of England , for the time be : and other article evident exhibit , but not sufficient prove , to be prove , under pain of perpetuali exclusion . which be do accord , complete justice shall be administer on both part . 
 item , as concern the eleven article , for the behalf of the Prussians , first exhibit , which contain loss amount unto the sum of 2445. noble : as touch 32 
 the first article on the behalf of England exhibit in the land of Prussia , contain loss which amount to the sum of 900. noble : after many thing allege on both part , relation thereof shall be make in the audience of the king and of the master generail : so that they shall set down , ordain , and determine such a end and conclusion of those matter , as shall seem most expedient unto they . 
 