concern this surprise Albertus Krantzius in the sixth book of his history of Norway , and the 8. chapter write in manner follow . 
 in the mean while Norway enjoy peace under the government of a woman : until Albertus king of Suecia , who have now seven year continue in captivity under queen Margaret , be to be set at liberty . which , when the common soldier of rostok and Wismer , call the vitalians . the vitalians perceive , ( who , while their king be hold captive , in the right of the forename city , for the behalf of their lord the king be prince of Mekleburg by birth , undertake and wage war all the time of his captivity ) band their force together , they resolve , at their own cost and charge , but in the right of the say city , to sail into the 3. kingdom , and to take such spoil as they can lay hold on . Theise common soldier therefore , see a end of their tyrannical and violent deal to approach , sail into Norway , unto the town of Norbern , be a mart town for all the merchant of Germany : who transport fish from thence , do bring thither merchandise of all kind , especial corn , unto the scarcity whereof , unless it be bring out of other country , that kingdom ( as we have say ) be very much subject . depart out of their ship and go on shore , they set upon the town , and by fire and sword they easy compel the inhabitant dwell in weak wooden house , to give place . thus . these vitalians enter and surprise the town convey such spoil unto their ship as they please , and have lade their ship with those booty , they return home frolic unto the port of their own city . without all respect , they rob and rifle the good , aswell of the germane , as of the noruagians : and like lewd companion , waste and make havoc of all thing , prove themselves never the wealthy . for it be not the guise of such good fellow to store up or to preserve 68 
 aught . the citizen , at the first , seem to be enrich : howbeit afterward , ( no man misdoubt any such calamity ) good ill get be worse spend . thus far Krantzius . 
 item , pitiful complain , the foresay merchant lenne . avouch , verify , and affirm , that upon the 14. day after the feast of saint George , in the year of our lord next above write , as 4. ship of lenne , lade with cloth , wine , and other merchandise , be sail upon the main sea , with all the good and ware contain in they , for Prussia , sundry malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans , be in diverse ship , come upon they , and by force of arm and strong hand take the say ship , with the good and merchandise contain in they : and some of the people which be in the say four ship , they slay , some they spoil , and other they put unto extreme ransom . And carry away with they those four ship with the commodity and merchandise therein , they part stake therewith , as they list , to the great impoverishment and loss of the say merchant of lenne , namely in cloth of William Silesden , Tho. Waterden , Joh. Brandon , Joh. Wesenham , and other merchant of lenne , to the value of 3623. il 5. S. n.d. 
 item , pitiful complain the foresay merchant do lenne . affirm , that one Henry Lambolt and other his adherent , in the year of our lord 1396. take upon the main sea between Norway and Scaw , one crayer lade with osmund , and with diverse other merchandise , pertain unto John Brandon of lenne , to the sum and value of 443. il 4. S. 2.d . Moreover , they take from John Lakingay 4. last and a half of osmund , to the value of 22O . lib . io . s . 
 item , the foresay merchant complain , that certain lenne . malefactor of Wismer , with other their complice of the Hans , in the year of our lord 1396. take from Thomas ploket of lenne , out of a certain ship sail upon the main sea towards Sconeland ( whereof James 
 Snycop be master ) cloth and other merchandise , to the sum and value of 13 . lib . 13. S. 4.d .. 
 lenne . item , the abovenamed merchant complain say , that certain malefactor of Wismer , with other of the Hans society , in the year of our lord 1397* wicked and unjust take out of a certain ship of Dantzik ( whereof Laurence van Russe be master ) from Ralph Bedingam of lenne , one fardel of cloth worth 52. il 7. S. 6.d . also , for the ransom of his servant , 8.1l 6 . s . 8.d . item , they take from Thomas earl diverse good , to the value of 24. pound . 
 lenne . item , the foresay merchant complain , that certain malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans , in the year of our lord 1399. wicked and unjust take one crayer pertain unto John laking-lich of lenne , lade with diverse good and merchandise pertain unto sundry merchant of lenne , namely from the forename John one fardel of cloth , and one chest full of harness , and other thing , to the value of 90 . lib . item , they take out of the foresay ship from Roger hood , one fardel of cloth , and one chest with diverse good , to the value of 58 . lib . item , from John Pikeron , one farthel of cloth , and one chest with diverse good , to the value of 44O . lib . item , from Andrew Purser one farthel of cloth , and one chest with diverse commodity therein , to the value of ten pound . 
 lenne . item , the abovenamed merchant complain say , that certain malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , and other of the Hans , namely , Godekin Mighel , Henry van hall de Stertebeker , with other of their confederate , in the year of our lord 1399. wicked and unjust take from John prior of lenne , out of the ship of Michael van Burgh , namely 160. nest of maser , worth loo . lib . 13. S. 4.d . item , 30. fur rigge of Kaleber worth 13. S. 4.d . a piece , the sum total amount to 20.ll item , 20. fur wombys of kalebre worth etc item , one girdle of silver , and one dagger adorn with silver worth 30. S. item , two coat , and one long jacket , and 70 
 other good , to the value of 30. S. item , he pay for his ransom 4 . 1ib . 13. S. 4-d . 
 unto all and singular the article abovewritten , the ambassador of England aforesaid do further add , that the doer and author of the damage , injury , and robbery set down in the article above write , ( of se-whom some be name in particular , and other in general ) perform and commit all those outrage , ‘ 
 be hire thereunto at the expense and charge of the common society of the city aforesaid . and that the inhabitant of every household in the foresay city ( each man accord to his ability ) witting and purpose set forth one , two , or more man , for the very same expedition , wherein all and singular the foresay trespass be commit . 
 the foresay english ambassador do exhibit the article abovewritten unto the procurator of the city of Wismer and rostok aforesaid : leave and liberty be always reserve unto the say ambassador , to enlarge , or to diminish , or to expound all , or every , or any of the say article whatsoever , so often as it shall seem expedient unto they . 
 