a declaration of the Indies and land discover , and subdue unto the emperor , and the king of portingal : and also of other part of . the Indies and rich country to be discover , which the worshipful m. Robert Thorne merchant of London ( who dwell long in the city of Sivil in Spain ) exhort king Henry the eight to take in hand . 
 most excellent prince , 
 xperience prove that natural all prince be desirous to extend and enlarge their dominion and kingdom . wherefore it be not to be marvel , to see they every day procure the same , not regard any cost , peril , and labour , that may thereby chance , but rather it be 
 to be marvel , if there be any prince content to live quiet with his own dominion . for sure the people will think he lack the noble courage and spirit of all other . 
 the world know that the desire of prince have be so fervent to obtain their purpose , that they have adventure and prove thing to man conjecture impossible , the which they have make possible , and also thing difficult have make facile : and thus to obtain their purpose , have in manner turn up and down the whole world so many time , that the people inhabit in the far region of the occident have pursue with great distress , labour and peril , to penetrate and enter into the far region of the orient : and in likewise those people of the say part of the orient have have no less labour and desire to enter and penetrate into the far land of the occident , and so follow their purchase have not cease until they can pass no far by reason of the great sea . 
 159 
 this natural inclination be cause , that scarce it may be say , there be any kingdom stable , nor king quiet , but that his own imagination , or other prince his neighbour do trouble he . God and nature have provide to your grace , and to your gracious progenitor , this realm of England , and set it in so fruitful a place , and within such limit , that it shall seem to be a place quiet and apart from all the foresay desire . one speciali cause be , for that it be compass with the sea : by reason thereof it seem , this notwithstanding , their desire and noble courage have be most common like unto other : and with marvelous great labour , cost and peril , they have travel and pass the sea , make war , not only with king and dominion nigh neighbour , but also with they of far country , and so have win and conquer many rich and fair dominion , and amplify this your grace realm with great victory and glory . and also now of late your grace have like courage and desire , and not without just cause , to enlarge this your kingdom , and demand your limit and tribute of the french king , which at that present he restrain , your grace in person pass with a great power into France , put your grace person to great pain and labour , and without doubt victorious you have conquer the say realm of France , as you begin , if your adversary have not reconcile himself , and knowledge your grace right and title : and so promise true to pay tribute then due , and fulfil your request in all thing , and also desire your grace for peace , the which of your clemency you can not refuse . 
 now i consider this your noble courage and desire , and also perceive that your grace may at your pleasure , to your great glory , by a godly mean , with little cost , peril , or labour to your grace or any of your subject , amplify and enrich this your say realm , i know it be a secret , my bind duty to manifest this secret unto your grace , which hitherto , as i suppose , have be hide : 160 
 which be , that with a small number of ship there may be discover diverse new land and kingdom , in the which without doubt your grace shall win perpetuali glory , and your subject infinite profit . to which place there be leave one way to discover , which be into the discovery north : for that of the four part of the world , it seem three part be discover by other prince . 
 for out of Spain they have discover all the Indies and sea Occidentali , and out of Portugal all the Indies and sea Orientali : so that by this part of the orient and occident , they have compass the world . for the one of they depart towards the orient , and the other towards the occident , meet again in the course or way of the midst of the day , and so then be discover a great part of the same sea and coast by the Spaniard . 
 so that now rest to be discover the say north part , the which it seem to i , be only your charge and duty . because the situation of this your realm be thereunto near and apt of all other : and also for that you have two already take it in hand . and in my 11^ Sebastian opinion it will not seem well to leave so great and cfbotandsir profitable a enterprise , see it may so easy and with in e^ht so little cost , labour , and danger , be follow and ob - year of his tayn : though heretofore your grace have make thereof reign . a proof , and find not the commodity thereby as you dnd this be the trust , at this time it shall be no impediment . for there may be now provide remedy for thing , than Oveido , that lack , and the inconvenience and let remove , that come to saint Dothen be cause that your grace desire take no full min8 > - effect , which be , the course to be change , and follow the foresay new course . And concern the mariner , ship , and provision , a order may be devise and take meet and convenient , much better than hitherto . 
 by reason whereof , and by God grace , no doubt your purpose shall take effect . Surely the cost herein will be nothing , in comparison to the great profit . the labour be much less , yea nothing at all , where so great honour and glory be hope for : and consider well the course , in 161 l 
 true the danger and way be short to we , then to Spain or Portugal , as by evident reason appear . 
 note . and now to declare something of the commodity and 
 utility of this navigation and discovery : it be very clear and certain , that the sea that common man say , without great danger , difficulty and peril , yea rather it be impossible to pass , that those same sea be navigable and without any such danger , but that ship may pass and have in they perpetuali clearness of the day without any darkness of the night : which thing be a great commodity for the navigant , to see at all time round about they , as well the safeguard as danger , and how great difference it be between the commodity and peril of other which lose the most part of every four and twenty hour the say light , and go in darkness grope their way , i think there be none so ignorant but perceive this more plain , than it can be express . yea what a vantage shall your grace subject have also by this light to discover the strange land , country , and coast ? for if they that be discover , to sail by they in darkness be with great danger , much more than the coast not discover be dangerous to travel by night or in darkness . yet these danger or darkness have not let the Spaniard and por-tingals and other , to discover many unknown realm to their great peril . which consider ( and that your grace subject may have the same light ) it will seem your grace subject to be without activity or courage , in leave to do this glorious and noble enterprise . for they be past this little way which they name so dangerous , ( which may be two or three league before navigation they come to the pole , and as much more after they under thepok . pass the pole ) it be clear , that from thence forth the sea and land be as temperate as in these part , and that than it may be at the will and pleasure of the mariner , to choose whether they will sail by the coast , that be cold , temperate or hot . for they be past the pole , it be plain , they may decline to what part they listen . 
 162 
 if they will go towards the orient , they shall enjoy Tartary . 
 the region of all the tartarian that extend towards the midday , and from thence they may go and proceed to the land of the chinas , and from thence to China . the land of Cathaio Orientali , which be of all the main land most orientali that can be reckon from our habitation . and if from thence they do continue their navigation , follow the coast that return towards the occident , they shall fall in with Malaca , and so with all the Indies which we call orientali , and follow the way , may return hither by the cape of Buona Speransa : and thus they shall compass the whole world . and if they will take their course after they be past the pole , towards the occident , they shall go in the back side of the new find land , which newfound of late be discover by your grace subject , until land they come to the back side and south sea of the Indies Occidentali . and so continue their voyage they may return through the strait of Magellan to this country , and so they compass also the world by that way : and if they go this three way , and after they be past the pole , go right towards the pole antarctike , and then decline towards the land and island situate between the tropike , and under the equinoctial ! , without doubt they shall find there the rich land and island of the world of gold , precious stone , balm , spice , and other thing that we here esteem most : which come out of strange country , and may return the same way . 
 by this it appear , your grace have not only a great advantage of the riches , but also your subject shall not travel half of the way that other doe , which go round about as aforesaid . 
 