here begin the prologue of the process of the libel of english policy , exhort all England to keep the sea , and namely the narrow sea : show what profit come thereof , and also what worship and salvation to England , and to all Englishman . 
 the true process of english policy 
 of utterward to keep this regne in 
 of our England , that no man may deny , ner say of sooth but it be one of the best , be this , that who see south , north , east and west , cherish merchandise , keep the admiralty ; 
 that we be master of the narrow see . 
 for Sigismond the great emperor , which yet reign , when he be in this land with king Henry the five , prince of honour , here much glory , as he think , he find , a mighty land which have take in hand to be in Francej and make mortality , and ever well keep round about the see . 
 and to the king thus he say : my brother , ( when he perceive two town Caleis and Dover ) of all your town to choose of one and other , to keep the sea and soon to come over to be outward and your regne to recover : keep these two town sure , and your majesty as your tweyne eye : so keep the narrow see . 
 for if this sea be keep in time of be , who can here pass without danger and woe ? who may escape , who may mischief differre ? what marchandie may forby be ago ? 
 for need hem must take trewe every foe : 
 114 
 Flanders and Spain , and other , trust to i , or else hinder all for this narrow see . 
 therefore i cast i by a little writing to show at eye this conclusion , for conscience and for my acquire against God and again abusion , and cowardice , and to our enemy confusion . for four thing our noble show to i , king , ship , and sword , and power of the see . where ben our ship , where ben our sword become ? our enemy bed for the ship set a sheep . 
 alas our rule halt , it be benumb . 
 who dare well say that lordship shall take keep ? 
 i will assay , though my heart gin to weep , to do this work , if we will ever thou , for very shame to keep about the see . 
 shall any prince , what so be his name , which have Nobles much leech we , bee lord of see : and Flemings to our blame , stop we , take we , and so make fade the flower of english state , and disteyne our honour ? for cowardice alas it shall so be . 
 therefore i gin to write now of the see . 
 of the commodity of Spain and of Flanders . the first chapter . 
 know well all man that profit in certain commodity call come out of Spain 
 and Marchandie , who so will weet what it be , bene fig , raisin , wine bastard , and Datis , and Licoris , Seville oil , and grain , white Pastill soap , and wax be not vain . iron , wool , wadmolle , gotefall , Kidfell also : for point-maker full needful bene they tweyn : saffron , quicksilver , which own Spain Marchandy , be into Flanders ship full crafty , unto Bruges as to her staple fair : 
 IT5 
 A.D. 
 c . 1437-regni 18. quatuor considerantur in moneta aurea anglic a , qua dicitur Nobile : scilicet rex , navis , gladius , y mare : qua designant potestatem an-glicorum super mare . in quorum opprobrium he diebus Britones minores ^AElandrenses y alii dicunt anglicise Tollite de vestro Nobile navem y imponite ovem . intendentes , quod sicut quondam a tempore edwardi tertii AngUci erant domini maris , modo he diebus sunt vecorde , victi , y ad bellandum y mare observandum velut oves . 
 fig , raisin , wine bastard , date , Lycoras , civil oil , groyne , 
 white Pastel soft , wax , iron , wadmolle , gotefall , Kidfell , saffron , quicksilver . the haven of Scluse he haven for her repair which be clepe Swyn though ship gide : where many vessel and fair be abide . but these merchant with their ship great , and such chaffare as they buy and get by the weigh must need take on hand by the coast to pass of our England , betwixt Dover and Caleis , this be no doubt . who can well else such matter bring about ? and when these say merchant discharge be of Marchandie in Flanders near the see , than they be charge again with Marchandy , that to Flanders bouge full rich . fine cloth of Ypre that name be better than we . cloth of curtrike , fine cloth of all colour , much fustian , and also linen cloth . but Flemings , if you be not wroth , 
 flemish cloth make of english wool . the great substance of your cloth at the full you wot you make it of our English will . then may it not sink in mannis brain , but that it must this Marchandy of Spain both out and in by our cost pass : he that say nay in wit be like a ass . we shall have peace with the ground tweyne 
 the necessary conjunction of Spain and Flanders . thus if this see be keep , i dare well say . for Spain and Flanders be as each other brother , and nether may well live without other : they may not lve to maintain their degree , without our english commodity : wool and tin : for the wool of England sustain the commons Flemings i understand . then if England will her wool restrain from Flanders , this follow in certain , Flanders of need must with we have peace , or else she be destroy without lees . also if Flanders thus destroy be : some Marchandy of Spain will never ythee : 116 
 for destroy it be , and as in cheeffe the wool of Spain it come not to preeffe , but if it be cost and menge well among the english wool the great dell . for spanish wool in Flaunders drape be , and ever have bee , that man have mind of this : and yet wool be one of the chief Marchandy 
 that long to Spain : who so will espy , it be of little value , trust unto i , with english wool but if it menge be . 
 thus if the sea be keep , than harken hither , if these two land come not together : so that the fleet of Flanders pass nought that in the narrow see it be not bring into the Rochelle to fetch the fumous wine , ner into bytonuse bay for salt so fine , what be then Spain ? what be Flanders also ? as who say , nought , the thrift be ago . for the little land of Flanders be but a staple to other land iwis : 
 and all that grow in Flanders grain and seed may not a month find they meat and breed . what have then Flanders , be Fleming lieffe or loath , but a little Mader and Flemish cloth : by draper of our wool in substance lve her commons , this be her governance , without which they may not live at ease . 
 thus must hem starve , or with we must have peace . 
 of the commodity of Portugal . the second chapter . 
 the Marchandy also of Portugal by diverse land turn into sale . 
 portugaler with we have troth in hand : who Marchandy come much into England . they ben our friend , with their commodity , and we English pass into their country . 
 wine , Hosea , wax , grain , fig , reisens , honey , cordeweyne , date , salt , hide . 
 note well . 
 the briton great rover and thief . 
 her land have wine , Hosea , wax , and grain , fig , reysin , honey and cordoweyne : date , and salt , hide , and such Marchandy : and if they will to Flanders pass for by , they shall not be suffer one ner twye , for support of our cruel enemy , that be to say Flemings with her gyle : for changeable they be in little while . than i conclude by reason many more , if we suffer neither friend nor foe , what so enemy , and so support pass for by we in time of werring , Seth our friend will not be in cause of our hinder , if reason lead this clause : then need from Flanders peace be to we seek , and other land shall seek peace , doubt nought : for Flanders be staple , as man tell i , to all nation of Christianity . 
 the commodity of petty Britain , with her rover on the sea . the three chapter . 
 furthermore to write i be fain 
 somewhat speak of the little Britain . commodity thereof there , be and be , salt , and wine , crest cloth and canvas . and the land of Flaunders sickerly be the staple of their Marchandy . 
 which Marchandie may not pass away but by the coast of England , this be no nay . and of this Britain , who so truth lovis , be the great rover and the great theevis , that have be in the sea many one year : that our merchant have buy full deer . for they have take notable good of we , on this side see , these false pelour call of saint Malo , and else where : which to their duke none obeisance will bear : 
 118 
 with such colour we have be hinder sore . and feign peace be call no be herefore . thus they have be in diverse coast many of our England , more than rehearse can i : in Norfolk coast , and other place about , and rob and burn and slay by many a rout : and they have also ransom town by town : that into the regne of boast have run her sound : which have be ruth unto this realm and shame : they that the sea shall keep be much to blame . for Britain be of easy reputation ; 
 and saint Malo turn hem to reprobation . 
 a story of Edward the three his ordinance for Britain . 
 here bring i in a story to i lend , that a good squire in time of parliament take unto i well write in a scroll : that i have commend both with high and low , of which all man accorden into one , that it be do not many year ago . 
 but when noble king Edward the third reign in grace , right thus it betide . for he have a manner jealousy to his merchant and love they hearty . he fell the weigh to rule well the see , whereby merchant may have prosperity . that for harflew houndflew do he make ; and great be that time be undertake , betwixt the king and the duke of Britain : at last to fall to peace both be they fain : upon the which make with convention our merchant make they ready bowne towards Britain to load their marchandie , ween they friend they go forth bold : but soon anon our merchant be ytake , and we speed never the better for truce sake . 
 " 9 
 A.D. 
 c - 1437 - 
 historiaosten-den quam ordinationem rex ed-viardus tertius feeit contra depradatore marinos britannia minoris , ad debellandum eos and subjugandum britannos minores . 
 they lose she good , her navy and spend : but their complaint come unto the king . then wax he wroth , and to the duke he send , and complain that such harm be hent ; by convention and peace make so refuse : which duke send again , and he excuse , rehearse that the mount of saint Michael , and saint Malo will never a dell 
 be subject unto his governance , nor be under his obeisance : and so they do without he that deed . but when the king anon have take heed : he in his heart set a judgement , without call of any parliament , or great tarry to take long advise to fortify anon he do devise 
 of english town three , that be to say , Dertmouth , Plymouth , the three it be Fowey : and give they help and notable puissance with insistence set they in governance upon petty bretayne for to be . 
 those good sea man will no more differre , but beat they home and make they may not rout , take prisoner , and make they for to lout . and eft the duke , a ensample wise , write to the king as he first do devise , he excuse : but our man wood with great power pass over the flood and war forth into the duke land , and have nigh destroy free and bond . 
 but than the duke know that the town three shall have lose all his native country , he undertake by surety true not false , for mount Michael and saint Malo also , and other party of the little Brytaine , which to obey , as say be , be not fain . the duke himself for all do undertake : with all his heart a full peace do he make : 
 120 
 so that in all the life time of the king , merchant have peace without werring : he make a statute for Lombard in this land , that they shall in no wise take on hand here to inhabit , here to charge and discharge but forty day , no more time have they large . this good king by wit of such appreiffe keep his merchant and the sea from mischief . 
 of the commodity of Scotland and drape of her wolle in Flanders . the four chapter . 
 moreover of Scotland the commodity 
 be fell , hide , and of wool the fleece . 
 and all these must pass by we away into Flanders by England , sooth to say . and all her wool be drape for to sell in the town of poperinge and of bell ; which my lord of Gloucester with ire for her falsehood set upon a fire . dnno domini 
 and yet they of bell and poperinge 1^56 . hen . 6 . 
 can never drape her wool for any thing , i4 ’ 
 but if they have English will withal . 
 our goodly wool which be so generail 
 needful to they in Spain and Scotland also , and other cost , this sentence be not false : you worthy merchant i do it upon you , i have this learn you wot well where and how : 
 you wot the staple of that marchandie , of this Scotland be Flaunders sekerly . 
 and the Scot be charge know at the eye , 
 out of Flanders with little mercery , 
 and great plenty of haberdasher wear , 
 and half her ship with cart wheel bare , and with barrow be lade as in substance : thus most rude ware be in her chevesance . so they may not forbear this flemish land . therefore if we will manly take in hand , 121 
 StatutumRegis edwardi tertii proLombardis . 
 to keep this sea from Flanders and from Spain , and from Scotland , like as from petty Britain , we shall right soon have peace for all her host , for they must needs pass by our english cost . 
 of the commodity of pruce , and high dutch man , and Easterling . the five chapitle . 
 now go forth to the commodity , that come from pruce in two manner degree . 
 for two manner people have such use , that be to say , high dutch man of Pruse , and esterling , which may not be forbear , out of Flanders , but it be very lose . for they bring in the substance of the beer , that they drinken feele too good cheap , not dear . you have hear that two Fleming together will undertake or they go any whither , or they rise once to drink a ferkin full , of good Beerekin : so sore they hall and pull . under the board they pissen as they sit : this come of covenant of a worthy wit . 
 without Caleis in their butter they cak when they flee home , and when they leisure lack to hold their siege , they go like as a doe : well be that Fleming that may truss , and go . for fear they turn back and hie fast , my lord of Gloucester make they so aghast with his come , and seek they in her land , and burn and slow as he have take on hand : so that our enemy dare not bide , nor steer , they flee to mew , they dare no more appear , rebuke sore for ever so shameful , unto her utter everlasting villainy . 
 now beer and bacon be from Pruse bring into Flanders , as love and far ysought ; 
 Osmond , copper , bowstave , steel , and wax , peltreware and grey pitch , Terre , board , and flex : 
 122 
 and colleyne the reed , fustian and canvas , card , bukeram : of old time thus it be . but the Fleming among these thing dear , in common loven best bacon and beer . also Pruse man make she adventure of plate of silver of wedge good and sure in great plenty which they bring and buy , out of the land of beam and Hungary : which be increase full great unto their land , and they be lade , i understand , with woollen cloth all manner of colour by dyer craft full diverse , that ben we . and they adventure full great unto the bay , for salt that be needful without nay . thus if they will not our friend be , we may light stop they in the see : they shall not pass our streeme without leave , it will not be , but if we shall hem grieve . 
 of the commodity of the Genuoys and her great carrack . Chap. 6. 
 the Genuois come in sundry wife 
 into this land with diverse merchandise in great carrack , array without lack with cloth of gold , silk , and pepper black they bring with they , and of two crood great plenty , will oil , woad ashen , by vessel in the see , cotton , Rochalum , and good gold of Genne . 
 and then be charge with wool again i wen , and woollen cloth of we of colour all . 
 and they adventure , as oft it do befall , into Flanders with such thing as they buy , that be their chief staple sekerly : and if they will be our full enemy , they shall not pass our stream with merchandise . 
 A.D. 
 c . u37-pitch , tar , board , plexe , colleinthreed , fustian , canvas , card , bokeram , silver-plate , wedge of silver and mettle . 
 | | or , woad . 
 [ the 
 123 
 A.D. c . 1437 - the commodity and nicetee of the venetian and florentine , with their gallee . Chap. 7. ' ! yhe great Galees of Venice and Florence J. be well lade with thing of complacence , all spicery and of gross ware : with sweet wine all manner of chaffare , ape , and jape , and marmuset tail , nifle and trifle that little have avail : and thing with which they fete blere our eye : with thing not endure that we buy . for much of this chaffare that be wastable may be forbear for dear and deceivable . and that i ween as for infirmity in our England be such commodity without help of any other land which by wit and practise both yfound : that all humour may be void sure , which that our gleder with our english cure : that we shall have no need of scamonie , turbit , enforbe , correct diagredie , rhubarb , see , and yet they be to needful , but i know thing all so speedefull , that grow here , as those thing say . let of this matter no man be dismay ; but that a man may void infirmity without degree fetch fro beyond the sea . and yef they shall except be any thing it be but sugre , trust to my say : he that trust not to my say and sentence , let he better search experience . in this matter i will not far press , who so not believe , let he leave and cease . 
 thus these galei for this lick ware , and eat ware , bear hence our best chaffare : cloth , will , and tin , which as i say before , out of this land worst might be forbear , 124 
 have great need to buy some of they three : and we receive of hem into this cost ware and chaffare that light will|be lose . and will Jesus , that our lords will consider this well both young and old : namely old that have experience , that may the young exhort to prudence ; what harm , what hurt , and what hindrance be do to we , unto our great grievance , of such land , and of such nation : as expert man know by probation , by write as discover our counsel , and false colour always the countertaile of our enemy ; that do we hinder unto our good , our realm , and to the king : as wise man have show well at eye ; and all this be colour by marchandye . 
 a example of deceit . 
 also they bear the gold out of this land , and suck the thrift away out of our hand : 
 as the wasp souk honey from the bee , so diminish our commodity . 
 now wool you hear how they in Cotteswold be wont to borrow or they shall be sell her will good as for year and year . 
 of cloth and tin they do in like manner : and in her galy ship this marchandie : then soon at Venice of they man will it buy . then utterne there the chaflare by the peise , and light also there they make she reise . and when the good be at Venice sell , then to carry her change they this money have , they will it proffer , their subtlety to save , to english merchant to yeve it out by eschange to be pay again they make not strange , 
 I25 
 at the receive and sight of a letter , here in England , seem for the better , by four penny less in the noble round : that be twelve penny in the golden pound . and if we wool have of payment a full month , than must he needs assent to eight penny loss , that be shilling twain in the english pound ; as eft soon again , for two month twelve penny must he pay . in the english pound what be that to say , but shilling three ? so that in pound fall for hurt and harm hard be with hem to dwell . and when english merchant have content this eschange in England of assent , that these say venetian have in win and Florentines to bear her gold soon over the see into Flanders again : 
 and thus they live in Flanders , sooth to sane , and in London with such chevisance , that man call usury , to our loss and hindrance . 
 another example of deceit . 
 now lesten well how they make we a valley when they borrow at the town of Caleis as they be wont , their will that be hem lend , for year and year they shall make payment . and sometime also two year and two year . 
 | | or , loan . this be fair two love : but yet will you hear , 
 how they to Bruges will she will carry , and for hem take payment without tarry , and sell it fast for ready money in hand . for fifty pound of money of loss they will not wone in a thousand pound , and live thereby till the day of payment easy , come again in exchange : make full like usury , as man make undertake . than when this payment of a thousand pound be well content , they shall have chaffare sound 
 126 
 if they will from the staple full , receive again three thousand pound in will . in Cotteswold also they ride about , and all England , and buy without doubt what they listen with freedom and franchise , more than we English may gitten many wise . but will God that without long delay these galee be unfraught in forty day , and in forty day charge again , and that they may be put to certain to go to oste , as we there with hem do . it be expedient that they do right so , as we do there . if the king will it : ah what worship will fall to english wit ? what profit also to our marchandie which will of need be cherish hearty ? for i will wit , why now our navy fail , when many a foe we at our door assail . now in these day , that if there come a need , what navy shall we have it be to dread . in Denmark be full noble conqueror in time past , full worthy warrior : which when they have their merchant destroy , to poverty they fall , thus be they noy : and so they stand at mischief at this day . This learn i late well writon , this no nay . therefore beware , i can no better will , if grace it will , of other man peril . 
 for if merchant be cherish to her speed , we be not likely to fail in any need . if they be rich , then in prosperity shall|be our land , lord , and commonty , and in worship . now think i on the son of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon ; that load star , and chief choose flower : what have by he our England of honour , and what profit have be of his riches , and yet last daily in worthiness ? 
 127 
 A.D. 
 c . 1437 - 
 note diligent . 
 a woeful complaint of lack of navy if need come . 
 a story of destruction of Denmark for destruction open their merchant . 
 the praise of Richard of WhitAngdon merchant . 
 that pen and paper may not i suffice 
 he to describe : so high he be of price 
 above merchant , that set he one of the best : i can no more , but God have he in rest . 
 now the principal matter . 
 what reason be it that we shall go to oste in their country , and in this english cost 
 they shall not so ? but have more liberty than we our self now also motte i thou . i will to gift man shall take no heed that let our thing public for to speed . for this we see well every day at eye , gift and fest stopen our policy . 
 now see that fool ben either they or we : but ever we have the worse in this country . therefore let they unto oste go here , or be our free with hem in like manner in their country : and if it will not be , compel they unto oste , and you shall see much advantage , and much proiite arise , much more than i can write in any wise . 
 of our charge and discharge at her mart .. 
 conceive well here , that Englishmen at mart be discharge , for all her craft and art , in Brabant of her marchandy 
 in fourteen day , and again hasty in the same day fourteen acharge eft . and if they bide long all be bereave , anon they shall forfeit her good all , or marchandy : it shall no better fall . and we to martis in Brabant charge be with english cloth full good and fair to see : we ben again charge with mercery , haburdasher ware , and with grosserie : 
 to which mart , that english man call fair , each nation oft make she repair : 
 128 
 c 1437. English , and french , Lombard , jennoye , Catalones , thedre they take her way : Scots , Spaniard , Irishman there abide , with great plenty bring of sale hide . 
 and i here say that we in Brabant bye , Flanders and Zealand moor of marchandy in common use then do all other nation : this have i hear of merchant relation : and if the english be not in the mart they be feeble , and as nought be her part . for they byemore , and from purse put out more marchandie than all the other rout . keep then the see , ship shall not bring ne fetch , and then the carrey will not thidre stretch : and so those mart will full evil thou , if we manly keep about the see . 
 of the commodity of Brabant and Zealand and 
 Henauld and marchandy carry by land to the mart . Cap. 8. 
 yet marchandy of Brabant and Zealand 
 the Madre and woad , that dyer take on hand to die with , garlic and onion , and saltfishe also for husband and commons . but they of holland at Caleis byen our fell , and wolle our , that Englishman hem sell . and the chaflare that Englishmen do byen in the mart , that no man may denien , be not make in Brabant that country : it come from out of Henauld , not by see , but all by land , by cart , and from France , Bourgoyne , Colein , Cameret in substance , therefore at mart if there be a restraint , man seyne plain that listen no fable paint , if Englishmen be withdraw away , be great rebuke and loss to her affray : as though we send into the land of France ten thousand people , man of good puissance , 11 129 1 
 Mader , woad . 
 garlic , onion , saltfish . 
 what our merchant buy in that cost more than all other . 
 to be unto she hinder multifarie , so ben our english merchant necessary . if it be thus assay , and we shall witten of man expert , by who i have this write . for say be that this cart marchandy draw in value as much very , as all the good that come in ship thither , which Englishmen bye m●st and bring it hither . for her mart be febel , shame to say , but Englishman thither dress her way . 
 a conclusion of this depend of keep of the sea . 
 than i conclude , if never so much by land be by car bring unto their hand , if well the sea be keep in governance ' they shall by sea have no deliverance . 
 we shall hem stop , and we shall hem destroy , as prisoner we shall hem bring to annoy . and so we shall of our cruel enemy make our friend for fear of marchandy , if they be not suffer for to pass into Flanders . but we be frail as glass and also brittle , not think never abide ; but when grace shine soon be we slide ; we will it not receive in any wise : that make lust , envy , and covetise : expone i this ; and you shall sooth it find , bear it away , and keep it in your mind . then shall worship unto our noble bee in feat and form to lord and majesty : Liche as the seal the great of this land on the one side have , as i understand , a prince ride with his sword ydraw , in the other side sit , soothe it be in see , betoken good rule and punish in very deed of England by the king . 
 13° 
 and it be so , God bless may he be . so in likewise i will be on the see by the noble , that sword shall have power , and the ship on the sea about we here . 
 what need a garland which be make of ivy show a tavern wineless , also thrive i ? 
 if man be wise , the Frenchman and Fleming shall bear no state in sea by werring . 
 then Hankin lion shall not be so bold to stop wine , and ship for to hold unto our shame . he have be beat thence . Alas , alas , why do we this offence , full to shend the old english fame ; 
 and the profit of England , and their name : why be this power call of covetise ; 
 with false colour cast beforn our eye ? that if good man call werriour will take in hand for the commons succour , to purge the sea unto our great avail , and win they good , and have up the sail , and on our enemy their life to impart , so that they may their prize well depart , as reason wold , justice and equity ; 
 to make this land have lordship of the sea . then shall Lombard and other feign friend make their challenge by colour false offend , and say their chaffare in the ship be , and challenge all look if this be amiss . for thus may all that man have buy to sore , ben soon excuse , and save by false colour . beware you man that bear the great in hand that they destroy the policy of this land , by gift and good , and the fine golden clothes , and silk , and other : say you not this soothe be ? but if we have very experience that they take meed with privy violence , carpet , and thing of price and pleasance , whereby stop shall be good governance : 
 131 
 of Hankin lion . 
 Lombard be cause enough to hurt this land , although there be none other cause . 
 false colour of good by Lombard . 
 alas for bribe if gift of god , feast if other mean , that stoppen our policy . 
 this be the very state of our time . 
 and if it be as you say to i , than will i say , alas cupidity , that they that have she life put in dread , shall soon out of win , all for meed , and lose her cost , and bring to poverty , that they shall never have lust to go to sea . 
 a exhortation to make a ordinance against colour of maintainer and excuser of folk good . 
 it be a marvellous thing that so great a sickness and hurt of you land may have no remedy of so many as take themselves wise man of governance . 
 for this colour that must be say aloft and be declare of the great full oft , that our seaman wool by many wise spoil our friend in steed of our enemy : for which colour and Lombard maintenance , the king it need to make a ordinance with his counsel that may not fail , i trow , that friend shall from enemy be know , our enemy take and our friend spare : the remedy of hem must be declare . thus may the sea be keep in no saddle , for if aught be speak , wot you well , we have the stroke , and enemy have the win : but maintainer be partner of the finning . we live in lust and bide in covetise : 
 this be our rule to maintain merchandise , and policy that we have on the sea . And , but God help , it will no other bee . 
 of the commodity of Ireland , and policy and keep thereof , and conquer of wild irish : with a incident of wale . Chap. 9 
 i cast to speak of Ireland but a little : commodity of it i will entitle , hide , and fish , salmon , Hake , herring , irish wool , and linen cloth , faldinge , 132 
 and martern good ben her marchandie , herts hide , and other of * venery . skin of otter , squirrel and irish hare , of sheep , lamb , and fox , be her chaffare , fell of kid , and cony great plenty . so that if Ireland help we to keep the sea , because the king clepe be rex angliae , and be dominus also Hybernias , old possess by progenitor : the irish man have cause like to we our land and she together to defend , that no enemy shall hurt ne offend , Ireland ne we : but as one commontie shall help well to keep about the sea : for they have haven great , and goodly bay , sure , wide and deep , of good assay , at Waterford , and cost many one . 
 and as man say in England be there none better haven , ship in to ride , no more sure for enemy to abide . 
 why speak i thus so much of Ireland ? for all so much as i can understand , it be fertile for thing that there do grow and multiplien , look who lust to know , so large , so good , and so commodious , that to declare be strange and marvelous . for of silver and gold there be the oore , among the wild irish though they be poor . for they be rude and can thereon no skill : so that if we have their peace and good will to my and fine , and metal for to pure , in wild irish might we find the cure , as in London say a juellere , which bring from thence gold oore to we here , whereof be foam metal good and clean , as they touch , no better can be see . 
 now here beware and hearty take intent , as you will answer at last judgement , 133 
 A.D. 
 c 1437 - 
 * or , hunt . 
 mine of silver and golden Ireland . 
 that for slought and for racheshede you remember with all your might to heed to keep Ireland that it be not lose . for it be a boterasse and a post , under England , and wale another : God forbid , but each be other brother , of one ligeance due unto the king . 
 but i have pity in good faith of this thing that i shall say with advisement : 
 i be afeard that Ireland will be shend : it must away , it wool be lose from we , but if thou help , thou Jesus gracious , and give we grace all slought to leave beside . for much thing in my heart be hide , which in another treatise i cast to write make all only for that soil and site , of fertile Ireland , which may not be forbear , but if England be nigh as good as go . God forbid that a wild irish wirlinge shall be choose for to be their king , after her conquest for our last puissance , and hinder we by other land alliance . wise man sayen , which felin not , ne douten , that wild irish so much of ground have get there upon we , as likeness may be like as England to sheeris two or three of this our land be make comparable : so wild Irish have win on we unable yet to defend , and of none power , that our ground be there a little corner , to all Ireland in true comparison . 
 it need no more this matter to expon . which if it be lose , as Christ Jesus forb , farewell Wales , than England come to dread , for alliance of Scotland and of Spain , and other more , as the petty Bretaine , and so have enemy environ round about . 
 i beseech God , that some prayer devout 
 r34 
 Mutt let the say appearance probable thus dispose without feign fable . but all only for peril that i see thus imminent , it’s likely for to be . and well i wot , that from hence to roam , and , as man say , in all Christendom , be no ground ne land to Ireland liche , so large , so good , so plenteous , so rich , that to this word dominus do long . 
 then i seem that right be and no wrong , to get the land : and it be piteous to we to less this high name dominus . and all this word dominus of name shall have the ground obeisant wild and tame . that name and people togidre may accord all the ground subject to the lord . 
 and that it be possible to be subject , unto the king well shall it be detect , in the little book that i off speak . i trow reason all this wool undertake . and i know well how it stante , alas fortune begin so to scant , or else grace , that dead be governance . for so diminish party of our puissance , in that land that we less every year , more ground and more , as well as you may here . i hear a man speak to i full late . which be a lord of full great estate ; 
 than expense of one year do in France war on man well will of puissance this say ground of Ireland to conquer . and yet because England may not forbear these say expense gather in one year , but in three year or four gather up here , may win Ireland to a finali conquest , in one sole year to set we all at rest . 
 and how soon will this be pay again : which be it worth yearly , if we not feign : 
 135 
 this lord be the earl of Ormond that tell to i this matter , that he will undertake it , in pain of loss of all his livelihood . 
 but this proffer can not be admit . ergo mall . 
 i wool declare , who so lust to look , i trow full plain in my little book . but covetise , and singularity of own profit , envy , cruelty , have do we harm , and do we every day , and muster make that shame be to say : our money spend all to little avail , and our enemy so great do prevail , that what harm may fall and overthwerte i may uneath write more for sore of heart . 
 a exhortation to the keep of wale . 
 beware of wale , Christ Jesus mutt we keep , that it make not our childers child to weep , ne we also , so if it go his way , by unwarenes : se that many a day man have bee ferde of her rebellion , by great token and ostentation : seche the mean with a discrete advise , and help that they rude not arise for to rebel , that Christ it forbid . 
 look well about , for God wot you have need , unfeigning , unfeyn and unfeint , that conscience for slought you not attaint : keep well that ground , for harm that may ben use , or afore God mutte you be accuse . 
 the trade of Bristol to island . 
 of the commodious stockfish of island , and keep of the sea , namely the narrow sea , with a incident of the keep of Caleis . Chap. xo . 
 of island to write be little need , 
 save of stockfish : yet forsooth in deed 
 out of Bristol , and cost many one , man have practise by needle and by stone thither ward within a little while , within twelve year , and without peril 
 136 
 go and come , as man be wont of old of Scarborough unto the cost cold . 
 and now so feel ship this year there wear , that much loss for unfreight they bear : island may not make they to be fraught unto the Hawys : thus much harm they catch . then here i end of the commodity for which need be well to keep the sea : Este and west , south and north they be . and chief keep the sharp narrow see , between Dover and Caleis : and as thus that foe pass none without good will of we : and they abide our danger in the length , what for our costis and Caleis in our strength . 
 a exhortation for the sure keep of Caleis . 
 and for the love of God , and of his bliss cherish you Caleis better than it be . 
 see well thereto , and hear the great complaint that true man tell , that will no lie paint , and as you know that writing come from thence : do not to England for slought so great oftence , but that redress it be for any thing : lest a song of sorrow that we sing . 
 for little wenith the fool who so may cheese what harm it be good Caleis for to less : what woe it be for all this english ground . which well conceive the emperor Sigismound , that of all joy make it one of the most , that Caleis be subject unto english cost . 
 he think it be a jewel most of all , and so the same in latin do it call . and if you wool more of Caleis hear and know , i cast to write within a little scroll , like as i have do before by and by in other parteis of our policy . 
 look how hard it be at the first to get ; and by my counsel light do not it let . 
 137 
 A.D. 
 c - U37 - 
 the old trade of Scarborough to island and the north . 
 the joy oj Sigismond the emperor that Caleis be English . 
 for if we less it with shame of face wilful , it be for lack of grace . Howe be harflew cry upon , and Rone , that they be likely for shought to be go ; how be it warn and cry on in England , i make record with this pen in my hand . it be waren plain in Normandy , and in England , and i thereon do cry . 
 the world be defraud , it betide right so . Harflew be farewell * harflew : lewd it be a go . lose in the year jsjowe ware Caleis , i can say no better : z^^Henry my soul discharge i by this present letter . the six . 
 after the chapitle of commodity of diverse land , show the conclusion of keep of the sea environ , by a story of king Edgar and two incident of king Edward the three , and king Henry the five . Chap. 11. 
 now see we well then that this round see 
 to our noble by pariformitee under the ship show there the sail , and our king with royal apparel , with sword draw bright and extent for to chastise enemy violent ; shall be lord of the sea about , to keep enemy from within and without ; to behold through Christianitee master and lord environ of the see : all live man such a prince to dread , of such a regne to be afeard indeed . thus prove i well that it be thus of old ; 
 * dicit Chro - which by a * chronicle anon shall tell , ntca , quod iste right curious : but i will interpret Etfpraxes - English , as i do it get : 
 soribus suis of king Edgar : oh most marvellous fielic'wr , nulli prince live , witty , and chevalerous : 
 138 
 so good that none of his predecessor be to he liche in prudence and honour . he be fortunate and more gracious than other before , and more glorious : he be beneath no man in holiness : he pass all in virtuous sweetness . 
 of english king be none so commendable : to English man no less memorable , than Cyrus be to pierce by puissance , and as great Charles be to they of France , and as to the roman be great Romulus , so be to England this worthy Edgarus . i may not write more of his worthiness for lack of time , ne of his holiness : but to my matter i he exemplify , of condition tweyne and of his policy : within his land be one , this be no doubt , and another in the see without ; 
 that in time of winter and off be , when boisterous wind put see man into fere ; within his land about by all province he pass through , perceive his prince , lord , and other of the commonty , who be oppressor , and who to poverty be draw and bring , and who be clean in life , and be by mischief and by strife with over lead and extortion : 
 and good and bid of each condition he aspy : and his minister also , who do trought , and which of they be false : how the right and law of the land be execute , and who dare take in hand to disobey his statute and decree , if they be well keep in all country : of these he make subtle investigation of his own espy , and other man relation . among other be his great business , well to ben ware , that great man of riches , 
 139 
 A.D. 
 c - u37-sanctitate inferior , omnibus morum suavitate prastantior fuerit . Luxit ipse Anglis non minus memorabilis , quam Cyrus Persis , Carolus Francis Romulus verb Romanis . 
 dicit Chronica , praeparaverat nave robustissimas numero tria millia sexcenta : in quibus re-deunte astate omneminsulam ad terrorem extraneorum , y ad suorum excitationem cum maximo apparatu circumnavigare consueverat . 
 and man of might in city nor in town shall to the poor doe non oppression . thus be he wont in this winter tide on such enforchise busy to abide . this be his labour for the public thing , thus be he occupy : a pass holy king . now to purpose , in the summer fair of lusty season , when clear be the air , he have ready ship make before great and huge , not few but many a store : full three thousand and six hundred also stately enough on our sea to go . 
 the chronicle say , these ship be full boisterous : such thing long to king victorious . 
 in summer tide will he have in win and in custom to be full ready soon , with multitude of man of good array and instrument off be of best assay . who can hem well in any wise describe ? it be not light for any man alive . thus he and his will enter ship great habiliment have and the fleet of see werre , that joyful be to see such a navy and lord of majesty , there present in person hem among to sail and row environ all along , so regal liche about the english isle ; to all stranger terror and peril . 
 who fame go about in all the world stout , unto great fere of all that be without , and exercise to knight and his meynee to he long of his natall country . for courage of need must have exercise , thus occupy for esshewin of vice . 
 this know the king that policy espy ; winter and summer he be thus occupy . thus conclude i by authority of chronike , that environ the see 
 140 
 shall be our subject unto the king , and he be lord thereof for any thing : for great worship and for profit also to defend his land from every foe . that worthy king i leave , Edgar by name , and all the chronike of his worthy fame : Saffe only this i may not pass away , a word of mighty strength till that i say , that grant he God such worship here , for his merit , he be without peer , that sometime at his great festivity king , and earl of many a country , and prince feel be there present , and many lord come thither by assent , to his worship : but in a certain day he bid ship to be ready of array : for to visit saint Johns church he list row unto the good holy baptist , he assign to earl , lord , and knight many ship right goodly to sight : and for himself and eight king moo subject to he he make keep one of thoo , a good ship , and entrede into it with eight king , and down do they sit ; and each of they a ore take in hand , at ore hale , as i understand , and he himself at the ship behind as steris man it become of kind . 
 such another row baptize dare well say , be not see of prince many a day . Lo then how he in water get the price , in land , in see , that 1 may not suffice to tell , oh right , oh magnanimity , that king Edgar have upon the see . 
 dicit Chronica ut non minus quantam ei etiam in hac vita bonorum operum merce-dem donaverit : cum aliquando ad maximam ejus festivitatem , reges , comites , multariimque provinciarum protectore convenissent , ' c . 
 141 
 [ a 
 a incident of the lord of the sea king Edward the three . 
 Caleis way yield to you english 1347. 
 king Edward have 700. English ship , and 14151. English mariner before Caleis . 
 the battle of scluse by sea . 
 of king Edward i pass and his prowess 
 on land , on sea you know his worthiness : the siege of Caleis , you know well all the matter round about by land , and by the water , how it last not year many ago , after the battle of crecye be ydoe : how it be close environ about , oide man see it , which lve , this be no doubt . old knight say that the duke of Burgoyn , late rebuke for all his golden coin ; of ship on see make no besiege there , for want of ship that dare not come for fear . it be nothing besiege by the see : thus call they it no siege for honesty . gun assail , but assault be there none , no siege , but fuge : well be he that may be go : this manner carp have knight far in age , expert through age of this manner language . but king Edward make a siege royal , and win the town : and in especial the sea be keep , and thereof he be lord . thus make he Nobles coin of record ; in who time be no navy on the see that may withstand his majesty . 
 battle of scluse you may read every day , how it be do i leave and go my way : it be so late do that you it know , in comparison within a little throw : for which to God give we honour and glory ; for lord of see the king be with victory . 
 142 
 another incident of keep of the see , in the time of the marvelous werriour and victorious prince , king Henry the five , and of his great ship . 
 a nd if i shall conclude all by the king Henry the five , what be his purpose , when at Hampton he make the great dromon , which pass other great ship of all the commons ; the Trinity , the grace de dieu , the holy ghost , and other more , which as now be lose . 
 what hope you be the king great intent of thoo ship , and what in mind he mean ? it be not else , but that he cast to be lord round about environ of the see . 
 and when Harflew have her siege about , there come carrack horrible great and stout in the narrow see willing to abide , to stop we there with multitude of pride . my lord of Bedford come on and have the cure , destroy they be by that discomfiture . this be after the king harflew have win , when our enemy to siege have begin ; that all be slay or take , by true relation , to his worship , and of his english nation . there be present the king chamberlain at both battle ; which know this in certain ; he can it tell otherwise then i : 
 ask he , and wit ; i pass forth hasty . what have this king of his magnificence , of great courage , of wisdom , and prudence ? provision , forewitte , audacity , of fortitude , justice , and agility , discretion , subtle avisednesse , attemperance , noblesse , and worthiness : science , prowess , devotion , equity , of most estate , with his magnanimity 
 143 
 the great ship of Henry the five , make at Hampton . 
 great carrack of Genua take by the duke of Bedford . 
 1416. 
 the french name thus overthrow be of five hundred sail . 
 the Trinity , the grace de dieu , the holy ghost . 
 Exhortatio generalis in custodiam totius anglia , per diligentiam custodia circuitus maris circa littora ejusdem : qua debet esse per 
 liche to Edgar , and the say Edward , as much of both liche hem as in regard . where be on live a man more victorious , and in so short time prince so marvelous ? by land and sea , so well he he acquit , to speak of he i stony in my wit . thus here i leave the king with his noblesse , Henry the five , with who all my process of this true book of pure policy of sea keep , intend victory i leave endly : for about in the see no prince be of better strenuity . 
 and if he have to this time live here , he have be prince name without peer : his great ship shall have be put in preefe , unto the end that he mean of in chief , for doubt it not but that he will have bee lord and master about the round see : 
 and keep it sure to stop our enemy hence , and win we good , and wise bring it thence : that no passage shall be without danger , and his licence on see to move and star . 
 of unity , show of our keep of the see : with a endly or finali process of peace by authority . Chap. 12. 
 now than for love of Christ , and of his joy , bring it England out of trouble and noy : 
 take heart and wit , and set a governance , set many wit without variance , to one accord and unanimity . 
 put to good will for to keep the see , first for worship and profit also , and to rebuke of each evil will foe . thus shall worship and riches to we long . than to the noble shall we do no wrong , to bear that coin in figure and in deed , to our courage , and to our enemy dread : 
 144 
 for which they must dress they to peace in haste , or else their thrift to stand , and to waste . 
 as this process have prove by and by all by reason and expert policy ; 
 and by story which prove well this part : or else i will my life put in jeoparte , but many lond will seche her peace for need , the see well keep : it must be do for dread . thus must Flanders for need have unity and peace with we : it will none other bee , within short while : and ambassador 
 will be here soon to treat for their succour . this unity be to God pleasance : and peace after the werre variance . 
 the end of battle be peace sickerly , and power cause peace final . keep then the sea about in speciali , which of England be the town wall . as though England be liken to a city , and the wall environ be the see . 
 keep than the sea that be the wall of England : and then be England keep by God hand ; that as for any thing that be without , England be at ease without doubt , and thus shall every land one with another Entercommon , as brother with his brother , and live together werrelesse in unity , without rancour in very charity , in rest and peace , to Christ great pleasance , without strife , debate and variance . 
 which peace man shall enserche with business , and knit it sadde hold in holiness . 
 the Apostle say , if you listen to see , be you busy for to keep unity of the spirit in the bond of peace . which be needful to all without less . the prophet bid we peace for to inquire to pursue it , this be holy desire . 
 n i4 king 
 A.D. 
 c - 1437-unanimitata Consiliariorum regis , y hominum bona voluntatis . 
 tres sunt causa pradic-ta custodia : scilicet , honour , commodum regni , y opprobrium inimicis . 
 Ephes. solliciti sitis servare unitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis . 
 c . 1437 - our lord Jesus say , bless motte they be 
 maith . 5. Beati pacifici , quoniam filii dei vocabuntur . that make peace ; that be tranquillity . for peace maker , as Matthew write aright , shall be call the son of God almight . God give we grace , the weigh for to keep of his precept , and slugly not to sleep in shame of sin : that our very foe may be to we converse , and turn so . 
 cum placuerint domino vice hominis ejus inimicos ad pacem convertet . for in the proverb be a text to this purpose plain enough without any gloss : when man weigh please unto our lord , it shall convert and bring to accord man enemy unto peace very , in unity , to live to gods pay , with unity , peace , rest and charity . he that be here clothe in humanity , that come from heaven , and sty up with our nature , or he ascend , he yave to we cure , and leave with we peace , again strife and debate , must give we peace , so well irradicate here in this world : that after all this feste we may have peace in the land of behest , 
 Urbs beata Jerusalem dicta pacis visio . Jerusalem , which of peace be the sight , with his brightness of eternal light , there glorify in rest with his tuition , the deity to see with full fruition : he second person in divineness be , who we assume , and bring we to the bliss . amen . here end the true process of the libel of english policy , exhort all England to keep the sea environ : show what profit and salvation , with worship come thereof to the reign of England . / ^1 oe forth libel , and meek show thy face ; six appear ever with humble countenance : and pray my lord to take in grace , 146 
 in opposaile and cherish the advance . to hardiness if that not variance thou have fro trought by full experience author and reason : if ought fail in substance remit to hem that yafe thou this science ; 
 that se it be soothe in very faith , that the wise lord baron of Hungerford have thou oversee , and very he say that thou be true , and thus he do record , next the gospel : God wot it be his word , when he thou red all over in a night . 
 go forth true book , and Christ defend thy right . 
 A.D. 
 I462 . 
 the wise lord of Hungerfords judgement of this book . 
 explicit libellus de politia conservativa maris . 
 