the book make by the right worshipful m. Robert thorn in the year 1527. in Sivil , to doctor ley , lord ambassador for king Henry the eight , to Charles the emperor , be a information of the part of the world , discover by he and the king of portingal : and also of the way to the molucca by the north . 
 right noble and reverend in etc i have receive your letter , and have procure and send to know of your servant , who , your lordship write , shall be sick in Merchena . i can there or else where hair of he , without he be return to you , or go to saint Lucar , and ship . 
 i can judge but that of some contagious sickness he die , so that the owner of the house for defame his house will bury he secret , and not be know of it . for such thing have often time happen in this country . 
 also to write unto your lordship of the new trade of spicery of the emperor , there be no doubt but that the island be fertile of clove , nutmeg , mace , and cinnamom : and that the say island , with other there about , abound with gold , ruby , diamond , balass , granate , jacinct , and other stone and pearl , as all other land , that be under and near the equinoctial . for we see , where nature give any thing , she be no niggard . for as with we and other , that be apart from the say equinoctial , our metal be lead , tin , and iron , so they be gold , silver , and copper . and as our fruit and grain be apple , nut , and corn , so they be date , nutmeg , pepper , Cloves , and other spice . and as we have jeat , amber , crystal , jasper , and other like stone , so have they ruby , diamond , 164 
 balass , saphire , jacinct , and other like . and though some say that of such precious metal , grain , or kind of spice , and precious stone , the abundance and quantity be nothing so great , as our metal , fruit or stone above rehearse : yet if it be well consider , how the quantity of the earth under the equinoctial to both the tropical line , ( in which space be find the say gold , spice and precious stone ) be as much in quantity , as almost all the earth from the tropicke to both the pole ; it can be deny but there be more quantity of the say metal , fruit , spice , and precious stone , than there be of the other metal and other thing before rehearse . and i see that the preciousness of these thing be measure after the distance that be between we , and the thing that we have appetite unto . for in this navigation of the spicery be discover , that these island nothing set by gold , but set more by a knife and a nail of iron , then by his quantity of gold : and with reason , as the thing more necessary for man service . and i doubt not but to they shall be as precious our corn and seed , if they may have they , as to we their spice : and likewise the piece of glass that here we have counterfeit be as precious to they , as to we their stone : which by experience be see daily by they that have trade thither . this of the riches of those country be sufficient . 
 touch that your lordship write , whether it may doctor Leys be profitable to the emperor or no ? it may be without letter . doubt of great profit : if , as the king of portingal do , he will become a merchant , and provide ship and their lade , and trade thither alone , and defend the trade of these island for himself . but other great business withhold he from this . but still , as now it be begin to be occupy , it will come to much . for the ship come in safety , there will thither many every year , of which to the emperor be due of all the ware and jewel that come from thence the five part for his custom clear without any cost . and beside 
 165 
 this be then . fleet wherein Cabot discover the river of plate , 1526. 
 note . 
 the new find island discover by the english . 
 a map of the world . 
 this he put in every float a certain quantity of money , of which he enjoy of the gain pound and pound like as other adventurer do . in a fleet of three ship and a caravel that go from this city arm by the merchant of it , which depart in April last pass , 1 and my partner have one thousand four hundred ducat that we employ in the say fleet , principal for that two english man , friend of i , which be somewhat learned in cosmography , shall go in the same ship , to bring i certain relation of the situation of the country , and to be expert in the navigation of those sea , and there to have information of many other thing , and advise that i desire to know especial . see in these quarter be ship , and mariner of that country , and card by which they sail , though much unlike we , that they shall procure to have the say card , and learn how they understand they , and especial to know what navigation they have for those island northwards , and northeastward . 
 for if from the say island the sea do extend , without interposition of land , to sail from the north point to the - north-east point one thousand seven hundred or one thousand eight hundred league , they shall come to the new find island that we discover , and so we shall be near to the say spicery by almost two thousand league then the emperor , or the king of portingal be . and to advise your lordship whether of these spicery of the king of portingal or the emperor be near , and also of the title that either of they have , and how our new find land be part from it , ( for that by write without some demonstration , it be hard to give any declaration of it ) i have cause that your lordship shall receive herewith a little map or card of the world : the which , i fear i , shall put your lordship to more labour to understand , then i to make it , only for that it be make in so little room that it can be but obscure set out , that be desire 
 166 
 to be see in it , and also for that i be in this science little expert : yet to remedy in part this difficulty , it be necessary to declare to your lordship my intent , with which i trust you shall perceive in this card part of your desire , if , for that i can express my intent , with my declaration i do not make it more obscure . 
 first , your lordship know that the cosmographer have divide the earth by 360 degree in latitude , and as many in longitude , under the which be comprehend all the roundness of the earth : the latitude be divide into four quarter , ninety degree amount to every quarter , which they measure by the altitude of the pole , that be the north and south star , be from the line equinoctial till they come right under the north star the say ninety degree : and as much from the say line equinoctial to the south star be other ninety degree . and as much more be also from either of the say star again to the equinoctial . which imagine to be round , be soon perceive thus , 360 degree of latitude to be consume in the say four quarter of ninety degree a quarter : so that this latitude be the measure of the world from north to south , and from south to north . and the longitude , in which be also count other 360 , be count from west to east , or from east to west , as in the card be set . 
 the say latitude your lordship may see mark take ™ ™ the and divide in the end of this card on the left hand : iatttudes-so that if you will know in what degree of latitude any region or coast stand , take a compass , and set the one foot of the same in the equinoctial line right against the say region , and apply the other foot of the compass to the say region or coast , and then set the say compass at the end of the card , where the degree be divide . and the one foot of the compass stand in the line equinoctial , the other will show in the scale the degree of altitude or latitude that the say region be in . also the longitude of the world i have set out in the nether part of the card , contain 
 167 
 also 360 degree : which begin to be count after ptoleme and other cosmographer from a headland call Capo Verde , which be over against a little cross make in the part occidental , where the division of the degree begin , and end in the same Capo Verde . 
 now to know in what longitude any land be , your lordship must take a ruler or a compass , and set the one foot of the compass upon the land or coast who longitude you will know , and extend the other foot of the compass to the next part of one of the transversali line in the orientali or occidental part : which do , set the one foot of the compass in the say transversal line at the end of the nether scale , the scale of longitude , and the other foot show the degree of longitude that the region be in . and your lordship must understand that this card , though little , contain the universali whole world betwixt two collaterali line , the one in the occidentali part descend perpendicular upon the 175 degree , and the other in the orientali on the 170 degree , who distance measure the scale of longitude . and that which be without the two say transversali line , be only to show how the orientali part be join with the occident , and occident with the orient . for that that be set without the line in the oriental part , be the same that be set within the other line in the occidentali part : and that that be set without the line in the occidentali part , be the same that be set within the line in the orientali part , to show that though this figure of the world in plain or flat seem to have a end , yet one imagine that this say card be set upon a round thing , where the end shall touch by the line , it will plain appear how the orient part join with the occident , as there without the line it be describe and figure . 
 and for more declaration of the say card , your lordship shall understand , that begin on the part occidental within the line , the first land that be set 168 
 out , be the main land and island of the Indies of the emperor . which main land or coast go northward , and finish in the land that we find , which be call here terra de Labrador . so that it appear the say land that we find , and the Indies to be all one main land . 
 the say coast from the say Indies southward , as by the card your lordship may see , come to a certain straight sea , call Estrecho de todo santos : now call by which straight sea the Spaniard go to the spicery , straight of 
 as i shall declare more at large : the which straight * ' 
 sea be right against three hundred fifteen degree of longitude , and be of latitude or altitude from the equinoctial three and fifty degree . the first land from the say beginning of the card towards the orient be certain island of the canary , and island of Capo verde . but the first main land next to the line equinoctial be the say Capo verde , and from thence northward by the strait of this sea of Italy . and so follow Spain , France , Flanders , almain , Denmark , and Norway , which be the high part towards the north . and over against Flanders be our island of England and Ireland . of the land and coast within the strait i have set out only the region , divide they by line of their limit , by which plain i think your lordship may see , in what situation every region be , and of what highness , and with what region it be join . i do think few be leave out of all Europe . 
 in the part of Asia and Africa i can not so well make the say division : for that they be not so well know , nor need not so much . this i write because in the say card be make the say line and strike , that your lordship shall understand wherefore they do serve . also return to the foresay Capo verde , the coast go southward to a cape call Capo de buona speransa : which be right over against the 60. 8c 65. degree of longitude . and by this cape go the Portugal to their spicery . for from this cape towards the 169 
 orient , be the land of Calicut , as your lordship may see in the headland over against the 130. degree . from the say cape of Buona speransa the coast return towards the line equinoctial , and pass forth enter the red sea , and return out , enter again into the gulf of Persia , and return towards the equinoctial line , till that it come to the headland call Calicut aforesaid , and from thence the coast make a gulf , where be the river of Ganges , return towards the line to a headland call Malaca , where be the principali spicery : and from this cape return and make a great gulf , and after the coast go right towards the orient , and over against this last gulf and coast be many island , which be island of the spicery of the emperor . upon which the Portugal and he be at variance . 
 n°te - the say coast go towards the orient , and end right against the 155. degree , and after return towards the occident northward : which coast not yet plain know , i may join to the new find land find by we , that i speak of before . so that i finish with this brief declaration of the card aforesaid . well i know i shall also have declare how the coast within the straight of the sea of Italy run . it be plain that pass the strait on the north side of that sea after the coast of Granado , and with that which pertain to Spain , be the coast of that which France have in Italy . and then follow in one piece all Italy , which land have a arm of the sea , with a gulf which be call mare Adriaticum . and in the bottom of this gulf be the city of Venice . and on the other part of the say gulf be Sclavonia , and next Grecia , than the streit of Constantinople , and then the sea call Euxinus , which be within the say strait : and come out of the say strait , follow Turcia major ( though now on both side it be call Turcia . ) and so the coast run southward to Syria , and over against the say Turcia be the 170 
 island of Rhodes , Candie , and Cyprus . and over against Italy be the island of Sicilia and Sardinia . and over against Spain be Majorca and Minorca . in the end of the gulf of Syria be Judea . and from thence return the coast towards the occident , till it come to the strait where we begin , which all be the coast of Africa and Barbary . also your lordship shall understand that the coast of the sea throughout all the world , i have colour with yellow , for that it may appear that all that be within the line colour yellow , be to be imagine to be main land or island : and all without the line so colour to be sea : whereby it be easy and light to know it . albeit in this little room any other description will rather have make it obscure then clear . and the say coast of the sea be all set just after the manner and form as they lie , as the navigation approve they throughout all the card , save only the coast and isle of the spicery of the emperor which be from over against the 160. to the 215. degree of longitude , for these coast and situation of the island , every of the cosmographers and pilot of portingal and Spain do set after their purpose . the Spaniard more towards the orient , because they shall appear to appertain to the emperor : and the Portugal moor towards the occident , for that they shall fall within their jurisdiction . so that the pilot and navigant thither , which in such case shall declare the truth , by their industry do set they false every one to favour his prince . and for this cause can be no certain situation of that coast and island , till this difference betwixt they be verify . 
 now to come to the purpose of your lordship demand doctor Leys touch the difference between the emperor and the deman^-king of portingal , to understand it better , i must declare the begin of this discovery . though peradventure your lordship may say that in that i have write aught of purpose , i fall in the proverb , a gemino ovo bellum : but your lordship command i to be large , 
 171 
 and i take licence to be prolixious , and shall|be peradventure tedious , but your lordship know that nihil ignorantia verbosius . 
 in the year 1484 the king of portingal mind to arm certain caravel to discover this spicery . then forasmuch as he fear that be discover , every other prince will send and trade thither , so that the cost and peril of discover shall be he , and the profit common : wherefore first he give knowledge of this his mind to all prince christen , say that he will seek among the infidel new possession of region , and therefore will make a certain army : and that if any of they will help in the cost of the say army , he shall enjoy his part of the profit or honour that shall come of it . and as then this discover be hold for a strange thing and uncertain . now they say , that all the prince of Christendom answer , that they will be no part of such a army , nor yet of the profit that may come of it . after the which he give knowledge to the pope of his purpose , and of the answer of all the prince , desire he that see that none will help in the cost , that he will judge all that shall be find and discover to be of his jurisdiction , and command that none other prince the pope re - shall intermeddle therewith . the pope say not as prehend . Christ say , quis i constituit judicem inter vos ? he do not refuse , but make himself as lord and judge of all , not only grant that all that shall be discover from orient to occident , shall be the king of portingal , but also , that upon great censure no other prince shall discover but he . and if they do , all to be the king of portingal . so he arm a fleet , and in the year 1497 be discover the island of Calicut , from whence be bring all the spice he have . 
 after this in the year 1492 the king of Spain will to discover land towards the occident without make any such diligence , or take licence of the king of portingal , arm certain caravel , and then discover this 172 
 India occidentali , especial two island of the say India , that in this card i set forth , name the one la Dominica , and the other Cuba , and bring certain gold from thence . of the which when the king of portingal have knowledge , he send to the king of Spain , require he to give he the say island . for that by the sentence of the pope all that shall be discover be he , and that he shall not proceed further in the discovery without his licence . and at the same time it seem that out of castil into portingal have go for fear of burn infinite number of Jew that be expel out of Spain , for that they will not turn to be Christians , and carry with they infinite number of gold and silver . so that it seem that the king of Spain answer , that it be reason that the king of portingal ask , and that to be obedient to that which the pope have decree , he will give he the say island of the Indies . now for as much as it be decree betwixt the say king , that none shall receive the other subject fugitive , nor their good , therefore the king of portingal shall pay and return to the king of Spain a million of gold or more , that the Jew have carry out of Spain to portingal , and that in so do he will give these island , and desist from any more discover . and not fulfil this , he will not only not give these island , but procure to discover moor where he think best . it seem that the king of portingal will not , or can not with his ease pay this money . and so not pay , that he can not let the king of Spain to discover : so that he enterprise not towards the orient where he have begin and find the spicery . And consent to the king of Spain , that touch this discover they shall divide the world between they two . and that all that shall be discover from cape Verde , where this card begins to be count in the degree of longitude , to 180 of the say scale of longitude , which be half the world towards the orient , and finish in this card right over against a little cross make at the say 180 degree , to be 173 
 the longitude hard to be find out . 
 the king of Portugal . and all the land from the say cross toward the occident , until it join with the other cross in the orient , which contain the other hundred and eighty degree , that be the other half of the world , to be the king of Spain . so that from the land over against the say hundred and eighty degree until it finish in the three hundred and sixty on both the end of the card , be the jurisdiction of the king of Spain . so after this manner they divide the world between they . 
 now for that these island of spicery fall near the term and limit between these prince ( for as by the say card you may see they begin from one hundred and sixty degree of longitude , and end in 215 ) it seem all that fall from 160 to 180 degree , shall be of portingal : and all the rest of Spain . and for that their cosmographer and pilot can not agree in the situation of the say island ( for the Portugal set they all within their 180 degree , and the Spaniard set they all without : ) and for that in measure , all the cosmographer of both part , or what other that ever have be can give certain order to measure the longitude of the world , as they do of the latitude : for that there be no star fix from east to west , as be the star of the pole from north to south , but all move with the move divine : no manner can be find how certainly it may be measure , but by conjecture , as the navigant have esteem the way they have go . but it be manifest that Spain have the situation of all the land from cape Verde , towards the orient of the Portugal to their 180 degree . and in all their card they never hitherto set the say island within their limitation of the say 180 degree , ( though they know very well of the island , ) till now that the Spaniard discover they . and it be know that the king of portingal have trade to these island afore , but will never suffer portingal to go thither from Calicut : for so much as he know that it fall out of his dominion : lest by go thither there 
 174 
 may come some knowledge of those other island of the king of Spain , but buy the clove of merchant of that country , that bring they to Calicut , much dear than they will have cost , if he have send for they , think after this manner it will abide always secret . and now that it be discover he send and keep the Spaniard from the trade all that he can . 
 also it shall seem that when this foresay consent of the division of the world be agree of between they , the king of portingal have already discover certain island that lie over against cape Verde , and also certain part of the main land of India towards the south , from whence he fette Brasill , and call it the land of Brasil . so for that all shall come in his term and limit , he take three hundred and seventie league beyond cape Verde : and after this , his 180 degree , be his part of the world , shall begin in the card right over against the 340 degree , where i have make a little compass with a cross , and shall finish at the 160 degree , where also i have make another little mark . and after this computation without any controversy , the island of the spicery fall out of the Portugal domination . so that now the Spaniard say to the Portugal , that if they will begin their 180 degree from the say cape Verde , to the intent they shall extend more towards the orient , and so to touch those island of the spicery of the emperor , which be all that be between the two cross make in this card , that than the island of cape Verde and the land of Brasil that the Portugal now obtain , be out of the say limitation , and that they be of the emperor . or if their 180 degree they count from the 370 league beyond the say cape Verde , to include in it the say island and land of Brasil , then plain appear the say 180 degree shall finish long before they come to these island of the spicery of the emperor : as by this card your lordship may see . for their limit shall begin at the 340 degree of this card , and end at the 160 degree , 
 175 
 new find land discover by the Englishman . 
 note . 
 to sail by the pole . 
 where i have make two little mark of the compass with cross in they . 
 so that plain it shall appear by reason , that the Portugal shall leave these island of cape Verde and land of Brasil , if they will have part of the spicery of the emperor : or else hold these , they have no part there . to this the Portugal say , that they will begin their 180 degree from the self same cape Verde : for that it may extend so much more towards the orient , and touch these island of the emperor : and will win these island of cape Verde and land of Brasil nevertheless , as a thing that they possess before the consent of this limitation be make . 
 so none can very tell which have the best reason . they be not yet agree , quare sub judice lie est . 
 but without doubt ( by all conjecture of reason ) the say island fall all without the limitation of portingal , and pertain to Spain , as it appear by the most part of all the card make by the Portugal , save those which they have falsify of late purposely . 
 but now touch that your lordship write , whether that which we discover touch any thing the foresay coast : once it appear plain , that the newfound land that we discover , be all a main land with the Indies Occidentali , from whence the emperor have all the gold and pearl : and so continue of coast more than 5000 league of length , as by this card appear . for from the say new land it proceed towards the occident to the Indies , and from the Indies return towards the orient , and after turn southward up till it come to the strait of todo santos , which i reckon to be more than 5000 league . 
 so that to the India it shall seem that we have some title , at least that for our discover we may trade thither as other doe . but all this be nothing near the spicery . 
 now then if from the say new find land the sea be navigable , there be no doubt , but sail northward and 176 
 pass the pole , descend to the equinoctial line , we shall hit these island , and it shall be a much short way , then either the Spaniard or the Portugal have . for we be distant from the pole but thirty and nine degree , and from the pole to the equinoctial be ninety , the which add together , be a hundred twenty and nine degree , league 2489. and mile 7440 : where we shall find these island . and the navigation of the Spaniard to the spicery be , as by this card you may see , from Spain to the island of Canarie , and from these island they run over the line equinoctial southward to the cape of the main land of the Indians , call the cape of saint Augustine , and from this cape southwards to the strait of todo santos , in the which or the strait navigation to the say strait be 1700. or 1800 league ; dfmaselane-and from these strait be pass they , they return toward the line equinoctial to the island of spicery , which be distant from the say strait 4200. or 4300. league . 
 the navigation of the Portugal to the say island be depart from Portugal southward toward the cape Verde , and from thence to another cape pass the line equinoctial call Capo de bona speransa , and from portingal to the cape be 1800 league , and from this cape to the island of spicery of the emperor be 2500. league . 
 so that this navigation amount all to 4300. league . so that ( as afore be say , ) if between our new find land or Norway , or island , the sea towards the north be navigable , we shall go to these island a short way by more than 2000 league . 
 and though we go not to the say island , for that note . they be the emperor or king of portingal , we shall by the way and come once to the line equinoctial , find land no less rich of gold and spicery , as all other land be under the say line equinoctial : and also shall , if we may pass under the north , enjoy the navigation of all Tartary . which shall be no less 
 two 177 m 
 answer . 
 a true opinion . 
 a voyage of discovery by the pole . m. Thorne and m. Eliot discoverer of newfound land . 
 the cause why the west Indies be not we : which also Sebastian Cabot write in a epistle to Baptista Ramusius . 
 profitable to our commodity of cloth , than these spicery to the emperor , and king of portingal . 
 but it be a general opinion of all cosmographer , that pass the seven clime , the sea be all ice , and the cold so much that none can suffer it . and hitherto they have all the like opinion , that under the line equinoctial for much heat the land be unhabitable . 
 yet since ( by experience be prove ) no land so much habitable nor more temperate . and to conclude , i think the same shall be find under the north , if it be experiment . for as all judge , nihil fit vacuum in rerum natura : so i judge , there be no land unhabitable , nor sea innavigable . if i shall write the reason that present this unto i , i shall be too prolix , and it seem not requisite for this present matter . God know that though by it i shall have no great interest , yet i have have and still have no little mind of this business : so that if i have faculty to my will , it shall be the first thing that i will understand , even to attempt , if our sea northward be navigable to the pole , or no . i reason , that as some sickness be heredi-tarious , and come from the father to the son , so this inclination or desire of this discovery i inherit of my father , which with another merchant of Bristol name Hugh Eliot , be the discoverer of the new find land , of the which there be no doubt , ( as now plain appear ) if the mariner will then have be rule , and follow their pilot mind , the land of the west Indies ( from whence all the gold come ) have be we . for all be one coast , as by the card appear , and be aforesaid . 
 also in this card by the coast where you see C. your lordship shall understand it be set for cape or headland , where i . for hand , where P. for port , where R. for river . also in all this little card i think nothing be err touch the situation of the land , save only in these hand of spicery : which , for that ( as afore be say ) every one set they after his mind , there can be 178 
 no certification how they stand . i do not deny , that there lack many thing , that a consummate card shall have , or that a right good demonstration desire . for there shall be express all the mountain and river that be principali of name in the earth , with the name of port of the sea , the name of all principali city , which all i may have set , but not in this card , for the little space will not consent . 
 your lordship may see that set only the name almost of every region , and yet not of all , the room be occupy . many island be also leave out , for the say lack of room , the name almost of all port put to silence , with the rose of the wind or point of the compass : for that this be not for pilot to sail by , but a summary declaration of that which your lordship command . and if by this your lordship can well perceive the meaning of this card , of the which i will not marveile , by reason of the rude composition of it , will it please your lordship to advise i to make a big and a better map , or else that i may cause one to be make . for i know my self in this and all other nothing perfect , but licet semper discens , nunquam tamen ad perfectam scientiam perveniens . also i know , to set the form spherical of the world in Plano after the true rule of cosmography , it will have be make otherwise then this be : howbeit the demonstration shall not have be so plain . 
 and also these degree of longitude , that i set in the low part of this card , shall have be set along by the line equinoctial , and so then must be imagine . for the degree of longitude near either of the pole be nothing equal in bigness to they in the equinoctial . but these be set so , for that set they a long the equinoctial , it will have make obscure a great part of the map . many other curiosity may be require , which for the nonce i do not set down , as well for that the intent i have principal be to satisfy your doubt touch the spicery , as for that i lack leisure and time . i trust your lordship 
 179 
 correct that which be err , will accept my good will , which be to do any thing that i may in your lordship service . but from henceforth i know your lordship will rather command i to keep silence , than to be large , when you shall be weary with the read of this discourse . Jesus prosper your estate and health . 
 your lordship 
 Robert Thorne 1527. 
 also this card and that which i write touch the variance between the emperor and the king of Portugal , be not to be show or communicate there with many of that court . for though there be nothing in it prejudicial ! to the emperor , yet it may be a cause of pain to the maker : as well for that none may make these card , but certain appoint and allow for master , as for that peradventure it will not sound well to they , that a stranger shall know or discover their secret : and will appear worst of all , if they understand that i write touch the short way to the spicery by our sea . though peradventure of troth it be not to be look to , as a thing that by all opinion be unpossible , and i think never will come to effect : and therefore neither here nor else where be it to be speak of . for to move it among wise man , it shall be have in derision . and therefore to none i will have write nor speak of such thing , but to your lordship , to who bold i commit in this all my foolish fantasy as to my self . but if it please God that into England i may come with your lordship , i will show some conjecture of reason , though against the generail opinion of cosmographer , by which shall appear this that i say not to lack some foundation . and till that time i beseech your lordship let it be put to silence : and in the mean season it may please God to send our two Englishman , that be go to the spicery , which may also bring more plain declaration of that which in this case may be desire . 
 also i know i need not to have be so prolix in 180 
 the declaration of this card to your lordship , if the say card have be very well make after the rule of cosmography . for your lordship will soon understand it better than i , or any other that can have make it : and so it shall appear that i show delphinum natare . but for that i have make it after my rude manner , it be necessary that i be the declarer or gloss of my own work , or else your lordship shall have have much labour to understand it , which now with it also can be excuse , it be so gross do . but i know you look for no curious thing of i , and therefore i trust your lordship will accept this , and hold i for excuse . in other man letter that they write they crave pardon that at this present they write no large : but i must finish , ask pardon that at this present i write so large . Jesus preserve your lordship with augmentation of dignity . 
 your servant Robert 
 thorn , 1527. 
 Epitaphium m. Roberti Thorni , sepulti in Ecclesia Templariorum Londini . 
 Obertus iaceo hic thorn , quem Bristolia quondam Praetoris merito legit ad officium . 
 huic etenim semper magna ; Respublica curae , charior and cunctis patria divitiis . 
 far inopi auxilium , tristes componere light , 
 dulce huic consilio qu6sque juvare fuit . 
 qui pius exaudis miserorum voto precesque , 
 Christe huic coeli des region locum . 
 