a letter of master Richard Gray one of the first agent of the Moscovie company to master Henry lane at Moscow , write in i558 - colmogro the 19 of February 1558. 
 worshipful sir , after hearty commendation etc 
 you shall understand that this Lent come Lampas a to Lampas such a number of man of diverse nation great mart fir w£th ware } as have not be see these ten year . tk^North thither come many out of Ugori : therefore i will have be there my self , and also have receive such money as be owe we in ware by Kerill his brother and Osep boscovo . for as you well know , thence they will go with their ware to the Moscow , and make we payment with delay , as they have do these other year pass . Colobone and his partner be depart towards Lampas with seven sled lade with victual . other also be go to that Mart. as touch the bring of money with you , it will be good , for i assure you since our come to this country have not so many person go to the sea , as will do this year . trust that God will send good store of train oil , i will cause as much cask to be in a readiness as i can , if you shall think it meet to send some money before . all 
 394 
 our old hemp be spin and wrought in ten cable from fifteen inche to ten the least , and thirteen hauser from six inche to three inche : and all may weigh white eight and twenty thousand pound weight and upward . there be in hemp ockam five thousand pound two hundred weight in twelve sack at the least : the flax that come down in the nassada with those seven podes that come last be all spin with a good part of that hemp that come last . God send more short , for all that be here and that be come in the three other sled , will be dispatch by the four week in Lent. within these few day i buy thirteen podes , seven pound of hemp that cost two roble , twenty eight altines , four penny , which together with that that be buy before , shall be lay in dip and sound line , for it be very good . there be spend above fifty barrel of tar already : you shall what quanti-understand that these eight workman will spin ^afhempeZ . and lay above fourscore and ten thousand pound of hemp , so it be dress ready to their hand , year . have two to turn the wheel , and two to wind up . therefore i have agree with these two boy to serve the worshipful company four year a piece . one of they wind up and be very apt to spin : therefore i will have two other young man russes to spin , if they can find good surety for their truth . i have be in hand with these two young man that come out of the Trinity , and they with i , but under seven pound a year they will not serve , nor Thomas Bunting that be Roger Bunting his servant . therefore i will have three russes at the least to spin , five of they will be as good as these three , and will not be so chargeable all , as one of these will be . i think it be good that our Nassada be somewhat strengthen in her floor on both side with plank of five or six inche thick , from the stem to the stern , as i have write to Thomas Hawtrey at 
 395 
 white hawk in white bear prohibit without licence . 
 master Gray journey to Lampas . 
 1558. 
 vologda . also if you shall so think meet , your wax and tallow shall be lade in two dosnicke , for they be meet to go aboard the ship : i do intend to set up a house at Boroseva over against the place whereas the ship shall ride , your advice therein i expect , it shall not cost above three roble , and yet if we will , there shall be two warm room in it . as for other matter at this present i have not to trouble you withal , and if it will please you i will be glad to hear some good news of master Jenkinson . thus Jesus be with you and be his guide . 
 Postscriptum . 
 as for these our hawk they be not white , but white and mail , but indeed be jarfawkon . Theise day past our Olen die . so this year our master of the company be like to have none , nor any white bear . neither may any pass out of the realm without a special licence from the emperor . 
 i intend God willing to go to Lampas , if i do i will take four or five kersey with i , but as for money there be small store here to carry . 
 you , Richard grey . 
 