the first voyage make by master Anthony Jenkinson , from the city of London towards the land of Russia , begin the twelve of May , in the year 1557. 
 irst by the grace of God , the day and year above mention , i depart from the say city , and the same day at Gravesend embark my self in a good ship , name the primerose , be appoint , although unworthy , chief captain of the same , and also of the 
 other 3 good ship , to say , the John Evangelist , the anne , and the Trinity , have also the conduct of the emperor of Russia his ambassador name Osep Nepea Gregoriwich , who pass with his company in the say primerose . and thus our four tall ship be well appoint , aswell for man as victual as other necessary furniture , the say twelve day of the month of May , we weigh our anchor , and depart from the say Gravesend , in the after noon , and ply down the Thames , the wind be easterly , and fair weather , the 13 day we come a ground with the primerose , upon a sand call the black tail , where we sit fast until the 14 day in the morning , and then God be praise , she come off : and that day we ply down as far as our lady of holland , and there come to a anchor , the wind be easterly , and there remain until the 20 day : than we weigh and go out at Goldmore gate , and from thence in at balsey slade , and so into orwel wand , where we come to a anchor : but as we come out at the say Goldemore gate , the Trinity come on ground on certain rock , that lie to the northward of the say gate , and be like to be bilge and lose . but by the aid of God , at the last she come off again , be very leak : and the 21 day the primerose remain at a anchor in the wand , the 
 413 
 other three ship bear into orwel haven , where i cause the say Trinity to be ground , search , and repair . so we remain in the say haven , until the 28 day : and then the wind be westerly , the three ship that be in the haven , weigh and come forth , and in come forth the John Evangelist come on ground upon a sand , call the Andros , where she remain one tide , and the next full sea she come off again without any great hurt , God be praise . 
 the 29 day in the morning all four ship weigh in the wand , and that tide go as far as qrfordnesse , where we come to a anchor , because the wind be northerly : and about six of the clock at night , the wind vex to the southwest , and we weigh anchor , and bear clear of the ness , and then set our course Northeast and by north until midnight , be then clear of Yarmouth sand . than we wind north and by west , June , and northnorthwest , until the first of June at noon , than it wax calm , and continue so until the second day at noon : then the wind come at northwest , with a tempest , and much rain , and we lay close by , and cape Northnortheast , and Northeast and by north , as . the wind shift , and so continue until the three day at noon : then the wind vex Westerly again , and we go north our right course , and so continue our way until the four day , at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the wind vex to the northwest again and blow a fresh gale , and so continue until the seven day in the morning , we lie with all our ship close by , and cape to the northward : and then the wind vere more northerly , we be force to put roomer with the coast of England again , and fall overthwart Newcastle , but go not into the haven , 8c so ply upon the coast the eight day 8c the nine . 
 the ten day the wind come to the northnorthwest , 8c we be force to bear roomer with Flamborow head , where we come to a anchor , and there 414 
 remain until the seventeenth day . then the wind come fair , and we weigh , and set our course north and by east , and so continue the same with a merry wind until the 21 at noon , at which time we take the sun , and have the latitude in sixty degree . than we shift our course , and go Northnorth east , and Northeast and by north , until the 25 day . than we discover certain island , call Heilick island , lie heilickls-from we Northeast , be in the latitude of sixty six land in 66 degree , 40 minute . than we go north and by ^8 ™ 4° west , because we will not come too nigh the land , “ s' and run that course four hour , we discover , and have sight of roast island , join to the main roast island . land of Finmarke . thus continue our course along the coast of Norway and Finmark , the 27 day we take the sun , be as far shoot as Lofoot , and have the latitude in 69 degree . and the same day in the afternoon appear over our head a rainbow , like 
 a semicircle , with both end upward . note that there be between the say roast island and Lofoot , a whirl Malestrand a pool call Malestrand , which from half ebb until half flood , make such a terrible noise , that it shake it the ring in the door of the inhabitant house of the say island ten mile oflf . also if there comes any whale within the current of the samej they make a pitiful cry . Moreover , if great tree be carry into it by force of stream , and after with the ebb be cast out again , the end and bough of they have be so beat , that they be like the stalk of hemp that be bruise . note , that all the coast of Finmarke be high mountain and hill , be cover all the year with snow . and hard aboard the shore of this coast , there be 100 or 150 fathom of water in depth . thus proceed and sail forward , we fall with a island 
 call zenam , be in the latitude of 70 degree . Zenam island . about this island we see many whale , very monstrous , about our ship , some by estimation of 60 foot long : and be the engender time they roar and 
 415 
 cry terrible . from thence we fall with a island , Kettelwike call Kettelwicke . 
 island . this coast from roast unto Lofoot lie north and south , and from Lofoot to Zenam Northeast and southwest , and from Zenam to Kettelwike Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . from the say Kettelwike we sail east and by north io league , and fall with a Inger sound , land call Inger sound , where we fish , be becalm , and take great plenty of cod . thus ply along the north the coast , we fall with a cape , call the north cape , ^ape - which be the northermost land that we pass in our voyage to saint Nicholas , and be in the latitude of 71 degree and ten minute , and be from Inger sound east , and to the northward 15 league . And be at this north cape the second day of July , we have the sun at north 4 degree above the horizon . the three day we come to Wardhouse , have such mist Wardhouse , that we can not see the land . This Wardhouse be a castle stand in a island 2 mile from the main of Finland , subject to the king of Denmark , and the eastermost land that he have . there be two other 
 cattle feed with fish . 
 the monastery of Pechinchow . 
 island near adjoin unto that , whereon the castle of Wardhouse stand . the inhabitant of those three island live only by fish , and make much stockfish , which they dry with frost : their most feed be fish ; bread and drink they have none , but such as be bring they from other place . they have small store of cattle , which be also feed with fish . from Wardhouse we sail southsoutheast ten league , and fall with a cape of land call Kegor , the northermost part of the land of Lappia . and between Wardhouse , and the say cape be a great bay , call DommeshafF , in the south part whereof be a monastery of monk of the russes religion , call Pechinchow . thus proceed forward and sail along the coast of the say land of Lappia , wind southeast , the four day through great mist and darkness we lose the company of the other three ship , and meet not 
 416 
 with they again , until the seven day , when we fall with a cape or headland call Swetinoz , which be the enter into the bay of S. Nicholas . at this cape lie a great stone , to the which the bark that pass thereby , be wont to make offering of butter , meal , and other victual , think that unless they do so , their bark or vessel shall there perish , as it have be oftentimes see : and there it be very dark and misty . note that the sixth day we pass Arzina reca by the place where sir Hugh Willoughbie , with all the n ™ his company perish , which be call arzina reca , that be to say , the river Arzina . loughbiewa 
 the land of Lappia be a high land , have snow freeze . 
 lie on it common all the year . the people of the country be half Gentiles : they live in the summer time near the sea side , and use to take fish , of the which they make bread , and in the winter they remove up into the country into the wood , where they use ' hunt , and kill deer , bear , wolves , fox , and other beast , with who flesh they be nourish , and with their skin apparel in such strange fashion , that there be nothing see of they bear but their eye . the lapplans they have none other habitation , but only in tent , cover all remove from place to place , accord to the season of the year . they know no art nor faculty , but only shoot , which they exercise daily , as well man as woman , and kill such beast as serve they for their food . thus proceed along the coast from Swetinoz aforesaid , the nine day of July we come to cape grace , be in the latitude of 66 degree and 45 minute , and be at the enter in of the bay of S. 
 Nicholas . aboard this land there be 20 or 30 fathom water , and sundry ground good to anchor in . the then current current at this cape run Southwest and Northeast . at£atezrace ' from this cape we proceed along until we come to cross island , which be seven league from the say cape Southwest : and from this island , we set over to the other side of the bay , and go Southwest , and fall 
 two 417 2d 
 with a headland call Foxenose , which be from the the enter say island 25 league . the enter of this bay from cross island to the near land on the other side be seven league seven league over . from Boxenose proceed forward broad at they the twelve day of the say month of July , all our least . four ship arrive in safety at the road of saint Nicholas in the land of Russia , where we anchor , and have sail from London unto the say road seven hundred and fifty league . the russian ambassador and his com-fl . 312. ] pany with great joy get to shore , and our ship here forthwith discharge themselves : and be lade again , and have a fair wind , depart towards England the August . first of August . the three of the say month i with other of my company come unto the city of Colmogro , be a hundred verstes from the bay of saint Nicholas , and in the latitude of 64 degree 25 minute . 1 tarry at the say colmogro until the fifteen day : and then i depart in a little boat up the great river of Dwina , which run very swift , and the self same day pineg river , pass by the mouth of the river call pinego , leave it on our left hand fifteen verstes from Colmogro . on both side of the mouth of this river pinego be high land , great rock of alabaster , great wood , and pineapple tree lie along within the ground , which by report have lie there since Noes flood . and thus proceed forward the nineteenth day in the morning , the town of i come into a town call yemp , a hundred verstes temps . from Colmogro . all this way along they make much tar , pitch and ash of aspen tree . from thence i come to a place call ustiug , a ancient city the last day of August . at this city meet two river : the one call Jug , and the other Sucana , both which fall into the aforesaid river of Dwina . the river Jug have his spring in the land of the Tartar call chere-mizzi , join to the country of Permia : and Succana have his head from a lake not far from the city of ustiug . Vologda . thus depart from ustiug , and pass by the river Succana , we come to a town call Totma . 
 418 
 about this place the water be very shallow , and stony , and troublesome for bark and boat of that country , which they call nassade , and dosnecke , to pass that way : wherein merchandise be transport from the aforesaid colmogro to the city of Vologhda . Theise descripvessel call nassade , be very long build , broad make , and close above , flat bottomed , and draw not above four foot water , and will carry two hundred ton : they have none iron appertain to they but all of timber , and when the wind serve , they be make to sail . otherwise they have many man , some to hale and draw by the neck with long small rope make fast to the say boat , and some set with long pole . there be many of these bark upon the river of Dwina : and the most part of they belong unto the ci tie of Vologhda : for there dwell many merchant , and they occupy the say boat with carry of salt from the sea side unto the say Vologhda . the twenty of September i come unto Vologhda , which be a great city , and the river pass through the midst of the same . the house be build with wood of fir tree , join one with another , and round without : the house be four square without any iron or stone work , cover with birch bark , and wood over the same : their church be all of wood , two for every parish , one to be heat for winter , and the other for summer . 
 on the top of their house they lie much earth , for fear of burn : for they be sore plague with fire . This Vologhda be in 59 degree , eleven minute , and be from colmogro , 1000 verstes . 
 all the way i never come in house , but lodge in the wilderness , by the river side , and carry provision for the way . and he that will travel those way , must good counsel ! carry with he a hatchet , a tinder box , and a kettle , for it ™ ™ 116 ™ ' to make fire and seethe meat , when he have it : for there be small succour in those part , unless it be in town . 
 419 
 the first day of December , i depart from Vologhda in post in a sled , as the manner be in winter . and the way to Moscua be as follow . from Vologhda to Commelski , 27 verstes , so to Olmor 25 verstes , so to teloytske 20 verstes , so to ure 30 verstes , so to voshan-sko 30 verstes , then to yeraslave 30 verstes , which stand upon the great river Volga , so to rostove , 50 verstes , then to Rogarin 30 verstes , so to peraslave 10 verstes , which be a great town , stand hard by a fair lake . from thence to dowbnay 30 verstes , so to godo-roke 30 verstes , so to Owchay 30 verstes , and last to the Moscow 25 verstes , where i arrive the sixth day of December . December . 
 there be 14 post call yanne between Vologhda and Moscow , which be account 500 verstes asunder . 
 the 10 day of December i be send for to the emperor castle by the say emperor , and deliver my letter unto the secretary , who talk with i of diverse matter , by the commandment of the emperor . and after that my letter be translate , i be answer that i be welcome , and that the emperor will give i that i desire . 
 the 25 day , be the day of the nativity , i come into the emperor presence , and kiss his hand , who sit aloft in a goodly chair of estate , have on his head a crown most rich deck , and a staff of gold in his hand , all apparel with gold , and garnish with precious stone . 
 there sit distant from he about two yard his brother , and next unto he a boy of twelve year of age , who be inheritor to you emperor of Casan , conquer by this emperor 8 year past . then sit his nobility round about he , rich apparel with gold and stone . and after i have do obeisance to the emperor , he with his own mouth call i by my name , bid i to dinner , and so i depart to my lodging till dinner time , which be at six of the clock , by candle light . 
 the emperor dine in a fair great hall , in the midst 420 
 whereof be a pillar four square , very artificial make , about which be diverse table set , and at the uppermost part of the hall , sit the emperor himself , and at his table sit his brother , his uncle son , the metropolitan , the young emperor of Casan , and diverse of his noble man , all of one side . there be diverse ambassador , and other stranger , as well Christians as heathen , diverse apparel , to the number of 600 man , which dine in the say hall , beside 2000 Tartar , man of war , which be new come to render themselves to the emperor , and be appoint to serve he in his war against the lieflander , but they dine in other hals . i be set at a little table , have no stranger with i , direct before the emperor face . be thus set and place , the emperor send i diverse bowl of wine , and mead , and many dish of meat from his own hand , which be bring i by a duke , and my table serve all in gold and silver , and so likewise on other table , there be set bowl of gold , set with stone , worth by estimation 400 pound sterling one cup , beside the plate which serve the table . 
 there be also a cupboard of plate , most sumptuous and rich , which be not use : among the which , be a piece of gold of two yard long , wrought in the top with tower , and dragon head , also diverse barrel of gold and silver , with castle on the bung , rich and artificial make . the emperor and all the hall throughout be serve with duke : and when dinner be end , the emperor call i by name , and give i drink with his own hand , and so i depart to my lodging . 
 note , that when the emperor drink , all the company stand up , and at every time he drink or taste of a dish of meat he bless himself . many other thing i see that day , not here note . 
 the 4 of January , which be twelftide with they , the emperor , with his brother and all his noble , all most rich apparel with gold , pearl , precious stone , and 
 421 
 A.D. 
 i558 - 
 costly fur , with a crown upon his head , of the tartarian fashion , go to the church in procession , with the metropolitan , and diverse bishop and priest . that day i be before the emperor again in Russe apparel , and the emperor ask if that be not i , and his chancellor answer yea . than he bid i to dinner : then come he out of the church , and go with the procession upon the river , be all freeze , and there stand bare head , with all his noble , there be a hole make in the ice , and the metropolitan hallow the water with great solemnity and service , and do cast of the say water upon the emperor son and the nobility . that do , the people with great throng fill pot of the say water to carry home to their house , and diverse child be throw in , and sick people , and pluck out quick again , and diverse Tartar christen : all which the emperor behold . also there be bring the emperor best horse , to drink at the say hallow water . all this be end , he return to his palace again , and go to dinner by candle light , and sit in a wooden house , very fair gild . there dine in the place , above 300 stranger , and i sit alone as i do before , direct before the emperor , and have my meat , bread and drink send i from the emperor . 
 the city of Moscow be great , the house for the most part of wood , and some of stone , with window of iron , which serve for summer time . there be many fair church of stone , but more of wood , which be make hot in the winter time . the emperor lodging be in a fair and large castle , wall four square of brick , high , and thick , situate upon a hill , 2 mile about , and the river on the southwest side of it , and it have 16 gate in the wall , and as many bulwark . his palace be separate from the rest of the castle , by a long wall go north and south , to the river side . in his palace be church , some of stone and some of wood , with round tower fair gild . in the church door and within the church be image of gold : the chief market for all 422 
 thing , be within the say castle , and for sundry thing sundry market , and every science by it self . and in the winter there be a great market without the castle , upon the river be freeze , and there be sell corn , earthen pot , tub , sled , etc the castle be in circuit 2900 pase . 
 the country be full of marish ground , and plain , in wood and river abundant , but it bring forth good plenty of corn . this emperor be of great power : for he have conquer much , as well of the lieflander , pole , lettoe , and Swethens , as also of the Tartar , and gentile , call samoeds , have thereby much enlarge his dominion . he keep his people in great subjection : all matter pass his judgement , be they never so small . the law be sharp for all offender . 
 the metropolitan deal in matter of religion , as himself list , who the emperor great honour . they use the ceremony , and order of the greek church . they worship many image paint on table , and special the image of saint Nicholas . their priest be marry , but their wife be dead , they may not marry the second time , and so become monk , whereof there be a great number in the land . 
 they have four Lents in the year , and the week before Shrofetide , they call the butter week , etc 
 they have many sort of meat and drink , when they banquet and delight in eat of gross meat , and stink fish . before they drink they use to blow in the cup : their great friendship be in drink : they be great talker and liar , without any faith or trust in their word , flatterer and dissembler . the woman be there very obedient to their husband , and be keep straight from go abroad , but at some season . 
 at my be there , i hear of man and woman that drink away their child , and all their good at the emperor tavern , and not be able to pay , have impane himself , the taverner bring he out to the high way , and beat he upon the leg : then they that 
 423 
 pass by , know the cause , and have peradventure compassion upon he , give the money , and so he be ransom . 
 in every good town there be a drunken tavern call a cursemay , which the emperor sometime let out to farm , and sometime bestow for a year or two on some duke or gentleman , in recompense of his service : and for that time he be lord of all the town , rob and spoil , and do what please he : and then he be grow rich , be take by the emperor , and send to the war again , where he shall spend all that which he have get by ill mean : so that the emperor in his war be little charge , but all the burden lie upon the poor people . 
 they use saddle make of wood and sinew , with the tree gild with damask work , and the seat cover with cloth , sometime of gold , and the rest saphian leather , well stitch . they use little drum at their saddle bow , by the sound whereof their horse use to run more swift . 
 the Russe be apparel in this manner : his upper garment be of cloth of gold , silk , or cloth , long , down to the foot , and button with great button of silver , or else lace of silk , set on with brooch , the sleeve thereof very long , which he wear on his arm , ruff up . under that he have another long garment , button with silk button , with a high collar stand up of some colour , and that garment be make straight . than his shirt be very fine , and wrought with red silk , or some gold , with a collar of pearl . under his shirt he have linen breech , upon his leg , a pair of hose without foot , and his boot of red or yellow leather . on his head he wear a white colepecke , with button of silver , gold , pearl , or stone , and under it a black fox cap , turn up very broad . 
 when he ride on horseback to the war , or any journey , he have a sword of the turkish fashion , and his bow and arrow of the same manner . in the town he 
 424 
 wear no weapon , but only two or three pair of knife , have the haft of the tooth of a fish , call the Morse . 
 in the winter time , the people travel with sled , in town and country , the way be hard , and smooth with snow : the water and river be all freeze , and one horse with a sled , will draw a man upon it 400 mile , in three day : but in the summer time , the way be deep with mire , and travel be very ill . 
 the Russe , if he be a man of any ability , never go out of his house in the winter , but upon his sled , and in summer upon his horse : and in his sled he sit upon a carpet , or a white bear skin : the sled be draw with a horse well deck , with many fox and wolves tail at his neck , and be conduct by a little boy upon his back : he servant stand upon the tail of the sled etc 
 A.D. 
 1557 - 
 