u - 376 - ] the ambassage of the right worshipful master Thomas Randolfe , esquire , to the emperor of Russia , in the year 1568 , brief write by himself . 
 in this voyage go Thomas Bannister , wonderful Geoffrey Ducket , for their voyage into Persia . 
 he 22 day of June , in the year of our lord 1568 , i go aboard the Harry , lie in the road at Harwich with my company , be to the number of forty person or thereabouts : of which the one half be gentleman , desirous to see the world . 
 within one day sail , we be out of the sight of land , and follow our course direct north , till we come to the north cape , we sail for the space of twelve day with a prosperous wind , without tempest or outrage of sea : have compass the north cape we direct our course flat southeast , have upon our right hand Norway , Wardhouse , Lapland , all out of sight till we come to cape gallant : and so sail between two bay , the two and thirty day after our departure from Harwich , we cast anchor at saint Nicholas road . in all the time of our voyage , more than the great number of whale engender together , which we may plain behold , and the sperma Cetae , which we may see swim upon the sea , there be no great thing to be wonder at . sometime we have calm , wherein our mariner fish , and take good the abbey of store of diverse sort . at saint Nicholas we land the saint Nicholas of 23 of July , where there stand a abbey of monk 20 monk . ( t£ ) number of twenty ) build all of wood : the apparel of the monk be superstitious , in black hood , as we have be . their church be fair , but full of paint image , taper , and candle . their own house be low , and small room . they lie apart , they eat together , and be much give to drunkenness , unlearned , write they can , preach they do 102 
 1568. never , ceremonious in their church , and long in their prayer . 
 at my first arrival i be present from their prior with two great rye loaf , fish both salt and fresh of diverse sort , both sea fish and fresh water , one sheep alive , black , with a white face , to be the more grateful unto i , and so with many solemn word invite i to see their house , they take their leave . 
 town or habitation at saint Nicholas there be none the English more than about four house near the abbey , and house at 8. another build by the english company for their own king 0 ‘ use . 
 this part of the country be most part wood , save here and there pasture and arable ground , many river and diverse island unhabit , as the most part of the country be , for the coldness in winter . 
 s. Nicholas stand Northeast : the elevation of the the river of pole 64 degree . the river that run there into the ^wina . sea be call Dwina , very large , but shallow . this river take his beginning about 700 mile within the country , and upon this river stand colmogro , and many pretty village , well situate for pasture , arable land , wood , and water . the river pleasant between high hill of either side inward inhabit , and in a manner a wilderness of high fir tree , and other wood . 
 at Colmogro be 100 verst , which we account for Colmogro . three quarter of a mile every verse , we tarry three week , not be suffer to depart before the emperor have word of our come , who send to meet we a gentleman of his house , to convey we , and to see we furnish of victual , and all thing needful , upon his own charge . 
 the allowance of meat and drink be for every day two rubble , beside the charge of boat by water , and four score post horse by land , with above 100 cart to carry my wine , and other carriage . 
 Colmogro be a great town build all of wood , not wall , but scatter house from house . the people be 
 103 
 a english house with land at colmogro . 
 [ i - 377-j 
 the description of the inland of Moscovie . 
 rude in manner , and in apparel homely , save upon their festival ! , and marriage day . 
 the people of this town find commodity by the english man traffic with they be much at their commandment , give much to drunkenness , and all other kind of abominable vice . 
 in this town the english man have land of their own , give they by the emperor , and fair house , with office for their commodity , very many . 
 of other town until i come to Vologda , i write not , because they be much like to this , and the inhabitant not differ from they . 
 i be five whole week upon the river of Dwina till i come to Vologda , be draw with man against the stream , for other passage there be none . 
 vologda stand upon the river of Vologda , which come into Dwina . the town be great and long , build all of wood , as all their town be . 
 in this town the emperor have build a castle environed with a wall of stone , and brick , the wall fair and high , round about . here ( as in all other their town ) be many church , some build of brick , the rest of wood , many monk and nun in it : a town also of great traffic , and many rich merchant there dwell . 
 from hence we pass by land towards Moscow in post , be 500 verst great , which be equal with our mile . in their town we bait or lie , be post town . 
 the country be very fair , plain and pleasant , well inhabit , corn , pasture , meadow enough , river , and wood , fair and goodly . 
 at yeraslave we pass the river of Volga , more than a mile over . this river take his beginning at Beal Ozera , and descend into mare Caspium , portable thorough of very great vessel with flat bottom , which far pass any that our country use . 
 to sail by this river into mare Caspium the english company cause a bark to be build of 27 tunn , which 104 
 there be never see before : this bark build , and ready rig to the sea with her whole furniture cost not the company above one hundred mark there . 
 to Moscow we come about the end of September , his arrival receive by no man , not so much as our own country - at mosco-man suffer to meet we , which breed suspicion in i of some other course intend , than we have hitherto find . 
 we be bring to a house build of purpose by the special emperor for ambassador , fair and large , after the ^u^atMosco it fashion of that country . bassadour . 
 two gentleman be appoint to attend upon i , the one to see we furnish of victual , and that we lack nothing of the emperor allowance : the other to see that we shall not go out of the house , nor suffer any man to come unto we , in which they leave nothing undo that belong to their charge . but special he that look to our person so straight handle we , that we have no small cause to doubt that some evil have be intend unto we . no supplication , suit , or request can take place for our liberty , nor yet to come to his presence . 
 have pass over 17 week in this sort , the emperor send word that we shall be ready against Tuesday the 20 of February , at eight a clock in the morning . 
 the hour be come that i shall go to the court , two the two gentleman pristave ( as they call they ) come pristave . unto i apparel more princely than before i have ever see they . they press we to depart , and mount upon their own horse , and the ambassador upon such a one as he have borrow , his man march on foot , to their great grief . 
 the ambassador ( be my self ) be convey into a office where one of the chancellor do use to sit , be there accompany with the two foresay gentleman : i tarry two long hour before i be send for to the emperor . in the end message be bring that the emperor be set , i be convey by my gentleman up a pair of stair through a large room , where sit by 105 
 he admission to the emperor presence . 
 the queen present . 
 the emperor speech to the ambassador . 
 my estimation 300 person , all in rich attire , take out of the emperor wardrobe for that day , upon three rank of bench , set round about the place , rather to present a majesty , then that they be either of quality or honour . 
 at the first entry into the chamber i with my cap give they the reverence , such as i judge their stately sit , grave countenance , and sumptuous apparel require , and see that it be not answer again of any of they i cover my head , and so pass to a chamber where the emperor be , there receive i at the door from my two gentleman or governor , two of the emperor counsellor , and show i to the emperor , and bring i to the middle of the chamber , where i be will to stand still , and to say that which i have to say . i by my interpretor open my message as i receive it from the queen my mistress , from who i come , at who name the emperor stand up , and demand diverse question of her health and state : whereunto answer be make , he give i his hand in token of my welcome , and cause i to sit down , and further ask i diverse question . 
 this do , i deliver her majesty present , which be a notable great cup of silver curious wrought , with verse grave in it , express the history workmanly set out in the same . 
 all be say and do ( as appear ) to his contentment , he licence i and my whole company to depart , who be all in his presence , and be salute by he with a nod of his head , and say unto i : i dine not this day open for great affair i have , but i will send thou my dinner , and give leave to thou and thou to go at liberty , and augment our allowance to thou , in token of our love and favour to our sister the queen of England . 
 i with reverence take my leave , be convey by two other of great calling than those that bring i to the emperor sight , who deliver i to the two 
 106 
 first gentleman , who conduct i to the office where i first be , where come unto i one call the long duke , with who i confer a while , and so return to my lodging . 
 within one hour after in come to my lodging a duke rich apparel , accompany with fifty person , each of they carry a silver dish with meat , and cover with silver . the duke first deliver twenty loaf of bread of the emperor own eat , have taste the same , and deliver every dish into my hand , and taste of every kind of drink that he bring . 
 this be do , the duke and his company sit down with i , and take part of the emperor meat , and fill themselves well of all sort , and go not away from i unrewarded . 
 within few night after the emperor have will to speak secret with i , and send for i in the night by the long duke : the place be far off , and the night cold , and i have change my apparel into such as the russes do wear , find great incommodity thereby . 
 have talk with he above three hour , towards the morning i be dismiss , and so come home to my lodging , where i remain above six week after , before i hear again from the emperor , who go the next day to Slovoda , the house of his solace . after the end of which six week , which be about the begin of April , the emperor return from Slovoda aforesaid , and send for i again to make repair unto he . And be come , i deal effectual with he in the behalf of our english merchant , and find he so gracious incline towards they , that i obtain at his hand my whole demand for large privilege in general , together with all the rest my particular request . and then he commend to my conduct into England , a noble man of he , call Andrew Savin , as his ambassador , for the better confirmation of his privilege grant , and other negotiation with her majesty . and thus be dispatch with full contentment , the say ambassador 
 a second conference with the emperor . 
 Andrew Savin ambassador to the queen . 
 107 
 and my self depart , and embark at saint Nicholas about the end of July , and arrive safe at London in the month of September follow . 
 