necessary note to be observe , and follow in discovery , as hereafter follow . 
 your bark with all furniture and necessary be in readiness for you to depart to the sea : be that you take your bark at saint Nicholas , or any part of Dwina Reca ) you shall from thence , even as timely in the spring as the ice will permit you , sail , and make all expedition that may be , unto the mouth of the river Pechora ( as your commission do lead you ) and as you pass by the coast all along ( notwithstanding the plat that show you the description of the say coast , from Dwina unto vaigat ) yet you shall seek by all the mean that you can , to amend the same plat , use as many observation , as you possible can do : and these note follow be to be observe by you principal . 
 1 first , that you do observe the latitude as often , and in as many place as you may possible do it , note diligent the place where you do so observe the same . 
 2 also that you do diligent set with your compass , how the land do lie from point to point , all alongst 
 122 
 as you go , and to use your judgement how far there may be between each of they . 
 3 item , that you do always use to draw the proportion and bite of the land , aswell the lie out of the point , and headland , unto the which you shall give some apt name ( at your discretion ) as also the form of the bay , and to make some mark in draw the form , and border of the same , where the high cliff be , and where low land be , whether sandy hill , or whatsoever : omit not to note any thing that may be sensible and apparent to you , which may serve to any purpose . 
 4 in pass along by any coast , that you keep your lead go often time , and sound at the least once every glass , and often if you think good as occasion do serve , and note diligent the depth with the manner of the ground , and at every time , how far the same sound may be from the next shore to it : and how the next point or headland do bear from you . and in the sea after you set off from your port , you shall orderly at the end of every four glass sound , and if you find ground , note the depth and what ground , but if you can find no ground , you shall also note in what depth you can find no ground . 
 5 also that you do diligent observe the flow , and ebb in every place , and how the tide do set , which way the flood do come , and how much water it do high in every place , and what force the same tide have to drive a ship in a hour , as near as you can judge it . 
 6 also that you do seek to observe with the instrument which i deliver you herewith , accord as i teach you at rose island , the true platform , and distance , in as many place as convenient you may , for it serve very apt your purpose . 
 7 also that you take with you paper and ink , and keep a continual jour nail or remembrance day by day , of all such thing as shall fall out worth the knowledge , not forget or omit to write it , and note it , that it may be show and read at your return . 
 123 
 8 these order if you shall diligent observe , it will be easy for you to make a plat and perfect description of your discovery , and so shall your note be sufficient to answer that which be look for at your hand . but withal you may not forget to note as many thing as you can learn and understand by the report of any people whatsoever they be , so that it appertain any way to our desire . and thus the lord God prosper your voyage . amen . 
 