further observation concern the state of Persia , take in the foresay five voyage into those part , and write by m. Geffrey Ducket , one of the agent employ in the same . 
 hamaky be the fair town in all media , and the chief commodity of that country be raw silk , and the great plenty thereof be at a town three day journey from shamaky call arash : and within 3. day journey of arash be a country name grosin , who inhabit 
 ant be Christians , and be think to be they which be otherwise call Georgians : there be also much silk to be sell . the chief town of that country be call Zegham , from whence be carry yearly into Persia , a incredible quantity of Hasell nut , all of one sort and goodness , and as good and thin shale as be our filbert . of these be carry yearly the quantity of 4000 camel lade . 
 of the name of the sophy of Persia , and why he be call the shaugh , and of other custom . 
 the king of Persia ( who here we call the great sophy ) be not there so call , but be call the shaugh . it be there dangerous to call he by the name of sophy , because that sophy in the persian tongue , be a beggar , and it be as much as to call he , the great beggar . he lie at a town call Casbin , which be situate in a goodly fertile valley of 3. or 4. day journey in length . the town be but evil build , and for the most part all of brick , not harden with fire , but only dry at the sun , as be the most part of the build of all Persia . the king have not come out of the compass of his own house in 33. or 34. year , whereof the cause be not know , but as they say , it be 
 upon a superstition of certain prophecy to which they be great addict : he be now about 80. year of age , and very lusty . and to keep he the more lusty , he have 4. wife always , and about 300. concubine , and once in the year he have all the fair maiden and wife that may be find a great way about bring unto he , who he diligent peruse , feel they in all part , take such as he like , and put away some of they which he have keep before , and with they that he put away , he gratifi some such as have do he the best service . and if he chance to take any man wife , her husband be very glad thereof , and in recompense of she , oftentimes he give the husband one of his old store , who he thankful receive . 
 if any stranger be a christian shall come before how stranger he , he must put on a new pair of shoe make in be used-that country , and from the place where he enter , there be dig as it be a causey all the way , until he come to the place where he shall talk with the king , who stand always above in a gallery , when he talk with any stranger : and when the stranger be depart , then be the causey cast down , and the ground make even again . 
 of the religion of the persian . 
 their religion be all one with the Turk , save that they differ who be the right successor of Mahumet . the Turk say that it be one Homer and his son Usman . but the persian say that it be one Mortus Ali , which they will prove in this manner . they say there be a counsel call to decide the matter who shall be the successor : and after they have call upon Mahumet to reveal unto they his will and pleasure therein , there come among they a little a goodly and lizard , who declare that it be mahumet pleasure well ground that Mortus Ali shall be his successor . This Mortus re Ali be a valiant man and slay Homer the Turk prophet . he have a sword that he fight withal , with 
 159 
 the which he conquer all his enemy , and kill as many as he strike . when Mortus Ali die , there come a holy prophet , who give they warning that short there will come a white Carnell , upon the which he charge they to lay the body and sword of Mortus Ali , and to suffer the camel to carry it whither he will . the which be perform , the say white camel carry the sword and body of Mortus Ali unto the sea side , and the camel go a good way into the sea , be with the body and sword of Mortus Ali take up into heaven , for who return they have long look in Persia . and for this cause the king always keep a horse ready saddle for he , and also of late keep for he one of his own daughter to be his wife , but she die in the year of our lord , 1573. and they say furthermore , y‘ if he come not short , they shall of our belief : much like the Jew , look for their Messiah to come and reign among they like a worldly king for ever , and deliver they from the captivity which they be now in among the christian , Turk , and gentile . 
 the shaugh or king of Persia be nothing in strength and power comparable unto the Turk : for although he have a great dominion , yet be it nothing to be compare with the turk : neither have he any great ordinance or gun , or harquebuss . notwithstanding his old son Ishmael about 25. year past , fight a great battle with the Turk , and slay of his army about a hundred thousand man : who after his return , be by his father cast into prison , and there continue until this day : for his father the shaugh have he in suspicion that he will have put he down , and have take the regiment unto himself . 
 their opinion of Christ be , that he be a holy man and a great prophet , but not like unto Mahumet : say , that Mahumet be the last prophet by who all thing be finish , and be therefore the great . to prove that Christ be not God son , they say that God have never wife , and therefore can have no son 
 160 
 or child . they go on pilgrimage from the further part of Persia unto Mecha in Arabia , and by the way they visit also the sepulchre of Christ at Jerusalem , which they now call couch kaly . 
 the most part of spice which come into Persia be bring from the island of ormus , situate in the gulf of Persia call Sinus Persicus , between the main land of Persia and Arabia , etc the Portugal touch at ormus both in their voyage to east India and homeward again , and from thence bring all such spice as be occupy in Persia and the region thereabouts : for of pepper they bring very small quantity , and that at a very dear price . 
 the Turk oftentimes bring pepper from Mecha in Arabia , which they sell as good cheap as that which be bring from ormus . silk be bring from no place , but be wrought all in their own country . 
 ormus be within two mile of the main land of Persia , and the Portugal fetch their fresh water there , for the which they pay tribute to the shaugh or king of Persia . 
 within Persia they have neither gold nor silver mine , yet have they coin money both of gold and silver , and also other small money of copper . there be bring into Persia a incredible sum of dutch dollar , which for the most part be there employ in raw silk . 
 they have few book and less learning , and be for the most part very brutish in all kind of good science , save in some kind of silk work , and in such thing as pertain to the furniture of horse , in the which they be pass good . 
 their law be as in their religion , wicked and detestable . and if any man offend the prince , he punish it extreme , not only in the person that offend , but also in his child , and in as many as be of his kin . theft and murder be often punish , yet none otherwise then please he that be ruler in the place where the offence be commit , and as the party offend in 161 l 
 their money . 
 their book and learning . 
 such be the law of the macedonian for treason . 
 be able to make friend , or with money to redeem his offence . 
 dissension fir there be oftentimes great mutiny among the people 
 great town which of Mortus Ali his son be great : insomuch that sometime in the town two or three thousand people be together by the ear for the same , as i have see in the town of shamaky and Ardouil , and also in the great city of Teveris , where i have see a man come from fight , in a bravery bring in his hand four or five man head , carry they by the hair of the head : for although they shave their head most common twice a week , yet leave they a tuft of hair upon their head about 2. foot long . 
 i have inquire why they leave the tuft of hair upon their head . they answer , that thereby they may easiler be carry up into heaven when they be dead . 
 for their religion they have certain priest who be apparel like unto other man . they use every morning and afternoon to go up to the top of their church , and tell there a great tale of Mahumet and Mortus Ali : and other preach have they none . their lent be after Christmas , not in abstinence from flesh only , but from all meat and drink , until the day be off the sky , but than they eat sometime the whole night their priest and although it be against their religion to drink wine , at n’^t the7 wi^ take excess thereof and en ' be drunken . their lent begin at the new moon , and they do not enter into it until they have see the same : neither yet do their lent end , until they have see the next new moon , although the same ( through close weather ) shall not be see in long time . 
 their saint they have among they certain holy man who they and holy man . gete , count holy for that they or any of their ancestor have be on pilgrimage at Mecha in Arabia , pilgrimage . for whosoever go thither on pilgrimage to visit the sepulchre of Mahumet , both he and all his posterity be ever after call set , and count for holy man , and have no less opinion of themselves . and if a man 162 
 contrary one of these , he will say that he be a saint , and therefore ought to be believe , and that he can lie , although he lie never so shameful . thus a man may be too holy , and no pride be great than spirituali pride of a mind puff up with his own opinion of holiness . Theise set do use to shave their head all over , save on the side a little above the temple , the which they leave unshaven , and use to braid the same as woman do their hair , and to wear it as long as it will grow . 
 every morning they use to worship God , Mahumet , their prater and Mortus Ali , 8c in pray turn themselves towards and w°r-the south , because Mecha lie that way from they , when they be in travel on the way , many of they will Mahumet . ( as soon as the sun rise ) light from their horse , turn themselves to the south , and will lay their gown before they , with their sword and bead , and so stand upright worship to the south : and many time in their prayer kneel down and kiss their bead , or somewhat else that lie before they . 
 the man or woman do never go to make water , wash and but they use to take with they a pot with a spout , outward clen-and after they have make water , they flash some water linesse-upon their privy part , and thus do the woman as well as the man : and this be a matter of great religion among they , and in make of water the man do cower down as well as the woman . 
 when they earnest affirm a matter , they will swear their . by God , Mahumet , or Mortus Ali , and sometime by swearin&-all at one : as thus in their own language , say , olla , Mahumet , Ali. but if he will swear by the shaugh head , in say Shaugham bash , you may then believe he if you will . 
 the shaugh keep a great magnificence in his court : the king and although sometime in a month or six week none of his nobility or counsel can see he , yet go they daily to the court , and tarry there a certain time until they have know his pleasure whether he will come - 
 163 
 I57+ - maund they any thing or not . he be watch every night with a thousand of his man , which be call he 
 pursuivant . cursh , who be they that he use to send into the country about his great affair . when he send any of they ( if it be to the great of any of his nobility ) he will obey they , although the messenger shall beat any of they to death . 
 the king company with his wife and concubine . the shaugh occupi himself always two day in the week in his bathstove , and when he be dispose to go thither , he take with he five or six of his concubine , more or less , and one day they consume in wash , rub , and bathe he , and the other day in pare he nail , and other matter . the great part of his life he spend among his wife and concubine . he have now reign about fifty and four year , and be therefore count a very holy man , as they ever esteem their king , if they have reign fifty year or more : for they measure the favour of God by a man prosperity , or his displeasure by a man misfortune or adversity . the great Turk have this shaugh in great reverence , because he have reign king so long time . 
 the succession of the kingdom . i have say before that he have four wife , and as many concubine as he list : and if he chance to have any child by any of his concubine , and be mind that any of those child shall inherit after he , then when one of his wife die , the concubine who he so favour , he make one of his wife , and the child who he so love best , he ordain to be king after he . what i hear of the manner of their manage , for offend of honest conscience and chaste ear , i may not commit to writing : their fast i have declare 
 circumcision . before . they use circumcision unto child of seven year of age , as do the Turk . their house ( as i have say ) be for the most part make of brick , not burn but only dry in the sun : in their house they have but little furniture of household 164 
 stuff , except it be their carpet and some copper work : their house for all their kettle and dish wherein they eat , be off and . manner copper . they eat on the ground , sit on carpet eatin^-crosse legged as do tailor . there be no man so simple but he sit on a carpet better or worse , and the whole house or room wherein he sit be whole cover with carpet . their house be all with flat roof cover with earth : and in the summer time they lie upon they all night . 
 they have many bond servant both man and woman . bondman and bondman and bondwoman , be one of the best kind of bondwoman . merchandise that any man may bring . when they buy any maid or young woman , they use to feel they in all part , as with we man do horse : when one have buy a young woman , if he like she , he will keep she for his own use as long as he list , and then sell she to a other , who do the like with she . 
 so that one woman be sometime sell in the space of four or five year , twelve , or twenty time . if a woman buy man keep a bondwoman for his own use , and if he and find she to be false to he , and give her body to any 11110 hire ' other , he may kill she if he will . 
 when a merchant or traveller come to any town where he intend to tarry any time , he hire a woman , or sometime 2. or 3. during his abode there . and when he come to a other town , he do the like in the same also : for there they use to put out their woman to hire , as we do here hackney horse . 
 there be a very great river which run through the plain of Javat , which fall into the caspian sea , by a town call Bachu , near unto which town be a strange thing to behold . for there issue out of the abundance of ground a marvelous quantity of oil , which oil they " sue fetch from the uttermost bound of all Persia : it serve out all the country to burn in their house . 
 this oil be black , and be call nefte : they use to carry it throughout all the country upon cow and ass , of which you shall oftentimes meet with four or five i65 
 hundred in a company . there be also by the say town of Bachu another kind of oil which be white and very precious : and be suppose to be the same that here be Oleum Petro - call Petroleum . there be also not far from Shamaky , k*1 ™ - a thing like unto tar , and issue out of the ground , whereof we have make the proof , that in our ship it serve well in the stead of tar . 
 two sort of in Persia be cow of two sort : the one like unto tne - we in these part : the other be marvelous evil 
 favour , with great bone and very lean , and but little hair upon they : their milk be walowish sweet : they be like unto they which be speak of in the scripture , which in the dream of Pharaoh signify the seven dear year : for a lean or more evil favour beast can no man see . 
 in the country of Shirvan ( sometime call Media ) if you chance to lie in the field near unto any village , fox in great as the twilight begin , you shall have about you plenty - two or three hundred fox , which make a marvelous wawl or howl : and if you look not well to your victual , it shall escape they hardly but they will have part with you . 
 the caspian sea do neither ebb nor flow , except sometime by rage of wind it swell up very high : the water be very salt . howbeit , the quantity of water that fall out of the great river of Volga make the water fresh at the least twenty league into the sea . the caspian sea be marvelous full of fish , but no kind of monstrous fish , as far as i can understand , yet have it sundry sort of fish which be not in these part of the world . 
 the mutton there be good , and the sheep great , have very great rump with much fat upon they . 
 rice and mutton be their chief victuali . 
 