the queen majesty letter to shaugh Thamas the great Sophi of Persia , send by Arthur Edward , William Turnbull , Matthew Tailbois , and - Peter Gerard appoint agent for the Moscovie company , in their sixth voyage to Persia , begin in the year 1579. 
 to the most noble and invincible emperor of Persia , king of Shirvan , Gilan , grosin , Corassan , and great governor of the Indies . 
 Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the most noble and invincible emperor of Persia , king of Shirvan , Gilan , grosin , Corassan , and great governor even unto the Indies , send greeting . most noble and in - 
 il 1568 vincible prince , it be now two ten year since , or 
 394 - thereabouts , wherein ( after the honourable ambassade of 
 the noble man Anthony Jenkinson our well-beloved subject , to your most noble and invincible father perform ) we labour to bring to pass by Thomas Bannister and Geoffrey Ducket merchant , our subject , that throughout all the kingdom subject to his empire , free power may be give to will . Garrard , Thomas Ofley , William Chester knight , Rowland haiward , Lionel Ducket , 
 212 
 William Allen , Thomas Bannister , Geoffrey Ducket , Laurence chapman merchant , and unto their society , to enter into his land and country at all time when they will and can , there to exercise and use their trade of merchandise , and from thence likewise after exchange or sale make of those ware , which they shall bring with they with his like good leave and favour , to carry from thence those thing wherewith his dominion do abound and with we be scant . which our petition the most noble prince your father take so thankful and in such good part , that he not only grant frank and commodious leave , as be desire : but the same he will to be unto they most free and beneficial , and to have continuance for many year and time . the benefit of the which his wonderful liberality , our subject do enjoy with such humanity and freedom as there can be no great , till the time that by reason of war more and more increase in those part , by the which our subject be to make their journey into Persia , they be debar and shut from that voyage and traffic . the which traffic the say society be eftsoon desirous to renew to the weal and commodity of both our dominion they have now send into Persia their factor and agent Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Tailbois , Peter Gerrard merchant , with their associate , who we beseech your invincible majesty to entertain with that favour wherewith your father do embrace Tho. Bannister 8c Geffrey Ducket , and to enfranchise their whole society with that freedom , that neither they through any their misdemeanour towards your subject , may thereof seem unworthy ( as we hope they will not ) neither we our self otherwise enjoy they , then with the perpetuali remembrance of your good affection towards we , and with the like favourable inclination of our part towards you . the matter it self 8c tract of time shall sufficient prove the foresay manner of traffic unprofitable to neither of we . for so have one god the chief 
 213 
 A.D. 
 1579 - 
 governor of all thing dispose of our affair on earth , that each one shall need other . and as for our people and subject of the english nation , in very deed your majesty shall find they make and fashion so pliant to the performance of all duty of humanity , that it can never repent you to have grant they this frank traffic , nor shame we to have obtain it for they at your hand . that therefore it may please your majesty to yield unto they this at our request , most earnest we beseech you . and we ( as it well beseem a prince ) if ever hereafter we may , will show our self not to be unmindful of so great a benefit . we wish your majesty well and prosperous to fare . give at our palace of Westminster the io . day of June , in the year of our lord 1579. and of our reign the 21. 
 