the request of a honest merchant to a friend of he , to be advise and direct in the course of kill the whale , as follow . An. 1575. 
 i pray you pleasure i in get i perfect information of the matter hereunder specify . 
 for the provision and furniture for a ship of 200 ton , to catch the whale fish in Russia , pass from England . how many man to furnish the ship . 
 how many fisherman skilful to catch the whale , and how many other officer and Cooper . 
 200 
 how many boat , and what fashion , and how many man in each boat . 
 what wage of such skilful man and other officer , as we shall need out of Biskay . 
 how many harp iron , spear , cord , axe , hatchet , knife , and other implement for the fish , and what sort and greatness of they . 
 how many kettle , the greatness and manner of they , and what mettle , and whether they be set on trivet or on furnace for boil of the train oil , and other . 
 what quantity of cask , and what sort of cask , and what number of hoop and twig , and how much thereof to be stave for the train . 
 what quantity of victual , and what kind of victual for the man in all the ship for 4 month time . 
 for the common mariner and officer to govern the ship , we shall not need any out of biskaie , but only man skilful in the catch of the whale , and order of the oil , and one Cooper skilful to set up the stave cask . 
 also what other matter be requisite to be know , and do for the say voyage to catch the whale , not here note nor remember . 
 these request be thus answer , which may serve as direction for all such as shall intend the same voyage , or the like for the whale . 
 a proportion for the set forth of a ship of 200. ton , for the kill of the whale . 
 there must be 55 man who depart for Wardhouse in the month of April , must be furnish with 4 kintal and a half of bread for every man . 250 hogshead to put the bread in . 
 150 hogshead of Cidar . 
 6 kintals of oil . 
 8 kintals of bacon . 
 201 
 10 quarter of salt . 
 150 pound of candle . 
 8 quarter of bean and pease . 
 saltfish and herring , a quantity convenient . 
 4 ton of wine . 
 half a quarter of mustard seed , and a quern . 
 a grindstone . 
 800 empty shake hogshead . 
 350 bundle of hoop , and 6 quintalines . 
 800 pair of head for the hogshead . 
 10 Estachas call rox for harp iron . 
 10 piece of Arporieras . 
 3 piece of baibens for the javelin small . 
 2 tackle to turn the whale . 
 a hals of 27 fathom long to turn you whale . 
 15 great javelin . 
 18 small javelin . 
 50 harp iron . 
 6 machicos to cut the whale withal . 
 2 dozen of macheto to minch the whale . 
 2 great hook to turn the whale . 
 3 pair of can hook . 
 6 hook for staff . 
 3 dozen of staff for the harp iron . 
 6 pilley to turn the whale with . 
 10 great basket . 
 10 lamp of iron to carry light . 
 5 kettle of 150 livre . the piece , and 6 ladle . 
 1000 of nail for the pinnace . 
 500 of nail of carabelie for the house , and the wharf . 
 18 axe and hatchet to cleave wood . 
 12 piece of line , and 6 dozen of hook . 
 2 beetle of rosemary . 
 4 dozen of oar for the pinnace . 
 6 lantern . 
 500 of Tesia . 
 202 
 William BURROUGH’S deposition a.d. 
 1576. 
 item , gunpowder and match for harquebuss as shall needful . 
 item , there must be carry from hence 5 pinnace , five man to strike with harp iron , two cutter of whale , 5 cooper , and a purser or two . 
 a note of certain other necessary thing belong to the whalefish , receive of master W. Burrough . 
 a sufficient number of pilley for tackle for the whale . 
 a dozen of great basket . 
 4 furnace to melt the whale in . 
 6 ladle of copper . 
 a thousand of nail to mend the pinnace . 
 500 great nail of spike to make their house 
 3 pair of boot great and strong , for they that shall cut the whale . 
 8 calve skin to make apron or barbecan . 
 