a letter send from her highness to the say great duke of Russia , by sir Hierome bow aforesaid , her majesty ambassador . 
 312 
 the same in english . 
 ELizabeth by the grace of God , queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the most excellent prince and lord , John Basiliwich , by the same grace of God , king and great duke of all Russia , Volodomer , Moscovie , and Novogrod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Plesco , and great duke of Smolensco , of tuer , Ugor , and Permie , Viatsca , Bolhar , and other , lord and great duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Cherniga , rezan , polotsko , Rostove , jaroslave , Bealozera , Lifland , Oudor , Obdor , and condensa , and governor of all the land of Siberia , and of the north part and other , her dear brother and friend , salutation . 
 most excellent prince , most dear brother and friend , by those thing which the worthy ambassador of your excellency declare unto we , we have understand how kind it will be take , if we shall send to your 313 
 excellency a ambassador from we , with commandment and instruction . in which matter your honourable request have so much please we , that we can not any manner of way satisfy our self , except we perform the same . and have purpose with our self so to do , we think of , and remember Jerome Bowes knight , a gentleman of quality of our household , a man very much belove of we , who at this present we send unto your majesty , and to who wisdom and faithfulness we have commit all , whatsoever we take to appertain to the advancement of both our honour indifferent . in the discharge of which service , we doubt not but that all care and diligence shall be use on his part , so that we entreat your majesty to give he credence in the prosecute of those thing which he have from we in commandment , no less than to our self , if we be present . and whereas doctor Jacob. Robert Jacob doctor of physic be a man very dear unto we , who the last year we send unto your excellency , we desire that he may have that favour and estimation with you , which good prince think a most honest and virtuous man worthy of : for have we not carry great respect to our mutual friendship , and endeavour to gratify your majesty , we shall in no case have part with he . And see we continue still the same good will towards your excellency , we do even promise to our self your honourable kindness towards he : and we pray the almighty god to preserve your majesty in good safety and health . give at our palace of Greenwich the 19 day of June , in the year of our lord 1583 , and of our reign the five and twenty . 
 