commission give by sir Rowland Hayward [ i - 433j knight , and George bairn , aiderman and governor of the company of english merchant , for discovery of new trade , unto Arthur pet , and Charles Jackman , for a voyage by they to be make , for discovery of Cathay , 1580. in form follow . 
 n the name of God almighty , and everlasting , amen . This write for commission tripartite , make the twenty day of May anno Dom. 1580. and in the 22. year of the reign of our sovereign lady Elizabeth by the grace of God , queen of England , 
 France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc between sir Rowland Hayward knight , and George bairn , aiderman of the city of London , and governor of the company of english merchant , for discovery of new 251 
 trade , for the behoof , and in the name of the say company , on the first party , and Arthur pet of Ratcliff , in the county Middlesex , captain , master , and chief ruler of the good bark , call the George of London , of the burden of 40. ton , or thereabouts , on the second party , and Charles Jackman of popler , in the say county of Middlesex , captain , master and ruler of the good bark , call the William of London , of the burden of 20. ton , or thereabouts , ( which bark be now ride at anchor in the river of Thames against Limehouse ) on the three party : witness , that the say governor , and company have hire the say Arthur Pet , to serve in the say bark , call the George , with nine man and a boy : and likewise the say Charles Jackman , to serve in the say bark , call the William , with five man and a boy , for a voyage by they to be make by God grace , for search and discovery of a passage by sea from hence by borough strait , and the island vaigat , eastwards , to the country or dominion of the mighty prince , the emperor of Cathay , and in the same unto the city of Cambalu and Quinsay , or to either of they . 
 the which passage ( upon authority of writer , and great reason ) be conceive to be from the vaigat eastwards , accord to the description in plat of spirali line , make by master William Burrough , whereof either of the say Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman , have one deliver unto they , and also one other sail card , and a blank plat for either of they . but if it shall not be in all point , accord to that description , yet we hope that the continent or firm land of Asia do not stretch it self so far northwards , but that there may be find a sea passable by it , between the latitude of 70. and 80. degree . and therefore we have appoint you with these two bark to make trial of the same : wish you both to join in friendship together , as most dear friend and brother , to all purpose and effect , to the furtherance and orderly 252 
 perform of the same voyage . and likewise order your company , that they of the one bark may have such love and care , to help and succour they of the other , as most dear friend and brother will do : so as it may appear , that though they be two bark , and two company , ( which be so appoint for your great comfort and assurance ) yet that you be whole of one mind , and bend your self to the uttermost of your power , to perform the thing that you be both employ for . 
 do you observe good order in your daily service , and pray unto God , so shall you prosper the better . 
 we will have you to meet often together , to talk , confer , consult , and agree how , and by what mean you may best perform this purpose voyage , accord to our intent . and at such meeting we think it requisite , that you call unto you your mate , and also Nicholas chancellor , ( who we do appoint as merchant , to keep account of the merchandise you shall buy or sell , barter or change ) to the end that whatsoever God shall dispose of either of you , yet they may have some instruction and knowledge how to deal in your place , or place . and of all your assembly and consultation together , and the substance of matter you shall at every time agree upon , we will have you to note they in the paper book that we give you for that purpose , unto each bark one . we do appoint Arthur pet in the George , as admiral , to wear the flag in the main top , and Charles Jackman in the William , as vice-admiral . for good order to be take for your good and orderly keep of company together , which we wish may be such , as you shall never lose sight the one of the other , except by both your consent , to discover about a island , or in some river , when and where you may certain appoint to meet together again , we refer the same to your discretion . 
 and now for your good direction in this voyage , we will have you with the next good wind and weather , 253 
 that God shall send thereunto meet and convenient , after the 22. day of this present month of May , sail from this river of Thames , to the coast of Finmarke , to the north cape there , or to the Wardhouse , and from thence direct your course to have sight of willoughbies land , and from it pass alongst to the nova Zemla , keep the same land always in your sight on your larboordside ( if convenient you may ) to the end you may discover , whether the same willoughby land be continent and firm land with Nova Zembla , or not : notwithstanding we will not have you to entangle your self in any bay , or otherwise , so that it may hinder your speedy proceed to the island vaigat . 
 and when you come to vaigat , we will have you to get sight of the main land of Samoeda , which be over against the south part of the same island , and from thence with god permission , to pass eastwards alongst the same coast , keep it always in your sight ( if convenient you may ) until you come to the mouth of the river ob , and when you come unto it , pass over the say river mouth unto the border of land , on the Eastside of the same ( without any stay to be make for search inward in the same river ) and be in sight of the same easterly land , do you in god name proceed alongst by it , from thence eastwards , keep the same always on your starboordside in sight , if you may , and follow the tract of it , whether it incline southerly or northerly ( as at time it may do both ) until you come to the country of Cathay , or the dominion of that mighty emperor . 
 and if God prosper your voyage with such good success , that you may attain to the same , do you seek by all mean you can to arrive to the city cambalu , and quinsay , or to the one of they . but if it happen that you can convenient come to either of those place , or shall|be drive to remain and winter in some other port or place of his dominion , do you seek by all mean possible to win favour 
 254 
 commission to pet and Jackman a.d. 
 1580. 
 and like of the people , by gift and friendly demean towards they , and not to offer violence , or do wrong to any people or nation whatsoever , but therein to be innocent as dove , yet wily as serpent , to avoid mischief , and defend you from hurt . and when you shall have get friendship through your discreet order of your self , towards the people , do you learn of they what you can of their prince , and show they one of the queen majesty letter , which she send the queen with you ( by either of you one , make of one substance lettersand effect , for each of you particular ) write in latin , whereunto her majesty have subscribe , and cause her signet seal to be set , the effect of the same letter you have also write in english , for your own understanding thereof . 
 the same her majesty letter you shall procure to deliver unto the same mighty prince , or governor , with some present to be give , such as you shall think meet and convenient , use your self in all point accord to the effect of the same letter , and procure again from the same prince , his letter accord . 
 and if God so prosper your voyage , that you may this summer pass the strait , and compass about the northermost land of Asia , unto the country of Cathay , or dominion of that mighty prince , and winter in it , may obtain from he his letter of privilege against the next year spring , you may then after your first set forth , search and discover somewhat further than you have discover before your winter , so far as you shall think convenient , with regard have , and always provide , that you may return home hither , to give we advise of your proceed the same summer , or before the sharpness or extremity of winter overtake you . 
 and if it happen you can this summer attain to the border of Cathay , and yet find the land beyond the ob , to stretch it self Easterly , with the sea adjoin unto it navigable , do you then proceed on your dis - 
 255 
 covery ( as before say ) alongst the same continent , so far as you can this summer , have care in the travel to find out some convenient harbour and place , where you may winter : and when you think it convenient , put your self to winter , where if you happen to find people , you shall deal with they , as we have before advise you to do with the people of Cathay , etc and if you can learn that they have a prince or chief governor , do you procure to deliver unto the same prince or governor one of the queen majesty letter , as before say , and seek to obtain again his letter accord . if you so happen to winter and obtain letter of privilege , find the country and people , with the commodity to be such , that by use trade thither with the people , and for the commodity , it may be beneficial unto we ( as we hope you may ) the same will be some good like unto we : notwithstanding we will have you the next summer ( by the grace of God ) at your first set out of your winter harbour , proceed alongst that tract of land to Cathay , if you see likelihood to pass it ( for that be the country that we chief desire to discover ) and see you be full victual for two year and upward , which you may very well make to serve you for two year and a half , though you find no other help , you may therefore be the bold to adventure in proceed upon your discovery : which if you do , we doubt not , but you shall achieve the country of Cathay , and deliver to the prince there , one of her majesty letter , bring from thence the same prince letter answerable : and so in the year of our lord 1582. return home with good news , and glad tiding , not only unto we the adventurer in this voyage , but also to our whole country and nation , which God grant you may do , amen . 
 but if it happen that the land of Asia , from beyond the river ob , extend it self northwards to 80. degree , or near the pool , whereby you find it to lead you 256 
 into that extremity , that small or no hope may be look for , to sail that way to Cathay , do you notwithstanding follow the tract of the same land , as far as you can discover this summer , have care to find out by the way a convenient place for you to winter in , the which ( if you may discover the same land of Asia this summer to extend it self to 80. degree of latitude , and upward or to 85. degree ) we wish then that the same your winter place may be in the river of ob , or as near the same river as you can , and find in such winter place , people , be they samoed , Yowgorians , or molgomze , etc do you gentle entreat with they as aforesaid , and if you can learn that they have a prince or chief governor among they , do you deliver he one of her majesty letter , and pro - 2% queen cure thereof a answer accord : do you procure otter . to barter and exchange with the people , of the merchandise and commodity that you shall carry with you , for such commodity as you shall find they to have , etc 
 if you so happen to winter , we will have you the next summer to discover into the river ob , so far as convenient you may : and if you shall find the same river ( which be report to be wide or broad ) to be also navigable and pleasant for you , to travel far into , happy you may come to the city Siberia , or to some the city of other town or place habit upon or near the border iberia-of it , and thereby have like to winter out the second winter : use you therein your discretion . 
 but if you find the say river ob to be shall , or not such as you may convenient travel in with your bark , do you then the next summer return back through borough strait : and from that part of Nova Zembla , adjoin to the same strait , do you come alongst the tract of that coast westwards , keep it on the starboard side , and the same always in sight , if convenient you may , until you come to willoughbies land , if outward bind you shall not tvilloughby happen to discover and try whether the say Willough - land . 
 in 257 r 
 bie land join continent with the same nova Zembla , or not . but if you shall then prove they to be one firm and continent , you may from Nova Zembla direct your course unto the say willoughbies land , as you shall think good , and as you may most convenient : and from willoughbies land you shall proceed westwards alongst the tract of it , ( though it incline northerly ) even so far as you may or can travel , have regard that in convenient time you may return home hither to London for winter . 
 and for your orderly pass in this voyage , and make observation in the same , we refer you to the instruction give by m. William Burrough , whereof one copy be annex unto the first part of this indenture under our seal , for you Arthur pet , another copy of it be annex to the second part of this indenture , under our seal also , for you Charles Jackman , and a three copy thereof be annex unto the three part of this indenture , remain with we the say company , seal and subscribe by you the say Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman . 
 and to the observe of all thing contain in this commission ( so near as God will permit i grace thereunto ) i then say Arthur Pet do covenant by these present to perform they , and every part and parcel thereof . and i the say Charles Jackman do for my part likewise covenant by these present to perform the same , and every part thereof , so near as God will give i grace thereunto . 
 and in witness thereof these indenture be seal and deliver accord , the day and year first above write . thus the lord God almighty send you a prosperous voyage , with happy success and safe return , amen . 
 