the description of the region , people , and river , lie north and east from Moscovia : as the way from Moscovia to the river Petzora , and the province Jugaria or Juhra , and from thence to the river Obi. likewise the description of other country and region , even unto the empire of the great can of Cathay , take out of Sigismundus ab Herberstein . 
 he dominion of the prince of Moscovia , reach far towards the east and north , unto the place which we will now describe . as concern which thing , i translate a book y‘ be present unto i in the moscovite tongue , and have here make a brief rehearsal of the same . 
 i will first therefore describe the journey from Moscovia to Petzora , and so to Jugaria and Obi. from Moscovia to the ci tie of Vologda , be number five hundred verst , one verse contain almost the space of a italian mile . from Vologda to ustiug towards the right hand , descend with the course of the river of Vologda and Suchana with who it join , be count five hundred verstes , where within two verst of the town call Strelze , and hard by the city of ustiug , Suchana join unto lug 405 
 the dominion of the duke of Moscovia . 
 vdogda . 
 verse . 
 ustiug . 
 lug . So call of his swift and pleasant stream . 
 Pienega . 
 Nicholai . 
 Kulvio . 
 the region by the north sea . 
 Pieza . 
 Piescoia . 
 Rubicho . 
 czircho . 
 Czilma . 
 Petzora . 
 which run from the south : from who mouth unto the spring of the same , be number five hundred verst . 
 but Suchana and lug , after they join together , lose their first name , and make but one river name Dwina , by the which the passage to the city of Colmogro contain five hundred verst , from whence , in the space of six day journey , Dwina enter into the north ocean at six mouth . and the great part of this journey consist by navigation . for by land from Vologda unto Colmogro , pass over the river Uvaga , be a thousand verstes . not far from Colmogro , the river Pienega run from the east on the right hand for the space of seven hundred verst , fall into Dwina . from Dwina by the river Pienega , by the space of two hundred verst , they come to a place call Nicholai , from whence within half a verse ship have passage into the river Kulvio , which have his originali from a lake of the same name toward the north , from who spring be eight day voyage to the mouth of the same , where it enter the ocean . 
 sail by the coast of the right hand of the sea , they pass by the region of Stanuwische , Calunczscho , and apnu : and sail about the promontory or cape of Chorogoski Nosz , Stanuwische , Camenckh , and Tolstickh , they come at length into the river Mezen , and from thence in the space of six day , to a village of the same name , stand in the mouth of the river Pieza , by the which again ascend towards the left hand 8c summer east , they come to the river Piescoia : from whence sail for the space of five verst , they come into two lake , in the which be see two way : whereof one on the right side , go to the river Rubicho , by the which they pass to the river Czircho . other , by a other and short way , bring their ship from the lake direct into Czircho : from whence , except they be hinder by tempest , they come in the space of three week to the river and mouth of Czilma , flow into the great river Petzora , which in that 406 
 of the north and east region a.d. 
 1588. 
 place be two verst in breadth . sail from thence , they come in the space of six day to the town and castle of Pustosero , near unto the which , Petzora Pustosero . enter into the north ocean at six mouth . the inhabitant of this place , be man of simple wit : they receive the faith of Christ , and be baptise in the year m.d.xviii . 
 from the mouth of Czilma unto the mouth of the river Ussa , go by Petzora , be one month voyage . Ussa . Ussa have his spring in the mountain * Poyas Semnoi , * Cingulus be on the left hand towards the summer east , and mun^-springeth out of a great stone of the same mountain , call come Bolschoi . from the spring of Ussa to the mouth of the same , be number more than a thousand verst . Furthermore , Petzora run from this south winter part , from whence ascend from the mouth of Ussa , unto the mouth of the river Stzuchogora , be three week voyage . they that describe this voyage say that they rest between the mouth of the river of stzuchogora and Potzscheriema , and stzuchogora . leave their victual there which they bring with they Potzscheriema from Russia . beyond the river of Petzora and Stzuchogora towards the mountain Camenipoias , and Camenipoias . the sea with the hand thereabouts , and the castle of Pustosero , be diverse and innumerable nation , which by one common name be call samoged ( that be ) Samoged . such as eat themselves . they have great increase of an fowl , bird , and diverse kind of beast : as sable , and easts-marternes , Bevers , otter , hermelines , squirrel : and in the ocean the beast call a mors : also Vesse , white bear , wolf , hare , Equiwodvani , great whale , and a fish call Semfi , with diverse other . 
 the people of these nation come not to Moscovia : for they be wild , and flee the company and society wild people . of other man . 
 from the mouth of Stzuchogora , sail up the river unto Poiassa , Artawische , Cameni , and Poiassa Poiassa . the great , be three week voyage . Furthermore , the 
 407 
 sibut . 
 Lepin . 
 Sossa . 
 Obi. 
 kitaisko . 
 uvogolici . 
 Irtische . 
 Jerom. 
 tumen . 
 Grustina . 
 Kitai . 
 black man withoutspeech . 
 serponow . Lucomoria . 
 man that perelp die and revive . 
 a strange trade of merchandise . 
 ascend to the mount come , be three day journey : from the which descend they come to the river Artawischa , and from thence to the river sibut , from whence they pass to the castle of Lepin , and from Lepin to the river Sossa . the people that inhabit the region by this river , be call uvogolici . leave Sossa on the right hand , they come to the great river Obi , that spring out of the lake Kitaisko , the which , with all the haste they can make , they can scarce pass over in one day , the river be of such breadth that it reach fourscore verst . the people also that dwell about the river , be call uvogolici and Ugritzschi . from the castle of Obea , ascend by the river of Oby , unto the river Irtische , into the which Sossa enter , be three month journey . in these place be two castle name Jerom and Tumen , keep by certain lord call Knesi Juhorski , be tributary to the great duke of Moscovia , as they say . here be diverse kind of beast and fur . 
 from the mouth of the river Irtische to the castle of Grustina , be two month journey : from whence to the lake Kitai , by the river Oby ( which i say to have his spring in this lake ) be more than three month journey . from this lake come many black man , lack the use of common speech . they bring with they diverse ware , and especial pearl and precious stone , which they sell to the people call Grustintzi and Serponowtzi . Theise have their name of the castle serponow , situate in the mountain of Lucomoria , beyond the river Obi. they say that to the man of Lucomoria chance a marvelous thing and incredible : for they affirm , that they die yearly at the xxvii . day of November , be the feast of saint George among the moscovite : and that at the next spring about the xxiii . day of April , they revive again as doe frog . 
 with these also , the people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi exercise a new and strange kind of trade : for when the accustom time of their die , or rather 408 
 of the north and east region a.d. 
 1588. 
 of sleep , approach , they leave their ware in certain place appoint , which the Grustintzi and Serponowtzi carry away , leave other ware of equal value in their place : which if the dead man at the time of their revive perceive to be of unequal price , they require their own again : by reason whereof , much strife and fight be between they . 
 from the river of Obi descend towards the left [ i . 494-j hand , be the people call calami , which come thither . from Obiowa and Pogosa . beneath Obi , about Aurea aamt ' Anus ( that be , the golden old wife ) be the river Sossa , river . Berezvua , and Danadim , all which spring out of the mountain come , Bolschega , Poiassa , and the rock join to the same . all the nation that inhabit from these river to aurea anus , be subject to the prince of Moscovia . 
 aurea Anus , call in the moscovite tongue , slata aurea anus . Baba , be a idol , at the mouth of Obi in the province of Obdora , stand on the further bank towards the Obdora . sea . along by the bank of Obi , and the river near there about , be here and there many castle and fortress : all the lord whereof be subject to the prince of Moscovia , as they say . they say also , or rather fable , that the idol call Aurea Anus , be a image like unto a old wife , have a child in her lap , and that there be now see another infant , which they say to be her nephew : also , that there be certain instrument that make a continual sound like the noise of trumpet , the which , if it so be , i think it to be by reason of the wind , blow continual into the hollow place of those instrument . 
 the river cousin fall out of the mountain of cousin . Lucomoria : in the mouth of this be a castle , whither from the spring of the great river cousin , be two month voyage . Furthermore , from the spring of the same river , the river Cassima have his originali , which Cassima . run through Lucomoria , fall into the great river Tachnin , beyond the which ( as be say ) dwell man of great river . 
 409 
 a fish like a man . 
 Pliny write of the like fish . 
 the end of the journal . 
 mountain . 
 the great can of Cathay . 
 Moria be the sea . 
 Lucomoria . Tumen . 
 prodigious shape , of who , some be overgrow with hair like wild beast , other have head like dog , and their face in their breast , without neck , and with long hand also , and without foot . there be likewise in the river Tachnin a certain fish , with head , eye , nose , mouth , hand , foot , and other member utter of humane shape , and yet without any voice , and pleasant to be eat , as be other fish . 
 all that i have hitherto rehearse , i have translate out of the say journey which be delivered1 i in the moscovite tongue : in the which , perhaps some thing may seem fabulous , and in manner incredible , as of the dumb man , and the dead revive , the Aurea Anus also , and the monstrous shape of man , with the fish of humane form : whereof , although i have make diligent inquisition , yet can i know nothing certain of any that have see the same with their eye : nevertheless , to give further occasion to other to search the truth of these thing , i have think good to make mention hereof . 
 Noss in the moscovite tongue signify a nose , and therefore they call all cape or point , that reach into the sea , by the same . name . 
 the mountain about the river of Petzora be call 
 Semnoi Poyas , or Cingulus mundi , that be , the girdle of the world , or of the earth . 
 Kithai be a lake , of which the great can of Cathay , who the moscovians call Czar Kithaiski , have his 
 name : for can in the Tartar a king . 
 language signify , 
 the place of Lucomoria , near unto the sea , be savage , full of wood , and inhabit without any house . and albeit , that the author of this journey , say , that many nation of Lucomoria be subject to the prince of Moscovia , yet for as much as the kingdom of Tumen be near thereunto , who prince be a tartar , and name in their tongue , Tumenski Czar , that be , a king in Tumen , and have of late do great damage to the 
 410 
 of the north and east region aa 1588. prince of Moscovia : it be most like that these nation shall rather be subject unto he . 
 near unto the river Petzora ( whereof mention be Petzora . make in this journey ) be the city and castle of Papin , Papin . or Papinowgorod , who inhabitant be name Papini , and have a private language , differ from the moscovite . beyond this river be exceed high mottn-mountaine , reach even unto the bank , who ridge or top , by reason of continual wind , be in Hyperborei , manner utter barren without grass or fruit . and andRhiphei . although in diverse place they have diverse name , yet be they common call Cingulus mundi , that be , the girdle of the world . in these mountain do jerfalcon breed , whereof i have speak before . there grow also cedar tree , among the which be find the best and black kind of sable : and only these mountain be see in all the dominion of the prince of Moscovia , which perhaps be the same that the old writer call Rhipheos , or Hyperboreos , so name of the greek word , hyper , that be , above , and Boreas , that be , the north : for by reason they be cover with continual snow and frost , they can not without great difficulty be travail , and reach so far into the north , that they make the unknown land of engron-land . the duke of Moscovia , Basilius the son of John , send on a time two of his captain , name Simeon Pheodorowich Kurbski , 8c knee Peter Uschatoi , to search the place beyond these mountain , and to subdue the nation thereabouts . Kurbski be yet alive at my be in Moscovia , 8c declare unto i that he spend xvii . day in ascend the mountain , 8c yet can not come to the top thereof , which in their tongue be call Stolp , that be , a pillar . this mountain be extend into the ocean unto the mouth of the river of Dwina and Petzora . 
 but now have speak thus much of the say journey , i will return to the dominion of Moscovia , with other region lie eastward 8c south from the same , 
 411 
 jaroslave . 
 Hony. 
 la region dell cine . Confini deui ultimi tartari . 
 towards the mighty empire of Cathay . but i will first speak somewhat brief of the province of rezan , and the famous river of Tanais . 
 the province of rezan , situate between the river of Occa and Tanais , have a ci tie build of wood , not far from the bank of Occa : there be in it a castle name jaroslave , whereof there now remain nothing but token of the old ruin . not far from that city the river Occa make a hand name Strub , which be sometime a great dukedom , who prince be subject to none other . this province of rezan be more fruitful than any other of the province of Moscovia : insomuch that in this ( as they say ) every grain of wheat bring forth two , and sometime more ear : who stalk or straw grow so thick that horse can scarce go through they , or quail fly out of they . there be great plenty of honey , fish , fowl , bird , and wild beast . the fruit also do far exceed the fruit of Moscovia . the people be bold and warlike man . 
 