the ambassage of m. Giles Fletcher , doctor of the civil law , send from her majestic to Theodor the emperor of Russia , anno 1588. 
 n the year 1588. be send ambassador from her highness into the country of Russia , Giles Fletcher doctor of the civil law , as well to treat with the new emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , about league and amity , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich , 
 as also for the reestablish and reduce into order in 353 z 
 the decay trade of our Englishman there . who notwithstanding at his first arrival at the Moscow , find some part of hard entertainment , by mean of certain rumour concern the late naval victory which be there report to have fall on the spanish side , as also for some dislike conceive against the privilege trade of our english merchant . yet in the end he obtain of the emperor many good and equal condition , and be courteous and honourable dismiss by he . the principali point which he entreat of , and be grant unto he by the say emperor , be these : 
 1 a continuation of league and amity between her highness and the say emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich . 
 2 a confirmation and reestablishment of the former privilege of the company of our english merchant , which be infringe and annul in the principal point , with diverse necessary addition to the same , for the better order of their trade in those country hereafter , viz. that the state of the privilege grant before in the name of some private and particular man , be alter in that point , and the same grant by the name and stile of their incorporation , viz. to the fellowship of english merchant for the discovery of new trade . 
 3 that upon every surmise and light quarrel , the say privilege be not revoke and annul , as before time it have be . 
 4 that justice shall be administer to the say company and their agent without delay , upon such as shall offer they any despite or injury , or shall exact or impose upon they any payment , taxation or imposition whatsoever , contrary to the freedom of the say grant . 
 5 that the good and commodity of the say company , be not forcible take as before time they have be by the emperor officer or people of authority , 
 354 
 dr . Giles Fletchers ambassage a.d. 
 1588. 
 either for the use of the say emperor or of his officer . but in case they have need of the say commodity , the same to be take at reasonable price , and for ready money . 
 6 that then say company be not charge hereafter with the answer of such debt as be make by any Englishman not be of the society . 
 7 that the emperor authorize people shall not hereafter repute any Englishman resiant in that country , to be any factor , servant , or dealer in the say company affair , but such as the agent shall inregister by name , within the office where custom be enter in all such place of the land where the say company have residence to traffic . 
 8 that the name of such as shall so be inregistre be no long continue in record , nor themselves repute as factor or dealer for the say company , than the agent shall think good . but in case the say agent in his discretion shall think meet to strike out of the register any name of such as have be employ in the company service , the say person to be hold as private , and who act in bargain or otherwise , shall not charge the say company . 
 9 that if any english man within the country of Russia be suspect for any notorious crime , as felony , treason , etc the same be not straightway set upon the * Pudkey , nor otherwise torment , till such time * it be rest as he shall be convict by plain and evident proof : t0 which be do , the whole proceed to be send over to the queen of England . 
 10 that then say privilege with the addition , shall be publish in all town and part of the emperor dominion , where the say company have traffic . 
 11 that the say company shall be permit to use a sole trade through the emperor country , by the river Volga into Media , Persia , Bogharia , and the other the east country . 
 12 whereas there be claim of the say company 
 355 
 the sum of 23553. mark of debt , make by certain of their factor for the say company , for payment whereof , their whole stock be in danger of arrest , by public authority : further also 2140. rubble for custom and houserent , he obtain a rebatement of eighteen thousand , one hundred fifty and three mark of the say debt . 
 the say ambassador m. Giles Fletcher , as i understand , have draw a book entitle , of the ruff common wealth , contain : 
 first , a cosmographical description of the country , which have these chapter . 
 1 of the length and breadth of the country of Russia , with the name of the shire . 
 2 of the soil and climate . 
 3 of the native commodity of the country . 
 second , a description of their policy contain in these chapter , viz. 
 1 of the constitution or state of the ruff common wealth . 
 2 of their parliament , and manner of hold they . 
 3 of the ruff Nobili tie and mean whereby it be keep in a under , proportion agreeable to that state . 
 4 of the manner of govern their province or shire . 
 5 of the emperor privy counsel . 
 6 of the emperor custom and their revenue , with the practise for the increase of they . 
 7 of the ruff commonalty and their condition . 
 8 of their public justice and manner of proceed therein . 
 9 of the emperor force for his war , with the chief officer , and their salary or pay . 
 10 of their manner of muster , armour , and provision for victuali . 
 11 of their order , march , charge , and their martial discipline . 
 356 
 12 of their colony and policy in maintain their purchase by conquest . 
 13 of their borderer with who they have most to do in war and peace . 
 14 of their church office and degree . 
 15 of their liturgy or form of church service . 
 16 of their manner of administer the sacrament . 
 17 of the doctrine of the ruff church . 
 18 of the manner of solemnize their marriage . 
 19 of the other ceremony of the ruff church . 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 third , the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe contain these chapter . 
 1 of the emperor household officer , and order of his house . 
 2 of the private behaviour and manner of the ruff people . 
 