a letter to the right worshipful m. John the esquire , contain the sum and effect of m. Edward garland his message , deliver to master dee himself , ( letterwise ) for a more perfect memoriali thereof . anno 1586. 
 right worshipful , it may please you to understand , that i be send unto you from the most mighty prince Feodor Ivanowich , lord , emperor and great duke of Russia , etc as also from the most excellent prince Boris Feodorowich , lord protector of Russia : to give your 
 worship to understand the great good will and hearty desire they bear unto you ; for that of long time they have have great good report of your learning and wisdom , as also of your good counsel unto prince : whereupon his majesty most earnest desire and request be unto you ; that you will take the pain to come unto his city of Moscow , to visit his majesty court : for that he be desirous of your company , and also of your good counsel in diverse matter that his majesty shall think needful . and for the great goodwill that his majesty bear unto you , he will give you yearly towards your maintenance 2000 pound starling ; and the lord protector will give you a thousand rubble , as also your provision for your table you shall have free out of his majesty kitchen : and further whatsoever you shall think needful or convenient for you , in any part or part of his dominion , it shall be at your worship commandment . and this be the sum and effect of my message and commandment give i by his majesty and the lord protector . 
 in witness whereof i have write this with my own hand , the 17. of December 1586. 
 by i Edward garland . 
 in Trebona castle otherwise call Wittingaw in 447 
 BoSmia : to which place this m. Edward garland come to m. thou with two moscovite to serve he , etc he have six more , which by m. this counsel be send back . 
 witness m. Edward Kelley , and m. Francis garland , brother to the foresay Edward , and diverse other . 
 it seem that this princely offer of the emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , and of the lord Boris Pheodorowich protector to his majesty , be make unto the learned and famous mathematitian m. John Dee , partly to use his counsel and direction about certain discovery to the north-east ; and partly for some other weighty occasion : but because their conquest to Siberia be not as then full settle , and for diverse other secret reason , it be for y‘ time with all thankfulness refuse . 
 