the content of m. garland commission unto Thomas Simkinson for the bring of m. John Dee to the emperor of Russia his court . 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 after our account 1596. 
 riend Thomas Simkinson i pray you go to brounswik or Cassil and inquire if master John dee be there or where he be , and when you find he , certify he how that i have send you purposely to know where he do remain , and at your return i will come and speak 
 with he my self . also you may certify he that the emperor of Russeland have certain knowledge 445 
 of his great learning and wisdom be marvelous desirous of he to come into his country . And have give i his letter with his hand and golden seal at it for to bring he into the country with i if it be possible , and for his live show he that he shall be sure of 2000 pound yearly , and also all provision for his table out of the emperor kitchen free : and if he think this too little , i will assure he that if he ask as more , he shall have it , and for his charge into the country , i have sufficient of the emperor allowance to bring he and all his royal into the country . and because he may doubt of these proffer , he shall remain at the border until the emperor be certify of he , and of his request , which he will have . and i be sure he shall be convey through the land with five hundred horse , and he shall|be account as one of the chief in the land next the emperor . also show he how that my lord protector at my come away do take i in his arm , and desire i as he shall be my friend to bring he with i , and he will give he of his own purse yearly 1000 rubble beside the emperor allowance . all these foresay grant and demand do i Thomas Simkinson acknowledge to be speak by Edward garland to i , and to be send to declare the same unto master John Dee . and in witness that this be of a truth i have write the same with my own hand , and thereunto set my name , in wittingaw , otherwise call Trebona , the 18. of September , anno 1586. 
 by i Thomas Simkinson of Hull . 
 