a testimony of the northeastern discovery make by the english , and of the profit that may arise by pursue the same : take out of the second volume of navigation and voyage , folio 17. of the notable cosmographer , m. John Baptista Ramusius , secretary to the state of Venice : write in italian in the year , 1557. 
 458 
 moreover ( have before speak of diverse particularity , in a excellent map of Paulus Venetus ) on that part subject to our north pole , where every writer and cosmographer of these and of former time hitherto , have , and do place the freeze sea , and that the land stretch continual to 90. degree , towards the pole : contrariwise , in this map be to be see , that the land extend only a little above Norway and Swethland , and then turn it self trend afterward towards the southeast and by east , unto the country of Moscovie and Russia , and stretch direct unto Cathay . and that this be true , the navigation which the english man have of late make , intend to discover Cathay , in the time of Edward the sixth , king of England , be very sufficient witness . for in the mid of their voyage , light by chance upon the coast of Moscovie ( where they find then reign John Vasiliwich emperor of Russia , and great duke of Moscovia , who after he have , to his great delight and admiration , see the english man , entertain they with exceed great courtesy ) find this sea to be navigable , and not freeze . 
 which navigation to Cathay , although it be not as the great yet thorough know , yet if with often frequent rthelterne the same , and by long use and knowledge of those discovery . sea it be continue , it be like to make a wonderful change and revolution in the state of this our part of the world . 
 [ the testimony 
 459 
 the testimony of Gerardus Mercator in his last large map of Europe , touch the notable discovery of the english , make of Moscovie by the north-east . 
 the same in english . 
 the most famous navigation of the english man by the north-east sea have offer unto i a great occasion , and certain direction for the reformation of the map of Europe : which discovery have the northern part of Finmarke , Lapland , and Moscovie , lay out accord to the just elevation and the quarter of the world . and further , the true observation of the latitude of the city of Moscow , make by the foresay Englishman , have yield i a infallible rule , for the correct of the situation of the inland country : which notable help be minister unto i , i think it my duty to exhibit to the world this map , more exact and perfect then hitherto it have be publish . 
 460 
 another testimony of Joannes Metellus Sequanus concern the same navigation and discovery in his preface prefix before Osorius de rebus gestis emanuelis regis Portugalli^ , write about the year , 1574. 
 the same in english . 
 but least all and the whole glory of discover the ocean sea shall be ascribe to the Spaniard , the Englishman about twenty year past , by a new navigation into Moscovie , discover the north-east part . for they by reason of the war of Swethland be hinder from the traffic of the moscovite and of the narve in Liefland , open a passage for themselves by the ocean sea , beyond the northern latitude of 70. degree : have in their course on the one side the coast of Norway , Finmark , Lapland , Scrickfin and Biarmia : on the other side the coast of Gronland . 
 461 
 A.D. j574 - which voyage the Hollander afterward enter into , but not without some conflict with the english . they carry thither old plate and course linen cloth , and all kind of small mercery ware , serve for the apparel of man and woman , as linen , and silk girdle , garter , purse , knife , and many such like thing . and they bring away from the moscovite , all kind of precious fur , and salmon salt and dry in the smoke . 
 