a brief and true report of the honourable voyage unto Cadiz , 1596. of the overthrow of the king fleet , and of the win , sack , and burn of the city , with all other accident of moment , thereunto appertain . 
 ft that the two most noble and renown lord general : the lord Robert earl of Essex , and the lord Charles Howard lord high admiral of England , be come unto Plymmouth ( which be about the begin of may last , 1596. ) be there accompany with diverse 
 other noble peer , as the earl of Sussex , the lord Thomas Howard , the lord Harbert , the lord Warden sir Walter Raleigh : the lord martial sir Francis Vere : the lord Burk , don Christopher young prince of Portugal , young count Lodovick of Nassaw , and the admiral of the Hollander , sir John Vanderfoord : beside many other most worthy knight and gentleman of great worth attend upon this most honourable action : it please they , there to make their abode for the time of that month , as well for the new furnish and revictual of her majesty royal navy : as also for the expect of some other ship , which be to come from diverse place of the realm , and be as yet want : make that place as it shall seem the rendezvous for all the whole fleet , thereto complete the full number of all such company both for sea and land : as be in their noble and deep wisdom think meet and agree upon . 
 236 
 all the time of this their abode there , there be a most zealous and diligent care have for the holy service of God , daily and reverent to be frequent : and also for other good and civil order of military discipline to be observe , to the exceed great comfort and rejoice of all the heart of the godly and well dispose . 
 and for that it may the better appear , that there be small hope of pardon to be expect of the offender , if they do at any time neglect their duty , about due observation of matter of importance : their order , law , and decree be once publish : about the 8. or 9 of the same month , there be two offender execute a little without the town , in a very fair pleasant green , call the ho : the one for beginning of a mutiny in his company , the other for run away from his colour . 
 and about the same time in the dutch regiment , a other for murder of one of his companion , about a quarrel between themselves , rise as it be suppose , upon their drink , be by order of martial ! law , present tie to the party so murder , and forthwith both of they so cast into the sea . 
 moreover , about the 28. of the same month , a certain lieutenant ( who name i will forbear ) be by sound of drum public in all the street disgrace , or rather after a sort disgrade , and cashier for bear any far office at that time , for the take of money by way of corruption , of certain press soldier in the country , and for place of other in their room , more unfit for service , and of less sufficiency and ability . this severe execute of justice at the very first do breed such a deep terror in the heart of the whole army , that it seem to cut off all occasion of the like disorder for ever afterward to be attempt . 
 and here before their departure from Plymmouth , it please their lordship to publish in print , and make know to all the world , especial to such as who it concern , and that both in the latin , french , dutch , 
 237 
 english and spanish tongue , what be the true , just , and urgent cause , that at this time provoke her majesty , to undertake the prepare and set forth of this so great a navy , annex thereunto a foil declaration , what be their good will and pleasure shall be do and perform of all they that mean not to incur their own private present danger , or else be willing to avoid her majesty future indignation and displeasure . 
 likewise now , at the same instant , their own most provident and godly decree , which they have devise for the honest carriage of every particular person in their degree and vocation , be make know to all man , and publish in sundry write , with diverse great punishment , set down and appoint for the wilful offender and breaker of the same . 
 thus then , all thing be in very good order and well appoint , the most holy name of our omnipotent god be most religious and devout call upon , and his bless and sacred communion be diverse time most reverent and public celebrate : these two most noble personage , with all their honourable associate , and most famous worthy knight , gentleman , captain , leader , and very willing and expert soldier , and mariner , be furnish with 150. good sail of ship or thereabouts : in the name of the most high and everliving God , and with all true and faithful obedience , to her sacred majesty , to the infinite good and tranquilli tie of our country , and to the perpetuali glory , and triumphant renown of the eternal memory of their honourable name to all posterity , the first day of June embark themselves , weigh anchor , and hoist up sail , and put to sea onward their journey from the sound of Plymmouth . 
 the wind , at the first set forth , seem very favourable : but yet in the evening grow very scant , and all that night fall more and more against we , and we have sail no further than to a certain place 238 
 call dodman head : we be constrain the next day , to make our return to the road of Plymmouth again , and there in the sound to lie at anchor for that night . 
 about this time , and in this very place , by good fortune there come to my hand a prayer in English , touch this present action , and make by her majesty , as it be voice : the prayer seem to i to be most excellent , aswell for the matter , as also for the manner , and therefore for certain diverse good motive which then present come to my mind , and whereof hereafter in his more convenient time and place , i will make far mention , i presume at that very instant to translate it into latin . 
 the prayer be thus . 
 most omnipotent maker and guide of all our world mass , that only search and fadome the bottom of all our heart conceit , and in they see the true original of all our action intend : thou that by thy foresight do true discern , how no malice of revenge , nor quittance of injury , nor desire of bloodshed , nor greediness of lucre have breed the resolution of our now set out army , but a heedful care , and wary watch , that no neglect of foe , nor over-surety of harm may breed either danger to we , or glory to they : these be the ground wherewith thou do inspire the mind , we humble beseech thou with bend knee , prosper the work , and with best forewinde guide the journey , speed the victory , and make the return the advancement of thy glory , the triumph of their fame , and surety to the realm , with the least loss of the english blood . to these devout petition lord give thou thy bless grant . 
 my homely translation be thus . 
 sum praepotens deus , immensae huius totius nostri mundi molis fabricator and rector , qui solus perscrutaris intimos cordis nostri sensus , and ad fundum usque nostrarum cogitationum explorando penetras , ac in eis , 239 
 quid ver^ , and ex animo cogitemus , and quae sint actionum nostrarum rationes , ac fundamenta , cognoscis : tu , qui ea , quae in te est , ab omni aeternitate praescientia , vides , quod nec aliqua ulciscendi malitiosa cupiditas , nec injuriarum referendarum , desiderium , nec sanguinis effundendi sitis , nec alicujus lucri , quaestusve aviditus ad istam classem praeparandam , and emittendam nos commoverit : sed potiiis , quod provida quaedam cura , solersque vigilantia huc nos impulerit : ne vel inimicorum nostrorum neglectus , vel status nostri firmitatis nimium secura cogitatio , aut illis gloriam and honorem , aut nobis damnum and periculum pariat : cum , inquam , haec sint nostri , quicquid attentatur , negotii fundamenta : cumque tu hunc nobis animum , mentemque injeceris , ut istud aggrederemur : curvatis genibus a te humillimi petimus , ut velis hoc nostrum incoeptum secundissimi fortunare , totum iter prosperrimis flatibus dirigere , celerem and expeditam victoriam nobis concedere , reditumque talem nostris militibus elargiri , qualis and nomini tuo incrementum gloriae , and illis famae , laudisque triumphum , and regno nostro firmam tranquillitatem possit apportare : idque cum minimus anglorum sanguinis dispendio . his nostris religiosis petitionibus concede , domine , sacrosanctam and annuentem voluntatem tuam . 
 after that we have anchor at Plymmouth that night , as i have say , the three of June very early in the morning , have a reasonable fresh gale of wind , we set sail , and keep our course again , and the nine of the same month come something near to the north cape , in a manner in the same altitude , or not much differ , which be about xliii . degree , and something more , yet bear so , as it be impossible to be descry from the land : there it please the lord to call a select council , which be always do by hang out of a flag of the arm of England , and shoot off of a great warn piece . of this select or privy council , be no more than these : the two lord general , 
 240 
 the lord Thomas Howard , the lord warden sir Walter Raleigh , the lord Martiali sir Francis Vere , sir George carry master of the ordinance , sir conier Clifford , and sir Anthony Ashley , clarke of the say counsel . and when it please the lord general to call a common counsel ( as often time they do upon weighty matter best know to their honour ) than they will cause a other kind of flag to be hang out , which be the Redcrosse of S. George , and be very easy to be discern from the other that appertain only to the select counsel , and so often as this flag of saint George be hang out , then come all the master and captain of all the ship , who opinion be to be demand , in such matter as appertain unto this say select counsel : it be present conclude , that our course in sail shall forthwith be alter , and that we shall bear more into the west , for some purpose to they best know . 
 at that very instant many letter of instruction be address and send to every particular master and captain of the ship : what the content of those letter of instruction be it be not as yet know unto any , neither be it hold meet to be inquire or know of any of we . but under the title and superscription of every man particular letter these word be endorse . open not these letter on pain of your life , unless we chance to be scatter by tempest , and in that case open they , and execute the content thereof : but if by mishap you fall into your enemy hand , then in any case cast they into the sea , seal as they be . it shall seem that these letter do contain in they the principali place and meaning of this intend action , which be hitherto by their deep foresight keep so secret , as no man to my knowledge either do , or can so much as suspect it , more than themselves , who have the only manage thereof . a conceit in my judgement of great moment in the world , to effect any matter of importance . i mean , to entertain those two 
 iv 241 queen 
 virtue , fidem , and taciturnitatem : so much commend by the old writer . and if there be ever any great designment , in this our age , and memory , discreet , faithful , and close carry , i assure my self it be this , and though it be but in respect of that point only : yet for such faithful secrecy , it deserve immortali praise . 
 all this while , our ship , God be thank , keep in a most excellent good order , be divide into five squadron : that be to say , the earl of Essex , the lord admiral , the lord Thomas Howard , the lord Warden sir Walter Raleigh , and the admiral of the Hollander . all which squadron , albeit they do every day separate themselves of purpose , by the distance of certain league , as well to look out for such ship as be happy under sail , as also for the better procure of sea-room : yet always common either that day , or the next day , toward evening , they come all together , with friendly salutation and gratulation one to a other : which they term by the name of hail : a ceremony do solemn , and in very good order , with sound of trumpet and noise of cheerful voice : and in such sort perform as be no small encouragement one to the other , beside a true report of all such accident , as have happen in their squadron . 
 hitherto , as i say , our journey be most prosperous , and all our ship in very good plight , more than that the mary rose , by some mischance , either spring or spend her foreyarde , and two day after sir Robert cross have in a manner the like mischance . 
 now be thus between the north cape , and cape S. Vincent , and yet keep such a course a loof , that by no mean , those from the shore may be able to descry we : the ten of June , a french bark , and a fleme come from the coast of Barbary be bring in by some of our company : but they be both of they very honourable and well use by the lord general : and so after a few day tarry , be 242 
 1596. peaceable send away , after that they have confer with they about such matter , as be think good in their honourable wisdom . 
 the twelve of the same month , sir Richard Levison knight , assist with sir Christopher blunt , fight with three hamburger , and in that fight slay two of they , and hurt eleven , and in the end bring they all three inn : and this be the very first handsel and maidenhead ( as it be ) of any matter of importance , or exploit worthy observation that be do in the way outward of this honourable voyage , and be so well perform of those most worthy gentleman , as every man high commend they for their great valour , and discretion , and no less rejoice at this their fortunate success . 
 the next day after , sir Richard Weston meet with a Fleming , who refuse to vale his foretop , with the like good courage and resolution , attempt to bring he in . the fight continue very hot between they , for a good space : in the end the swan , wherein the say sir Richard be , have her fore-beake strike off : and have spend before in fight the one side of her tire of ordinance , while she prepare to cast about , and to bestow on he the other side , in the mean time the fleming take this opportunity , do get almost half a league from he : and so for that time make his escape . and yet the next day after , the say Fleming be in a manner get to the very mouth of the river up to Lisbon , be take , and bring in by m. Dorrell , be captain of the John and Francis of London . thus by divide their squadron , and spread the whole sea over a mighty way , there can not so much as the least pink pass but she be espy and bring in . 
 the 13. 14. and 15. day , certain little straggle caravel be take by certain of the fleet , and in one of they a young beggarly friar utter unlearned , with a great packet of letter for Lisbon : the poor wretch be marvellous well use by the lord 
 243 
 general , and that caravel , and the like still as they be take be command to give their attendance , and their honour do understand what they may of these poor man , of the estate of Spain for that present . 
 about this time and in this place it be , that first in all my life time i do see the fly fish , who when they be hardly pinch and chase by the bonito and other great fish , than to avoid the danger , they present mount up , and forsake the water , and betake themselves to the benefit of their wing and make their flight , which common be not above five or six score , or there about , and then they be constrain to fall down into the water again , and it be the mariner opinion that they can fly no long than their wing be wet . the fish it self be about the bigness of a mack-rell or a great white hear , and much of that colour and make , with two large wing shape of nature very cunning , and with great delight to behold , in all the world much like to our gentlewoman dutch fan , that be make either of paper , or parchment , or silk , or other stuff , which will with certain plight easy run and fold themselves together . one of these fly fish be present to my lord admiral by a fisher man , and new take in his lord return from Cadiz , and then i have good leisure and opportunity to view it . 
 the 18. day early in the morning we take a irish man , and he come direct from Cadiz , have be there but the day before at twelve of the clock at high noon . this man be examine , tell true that there be now great store of ship at Cadiz , and with they xviii . or nineteeen . galley in a readiness , and that among those ship there be diverse of the king best : and namely , that the fillip of Spain be among they , but what their intent be , he can not tell . this man be command also to give his attendance . 
 the 20. of June be Sunday , we come before Cadiz very early in the morning , and in all this time as yet , the whole navy have not lose either by sickness or by any 244 
 other manner of way six man to my knowledge : as for the dutch company , i be not able precise to say what happen there , for that they be no part of our charge to be look unto , but be a regiment entire of themselves , and by themselves to be provide for , either for their diet , or for the preservation of their health by physic . 
 thus than i say , be all in good plight and strong , the 20. of June we come to Cadiz , and there very early in the morning present our self before the town , ride about a league or something less , from it . the sea at that instant go marvelous high , and the wind be exceed large . notwithstanding , a council be call , our lord general forthwith attempt with all expedition to land some certain company of their man at the west side of the town , by certain long boat , light horseman , pynness , and barge make for the purpose , but can not compass it , and in the attempt thereof , they chance to sink one of their barge , with some four score good soldier well appoint in she , and yet by good hap and great care , the man be all save except viii . and therefore they be constrained to put off their land till a other more convenient time . 
 that morning very timely , there light a very fair dove upon the main yard of the lord admiral ship , and there she sit very quiet for the space of 3. or 4. hour , be nothing dismay all that while , every man gaze and look much upon she , and speak their mind and opinion , yet all conclude by no mean to disquiet she : i for my part , take it for a very good omen and bode , as in truth ( God be thank ) there fall out nothing in the end to the contrary . and as at our very first come to Cadiz this chance , so likewise on the very last day of our depart from the same town , another dove present her self in the self same order into the same ship , and present grow wonderful tame and familiar to we all , and do so still keep we company , even till our arrival here in England . 
 245 
 we no soon present our self , but present a goodly sort of tall spanish ship come out of the mouth of the bay of Cadiz , the galley accompany they in such good order , and so place as all of they may well succour each other , and therewithal ! keep themselves very close to their town , the castle , and the fort , for their better guard and defence , abide there still , and expect our far determination . all that day pass , be very rough and boisterous , and little or nothing can be do , more than that about the evening there pass some friendly and kind salutation send one from the other in warlike manner , by discharge certain great piece , but to my knowledge no hurt do at all , or else very little . 
 a careful and diligent watch be have all that night through out the whole army , and on Monday morning be the 21. day , the wind and weather be become moderate and favourable , between five and six of the clock in the morning , our ship in the name of almighty God , and in defence of the honour of England , without any far delay , with all speed , courage , and alacrity , do set upon the spanish ship , be then under sail , and make out of the mouth of the bay of Cadiz , up towards Puente de Suago on Granada side , be in number lix . tall ship , with nineteeen . or ago . galley attend upon they , sort in such good order , and reasonable distance as they may still annoy we , and always relieve themselves interchangeable : have likewise the castle , fort , and town , continual to assist they and they , and always ready to play upon we and we . 
 in most man opinion it seem that the enemy have a wonderful advantage of we , all circumstance be well weigh , but especial the straightness of the place , and the natural form and situation of the bay it self , be right consider . for albeit the very bay it self be very large and exceed beautiful , so that from Cadiz to port S. mary , be some vi . or seven . English mile over or there about , yet be there many rock , shelf , sand 246 
 and shallow in it , so that the very channel and place for sea room , be not above 2. or 3. mile , yea and in some place , not so much , for the ship of any great burden , to make way in , but that they must either be set on ground or else constrain to run foul one on another . all this notwithstanding , with great and invincible courage , the lord generail present set upon they , and sort out some such convenient ship , as to their honourable wisdom seem fit for that time service , they be drive to take some other course then before have be by they intend . wherefore upon a grave consultation have by a select counsel , what great danger may ensue upon so mighty a disadvantage as appear in all probability , if it be not by good and sound judgement prevent , and therewithal in their singular wisdom foresee that some great stratagem may be practise by the enemy , either by firework , or some other subtle politic devise , for the hazard of her majesty ship of honour in so narrow a place , thus with all expedition they conclude that the viceadmiral , the lord Thomas Howard , that most noble lord Howard ( who exceed great magnanimity , courage , and wisdom , join with such a honourable kind of sweet courtesy , bounty , and liberality , as be not able by i and my weakness to be express , have win he all the faithful love heart of as many as ever have have any manner of deal with he ) this lord Thomas , i say , in you non pareille for that time , and the rear admiral sir Walter Raleigh ( a man of marvelous great worth and regard , for many his exceed singular great virtue , right fortitude and great resoluteness in all matter of importance ) in the warspight associate with diverse most famous worthy knight , namely , sir Francis veer the lord Martiali in the rainbow , sir George carry m. of the ordinance , in the mary rose , sir Robert Southwell in the lion , gentleman for all laudable good virtue , and for perfect courage and discretion in all military action , of as great praise and good desert as any gentleman of their degree whosoever , 
 247 
 have with they some of you ship of London , and some of the dutch squadron of reasonable burden , shall lead the dance , and give the onset , and that the two most noble lord generail with some other of their company , shall in their convenient time and order , second the main battle . the fight be begin and grow very hot , the lord general the earl of Essex , ( who infinite princely virtue , with triumphant fame , deserve to be immortalize ) be on port s. mary side , upon a sudden and unlock for of other , thrust himself among the foremost into the main battle . the other most honourable lord general ( who singular virtue in all respect be of such a excellency and perfection , as neither can my praise in any part increase they , nor any man envy any whit blemish or diminish they ) understanding , the most noble earl to be in fight among they , and perceive by the m. of his ship , the ark royal , that for lack of water , it be not possible , that he may put any near , without far delay , call present for his pynnesse , and in the same pynnesse put himself , and his honourable son L. William Howard that now be , aboard the honour de la mer , and there remain in the fight till the battle be end . the fight be very terrible , and most hideous to the beholder by the continual discharge of those roar thunder great piece , on all side , and so continue doubtful till about one or two of the clock in the afternoon : about which time the fillip , who in very truth , they have all most fancy unto , begin to yield and give over , her man that remain alive shift for themselves as they be able , and swim and run a shore with all the haste that they can possible , and therewithal ! , at the very same instant themselves fire their ship , and so leave she , and present thereupon a great argosy , with a other mighty great ship , fire themselves in you like manner . immediate hereupon , the residue of the ship , run they - self on ground , as far from we as they can , and thereby purchase their own safety , or rather breathe 
 248 
 / n^n a fJrytna / ty Henry Cornelius five ] * oom . 
 / / / . » - lt / hyraph from a angtnal letter tn the Pofjteffian rf 
 John thane . 
 space for the time . of they all two fair ship only be board and take by our man with most part of their furniture in they , the one call S. matthy , a ship by estimation of some twelve . hundred ton , and the other saint Andrew , be a ship of not much lesser burden . the galley , see this sudden great victorious overthrow , make all the haste they can towards the bridge call Puente de sva ? o , and there shroud themselves in such sort as our ship can not by any mean possible come nigh they for lack of water . 
 the spanish ship in all be lix . and as be say , all tall ship and very rich furnish and well appoint , whereof some of they be bind for the Indies , and other freight and furnish for Lisbon , as themselves affirm : and have we not come that very time that we do , ( which for my part , i do not attribute so much unto mere chance , as to some secret deep insight and foreknowledge of the two most worthy lord general , who no doubt spare for no cost or labour for true intelligence ) we have certain miss of they all . 
 of what great wealth and riches these ship be , that i leave to other man judgement and report , but sure i be , that themselves offer two million and a half of ducat for the redemption of the good and riches that be in they : which offer of they , albeit it be accept of the lord general , and shall have be receive , yet we be defeat of it , as hereafter shall be more at large declare . 
 what manner of fight this be , and with what courage perform , and with what terror to the beholder continue , where so many thunder tear piece be for so long a time discharge , i leave it to the reader to think and imagine . yet such be the great mercy and goodness of our live God , that in all this cruel terrible fight , in the end , there be not either slay or hurt by any manner of mean ( except one mischance that happen , whereof i will by and by make mention ) many above the number of 100 of our man : notwithstanding 
 249 
 diverse of our ship be many time shoot through and thorough : yea and some of they no less than two and twenty time , as i be inform by credible report of the captain and master themselves . i know not of any other hurt do , save only that sir Robert Southwell , who always show himself a most valiant resolute knight in all this action , make a little too much haste with his pinnace to board the fillip , have there his say pinnace burn with the fillip at the same instant , and yet by good care and diligence his man be save . 
 one other mischance ( as i say ) there happen , and it be thus : one of the Fleming flyboat , who have , in all the conflict before , carry himself very well and valiant , about ten of the clock while the fight continue sharp , chance by great negligence and misfortune , to be fire and blow up by his own powder , who can not have any few in he , than one hundred fight man by all supposal , and so in the very twinkle of a eye , both ship and man be all cast away , except seven . or viii . which by very good fortune , and great care and diligence of some of the other ship be save . 
 immediate upon this notable victory without any far stay in all the world , the lord general the earl of Essex put to shore , and land about 3000. shot , and pikeman : of the which number the one half be present dispatch to the bridge Puente de sva ? o , under the conduct of three most famous worthy knight , sir Christopher blunt , sir conier Clifford , and sir Thomas Gerard : with the other half , be about fifteen hundred , the most noble earl of Essex himself , be accompany with diverse other honourable lord , namely the earl of Sussex , the lord Harbert , the lord Burk , count Lodovick of Nassaw , the lord Martiali sir Francis Vere , with many other worthy knight , and man of great regard , who all in that day service do most valiant behave themselves , with all expedition 250 
 possible march on foot towards the town of Cadiz , which be about three english mile march . that time of the day be very hot and faint and the way be all of dry deep slide sand in a manner , and beside that , very uneven , and by that mean so tiresome and painful as may be . the enemy have reasonable company both of horse and footman , stand in a readiness some good distance without the town to welcome we , and to encounter the lord general . but the most famous earl with his valiant troop , rather run in deed in good order , then march , hasten on they with such unspeakable courage and celerity , as within one hour space and less , the horseman be all discomfit and put to flight , their leader be strike down at the very first encounter , whereat the footman be wonderful dismay and astonish at the unexpected manner of the Englishman kind of such fierce and resolute fight , retire themselves with all the speed possible that they can , to recover themselves into the town again , which be do by they , with far swift leg than manly courage , our man be enforce to scale the wall : which thing in very deed , although it be not without great danger and difficulty to be perform : yet such be the invincible resolution , and the wonderful dexterity of the english , that in one half hour or thereabouts , the enemy be repulse , and the town wall possess , by the noble earl himself , be in all this action , either the very first man or else in a manner join with the first . 
 the town wall be then possess , and the english ensign be there display upon they , with all speed possible they proceed on to march through the town , make still their way with sword and shot so well as they can , be still fight withal at every turn . 
 immediate upon this most famous entry , the noble earl , ( accord to their resolution , as i take it , put 
 251 
 down before ) be second by the noble lord admiral in person , who be accompany , with the noble lord Thomas Howard , the most worthy gentleman his son , now lord Howard , sir Robert Southwell , sir Richard Levison , and with diverse other gentleman , his lord follower of good account : he colour be advance by that valiant resolute gentleman , ( a man beautify with many excellent rare gift , of good learning and understand ) saint Edward Hobby knight . and thus he likewise march with all possible speed on foot , notwithstanding his lord many year , the intolerable heat for the time , and the overtire tedious deep sand , with other many impediment : yet in good time , join himself with the earl and his company , and give they the strong , and best assistance that he can . 
 thus than the two lord general with their company be join together , and proceed so far as the market place , there they be hot encounter , where and at what time , that worthy famous knight sir John Winkfield , be sore wound before on the thigh , at the very entry of the town , and yet for all that no whit respect himself , be carry away with the care he have to encourage and direct his company , be with the shot of a musket in the head most unfortunate slay . 
 and thus before eight of the clock that night be these two most noble lord general , master of the market place , the fort , and the whole town and all , only the castle as yet hold out , and from time to time as they can , still annoy they with seven batter piece . by this time night begin to grow on , and a kind of peace or intermission be obtain by they of the castle : to who the lord general have signify : that unless before the next day in the morning they will absolute render themselves , they shall look for no mercy , but shall every one be put to the sword : upon which message they take deliberation that night : but in the morning before break of day 252 
 they hang out their flag of truce , and so without any further composition do yield themselves absolute to their mercy , and deliver up the castle . 
 and yet notwithstanding all this , in the night time while they have this respite to pause , and deliberate about the peacemaking , there be diverse great and sudden alarm give : which do breed some great outrage and disorder in the town . at every which alarm , the two lord general show themselves marvelous ready and forward , insomuch that at the very first alarm , scant well furnish with any more defence than their shirt , hose , and doublet , and those too altogether in a manner untie , they be abroad in the street themselves , to see the uttermost of it . but for that it be not as yet very well know ( or at the least not well know unto i ) either wherefore , or by who these alarm be attempt : i be therefore to entreat , that a bare report , that such a thing be do , may suffice . 
 these thing be do , and this surrender be make , present proclamation be publish , that the fury now be pass , all man shall surcease from all manner of blood and cruel deal , and that there shall not kind of violence or hard usage be offer to any , either man , woman or child , upon pain of death : and so permit the spoil of so much of the town as be by they think meet , to the common soldier for some certain day , they be continual in counsel about other grave direction , best know to their honourable wisdom . 
 this honourable and merciful edict i be sure be straight and religious observe of the english : but how well it be keep by the dutch , i will neither affirm , nor yet deny . for i perceive between they and the Spaniard there be a implacable heartburn , and therefore as soon as the dutch squadron be espy in the fight , immediate thereupon both they of Sivil and S. Lucar and also some of some other place do not only arrest all such dutch ship , as deal with they friendly 253 
 by the way of traffic and merchandise , and so confiscate their good , but also imprison the merchant and owner of the same , and , as the report go , do entreat many of they with extreme cruelty thereupon . 
 in the mean while the very next day be the two and twenty day of June , all the spanish ship which be leave on ground in the bay of Cadiz , where the great overthrow have be but the day before , be by the Spaniard themselves there set on fire , and so from that time forward they never leave burn of they , till every one of they , good and all , as far as we know be burn and consume . this their do be much marvel at of we , and so much the more , for that , as i say before , there have be make some offer for the redemption and save of the good , and it be not to they unknown that this their offer be not mislike , but in all probability shall have be accept . the common opinion be , that this be do either by the appointment of the duke de Medina Sidonia , or else by express commandment from the high power . 
 not long after the same time ( three day as i remember ) the galley that be run on ground , do quit themselves also out of that place , and by the bridge of the hand call Puente de sva ? o , make their way round about the same hand , and so by put themselves to the main sea , escape to a town call Rotta , not far off , but something up towards the town of saint lucre , and there purchase their safety by that mean . 
 thus be this notable victory , as well by sea as by land , both begin and in effect perform , within the compass , in a manner , of fourteen hour : a thing in truth so strange and admirable , as in my judgement will rather be wonder at then believe of posterity . and if ever any notable exploit in any age be comparable to Caesar veni , vidi , vici , certain in my poor opinion it be this . 
 2s4 
 here it be to be wish ( and perchance of some too it be look for ) that every man particular worthy act in this day service , with the party name also , shall be put down , that thereby both they and their good desert may be register to all posterity : and for my part i will it be so , and wish i be able to do it . but for that i confess it be a matter that pass my power , yea , and for that i think it also a thing impossible to be precise perform by any other , i be to crave pardon for that i rather leave it out altogether , then presume to do it maim : and in this point i refer the reader only to the map that be set forth of this journey , where it be in some part convenient touch and specify . 
 the town of it self be a very beautiful town , and a large , as be the chief see of the bishop there , and have a goodly cathedral church in it , with a right goodly abbey , a nunnery , and a exceed fine college of the Jesuit , and be by natural situation , as also by very good fortification , very strong , and tenable enough in all man opinion of the better judgement . their build be all of a kind of hard stone , even from the very foundation to the top , and every house be in a manner a kind of a fort or castle , altogether flat-roofed in the top , after the turkish manner , so that many man together , and that at ease , may walk thereon : have upon the house top , great heap of weighty stone pile up in such good order , as they be ready to be throw down by every woman most easy upon such as pass by , and the street for the most part so exceed narrow , ( i think to avoid the intolerable great heat of the sun ) as but two man or three at the most together , can in any reasonable sort march through they , no street be broad common than i suppose Watling street in London to be . 
 the town be altogether without glass , except the church , yet with fair comely window , and with fair grate of iron to they , and have very large fold leave 255 
 of wainscot or the like . it have very few chimney in it , or almost none at all : it may be some one chimney in some one or other of the low out room of least account , serve for some necessary use , either to wash in , or the like , or else now and then perchance for the dress of a dish of meat , have , as it shall seem unto i , always a great care and respect how to keep themselves from all kind of great heat , then how to provide for any store of great roast . it have in it by report of they that shall best know it , some four thousand and more , of very good able fight man , and six hundred horseman at the least . no question but that they be well furnish of all thing appertain thereunto , especial so many good ship lie there , and be so well store with all manner of munition , shot , and powder , as they be . 
 whether they have knowledge of our come or not , i can say nothing to it : themselves give it out that they understand not of it , but only by a caravel the Friday at evening before we come . but whether they know it or no , thus much i dare bold affirm , that if the english have be possess of that or the like town , and have be but half so well provide as they be , they will have defend it for one two month at the least , against any power whatsoever in all Christendom . but sure God be a mighty God , and have a wonderful secret stroke in all matter , especial of weight and moment . whether their heart be kill at the mighty overthrow by sea , or whether they be amaze at the invincible courage of the english , which be more than ordinary , care no more for either small shot or great , than in a manner for so many hailstone , or whether the remorse of a guilty conscience towards the english nation , for their dishonourable and devilish practise , against her sacred majesty , and the realm , ( a matter that easy beget a faint heart in a guilty mind ) or what other thing there be in it i know not , but be it speak to their perpetuali shame and infamy , 256 
 there be never thing more resolute perform of the courageous english , nor more shameful lose of the brag Spaniard . 
 of what wealth this town shall be , i be not able to resolve the asker : for i confess that for my own part , i have not so much good luck , as to be partaker so much as of one penny , or penny worth . howbeit my ill fortune make that town never a whit the poor . but as it shall appear by the great pillage by the common soldier , and some mariner too , and by the goodly furniture , that be deface by the base people , and thereby utter lose and spoil , as not worth the carry away , and by the over great plenty of wine , oil , almond , olive , raisin , spice , and other rich grocery ware , that by the intemperate disorder of some of the rasher sort be knock out , and lie trample under foot , in every common high way , it shall appear that it be of some very mighty great wealth to the first owner , though perchance , not of any such great commodi tie to the last subduer , for that i judge that the better part be most riotous and intemperate spend and consume . a disorder in my opinion very much to be lament , and if it may be by any good mean remedy , in my conceit , it be a most honourable device . 
 the Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday follow , the lord general spend in counsel , about the dispose of all matter , aswell touch the town and prisoner , as also concern all other matter , think meet of they in their honourable wisdom , and in all that mean while do show such honourable bounty and mercy , as be not able to be express . for not only the life of every one be spare , but also there be a especial care have , that all the religious , as well man as woman , shall be well and favourable entreat , who free without any manner of ransom or other molestation , they cause to be safe transport over to port saint marie , a town in a manner as fair as Cadiz : but at that time , 
 iv 257 r 
 as the case do stand , certain know to be of no wealth in the world , and it be some six or seven mile distant over against Cadiz , in a manner as Paul be against Southwark , on the other side of the bay , in a part of Andaluzia , subject to the territory of the duke de Medina Sidonia . 
 moreover , at the same instant they do appoint that worthy knight sir Amias Preston , and some other in some convenient bark , to transport over to the say town safe and in good order , a hundred or more of the better sort of ancient gentlewoman , and merchant wife , who be suffer to put upon themselves , some of they two , yea , some three suit of apparel , with some convenient quanti tie of many jewel , chain , and other ornament belong to their estate and degree . such be the heroical liberality , and exceed great clemency , of those most honourable lord general , thereby , as it shall seem unto i , beat down that false surmise opinion , which have be hitherto common spread abroad , and settle among the Spaniard : which be , that the english do trouble they and their country , more for their gold , riches and pearl etc then for any other just occasion . whereas by these their honourable deal it be manifest to all the world , that it be only in respect of a just revenge for the manifold injury , and most dishonourable practise that have be from time to time attempt by they against we and our nation , and also in the defence of the true honour of England : which they have seek , and daily do seek , by so many sinister and reproachful device , so much as in they lie , to deface . 
 upon Saturday be the 26. sir John Winkfield knight be bury , in honourable and warlike manner , so far forth as the circumstance of that time and place can permit . at who funeral the navy discharge a great part of their ordinance , in such order , as be think meet and convenient by the lord general commandment . 
 258 
 the twenty seven day be Sunday , in the abbey the divine service be have , and a learned sermon be make there by one master Hopkins , the right honourable earl of Essex his preacher , a man of good learning and sweet utterance , and even there the same day , something before the sermon be make , these worthy gentleman follow be knight by the lord general . and here i be to signify by the way that two of these be knight three or four day before , and some three or four more be knight after that time , upon certain occasion : but yet i hold it best ( and i trust without offence ) to recite their name in this place altogether . 
 the name of such noble man and gentleman , as I1 - 6l6 - ] be knight at Cadiz in June 1596 by the two most honourable lord general . 
 Olr Samuel Bagnol . sir John Leigh , alias Lee. June 21. 22. 
 o sir Arthur savage . sir Richard Weston . 
 the earl of Sussex . sir Richard wainman . 
 the lord Harbert . sir James Wootton . 27 - 
 the lord Burk . sir Richard ruddal . 
 count Lodowick . sir Robert Mansfield . 
 sir William Howard . sir William Mounson . 
 sir George d’eureux . sir John Bowles . 
 sir Henry Nevel . sir Edward bow . 
 sir Edmund Richard sir Humphrey druel . 
 sir Richard Leven . sir Amias Preston . 
 sir Peter Egomort . sir Robert Remington . 
 sir Anthony Ashley . sir John buck . 
 sir Henry Leonard . sir John Morgan . 
 sir Richard Levison . sir John Aldridg . 
 sir Horatio Vere . sir John Asshindon . 
 sir Arthur Throckmorton . sir Matthew Browne . 
 sir mile Corbet . sir John Acton . 
 sir Edward Conway . sir Thomas gate . 
 sir Oliver Lambert . sir Gilly mericke . 
 sir Anthony cook . sir Thomas smith . 
 259 
 sir Christopher Heydon . 
 sir Francis Popham . 
 sir Philip Woodhouse . 
 sir Alexander Clifford . 
 sir Maurice Barkley . 
 sir Charles blunt . 
 sir George Gifford . 
 sir Robert cross . 
 sir James Escudamor . 
 sir Urias Leigh . 
 sir William Pooley . 
 sir Thomas palmer . 
 sir John Stafford . 
 sir Robert Lovel . 
 sir John Gylbert . 
 sir William Harvie . 
 sir John grey . 
 do Christ . prince of portingal 
 sir John Vanderfoord , admiral of the Hollander . 
 sir Robert Dudley . 8. August . 
 i be not curious in place these gentleman , but put they down at a venture . only encage have observe , as near as i can , the just day and time when they be create . and i trust where the place of it self be so worthy and equal , there the bare name and place of the party , shall breed no offence , or make a disparity . the two gentleman that be last knight receive their knighthood in the way of our return from Cadiz : the one of they upon the sea , not far from the bay of the groin , at what time our ship stand upon their stay for a space , while certain pinnace be send to descry what ship be at the groin : the other at Plymouth in the open street , when the lord general come from the sermon . the one a man of long service , and good desert among the dutch : the other of so many good part of a worthy gentleman , as the like be seidome see to concur in any . 
 i speak in the begin of her majesty prayer , which i presume ( though worthy ) to translate into latin : and now at this very time , there be some opportunity offer , for to make some use of that translation . for now be in Cadiz , attend upon my most honourable good lord , i talk with certain of the religious man , such as i find learned , whereof indeed there be some , though not very many . i 260 
 talk also with the bishop of Cusco there , a grave age comely man , and be of late choose to that bishopric , he be as then to have go to the Indies , have not we then take he prisoner , and so stay his journey for that time . with these man ever as occasion do serve , i do seek now and then to spend some speech , and to entertain time withal , i will break with they of this our victory , and of the injury and bad deal of their prince and country offer to her majesty , whereby she be provoke , and in a manner draw to this action : though otherwise of her own most excellent princely good nature , she be altogether give to peace , and quietness . and always in some part of our conference , i will show they a copy of her majesty prayer in latin , which i have always of purpose ready about i , whereby it may the better appear unto they , how unwilling , and upon how great and urgent occasion her majesty be , as it be enforce to undertake this action : and therewithal ! i do use now and then to bestow upon they a copy of the same in writing . they seem in all outward show to allow of my speech , and to praise her majesty good inclination , and earnest to wish that there may be a firm concord and peace again . 
 it please the lord general to deal exceed favourable with this say bishop of Cusco : for it be their good pleasure to give he his free passage without any ransom , and therewithal to let he to understand , that they come not to deal with churchman , or unarm man , or with man of peace , weakling and child , neither be it any part of their meaning to make such a voyage for gold , silver , or any other their wealth and riches , etc but that their only come be to meet with their dishonourable practise , and manifold injury , and to deal with man of war and valour , for the defence of the true honour of England : and to let they to understand , that whensoever they 261 
 attempt any base-conceited and dishonourable practice to their sovereign queen , their mistress , that it shall be revenge to the uttermost , etc 
 in this mean space , while the lord general continue at Cadiz , there come to they certain poor wretched turk , to the number of 38 , that have be a long time galleyslave , and either at the very time of the fight by sea , or else immediate thereupon , take the opportunity , do then make their escape , and do swim to land : yield themselves to the mercy of their most honourable lordship . it please they with all speed to apparel they , and to furnish they with money , and all other necessary , and to bestow on they a bark , and a pilot , to see they free and safe convey into Barbary , will they to let the country understand what be do , and what they have see . whereby i doubt not , but as her majesty be a most admirable prince already , over all Europe , all Africa , and Asia , and throughout Christendom : so the whole world hereafter shall have just cause to admire her infinite princely virtue , and thereby be provoke to confess , that as she have be mighty protect from time to time , by the powerful hand of the almighty , so undoubted , that she be to be judge and account of we , to be his most sacred handmaid , and choose vessel . and therefore , whatsoever wicked designment shall|be conspire and plot against her majesty hereafter , shall thought to be conspire , plot , and intend against the almighty himself : and for that cause , as i trust , shall|be by the infinite goodness and mercy of that almighty , mighty frustrate and overthrown . 
 the 28. day be Monday , the lord admiral come aboard the ark again , mind there to remain for a space , as indeed he do , and upon the advice of his physician , to deal something in physic , for that his lord find his body something out of frame . at that time it please his lord to write certain letter to the 262 
 duke of Medina Sidonia , for the deliverance of english captive , who be remain in the galley . for by this time , it be report , that the say duke be come down in person with some power , and that he be either at port S. mary , or else at Rotta , or thereabouts . his lord do indite the letter himself , but his pleasure be , they shall be turn into latin by another : and so to be send ( as indeed they be ) in the latin tongue unto the duke . 
 a copy of the lord admiral letter to the duke of Medina Sidonia . 
 illustrissimo principi Duci de Medina Sidonia . 
 illustrissime princeps , ex nonnullis quibusdam Hispanis intelligimus , excellentiam vestram jam nunc esse apud portum s. Mariae . et quoniam in anno domini 1588. id nobis tunc muneris assignatum erat a sereniss . nostra regina domina mea , ut contra vos , ves-trasque copias , ego solus pro eo tempore generalis essem constitutus : idcirco non opinamur vobis ignotum esse , quam mite quoddam , and humanum bellandi genus , tum hic jam in hoc ipso tempore , adversus huius loci populum atque incolas usurpaverimus : tum etiam saepiiis antehac quam humaniter , benigneque eos omnes tractaverimus , quos ex vestris jure belli captivos acceperimus . ex quorum numero quam multa millia , etiam gratis , nullo accepto pretio , libertate donaverimus , id putamus omnibus esse testatiu , quam ut a quoquam denegetur . Quocirca , neque ullo modo nobis in mentem venire potest , ut dubitemus , quin parem etiam in vobis humanitatem adversus nostros captivos simus reperturi . cum igitur nobis compertum jam sit , habere vos in vestris galeris , ex reginae nostrae serenissimae dominae meae subditis unum and quinquaginta captivos : non equidem dubitamus , quin eos omnes sitis relaxaturi , and ad nos missuri : ea lege , ac condition , ut totidem ex vestris hic captivis ejusdem loci atque ordinis , melioris etiam fortassis notae , 263 
 ac conditionis , homuncios , ad vos vicissim remittamus . id quod nos facturo data fide spondemus , quam primum nostros captivos ex vestris manibus acceperimus . hac in re si nostro desiderio ac voluntati parum satisfactum erit , aliud profectd tunc posthac belli genus ingrediemur , aliiimque bellandi morem cogemur , etiam inviti , and contra voluntatem prosequi . ex regius Anglicana class apud Cadiz ultimo Junii , stilo antiquo . 1596. 
 Carolus Howard . 
 these letter be send by a Spaniard , and a answer be bring from the duke with all convenient speed , and as it shall seem by the lord admiral next answer return to he in write , which immediate hereafter follow , the duke de Medina Sidonia his letter be honourable , and with good regard . 
 a copy of my lord admiral second letter to the duke of Medina Sidonia . 
 illustrissimo principi Duci de Medina Sidonia . 
 illustrissime princeps , litera ab excellentia vestra hodie accepimus : quae verb nostra sit ad illa responsio , nobiles isti viri , qui vestras litera ad nos pertulerunt : plenius declarabunt . hoc interim cupimus esse penitus persuasum excellentiae vestrae , nos seduld operam daturo , ut in omni honorificae benignitatis humanitatisque genere , expectation ! vestrae omni ex parte respondeamus . quod ad anglicos nostros captivos attinet , quos ab excellentia vestra huc ad nos crastino die missum iri expectamus , in ea re pollicemur excellentiae vestrae , quod plenius a nobis vestrae voluntati satisfactum erit : and quid pro illis captivis tale nos captivos vobis remittemus , quales tum ab ipso Dom. Mendoza , tum ab aliis illustrib . viris , qui a Dom. Porta Carero in illorum ad nos favorem mittebantur , communi cum consensu erant ab ipsis approbati . si vero quis alius jam captivus est vel posthac futurus erit in nostra potestate , pro cujus redemption nondum plenb conventum est and stipulatum de certo pretio persolvendo : concedimus excellentiae 264 
 the voyage to Cadiz vestrae , ut in hoc etiam casu vos , vestro pro arbitrio , de illis quicquid velitis , imperetis . ex regius class Anglicana , apud Cadiz , 3. die Julii stylo antiquo . 1596. Carolus Howard . 
 the next day after , be the 4. of July , the Ll. general cause the town of Cadiz to be set on fire , and raze and deface so much as they can , the fair cathedral church , and the religious house only be spare , and leave unblemished . and with the town all such provision for ship , and other thing , as be serviceable for you king use , and yet be not either so convenient for we to be carry away , or else such as we stand no whit at all in need of , be likewise at the same instant consume with fire . and present thereupon , their lordship , with as convenient speed as they can , and the whole army in such good order and leisure , as they think best , come aboard . 
 the next day be the 5. of July , the Ll. general with all the army be under sail , and now make for England , and but as yet pass the very mouth of the bay of Cadiz , a galley full of english prisoner , with a flag of truce , meet we from Rotta , send by the duke of Medina Sidonia , and send as it shall seem , one day late than his promise : but yet their flag be either not big enough , or not well place in the galley , or not well discern of our man , or by what other mischance i know not : but thus it be : by one of our small ship you sail foremost , assoon as the say galley come within gunshot , there be a great piece discharge upon she , and at that instant there be one man slay outright , and 2. other grievous hurt . the error be espy and perceive , our ship give over immediate from any far shoot . assoon as the galley come near we , my lord admiral cause a gracious salutation to be sound with his trumpet , and will the captain forthwith to come aboard his ship : which they do , and then he feast they with a very fine and honourable banquet , as the time and place may serve . and then by they under-265 
 stand of that unfortunate mischance that have happen by the shot of the say ship , he be very sorry for the same , and yet such be the merciful providence of almighty God , that even in this mischance also , he do hold his holy hand over the english . and all the harm that be do do light only upon the poor Turk , and the Spaniard himself . when this lord have well banquet they , he present call for his barge , and do accompany the say galley to the lord general the earl of Essex , who then do ride with his ship a good distance off : and there they be in like manner most honorable receive , and entertain , the spanish gentleman deliver up their prisoner the english captive , of who some have be there 6 year , some 8 , or ten : yea , and some 22. year , and upward , and some of they but late take in saint Francis drake last voyage to the Indies . the number of the prisoner deliver be but 39 and no more , and be bring in , and deliver by don Antonio de Corolla and his brother , and by don Pedro de Cordua , and certain other . if you demand why , of one and fifty captive , there be no more deliver then be , i presuppose , ( and i think it true to ) that at that time the residue be far offend in some remote place of Spain bestow , and so by that mean , not able at this time to be in a readiness , but yet like enough that there be some good order take for they hereafter , to be redeem , and send over into England . 
 if any man presume here so far , as to inquire how it chance , that the lord general rest so long at Cadiz , and go no far , and why port S. Mary be so fair a town , and so near to they , be forbear ? and why shears ali&s xeres ? and why Rotta and the like ? and why this or that be do ? and why that or this leave undo ? i will not answer he with our common english proverb , as i may , which be : that one fool may ask more question in one hour , than ten discrete man can well answer in five day . 
 266 
 but that grave ancient writer , Cornelius Tacitus , have a wise , brief , pithy say , and it be this : Nemo tentavit inquirere in columnas Herculis , sanctifisque ac reverentius habitum est de factis deorum credere , quim scire . which say , in my fancy , fit marvellous well for this purpose : and so much the rather , for that this Cadiz be that very place , ( at least by the common opinion ) where those say pillar of Hercules be think to be place : and , as some say , remain as yet not far off to be see . but to let that pass , the say bear this discrete meaning in it , albeit in a pretty kind of mystical manner utter : that it befitteth not inferior person to be curious , or too inquisitive after prince action , neither yet to be so saucy and so malapert , as to seek to dive into their secret , but rather always to have a right reverend conceit and opinion of they , and their do : and thereon so rest our inward thought , to seek to go no further , but so to remain ready always to arm our self with dutiful mind , and willing obedience , to perform and put in execution that which in their deep insight and heroical designment , they shall for our good , and the care of the common wealth determine upon . 
 this , and much less to , may suffice to satisfy any honest mind man . but yet if any will needs desire to be a little far satisfy , albeit it need not , yet then , thus much i dare say and affirm , that upon my knowledge , the chief cause why port saint mary , and the rest be leave untouched , be this : for that it be most certain know , that they be town not worth the salute of such a royal company , in which there be no manner of wealth in the world leave , more than bare house of stone , and stand wall , and may well have serve rather as a stale , perchance , to have entrap , then as a mean to have enrich . and it have be more than a suspicion of folly , for such a army as this , to have seek to fight with the air , and to have labour with great pain and charge , yea , and with 267 
 A.D. 
 I596 . 
 some evident danger too , to have overthrow that , which can very little or nothing have profit , be destroy : and yet now , can do as little harm be leave , as it be , untouched . 
 and thus much for our journey to Cadiz : for the accident that happen by the way , for the win , spoil , and burn of the say town , for the overthrow of the spanish fleet there , and for all other by-matter that happen , as appendance to the same , both in the time of our abode there , as also at the very last hour of our come from thence . 
 as for our return home , and our entrance into a part of portingal by the way , with the take , spoil , and burn of the town of Faraon there , and march into the spanish confine thereabouts , etc i mind to leave it to some other , who chance be to be present at the action , as my self be not , and shall|be off more sufficient ability to perform it . 
 