the travail of Helena . 
 the same in english . 
 HElena Flavia Augusta , the heir and only daughter of Coelus sometime the most excellent king of Britain , the mother of the emperor Constantine the great , by reason of her singular beauty , faith , religion , goodness and godly majesty ( accord to the testimony of Eusebius ) be famous in all the world . among all the woman of her time , there be none either in the liberali art more learned , or in instrument of music more skilful , or in the diverse language of nation more abundant than herself . she have a natural quickness or excellency of wit , eloquence of speech , and a most notable grace in all her behaviour . she be see in the hebrew , greek and latin tongue . 
 her father ( as Virumnius report ) have no other child to succeed in the kingdom after he but she , and therefore cause she to be instruct in these thing by the best teacher , that thereby she may the better in time govern the realm : so that by reason of her pass beauty , and other her excellent gift of body and mind , Constantius Chlorus the emperor marry she , and have by she a son call Constantine the 271 
 great , while he remain in Britain . who at length decease at York , this Helena ( not otherwise then Anna of who mention be make in the new testament ) continue a virtuous and holy widow to the end of her life . 
 there be some writer which do affirm , that persecution cease , and peace be grant to the christian church by her good mean . 
 after the light and knowledge of the gospel , she grow so skilful in divinity , that she write and compose diverse book , and certain greek verse also , which ( as Ponticus report ) be yet extant . be warn by some vision she go to Jerusalem , and visit all the place there , which Christ have frequent . she live to the age of fourscore year , and then die at Rome the 15 day of August , in the year of our redemption 337. Octavius be then king of Britain , and her son Constantine the emperor then also live , and her body be to this day very careful preserve at Venice . 
 