372 
 374 
 375 
 376 
 377 
 378 
 380 
 A.D. 
 1330 - 
 iv 385 2 b 
 Java . 
 386 
 387 
 389 
 390 
 391 
 393 
 395 
 Pythagorica 
 Chilenso . 
 Thalay . 
 Kakam . 
 Caramoran . 
 Cambalec . 
 397 
 398 
 400 
 iv 401 2 c 
 402 
 403 
 405 
 406 
 here begin the journal of Frier Odoricus , one of the order of the minorite , concern strange thing which he see among the Tartar of the east . 
 Pera. 
 [ ii i . 5+ - ] 
 lbeit many and sundry thing be report by diverse author concern the fashion and condition of this world : notwithstanding i friar Odoricus of Friuli , de portu Vahonis be desirous to travel unto the foreign and remote nation of infidel , see and hear great and mira - 
 culous thing , which i be able true to avouch . first of all therefore sail from Pera by Constantinople , i arrive at Trapesunda . this place be right commodi-ously situate , as be a haven for the persian and Medes , and other country beyond the sea . in this land i behold with great delight a very strange spectacle , namely a certain man lead about with he more than four thousand partridge . the man himself walk upon the ground , and the partridge fly in the air , which he lead unto a certain castle call Zavena , be three day journey distant from Trapesunda . the say partridge be so tame , that when the man be desirous to lie down and rest , they 408 
 will all come flock about he like chicken . and so he lead they unto Trapesunda , and unto the palace of the emperor , who take as many of they as he please , and the rest the say man carry unto the place from whence he come . in this city lie the body of Athanasius , upon the gate of the city . and then i pass on further unto Armenia major , to a the city of certain city call Azaron , which have be very rich Azaronin ar-in old time , but now the Tartar have almost lay major-it waste . in the say city there be abundance of bread and flesh , and of all other victual except wine and fruit . this city also be very cold , and be report to be high situate , than any other city in the world . it have most wholesome and sweet water about it : for the vein of the say water seem to spring and flow from the mighty river of Euphrates , which be but a day journey from the say city . 
 also , the say city stand direct in the way to Tauris . and i pass on unto a certain mountain call Sobissacalo . in the foresay country there be the very Sobissacalo . same mountain whereupon the ark of Noah rest : unto the which i will willing have ascend , if my company will have stay for i . howbeit the people of that country report , that no man can ever ascend the say mountain , because ( say they ) it please not the high god . and i travail on further unto 
 Tauris that great and royal city , which be in old time Tauris a city call Susis . this city be account for traffic of °f^ersta-marchandize the chief city of the world : for there be no kind of victual , nor any thing else belong unto merchandise , which be not to be have there in great abundance . this city stand very commodious : for unto it all the nation of the whole world in a manner may resort for traffic . concern the say city , the christian in those part be of opinion , that the persian emperor receive more tribute out of it , than the king of France out of all his dominion . near unto the say city there be a salt-hill yield salt unto the city : and of 
 409 
 that salt each man may take what please he , not pay ought to any man therefore . in this city many Christians of all nation do inhabit , over who the Saracen bear rule in all thing . than i travel on further unto a or , sum / tania . city call * Soldania , wherein the persian emperor lie all summer time : but in winter he take his progress the caspian unto another city stand upon the sea call * Baku . sea - also the foresay city be very great and cold , have 
 good and wholesome water therein , unto the which also store of merchandise be bring . Moreover i travel with a certain company of Caravans towards upper India : and in the way , after many day journey , i come unto or , Cassibin . the city of the three wise man call * Cassan , which be a noble and renown city , save that the Tartar have destroy a great part thereof , and it abound with bread , wine , and many other commodity . from this city unto Jerusalem ( whither the three foresay wiseman be miraculous lead ) it be fifty day journey . there be many wonder in this city also , which , for brevity sake , i omit . from thence i depart unto a certain guest . city call * guest , whence the sea of sand be distant , one day journey , which be a most wonderful and dangerous thing . in this city there be abundance of all kind of victual , and especial of fig , reisin , and grape ; moor ( as i suppose ) then in any part of the whole world beside . this be one of the three principali city in all the persian empire . of this city the Saracen report , that no Christian can by any mean live therein above a year . then pass many day journey on forward , i como . come unto a certain city call * Comum , which be a huge and mighty city in old time , contain well nigh fifty mile in circuit , and have do in time past great damage unto the roman . in it there be stately palace altogether destitute of inhabitant , notwithstanding it abound with great store of victual . from hence travel through many country , at length i come unto the land of Job name hus , which be rail of all kind of victual , and very pleasant situate . there - 
 410 
 about be certain mountain have good pasture for cattle upon they . here also manna be find in great abundance . four partridge be here sell for less than a groat . in this country there be most comely old man . here also the man spin and card , and not the woman . this land border upon the north part of Chaldasa . 
 of the manner of the chaldasans , and of India . 
 from thence i travel into Chaldaea , which be a great kingdom , and 1 pass by the tower of Babel . This tw °f region have a language peculiar unto it self , and there be beautiful man , and deform woman . the man of the same country use to have their hair kempt , and trim like unto our woman : and they be golden turban upon their head rich set with pearl , and precious stone . the woman be clad in a course smock only reach to their knee , and have long sleeve hang down to the ground . and they go barefooted , wear breech which reach to the ground also . they wear no attire upon their head , but their hair hang disheavele about their ear : and there be many [ ii i . $5. ] other strange thing also . from thence i come into the low India , which the Tartar overrun and waste . and in this country the people eat date for the most part , whereof 42. livre . be there sell for less than a groat . i pass further also many day journey unto the ocean sea , and the first land where i arrive , be call * Ormes , ormus . be well fortify , and have great store of merchandise and treasure therein . such and so extreme be the heat in that country , that the privity of man come out of their body and hang down even unto their mid-leg . and therefore the inhabitant of the same place , to preserve their own life , do make a certain ointment , and anoint their privy member therewith , do lap they up in certain bag fasten unto their body , for otherwise they must needs die . here also they use a kind of bark or ship call jase be compact together only 
 411 
 with hemp . and i go on board into one of they , wherein i can not find any iron at all , and in the Thana , where - space of 28. day i arrive at the city of Thana , wherein of Frederick four of our friar be martyr for the faith of Christ . 
 etfl this country be well situate , have abundance of bread and wine , and of other victual therein . T. his kingaome in old time be very large and under the dominion of king Porus , who fight a great battle with Alexander the great . the people of this country be idolater worship fire , serpent and tree . and over all this land the Saracen do bear rule , who take it by main force , and they themselves be in subjection unto king Daldilus . there be diverse kind of beast , as namely black lion in great abundance , and ape also , and monkei , and bat as big as our dove . also there be mouse as big as our country dog , and therefore they be hunt with dog , because cat be not able to encounter they . Moreover , in the same country every man have a bundle of great bough stand in a waterpot before his door , which bundle be as great as a pillar , and it will not wither , so long as water be apply thereunto : with many other novelty and strange thing , the relation whereof will breed great delight . 
 how peper be have : and where it grow . 
 moreover , that it may be manifest how peper be have , it be to be understand that it grow in a certain Malabar . kingdom whereat i my self arrive , be call * Minibar , and it be not so plentiful in any other part of the world as it be there . for the wood wherein it grow contain in circuit 18. day journey . and in the say or , Alan - wood or forest there be two city , one call * Flan - 
 dnna . drina , and the other Cyncilim . in Flandrina both Jew 
 and christian do inhabit , between who there be often contention and war : howbeit the christian overcome the Jew at all time . in the foresay wood pepper be have after this manner : first it grow in leaf like unto potherb , which they plant near unto great tree 
 412 
 as we do our vine , and they bring forth pepper in cluster , as our vine do yield grape , but be ripe , they be of a green colour , and be gather as we gather grape , and then the grain be lay in the sun to be dry , and be dry be put into earthen vessel : and thus be pepper make and keep . now , in the same wood there be niany river , wherein be great store of crocodile , and of other serpent , which the inhabitant thereabouts do burn up with straw and with other dry fuel , and so they go to gather their pepper without danger . at the south end of the say forest stand the city of polumbrum , which abound with merchandise of all polumbrum . kind . all the inhabitant of that country do worship a live ox , as their god , who they put to labour for six year , and in the seven year they cause he to rest from all his work , place he in a solemn and public place , and call he a holy beast . Moreover they use this foolish ceremony : every morning they take two bason , either of silver , or of gold , and with one they receive the urine of the ox , and with the other his dung . 
 with the urine they wash their face , their eye , and all their five sense . of the dung they put into both their eye , than they anoint the ball of their cheek therewith , and three their breast : and then they say that they be sanctify for all that day ; and as the people do , even so do their king and queen . this people worship also a dead idol , which , from the navel upward , resembles a man , and from the navel downward a ox . the very same idol deliver oracle unto they , and sometime require the blood of fourty virgin for his hire . and therefore the man of that region do consecrate their daughter and their son unto their idol , even as Christians do their child unto some religion or saint in heaven . likewise they sacrifice their son and their daughter , and so , much people be put to death before the say idol by reason of that accurse ceremony . also , many other heinous and abominable villainy do that brutish beastly people commit : and i see many 
 413 
 more strange thing among they which i mean not here to insert . another most vile custom the foresay the burn nation do retai ne : for when any man die they burn of their dead , dead corpse to ash : and if his wife survive he , 
 her they burn quick , because ( say they ) she shall accompany her husband in his tilth and husbandry , when he be come into a new world . howbeit the say wife have child by her husband , may if she will , remain [ ii i . 56. ] still alive with they , without shame or reproach : notwithstanding , for the most part , they all of they make choice to be burn wl their husband . now , albeit the wife die before her husband , that law bind not the husband to any such inconvenience , but he may marry another wife also . likewise , you say nation have another strange custom , in that their woman drink wine , but their man do not . also the woman have the lid and brow of their eye and beard shave , but the man have not : with many other base and filthy fashion which the say woman do use contrary to the nature of their sex . from that kingdom i travel 10. day journey unto Mobar , or another kingdom call Mobar , which contain many maltapor . city . within a certain church of the same country , the body of saint Thomas the apostle be inter , the very same church be full of idol : and in 15. house round about the say church , there dwell certain priest who be nestorian , that be to say , false , and bad Christians , and schismatics . 
 of a strange and uncouth idol : and of certain custom and ceremony . 
 in the say kingdom of Mobar there be a wonderful strange idol , be make after the shape and resemblance of a man , as big as the image of our Christopher , and consist all of most pure and glitter gold . and about the neck thereof hang a silk ribbon , full of most rich and precious stone , some one of which be of more value than a whole kingdom . the house of this idol be all of beat gold , namely the roof , the pave - 
 414 
 mean , and the siel of the wall within and without . unto this idol the Indians go on pilgrimage , as we do unto saint Peter . some go with halter about their neck , some with their hand bind behind they , some other with knife stick on their arm or leg : and if after their peregrination , the flesh of their wound arm fester or corrupt , they esteem that limb to be holy , and think that their god be well please with they . near unto the temple of that idol be a lake make by the hand of man in a open and common place , whereinto the pilgrim cast gold , silver , and precious stone , for the honour of the idol and the repair of his temple . and therefore when any thing be to be adorn or mend , they go unto this lake take up the treasure which be cast in . Moreover at every yearly feast of the make or repair of the say idol , the king and queen , with the whole multitude of the people , and all the pilgrim assemble themselves , and place the say idol in a most stately and rich chariot , they carry he out of their temple with song , and with all kind of musical harmonic , and a great company of virgin go procession-wise two and two in a rank sing before he . many pilgrim also put themselves under the chariot wheel , to the end that their false god may go over they : and all they over who the chariot run , be crush in piece , and divide asunder in the midst , and slay right out . yea , and in do this , they think themselves to die most holy and secure , in the service of their god . and by this mean every year , there die under the say filthy idol , more than 500 person , who carcase be burn , and their ash be keep for relic , because they die in that sort for their god . Moreover they have another detestable ceremony . for when any man offer to die in the service of his false god , his parent , and all his friend assemble themselves together with a consort of musician , make he a great and solemn feast : which feast be end , they hang 5. sharp knife about his neck carry he before the idol , and so soon as he be come thither , he 
 415 
 take one of his knife cry with a loud voice , for the worship of my god do i cut this my flesh , and then he cast the morsel which be cut , at the face of his idol : but at the very last wound wherewith he murder himself , he utterth these word : now do i yield my self to death in the behalf of my god , and be dead , his body be burn , and be esteem by all man to be holy . the king of the say region be most rich in gold , silver , and precious stone , and there be the fair union in all the world . travel from thence by the ocean sea 50. day journey southward , i come unto a certain land name perhaps he Lammori , where , in regard of extreme heat , the people mean co - both man and woman go stark-naked from top to toe : mort‘ who see i apparel scoff at i , say , that God make Adam and Eve naked . in this country all woman be common , so that no man can say , this be my wife . also when any of the say woman bear a son or a daughter , she bestow it upon any one that have lie with she , who she please . likewise all the land of that region be possess in common , so that there be not mine and thou , or any propriety of possession in the division of land : howbeit every man have his own house peculiar unto himself . man flesh , if it be fat , be eat as ordinary there , as beef in our country . and albeit the people be most lewd , yet the country be exceed good , abound with all commodity , as flesh , corn , rise , silver , gold , wood of aloe , Campheir , and many other thing . merchant come unto this region for traffic do usual bring wl they fat man , sell they unto the inhabitant as we sei hog , who immediate kill and eat they . in this island towards the Sumatra . south , there be another kingdom call simoltra , where both man and woman mark themselves with redhot iron in 12. sundry spot of their face : and this nation be at continual war with certain naked people in another region . than i travel further unto another Java . island call Java , the compass whereof by sea be 3000. 
 [ ii i . 57 ] mile < the king of this hand have 7. other crown 
 416 
 king under his jurisdiction . the say hand be thorough inhabit , and be think to be one of the principali hand of you whole world . in the same hand there grow great plenty of clove , cubibez , and nutmeg , and in a word all kind of spice be there to be have , and great abundance of all victual except wine . the king of the say land of Java have a most brave and sumptuous palace , the most lofty build , that ever i see any , and it have most high grief and stayer to ascend up to the room therein contain , one stair be of silver , and another of gold , throughout the whole building . also the low room be pave all over with one square plate of silver , and another of gold . all the wall upon the inner side be seel over with plate of beat gold , whereupon be engrave you picture of knight , have about their temple , each of they a wreath of gold , adorn with precious stone . the roof of the palace be of pure gold . with this king of Java the great can of catay have have many conflict in war : who notwithstanding the say king have always overcome and vanquish . 
 of certain tree yield meal , honey , and poison . 
 near unto the say hand be another country call Panten , or Tathalamasin . and the king of the same country have many hand under his dominion . in this land there be tree yield meal , honey , and wine , and : the most deadly poison in all you whole world : for against it there be but one only remedy : and that be this : if any man have take of the poison , and will be deliver from the danger thereof , let he temper the dung of a man in water , and so drink a good quantity thereof , and it expel the poison immediate , make it to avoid at the fiinde-ment . meal be produce out of the say tree after this manner . they be mighty huge tree , and when they be cut with a axe by the ground , there issue out of the stock a certain liquour like unto gum , which they take 
 iv 417 2d 
 and put into bag make of leaf , lay they for 15 day together abroad in the sun , and at the end of those 15 day , when the say liquour be thorough parch , it become meal . than they steep it first in sea water , wash it afterward with fresh water , and so it be make very good and savoury paste , whereof they make either meat or bread , as they think good . of which bread i my self do eat , and it be fair without and somewhat brown within . by this country be the sea call mare mortuum , which run continual southward , into you which whosoever fall be never see after . in this country also be find cane of a incredible length , namely of 60 pace high or more , and they be as big as tree . other cane there be also call Cassan , which overspread the earth like grass , 8c out of every knot of they spring forth certain branch , which be continue upon the ground almost for the space of a mile . in the say cane there be find certain stone , one of which stone , whosoever carry about with he , can be wound with any iron : 8c therefore the man of that country for the most part , carry such stone with they , whithersoever they go . many also cause one of the arm of their child , while they be young , to be lance , put one of the say stone into the wound , heal also , and close up the say wound with the powder of a certain fish ( the name whereof i do not know ) which powder do immediate consolidate and cure the say wound . and by the virtue of these stone , the people aforesaid do for the most part triumph both on sea and land . howbeit there be one kind of stratagem , which the enemy of this nation , know the virtue of the say stone , do practise against they : namely , they provide themselves armour of iron or steel against their arrow , 8c weapon also poison with the poison of tree , 8c they carry in their hand wooden stake most sharp 8c hard-pointed , as if they be iron : likewise they shoot arrow without iron head , and so they confound 8c slay some of their un - 
 418 
 1330arm foe trust too secure unto the virtue of their stone . also of the foresay cane call Cassan they make sail for their ship , and little house , and many make other necessary . from thence after many day travel ! , °freedes-i arrive at another kingdom call Campa , a most Campa . beautiful and rich country , and abound with all kind of victual : the king whereof , at my be there , have so many wife and concubine , that he have 300 son and daughter by they . this king have 10004 tame elephant , which be keep even as we keep drove of ox , or flock of sheep in pasture . 
 of the abundance of fish , which cast themselves upon the shore . 
 in this country there be one strange thing to be observe , the every several kind of fish in those sea come swim towards the say country in such abundance , that , for a great distance into the sea , nothing can be see but you back of fish : which , cast themselves upon the shore when they come near unto it , do suffer man , for the space of 3. day , to come and to take as many of they as they please , and then they return again unto the sea . after that kind of fish come another kind , offer it self after the same manner , and so in like sort all other kind whatsoever : notwithstanding they do this but once in a year . and i demand of the inhabitant there , how , or by what mean this strange accident can come to pass ? they answer , that fish be teach , even by nature , to come and to do homage unto their , emperor . there be tortoise also as big as a oven . many other t'artojse . thing i see which be incredible , unless a man shall i-11 ' b see they with his own eye . in this country also dead man be burn , and their wife be burn alive with they , as in the city of polumbrum above mention : for the man of that country say that she go to accompany he in another world , that he shall take none other wife in manage . Moreover i travel on 
 419 
 further by the ocean-sea towards the south , pass through many country and island , wherot one be call Moumoran , and it contain in compass two . m. mile , wherein man and woman have dog face , and worship a ox for their god : and therefore every one of they carry the image of a ox of gold or silver upon their forehead . the man and the woman of this country go all naked , save that they hang a linen cloth before their privity . the man of the say country be very tall and mighty , and by reason that they go naked , when they be to make battle , they carry iron or steel-target before they , which do cover and defend their body from top to toe : and whosoever of their foe they take in battle not be able to ransom himself for money , they present devour he : but if he be able to redeem himself for money , they let he go free . their king wear about his neck 300. great and most beautiful union , and say every day 300. prayer unto his god . he wear upon his finger also a stone of a span long , which seem to be a flame of fire , and therefore when he wear it , no man dare once approach unto he : and they say that there be not any stone in the whole world of more value than it . neither can at any time the great tartarian emperor of katay either by force , money , or policy obtain it at his hand : notwithstanding that he have do the utmost of his endeavour for this purpose . 
 of the island of Sylan : and of the mountain where Adam mourn for his son Abel . 
 1 pass also by another island call Sylan , which contain in compass above two . m. mile : wherein be a infinite number of serpent , and great store of lion , bear , and all kind of raven and wild beast , and especial of elephant . in the say country there be a huge mountain , whereupon the inhabitant of that region do report that Adam mourn for his son Abel you space of 500 year . in the midst of this mountain 
 420 
 there be a most beautiful plain , wherein be a little lake contain great plenty of water , which water you inhabitant report to have proceed from the tear of Adam and Eve : howbeit i prove that to be false , because i see the water flow in the lake . this water be full of horseleeche , and bloodsucker , and of precious stone also : which precious stone the king take not unto his own use , but once or twice every year he permit certain poor people to dive under the water for you say stone , and all that they can get he bestow upon they , to the end they may pray for his soul . but ill they may with less danger dive under the water , they take limon which they pil , anoint themselves thorough with the juice thereof , and so they may dive naked under you water , the horseleeche not be able to hurt they . from this lake the water run even unto the sea , and at a low ebb the inhabitant dig ruby , diamond , pearl , and other precious stone out of the shore : whereupon it be think , that you king of this island have great abundance of precious stone , than any other monarch in the whole earth beside . in the say country there be all kind of beast and fowl : and the people tell i , that those beast will not invade nor hurt any stranger , but only the natural inhabitant . i see in this island foul as big as our country goose , have two head , and other miraculous thing , which i will not here write off travel on further towards the south , i arrive at a certain island call Bodin , which Or^Dadin . signify in our language unclean . in this island there do inhabit most wicked person , who devour and eat raw flesh commit all kind of uncleanness and abomination in such sort , as it be incredible . for the father eat his son , and the son his father , the husband his own wife , and the wife her husband : and that after this manner . 
 if any man father be sick , the son straight go unto the soothsaying or prognosticate priest , request he to demand of his god , whether his father shall recover of that infirmity or no ? than both of they 
 421 
 go unto a idol of gold or of silver , make their prayer unto it in manner follow : lord , thou be our god , and thou we do adore , beseech thou to resolve we , whether such a man must die , or recover of such a infirmity or no ? then the devil answer out of the foresay idol : if he say ( he shall live ) then returns his son and minister thing necessary unto he , till he have attain unto his former health : but if he say ( he shall die ) then go you priest unto he , and put a cloth into his mouth do strangle he therewith : which be do , he cut his dead body into morsel , and all his friend and kinsfolk be invite unto the eat thereof , with music and all kind of mirth : howbeit his bone be solemn bury . and when i find fault with that custom demand a reason thereof , one of they give i this answer : this we do , lest the worm shall eat his flesh , for than his soul shall suffer great torment , neither can i by any mean remove they from that error . many other novelty and strange thing there be in this country , which no man will credit , unies he see they with his own eye . howbeit , i ( before almighty [ ii i . 59 ] God ) do here make relation of nothing but of that only , whereof i be as sure , as a man may be sure . concern the foresay island i inquire of diverse well-experienced person , who all of they , as it be with one consent , answer i say , that this India contain 4400. island under it , or within it : in which island there be sixty and four crown king : and they say moreover , that the great part of those island be well inhabit . and here i conclude concern that part of India . 
 or , China . of the upper India : and of the province of Maney . 
 first of all therefore , have travel many day journey upon the ocean-sea towards the east , at length i arrive at a certain great province call 
 422 
 Maney , be in latin name India . concern this India i inquire of Christians , of Saracen , and of idolater , and of all such as bear any office under the great can . who all of they with one consent answer , that this province of Maney have more than 2000 great city within the precinct thereof , and that it abound with all plenty of victual , as namely with bread , wine , rise , flesh , and fish . all the man of this province be artificer and merchant , who , though they be in never so extreme penury , so long as they can help themselves by the labour of their hand , will never beg alm of any man . the man of this province be of a fair and comely personage , but somewhat pale , have their head shave but a little : but the woman be the most beautiful under the sun . the first city of you say India which i come unto , be call Ceuskalon , which or , Ceuskala . be a day journey distant from the sea , stand upon a river , the water whereof , near unto the mouth , where it exonerate it self into the sea , do overflow the land for the space of 12. day journey . all the inhabitant of this India be worshipper of idol . the foresay city of Ceuskalon have such a huge navy belong thereunto , that no man will believe it unless he shall see it . in this city i see 300.ll of good and new ginger sell for less than a groat . there be the he mean great , and the fair goose , and most plenty of they to be sell in all the whole world , as i suppose : they be as aniarci5 cai white as milk , and have a bone upon the crown of their Alcatrarzi . head as big as a egg , be of the colour of blood : under their throat they have a skin or bag hang down half a foot . they be exceed fat and well sell . also they have duck and hen in that country , one as big as two of we . there be monstrous great serpent likewise , which be take by the inhabitant and eat : whereupon a solemn feast among they without serpent be nought set by : and to be brief , in this city there be all kind of victual in great abundance . from thence i pass by many city and at length i come unto a city 
 423 
 name cai tan , wherein you friar minorite have two place of abode , unto the which i transport the bone of the dead friar , which suffer martyrdom for the faith of Christ , as it be above mention . in this city there be abundance of all kind of victual very cheap . the say city be as big as two of Bononia , and in it be many monastery of religious person , all which do worship idol . i my self be in one of those monastery , and it be tell i , that there be in it three . m. religious man , have xi . m. idol : and one of you say idol which seem unto i but little in regard of the rest , be as big as our Christopher . Theise religious man every day do feed their idol-god : whereupon at a certain time i go to behold the banquet : and indeed those thing which they bring unto they be good to eat , and fume hot , insomuch that the steam of the smoke thereof ascend up unto their idol , and they say that their god be refresh with the smoke : howbeit all the meat they convey away , eat it up their own self , and so they feed their dumb god with the smoke only . 
 of the city Fuco . 
 travel more eastward , i come unto a city name Fuco , which contain 30. mile in circuit , wherein be exceed great and fair cock , and all their hen be as white as the very snow , have wool in stead of feather , like unto sheep . it be a most stately and beautiful city and stand upon the sea . than i go 18. day journey on further , and pass by many province and city , and in the way i go over a certain great mountain , upon you one side whereof i behold all live creature to be as black as a coal , and the man and woman on that side differ somewhat in manner of live from other : howbeit , on the other side of the say hill every live thing be snow-white , and the inhabitant in their manner of live , be altogether unlike unto other . there , all marry woman carry in token that they have husband , a great trunk of horn upon their head . from thence i 424 
 travel 18. day journey further , and come unto a certain great river , and enter also into a city , where - a great unto belong a mighty bridge to pass the say river . nver-and my host with who i sojourn , be desirous to show i some sport , say unto i : sir , if you will see any fish take , go with i . than he lead i unto the foresay bridge , carry in his arm with he certain dive-doppers or water-fowl , bind unto a company rout catch-of pole , and about every one of their neck he tie a ingfish . thread , lest they shall eat the fish as fast as they take they : and he carry 3. great basket with he also : then loose he the dive-doppers from the pole , which present go into the water , and within less than the space of one hour , catch as many fish as fill the 3. 
 basket : which be full , my host untie the thread from about their neck , and enter the second time into the river they feed themselves with fish , and be satisfy they return and suffer themselves to be bind unto the say pole as they be before . and when i do eat of those fish , i think they be exceed good . travail thence many day journey , at length i arrive at another city call * Canasia , which cansahor signify in our language , the city of heaven . never in quinzat-all my life do i see so great a city ; for it contain in circuit a hundred mile : neither see i any plot thereof , which be not thorough inhabit : yea , i see many house of ten or twelve story high , one above another . it have mighty large suburb contain more people than the city it self . also it have twelve principali gate : and about the distance of eight mile , in the high way unto every one of the say gate stand a city as big by estimation as Venice , and Padua . the foresay city of Canasia be situate in water or marsh , which always stand still neither ebb - 
 ing nor flow : howbeit it have a defence for the wind the italian like unto Venice . in this city there be more than 10002. 
 bridge , many whereof i number and pass over they : 7ioo^ and upon every of those bridge stand certain watch - bridge . 
 425 
 man of the city , keep continual watch and ward about the say city , for the great can the emperor of catay . the people of this country say , that they have one duty enjoin unto they by their lord : for every fire pay one Balis in regard of tribute : and a Balis be five paper or piece of silk , which be worth one floren and a half of our coin . ten or twelve household be account for one fire , and so pay tribute but for one fire only . all those tributary fire amount unto the number of 85. Thuman , with other four Thuman of the Saracen , which make 89. in all ; and one Thuman con-sisteth 10000 fire . the residue of the people of the city be some of they Christians , some merchant , and some traveller through the country : whereupon i marveiled much how such a infinite number of person can inhabit and live together . there be great abundance of victual in this city , as namely of bread and wine , and especial of hogs-flesh , with other necessary . 
 of a monastery where many strange beast of diverse kind do live upon a hill . 
 in the foresay city four of our friar have convert a mighty and rich man unto the faith of Christ , at who house encage continual abode , for so long time as i remain in the city . who upon a certain time say unto i : Ara , that be to say , father , will you go and behold the city ? and i say , yea . then embark we our self , and direct our course unto a certain great monastery : where be arrive , he call a religious person with who he be acquaint , say unto he concern i : this Raban Francus , that be to say , this religious Frenchman come from the western part of the world , and be now go to the city of cambale to pray for the life of the great can , and therefore you must show he some rare thing , that when he return into his own country , he may say , this strange sight or novelty have i see in the city of Canasia . then the say religious man take two great 426 
 basket full of break relic which remain of the table , and lead i unto a little wall park , the door whereof he unlock with his key , and there appear unto we a pleasant fair green plot , into the which we enter . in the say green stand a little mount in form of a steeple , replenish with fragrant herb , and fine shady tree . and while we stand there , he take a cymbali or bell , and ring therewith , as they use to ring to dinner or bevoir in cloister , at the sound whereof many creature of diverse kind come down from the mount , some like ape , some like cat , some like monkey ; and some have face like man . and while i stand behold of they , they gather themselves together about he , to the number of 4200. of those creature , put themselves in good order , before who he set a platter , and give they the say fragment to eat . and when they have eat he ring upon his cymbal the second time , and they all return unto their former place . then , wonder great at the matter , i demand what kind of creature those may be ? they be ( quoth he ) the soul of noble man which we do here feed , for the love of God who govern the world : and as a man be honourable or noble in this life , so his soul after death , enter into the body of some excellent beast or other , but the soul of simple and rustical people do possess the body of more vile and brutish creature . than i begin to refute that foul error : howbeit my speech do nothing at all prevail with he : for he can not be persuade that any soul may remain without a body . from thence i depart unto a certain city name Chilenso , the wall whereof contain 40. mile in cir - Chilenso . cuit . in this city there be 360. bridge of stone , the fair that ever i see : and it be well inhabit , have a great navy belong thereunto , and abound with all kind of victual and other commodity . and thence i 
 go unto a certain river call Thalay , which , where it Thalay . be most narrow , be 7. mile broad : and it run through the midst of the land of Pygmaei , who chief city be 
 427 
 Cakam . call Cakam , and be one of the goodly city in the [ ii i . 61. ] world . Theise pigmaean be three of my span high , and they make large and better cloth of cotton and silk , than any other nation under the sun . And coast along by the say river , i come unto a certain city Janzu . name Janzu , in which city there be one receptacle for 
 the friar of our order , and there be also three church of the nestorian . This Janzu be a noble and great city , contain 48 Thuman of tributary fier , and in it be all kind of victual , and great plenty of such beast , fowl and fish , as Christians do usual live upon . the lord of the same city have in yearly revenue for salt only , fifty Thuman of Balis , and one balis be worth a floren and a half of our coin : insomuch that one Thuman of balis amount unto the value of fifteen thousand floren . howbeit the say lord favour his people in one respect , for sometime he forgive they free two hundred Thuman , lest there shall be any scarcity or dearth among they . there be a custom in this city , that when any man be determine to banquet his friend , go about unto certain tavern or cook house appoint for the same purpose , he say unto every particular host , you shall have such , and such of my friend , who you must entertain in my name , and so much i will bestow upon the banquet . and by that mean his friend be better feast at diverse place , than they shall have be at one . ten mile from the say city , about the head of the foresay river of Thalay , there be a certain other city call montu , which have the great navy that i see in the whole world . all their ship be as white as snow , and they have banquet house in they , and many other rare thing also , which no man will believe , unless he have see they with his own eye . 
 428 
 travel eight day journey further by diverse territory and city , at length i come by fresh water unto a certain city name Leneyn , stand upon the river of * Karavoran , which run through the midst of Cataie , and do great harm in the country when it overflow the bank , or break forth of the channel . from thence pass along the river eastward , after many day travel , and the sight of diverse city , 1 arrive at a city call * sumakoto , which abound more with silk than any other city in the world : for when there be great scarcity of silk , forty pound be sell for less than eight groat . in this city there be abundance of all merchandise , and of all kind of victual also , as of bread , wine , flesh , fish , with all choice and delicate spice . then travel on still towards the east by many city , i come unto the noble and renown city of cambale , which be of great antiquity , be situate in the province of Cataie . this city the Tartar take , and near unto it within the space of half a mile , they build another city call Caido . the city of Caido have twelve gate , be each of they two mile distant from another . also the space lie in the midst between the two foresay city be very well and thorough inhabit , so that they make as it be but one city between they both . the whole compass or circuit of both city together , be 40. mile . in this city the great emperor can have his principali seat , and his Imperiali palace , the wall of which palace contain four mile in circuit : and near unto this his palace be many other palace and house of his noble which belong unto his court . within the precinct of the say palace Imperiali , there be a most beautiful mount , set and replenish with tree , for which cause it be call the green mount , have a most royal and sumptuous palace stand thereupon , in which , for the most part , the great can be resident . upon the one side of the 
 429 
 Karamoron . 
 Sumacoto . 
 say mount there be a great lake , whereupon a most stately bridge be build , in which lake be great abundance of goose , duck , and all kind of water fowl : and in the wood grow upon the mount there be great store of all bird , and wild beast . and therefore when the great can will solace himself with hunt or hawk , he need not so much as once to step forth of his palace . Moreover , the principali palace , wherein he make his abode , be very large , have within it 14 pillar of gold , and all the wall thereof be hang with red skin , which be say to be the most costly skin in all the world . in the midst of the palace stand a cistern of two yard high , which consist of a precious stone call Merdochas , and be wreathe about with gold , and at each corner thereof be the golden image of a serpent , as it be , furious shake and cast forth his head . this cistern also have a kind of network of pearl wrought about it . likewise by the say cistern there be drink convey through certain pipe and conduct , such as use to be drink in the emperor court , upon the which also there hang many vessel of gold , wherein , whosoever will may drink of the say liquour . in the foresay palace there be many peacock of gold : and when any tartar make a banquet unto his lord , if the guest chance to clap their hand for joy and mirth , the say golden peacock also will spread abroad their wing , and lift up their train , seem as if they dance : and this i suppose to be do by art magic or by some secret engine under the ground . 
 of the glory and magnificence of the great can . 
 moreover , when the great emperor can sit in his imperiali throne of estate , on his left hand sit his queen or empress , and upon another inferior seat there sit two other woman , which be to accompany the emperor , when his spouse be absent , but in the low place of all , there sit all the lady of his kindred . all the marry woman wear upon their head a kind of orna-43° 
 mean in shape like unto a man foot , of a cubit and a half in length , and the low part of the say foot be adorn with crane feather , and be all over thick set with great and orient pearl . upon the right hand of the great can sit his first beget son and heir apparent unto his empire , and under he sit all the noble of the blood royal . there be also four secretary , which put all thing in write that the emperor speak . in who presence likewise stand his baron and diverse other of his nobility , with great train of follower after they , of who none dare speak so much as one word , unless they have obtain licence of the emperor so to do , except his jester and stage-player , who be appoint of purpose to solace their lord . neither yet dare they attempt to do aught , but only accord to the pleasure of their emperor , and as he enjoin they by law . about the palace gate stand certain baron to keep all man from tread upon the threshold of the say gate . when it please the great can to solemnize a feast , he have about he 14000. baron , carry wreathe and little crown upon their head , and give attendance upon their lord , and every one of they wear a garment of gold and precious stone , which be worth ten thousand floren . his court be keep in very good order , by governor of ten , governor of hundred , and governor of thousand , insomuch that every one in his place perform his duty commit unto he , neither be there any defect to be find . i friar Odoricus be there present in person for the space of three year , and be often at the say banquet ; for we friar minorite have a place of abode appoint out for we in the emperor court , and be enjoin to go and to bestow our blessing upon he . and i inquire of certain courtier concern the number of person pertain to the emperor court ? and they answer i , that of stage-player , musician , and such like , there be eighteen Thuman at the least , and that the keeper of dog , beast and fowl be 
 431 
 fifteen Thuman , and the physician for the emperor body , be four hundred ; the Christians also be eight in number , together with one Saracen . at my be there , all the foresay number of person have all kind of necessary both for apparel and victual out of the emperor court . Moreover , when he will make his progress from one country to another , he have four troop of horseman , one be appoint to go a day journey before , and another to come a day journey after he , the three to march on his right hand , and the four on his left , in the manner of a cross , he himself be in the midst , and so every particular troop have their daily journey limit unto they , to the end they may provide sufficient victual without defect . now the great can himself be carry in manner follow ; he ride in a chariot with two wheel , upon which a majestical throne be build of the wood of aloe , be adorn with gold and great pearl , and precious stone , and four elephant brave furnish doe draw the say chariot , before which elephant four great horse rich trap and cover do lead the way . hard by the chariot on both side thereof , be four baron lay hold and attend thereupon , to keep all person from approach near unto their emperor . upon the chariot also two milkwhite jerfalcon do sit , and see any game which he will take , he let they fly , and so they take it , and after this manner do he solace himself as he ride . Moreover , no man dare come within a stone cast of the chariot , but such as be appoint . the number of his own follower , of his wife attendant , and of the train of his first beget son and heir apparent , will seem incredible unto any man , unless he have see it with his own eye . the foresay great can have divide his empire into twelve part or province , and one of the say province have two thousand great city within the precinct thereof . whereupon his empire be of that length and breadth , that unto whatsoever part thereof he 
 43 2 
 ... I33°* intend his journey , he have space enough for six month continual progress , except his island which be at the least 5000. 
 of certain inn or hospital appoint for traveller throughout the whole empire . 
 the foresay emperor ( to the end that traveller may have all thing necessary throughout his whole empire ) have cause certain inn to be provide in sundry place upon the high way , where all thing pertain unto victual be in a continual readiness . and when any alteration or news happen in any part of his empire , if he chance to be far absent from that part , his ambassador upon horse or drome - [ ii i . 63. ] dary ride post unto he , and when themselves and their beast be weary , they blow their horn , at the noise whereof , the next inn likewise provide a horse and a man , who take the letter of he that be weary , and run unto another inn : and so by diverse inn , and diverse post , the report , which ordinary can scarce come in 30. day , be in one natural day bring unto the emperor : and therefore no matter of any moment can be do in his empire , but straightway he have intelligence thereof . Moreover , when you great can himself will go on hunt , he use this custom . some twenty day journey from the city of kambale there be a forest contain six day journey in circuit , in which forest there be so many kind of beast and bird , as it be incredible to report . unto this forest , at the end of every three or four year , himself with his whole train resort , and they all of they together environ the say forest , send dog into the same , which by hunt do bring forth the beast : namely , lion and stag , and other creature , unto a most beautiful plain in the midst of the forest , because all the beast of the forest do tremble , especial at the cry of hound . then come the great can himself , be carry upon three elephant , and shoot five 
 iv 433 2 e 
 arrow into the whole herd of beast , and after he all his baron , and after they the rest of his courtier and family do all in like manner discharge their arrow also , and every man arrow have a sundry mark . than they all go unto the beast which be slay ( suffer the live beast to return into the wood that they may have more sport with they another time ) and every man enjoy that beast as his own , wherein he find his arrow stick . 
 of the four feast which the great can solemnize every year in his court . 
 four great feast in a year do the emperor can celebrate : namely , the feast of his birth , the feast of his circumcision , the feast of his coronation , and the feast of his marriage . and unto these feast he invit all his baron , his stage-player , and all such as be of his kindred . then the great can sit in his throne , all his baron present themselves before he , with wreath and crown upon their head , be diverse attire , for some of they be in green , namely , the principali : the second be in red , and the three in yellow , and they hold each man in his hand a little ivory table of elephant tooth , and they be gird with golden girdle of half a foot broad , and they stand upon their foot keep silence . about they stand the stage-player or musician with their instrument . and in one of the corner of a certain great palace , all the philosopher or magician remain for certain hour , and do attend upon point or character : and when the point and hour which the say philosopher expect for , be come , a certain crier cry out with a loud voice , say , incline or bow your self before your emperor : with that all the baron fall flat upon the earth . than he cry out again ; arise all , and immediate they all arise . likewise the philosopher attend upon a point or character the second time , and when it be fulfil , the crier cry out amain ; put 
 434 
 your finger in your ear : and forthwith again he say ; pluck they out . again , at the three point he cry , Boult this meal . many other circumstance also do they perform , all which they say have some certain signification : howbeit , neither will i write they , nor give any heed unto they , because they be vain and ridiculous . and when the musician hour be come , than the philosopher say , solemnize a feast unto your lord : with that all of they sound their instrument , make a great and a melodious noise . and immediate another cry , peace , peace , and they be all whist . then come the women-musician and sing sweet before the emperor , which music be more delightful unto i . after they come in the lion and do their obeisance unto the great can . then the juggler cause golden cup full of wine to fly up and down in the air , and to apply themselves unto man mouth that they may drink of they . Theise and many other strange thing i see in the court of the great can , which no man will believe unless he have see they with his own eye , and therefore i omit to speak of they . i be inform also by certain credible person , of another miraculous thing , namely , that in a certain kingdom of the say can , wherein stand the mountain call kapsei ( the kingdom name be kalor ) there grow great gourd or pompion , which lamb in a be ripe , do open at the top , and within they be and urd " find a little beast like unto a young lamb , even as i my self have hear report , that there stand certain tree upon the shore of the irish sea , bear fruit like unto a gourd , which , at a certain time of the year do fall into the water , and become bird call barnacle , and this be most true . 
 of diverse province and city . 
 a nd after three year i depart out of the empire his retume of Cataie , travail fifty day journey towards westward . 
 the west . and at length i come unto the empire of 
 435 
 [ ii i . 64. ] Pretegoani , who principali city be Kosan , which have many other city under it . from thence pass many 
 Casan . day travel , i come unto a province call Casan , which be for good commodity , one of the only province under the sun , and be very well inhabit , insomuch that when we depart out of the gate of one city we may behold the gate of another city , as i my self see in diverse of they . the breadth of the say province be fifty day journey , and the length above sixty . in it there be great plenty of all victual , and especial of chestnut , and it be one of the twelve province of the great can . go on further , i come unto a certain 
 two or , thebet . kingdom call two Tebek , which be in subjection unto the great can also , wherein i think there be more plenty of bread and wine then in any other part of the world beside . the people of the say country do , for the most part , inhabit in tent make of black felt . their principali city be environ with fair and beautiful wall , be build of most white and black stone , which be dispose checkerwise one by another , and curious compile together : likewise all the high way in this country be exceed well pave . in the say country none dare shed the blood of a man , or of any beast , for the reverence of a certain idol . in the foresay city their Abassi , that be to say , their pope be resident , be the head and prince of all idolater ( upon who he bestow and distribute gift after his manner ) even as our pope of Rome account himself to be the head of all Christians . the woman of this country wear above a hundred trick and trifle about they , and they have two tooth in their mouth as long as the tusk of a boar . when any man father decease among they , his son assemble together all the priest and musician that he can get , say that he be determine to honour his father : then cause he he to be carry into the field ( all his kinsfolk , friend , and neighbour , accompany he in the say action ) where the priest with great solemnity cut 436 
 off the father head , give it unto his son , which be do , they divide the whole body into morsel , and so leave it behind they , return home with prayer in the company of the say son . so soon as they be depart , certain vulture , which be accustom to such banquet , come fly from the mountain , and carry away all the say morsel of flesh : and from thenceforth a fame be spread abroad , that the say party decease be holy , because the angel of God carry he into paradise . and this be the great and high honour , that the son can devise to perform unto his decease father . then the say son take his father same head , seethe it and eat the flesh thereof , but of storycmcern-the skull he make a drink cup , wherein himself same people with all his family and kindred do drink with great in William de solemnity and mirth , in the remembrance of his dead Rubricis . and devour father . many other vile and abominable thing do the say nation commit , which i mean not to write , because man neither can nor will believe , except they shall have the sight of they . 
 of a certain rich man , who be feed and nourish by fifty virgin . 
 while i be in the province of Maney , i pass by the palace of a certain famous man , which have fifty virgin damosel continual attend upon he , feed he every meal , as a bird feed her young one . also he have sundry kind of meat serve in at his table , and three dish of each kind : and when the say virgin feed he , they sing most sweet . this man have in yearly revenue thirty thuman of tagar of rise , every of which thuman yield ten thousand tagar , and one tagar be the burden of a ass . his palace be two mile in circuit , the pavement whereof be one plate of gold , and another of silver . near unto the wall of the say palace there be a mount artificial wrought with gold and silver , whereupon stand turret and steeple and other delectable thing for the solace 
 437 
 and recreation of the foresay great man . and it be tell i that there be four such man in the say kingdom . it be account a great grace for the man long nail . of that country to have long nail upon their finger , and especial upon their thumb , which nail they may fold about their hand : but the grace and beauty of their woman be to have small and slender foot : and therefore the mother when their daughter be young , do bind up their foot , that they may not grow great . travel on further towards the south , i arrive at a melistorte . certain country call melistorte , which be a pleasant and fertile place . and in this country there be a certain age man call senex de monte , who round about two mountain have build a wall to enclose the say mountain . within this wall there be the fair and most crystal fountain in the whole world : and about the say fountain there be most beautiful virgin in great number , and goodly horse also , and in a word , every thing that can be devise for bodily solace and delight , and therefore the inhabitant of the country call the same place by the name of paradise . 
 the say old senex , when he see any proper and valiant young man , he will admit he into his paradise . Moreover by certain conduct he make wine and milk [ ii i . 65. ] to flow abundant . This senex , when he have a mind to revenge himself or to slay any king or baron , commands he that be governor of the say paradise , to bring thereunto some of the acquaintance of the say king or baron , permit he a while to take his pleasure therein , and then to give he a certain potion be of force , to cast he into such a slumber as shall make he quite void of all sense , and so be in a profound sleep to convey he out of his paradise : who be awake , and see himself thrust out of the paradise will become so sorrowful , that he can not in the world devise what to do , or whither to turn he . then will he go unto the foresay old man , beseech he that he may be admit again into 438 
 his paradise : who say unto he , you can be admit thither , unless you will slay such or such a man for my sake , and if you will give the attempt only , whether you kill he or no , i will place you again in paradise , that there you may remain always : then will the party without fade put the same in execution , endeavour to murder all those against who the say old man have conceive any hatred . and therefore all the king of the east stand in awe of the say old man , and give unto he great tribute . 
 of the death of senex de monte . 
 a nd when the Tartar have subdue a great part of the world , they come unto the say old man , and take from he the custody of his paradise : who be incense thereat , send abroad diverse desperate and resolute person out of his forename paradise , and cause many of the tartarian noble to be slay . the Tartar see this , go and besiege the city wherein the say old man be , take he , and put he to a most cruel and ignominious death . the friar in that place have this speciali gift and prerogative : namely , that by the virtue of the name of Christ Jesus , and in the virtue of his precious blood , which he shed upon the cross for the salvation of mankind , they do cast forth devil out of they that be possess . and because there be many possess man in those part , they be bind and bring ten day journey unto the say friar , who be dispossess of the unclean spirit , do present believe in Christ who deliver they , account he for their god , and be baptise in his name , and also deliver immediate unto the friar all their idol , and the idol of their cattle , which be common make of felt or of woman hair : then the say friar kindle a fire in a public place ( whereunto the people resort , that they may see the false god of their neighbour burn ) and cast the say idol thereinto : howbeit at the first those idol come out of the fire again . then the friar sprinkle 
 439 
 A.D. 
 1330 - 
 the say fire with holy water , cast the idol into it the second time , and with that the devil flee in the likeness of black smoke , and the idol still remain till they be consume unto ash . afterwards , this noise and outcry be hear in the air : behold and see how i be expel out of my habitation . and by these mean the friar do baptise great multitude , who present revolt again unto their idol : insomuch that the say friar must eftsoon , as it be , underprop they , and inform they anew . there be another terrible thing which i see there : for pass by a certain valley , which be situate beside a pleasant river , i see many dead body , and in the say valley also i hear diverse sweet sound and harmony of music , especial the noise of cithern , whereat i be great amaze . this valley contain in length seven or eight mile at the least , into the which whosoever enter , die present , and can by no mean pass alive through the midst thereof : for which cause all the inhabitant thereabouts decline unto the one side . Moreover , i be tempt to go in , and to see what it be . at length , make my prayer , and recommend my self to God in the name of Jesus , i enter , and see such swarm of dead body there , as no man will believe unless he be a eye witness thereof . at the one side of the foresay valley upon a certain stone , i see the visage of a man , which behold i with such a terrible aspect , that i think very i shall have die in the same place . but always this sentence , the word become flesh , and dwell among we , i cease not to pronounce , sign my self with the sign of the cross , and near than seven or eight pase i dare not approach unto the say head : but i depart and flee unto another place in the say valley , ascend up into a little sandy mountain , where look round about , i see nothing but the say cithern , which i think i hear miraculous sound and play by themselves without the help of musician . And be upon the top of the mountain , i find 
 440 
 silver there like the scale of fish in great abundance : and i gather some part thereof into my bosom to show for a wonder , but my conscience rebuke i , 1 cast it upon the earth , reserve no whit at all unto my self , and so , by god grace i depart without danger . and when the man of the country know that i be return out of the valley alive , they reverence i much , say that i be baptise and holy , and that the foresay body be man subject unto the devil infernali , who use to play upon cithern , to the end they may allure people to . enter , and so murder they . thus much concern those thing which i behold most certain with my eye , i friar Odoricus have here write : many strange thing also i have of purpose [ ii i . 66. ] omit , because man will not believe they unless they shall see they . 
 of the honour and reverence do unto the great can . 
 i will report one thing more , which i see , concern the great can . it be a usual custom in those part , that when the foresay can travel through any country , his subject kindle fire before their door , cast spice thereinto to make a perfume , that their lord pass by may smell the sweet and delectable odour thereof , and much people come forth to meet he . and upon a certain time when he be come towards cambale , the fame of his approach be publish , a bishop of we with certain of our minorite friar and my self , go two day journey to meet he : and be come nigh unto he , we put a cross upon wood , i my self have a censer in my hand , and begin to sing with a loud voice : veni creator spiritus . and as we be sing on this wise , he cause we to be call , command we to come unto he : notwithstanding ( as it be above mention ) that no man dare approach within a stone cast of his chariot , unless he be call , but such only as keep his chariot . and when we come 
 441 
 near unto he , he veil his hat or bonnet be of a inestimable price , do reverence unto the cross . and immediate i put incense into the censer , and our bishop take the censer perfume he , and give he his benediction . Moreover , they that come before the say can do always bring some oblation to present unto he , observe the ancient law : thou shall not appear in my presence with a empty hand . and for that cause we carry apple with we , and offer they in a platter with reverence unto he : and take out two of they he do eat some part of one . and then he signify unto we , that we shall go apart , lest the horse come on might in ought offend we . with that we depart from he , and turn aside , go unto certain of his baron , which have be convert to the faith by certain friar of our order , be at the same time in his army : and we offer unto they of the foresay apple , who receive they at our hand with great joy , seem unto we to be as glad , as if we have give they some great gift - . .... 
 all the premise abovewritten friar William de Solanga have put down in write even as the foresay friar Odoricus utter they by word of mouth , in the year of our lord 1330 , in the month of May , and in the place of saint Anthony of Padua . neither do he regard to write they in difficult latin or in a eloquent stile , but even as Odoricus himself rehearse they , to the end that man may the more easy understand the thing report . i friar Odoricus of Friuli , of a certain territory call Portus Vahonis , and of the order of the minorite , do testify and bear witness unto the reverend father Guidotus minister of the province of saint Anthony , in the marquesate of Treviso ( be by he require upon my obedience so to do ) that all the premise above write , either i see with my own eye , or hear the same report by credible and substantiali person . the 442 
 common report also of the country where i be , testify those thing , which i see , to be true . many other thing i have omit , because i behold they not with my own eye . howbeit from day to day i purpose with my self to travel country or land , in which action i dispose my self to die or to live , as it shall please my God . 
 of the death of friar Odoricus . 
 in the year therefore of our lord 1331 the foresaid friar Odoricus prepare himself for the performance of his intend journey , that his travel and labour may be to great purpose , he determine to present himself unto pope John the two and twenty , who benediction and obedience be receive , he , with a certain number of friar willing to bear he company , may convey himself unto all the country of infidel . and as he be travel towards the pope , and not far distant from the city of Pisa , there meet he by the way a certain old man , in the habit and attire of a pilgrim , salute he by name , and say : all hail friar Odoricus . and when the friar demand how he have knowledge of he : he answer : while you be in India i know you full well , yea , and i know your holy purpose also : but see that you return immediately unto the coven from whence you come , for ten day hence you shall depart out of this present world . wherefore be astonish and amaze at these word ( especial the old man vanish out of his sight , present after he have speak they ) he determine to return . and so he return in perfect health , feel no crazedness nor infirmity of body . And be in his coven at Udene in the province of Padua , the ten day after the foresay vision , have receive the communion , and prepare himself unto God , yea , be strong and sound of body , he happy rest in the lord : who sacred departure be signify unto the [ ii i . 67. ] 
 443 
 pope aforesaid , under the hand of the public notary in these word follow . 
 in the year of our lord 1331 , the 14. day of Januarie , Beatus Odoricus a friar minorite decease in Christ , at who prayer God show many and sundry miracle , which i guetelus public notary of utina , son of m. Damianus de porto Gruaro , at the commandment and direction of the honourable Conradus of the borough of Gastaldion , and one of the council of utina , have write as faithful as i can , and have deliver a copy thereof unto the friar minorite : howbeit not of all , because they be innumerable , and too difficult for i to write . 
 