the voyage of Henry earl of Derbie , after duke of Hereford , and last Henry the four king of England , to Tunis in Barbary , with a army of Englishman write by Polidore Virgil . page . 1389. 
 Ranci interim per inducias nacti ocium , ac simul Genuensium precibus defatigati , bellum in afros , qui omnem oram insulasque Italiae latrociniis infestas reddebant , suscipiunt . richardus quoque rex angliae rogatus auxilium , mittit Henricum comitem Derbiensem cum electa anglicae 
 pubis manu ad id bellum faciendum . igitur Franci Anglique viribus and animus consociatis in africam trajiciunt , qui ubi littus attigere , eateniis a Barbaris descension prohibiti sunt , quoad anglorum sagittariorum virtute factum est , ut aditus pateret : in terram egressi recta Tunetam urbem regiam petunt , ac obsident . Barbari timore affection de pace ad eos legatos mittunt , quam nostris dare placuit , ut soluta certa pecuniae summa ab omni deinceps Italiae , galliaeque ora manus abstinerent . ita peractis rebus post paucos menses , quam eo itum erat , domum repediatum est . 
 the same in english . 
 the french in the mean season have get some leisure by mean of their truce , and be solicit and urge by the entreaty of the genuois undertake to wage war against the moor , who rob and spoil all the coast of Italy , and of the island adjacent . likewise Richard the second , king of England , be sue unto for aid , send Henry the earl of Derbie with a choice army of english soldier unto the same warfare . wherefore the english and french , with force and mind unite , sail over into Africa , who when they approach unto the shore be repel by the 45° 
 barbarian from land , until such time as they have passage make they by the valour of the english archer . thus have land their force , they forthwith march unto the royal city of Tunis , and besiege it . whereat the barbarian be dismay , send ambassador unto our Christian chieftain to treat of peace , which our man grant unto they , upon condition that they shall pay a certain sum of money , and that they shall from thenceforth abstain from piracy upon all the coast of Italy and France . and so have dispatch their business , within a few month after their departure they return home . 
 the Historic be somewhat otherwise record by froysard and holensh in manner follow , Pag - 473 - 
 in the thirteenth year of the reign of king Richard the second , the christian take in hand a journey against the Saracen of Barbary through suit of the genouois , so that there go a great number of lord , knight , and gentleman of France and England , the duke of Bourbon be their general . out of England there go John the Beaufort bastard son to the duke of Lancaster ( as froysard have note ) also sir John Russell , sir John butler , sir John Harecourt and other . they set forward in the latter end of the thirteenth year of the king reign , and come to Genoa , where they remain not very long , but that the galley and [ ii i . 70. ] other vessel of the genouois be ready to pass they over into Barbary . and so about midsummer in the begin of the fourteen year of this king reign the whole army be embark , sail forth to the coast of Barbary , where near to the city of Africa they land : at which instant the english archer ( as the chronicle of Chro-Genoa write ) stand all the company in good stead with their long bow , beat back the enemy from the ’ shore , which come down to resist their land . after 
 iv 451 2F2 
 they have get to land , they environ the city of Africa ( call by the moor Mahdia ) with a strong siege : but at length , constrain with the intemperancy of the scald air in that hot country , breed in the army sundry disease , they fall to a composition upon certain article to be perform in the behalf of the Saracen : and so 61 day after their arrival there they take the sea again , and return home , as in the history of France and Genoa be likewise express . where , by Polydore Virgil it may seem , that the lord Henry of Lancaster earl of Derby shall be general of the english man , that ( as before you hear ) go into Barbary with the french man and genouois . 
 