the voyage of m. John lock to Jerusalem . 
 n my voyage to Jerusalem , i embark my self the 26 of march 1553 in the good ship call the Matthew Gonson , which be bind for Livorno , or Legorne and Candia . it fall out that we touch in the begin of April next ensue at Cade in Andalozia , where the Spaniard , 
 accord to their accustom manner with all ship of extraordinary goodness and burden , pick a quarrel against the company , mean to have forfeit , or at the least to have arrest the say ship . and they 76 
 grow so malicious in their wrongful purpose , that i be utter out of hope of any speedy release , to the end that my intention shall not be overthrow , be enforce to take this course follow . notwithstanding this hard beginning , it fall out so lucky , that i find in the road a great ship call the Cavalia of Venice , wherein after agreement make with the patron , i ship my self the 24. of may in the say year 1553 , and the 25 by reason of the wind blow hard and contrary , we be not able to enter the strait of Gibraltar , but be put to the coast of Barbary , where we anchor in the main sea 2. league from shore , and continue so until two hour before sun set , and then we weigh again , and turn our course towards the strait , where we enter the 26 day aforesaid , the wind be very calm , [ ii i . 102. ] but the current of the strait very favourable . the same day the wind begin to rise somewhat , and blow a further gale , and so continue at northwest until our arrive at Legorne the three of June . and from thence ride over land unto Venice , i prepare for my voyage to Jerusalem in the pilgrim ship . 
 i John lock , accompany with master Anthony Rastwold , with diverse other , Hollanders , Zelanders , almains and french pilgrim enter the good ship the ship fila call fila Cavena of Venice , the 16 of July 1553. and the 17 in the morning we weigh our anchor and sail towards the coast of Istria , to the port of Rovigno , and Rovignlo a the say day there come aboard of our ship the Percevena port in Istria . of the ship name Tamisari , for to receive the rest of all the pilgrim money , which be in all after the rate of 55. crown for every man for that voyage , after the rate of five shilling starling to the crown : this do , he return to Venice . 
 the 19 day we take fresh victual aboard , and with the boat that bring the fresh provision we go on land to the town , and go to see the church of sancta Eufemia , where we see the body of the say . saint Eufemia . 
 the 20 day we depart from rovignio , and about monte de noon we have sight of monte de Ancona , and the hill 
 ncona . of paimatiaj or eise of Sclavonia both at one time , and by 
 report they be 100 mile distant from each other , and more . 
 the 21 we sail still in sight of Dalmatia , and a little before noon , we have sight of a rock in the midst of the 11 pomo . sea , call in italian , il Porno , it appear a far off to be in shape like a sugarloafe . also we see another Sant Andrea , rock about two mile compass call Sant Andrea : on this rock be only one monastery of friar : we sail between they both , and leave saint Andrea on the left hand of we , and we have also ken of another hand Lissaanlland . call Lissa , all on the left hand , these three hand lie east and west in the sea , and at sun set we have pass they . il pomo be distant from Sant Andrea 18 mile , and saint Andrea from Lissa io mile , and Lissa from Lezina hand . another hand call Lezina , which stand between the main of Dalmatia and Lissa , ten mile . this hand be inhabit , and have great plenty of wine and fruit and hereagainst we be becalm . 
 the 22 we have sight of another small hand call Catza . Catza , which be desolate and on the left hand , and on 
 Pelagosa . the right hand , a very dangerous hand call Pelagosa , 
 this be also desolate , and lie in the midst of the sea between both the maines : it be very dangerous and low land , and it have a long ledge of rock lie out six mile in to the sea , so that many ship by night be cast away upon they . there be between Catza and Pelagosa 30 mile , and these two hand be distant from Venice 400 mile . there be also about twelve mile Augusta . eastward , a great hand call Augusta , about 14 mile in length , somewhat hilly , but well inhabit , and fruitful ! of vine , corn and other fruit , this also we leave on the left hand : and we have hitherto keep our course from rovignio east southeast . this hand be under the signiory or government of Ragusa , it be distant from Ragusa 50 mile , and there be by that hand a great , 78 
 name Meleda , which be also under the government of Mekda . Ragusa , it be about 30 mile in length , and inhabit , and have good port , it lie by east from Augusta , and over against this hand lie a hill call monte s. monte sant Angelo , upon the coast of Puglia in Italy , and we have - angplo . sight of both land at one time . 
 the 23 we sail all the day long by the bowline alongst the coast of Ragusa , and towards night we be within 7 or 8 mile of Ragusa , that we may see the white wall , but because it be night , we cast about to the sea , mind at the second watch , to bear it again to Ragusa , for to know the news of the Turk army , but the wind blow so hard and contrary , that we can not . this city of Ragusa pay tribute to the Turk Ragusa pale yearly fourteen thousand Sechinos , and every Sechino t0 be of venetian money eight liver and two solde , beside the Turk other present which they give to the Turk bassa yearly . when they come thither . the venetian have a rock or crag within a mile of the say town , for the which the Raguseos will give they much money , but they do keep it more for the namesake , then for profit . this rock lie on the southside of the town , and be call two cromo , there be nothing on it but only a 11 cromo . monastery call Sant Jeronimo . the main of the Turk country be border on it within one mile , for the which cause they be in great subjection . this night we be put back by contrary wind , and anchor at Melleda - 
 the 24 be at a anchor under Melleda , we will have go on land , but the wind come so fair that we present set sail and go our course , and leave on the right hand of we the forename hand , and on the left hand between we and the main the hand of Zupanna , and within a mile of that under the main Zupanna . by east , another hand call Isola de Mezo . this hand de 
 have two monastery in it , one call Santa maria de ’ 
 bizo , and the other Sant Nicholo . also there be a three rock with a friary call Sant Andrea : these hand be sant^n^'ea - 
 Boca de Cataro , the town Cataro . Budoa . Antiveri . Marchevetti . the end of Sclavonia and the begin of Albania . 
 Puglia . 
 cape chimaera . 
 CapeOtranto . 
 11 fano . 
 from the main but two mile , and the channel between Melleda and Zupanna be but four or five mile over by guess , but very deep , for we have at a anchor forty fathom . the two hand of Zupanna and Mezo be well inhabit , and very fair building , but nothing plenty save wine only . this night towards sun set it wax calm , and we sail little or nothing . 
 the 24 we be past Ragusa 14 mile , and there we meet with two venetian ship , which come from Cyprus , we think they will have speak with we , for we be desirous to talk with they , to know the news of the Turk army , and to have send some letter by they to Venice . about noon , we have scant sight of castle novo , which castle a few year past the Turk take from the emperor , in which fight be slay three hundred spanish soldier , beside the rest which be take prisoner , and make galley slave . this castle be hard at the mouth of a channel call Boca de Cataro . the venetian have a hold within the channel call Cataro , this channel go up to Budoa , and further up into the country . about suneset we be over against the hill of Antiveri in Sclavonia , in the which hill the venetian have a town call Antiveri , and the Turk have another against it call Marchevetti , the which two town continual skirmish together with much slaughter . at the end of these hill end the country of Sclavonia , and Albania begin . Theise hill be thirty mile distant from Ragusa . 
 the 27 we keep our course towards Puglia , and leave Albania on the left hand . the 28. we have sight of both the maines , but we be near than coast of Puglia , for fear of foist . it be between cape chimaera in Albania and Cape otranto in Puglia 60 mile . Puglia be a plain low land , and chimaera in Albania be very high land , so that it be see the further . thus sail our course along the coast of Puglia , we see diverse white tower , which serve for sea-mark . about three of the clock in the after noon , we have sight of a rock call two fano , 48 80 
 mile from Corfu , and by sun set we discover Corfu . Corfu . thus we keep on our course with a prosperous wind , and make our way after twelve mile every hour . Most part of this way we be accompany with certain fish call in the italian tongue palomide , it be a fish three pahmide . quarter of a yard in length , in colour , eat , and make like a makarell , somewhat big and thick in body , and the tail fork like a half moon , for the which cause it be say that the Turk will not suffer they to be take in all his dominion . 
 the 29 in the morning we be in sight of a hand , which we leave on our left hand call Cephalonia , it be Cephalonia under the venetian and well inhabit , with a fair town encage strong situate on a hill , of the which hill the hand bear her name , it have also a very strong fortress or castle , and plenty of corn and wine , their language be Greeke , it be distant from the main of Morea , thirty Morea . mile , it is'in compass 80 mile . one hour within night we sail by the town stand on the south cape of Cephalonia , whereby we may perceive their light . there come oftentimes into the creek and river , the Turk foist and galley where at their arrival , the country people do signify unto their neighbour by so many light , as there be foist or galley in the hand , and thus they do from one to another the whole hand over . about three of the clock in the afternoon the wind scant , and we mind to have go to Zante , Zante . but we can not for that night . this hand of Zante be distant from Cephalonia , 12 or 14 mile , but the town of Cephalonia , from the town of Zante , be distant forty mile . this night we go but little forward . 
 the 30 day we remain still turn up and down because the wind be contrary , and towards night the wind mend , so that we enter the channel between Cephalonia , 8c Zante , the which channel be about eight or ten mile over , and these two bear east and by south , and west and by north from the other . the town of Zante lie within a point of the land , 
 five 81 f 
 where we come to a anchor , at nine of the clock at night . 
 John lock , the 31 about six of the clock in the morning , i and five Hol - £ve Hollander go on land , and host at the ‘ tand’5°n house of Pedro de Venetia . after breakfast we go 
 * to see the town , and pass along we go into some of the greek church , wherein we see their altare , image , and other ornament . this do , we go to Santa Maria a monastery of friar call sancta maria de la Croce , de la Croce , these be western Christians , for the greek have nothing to do with they , nor they with the greek , for they differ very much in religion . there be but 2. friar in this friary . in this monastery we see the the tomb of tomb that m. T. Cicero , be bury in , with Terentia m. T. Cicero . Antonia , his wife . this tomb be find about six year since , when the monastery be build , there be in time past a street where the tomb stand . at the find of the tomb there be also find a yard under ground , a square stone somewhat long than broad , upon which stone be find a write of two several hand write , the one as it seem , for himself , and the other for his wife , and under the same stone be [ ii i . 104. ] find a glass somewhat proportion like a urinali , but that it be eight square and very thick , wherein be the ash of the head and right arm of Mar. T. Cicero , for as story make mention he be behead as i remember at Capua , for insurrection . and his wife have get his head and right arm , ( which be bring to roam to the emperor ) go from Rome , and come to Zante , and there bury his head and arm , and write * or , Ave. upon his tomb this style m. T. Cicero . * have . then follow in other letter , et tu Terentia Antonia , which difference of letter declare that they be not write the detcrip - both at one time . the tomb be long and narrow , and deep , wall on every side like a grave , in the bottom ' whereof be find the say stone with the write on it , and the say glass of ash , and also another little glass of the same proportion , wherein , as they say , be 
 the tear of his friend , that in those day they do use to gather and bury with they , as they do use in Italy and Spain to tear their hair , to bury with their friend . in the say tomb be a few bone . after dinner we rest until it draw towards evening by reason of the heat . and about four of the clock we walk to another friary a mile out of the town call Sant Elia , these be white friar , there be two , but $ant Elia , but one be dead , not six day since . this friary have a i friar ' garden very pleasant , and well furnish with orange , lemon , pomegranate , and diverse other good fruit . 
 the way to it be somewhat ragged , up hill and down , and very stony , and in winter very dirty . it stand very pleasant in a clift between two hill , with a good prospect . from thence we ascend the hill to the castle , which be situate on the very top of a hill . 
 this castle be very strong , in compass a large mile descrip-and a half , which be victual , ( as it be never unfurnish ) and man with man of trust , it may defend Zante . it self against any prince power . this castle take the just compass of the hill , and no other hill near it , it be so steep down , and so high and ragged , that it will tire any man or ever he be half way up . very nature have fortify the wall and bulwark : it be by nature four square , and it command the town and port . the venetian have always their Podesta , or governor , with his two counselor resident therein . the town be well inhabit , and have great quantity of householder . the hand by report be threescore and ten mile about , it be able to make twenty thousand fight man . they say they have always five or six hundred horseman ready at a hour warning . they 2% Turk say the Turk have assay it with ioo . galley , but he can never bring his purpose to pass . it be strange to i how they shall maintain so many man in this hand , for their best sustenance be wine , and the rest but miserable . 
 the first of August we be warn aboard by the » 3 
 patron , and towards evening we set sail , and have sight the castle of of a castle call Torneste , which be the Turk , and be Tomeste . ten mile from Zante , it do belong to the venetian , but they have now lose it , it stand also on a hill on the twelve turk sea side in Morea . all that night we bear into the sea , ^Modonand because we have news ' at Zante of twelve of the Turk Conn and galley » that come from Rhodes , which be about candla . Modon , Coron , and Candia , for which cause we keep at the sea . 
 the second of August we have no sight of land , but keep our course , and about the three watch the wind Modon . scant , so that we bear with the shore , and have sight Coron . of Modon and Coron . 
 cavo Matta - the three we have sight of Cavo Mattapan , and all ? a - that day by reason of contrary wind , which blow somewhat hard , we lay a hull until morning . 
 the four we be still under the say cape , and ' so continue that day , and towards night there grow a contention in the ship among the Hollander , and it have like to have be a great inconvenience , for we have all our weapon , yea even our knife take from we that night . 
 the five , . we sail by the bowline , and out of the Candia . top we have sight of the hand of Candia , and towards noon we may see it plain , and towards night the wind wax calm . 
 the sixth towards the break of day we see two small Gezi . Hands call Gozi , and towards noon we be between they : the one of these hand be fifteen mile about , and the other io mile . in those hand be nourish store of cattle for butter and cheese . there be to the 
 Candia . 
 cape Spada . 
 c Salomon . 
 number of fifty or sixty inhabitant , which be Greeks , and they live chief on milk and cheese . the hand of Candia be 700 mile about , it be in length , from cape Spada , to cape Salomon , 300 mile , it be as they say , able to make one hundred thousand fight man . we sail between the Gozi , and Candia , and they be distant from Candia 5 or 6 mile . the candiot be strong 84 
 man , and very good archer , and shoot near the mark . 
 this island be from Zante 300 mile . 
 the seven we sail all along the say hand with little wind and unstable , and the eight day towards night we draw to the east end of the hand . 
 the 9 and 10 we sail along with a prosperous wind and see no land . 
 the two in the morning , we have sight of the hand of Cyprus , and towards noon we be thwart the cape call Ponta Malota , and about four of the clock we Ponta , be as far as Baffo , and about sun set we pass Cavo Bianco , and towards nine of the clock at night we double cavo de la get , and anchor afore Limisso , j 
 but the wind blow so hard , that we can not come cavo de la near the town , neither dare any man go on land . and atte-the town be from cavo de le get twelve mile distant . 
 the 12. of August in the morning we go on land to Limisso : this town be ruinate and nothing in it Limisso . worth writing , save only in the mid of the town there have be a fortress , which be now decay , and the wall part overthrow , which a turkish rover with certain galley do destroy about 10. or 12. year past . 
 this day walk to see the town , we chance to see in the market place , a great quantity of a certain vermin call in the italian tongue Cavalette . it be as i can Cavalette , be learn , both in shape and bigness like a grasshopper , for 
 i can judge but little difference . of these many year 7^7 of they have have such quantity y* they destroy all their Cyprus . corn . they be so plague with they , y‘ almost every year they do well nigh loose half their corn , whether it be the nature of the country , or the plague of God , that let they judge that best can define . but that there may no default be lay to their negligence for the destruction of they , they have throughout the whole land a constitute order , that every farm or or husbandman ( which be even as slave buy and sell to their lord ) shall every year pay accord to his territory , a 
 the pilgrim go to the greek church . 
 measure full of the seed or egg of these forename Cavalette , the which they be bind to bring to the market , and present to the officer appoint for the same , the which officer take of they very straight measure , and write the name of the presenter , and put the say egg or seed , into a house appoint for the same , and have the house full , they beat they to powder , and cast they into the sea , and by this policy they do as much as in they lie for the destruction of they . this vermin breed or engender at the time of corn be ripe , and the corn be have away , in the clod of the same ground do the husbandman find you nest , or , as i may rather term they , case of the egg of the same vermin . their nest be much like to the key of a hasel-nut tree , when they be dry , and of the same length , but somewhat big , which case be break you shall see the egg lie much like unto ant egg , but somewhat lesser . thus much i have write at this time , because i have no more time of knowledge , but i trust at my return to note more of this island , with the commodity of the same at large . 
 the 13. day we go in the morning to the greek church , to see the order of their ceremony , and of their communion , of the which to declare the whole order with the number of their ceremonious cross , it be to long . wherefore lest i shall offend any man , i leave it unwritten : but only that i note well , that in all their communion or service , not one do ever kneel , nor yet in any of their church can i ever see any grave image , but paint or portray . also they have store of lamp alight , almost for every image one . their woman be always separate from the man , and general they be in the low end of the church . this night we go aboard the ship , although the wind be contrary , we do it because the patron shall not find any lack of we , as sometime he do : when as tarry upon his own busi ness , he will colour it with the delay of the pilgrim . 
 the 14. day in the morning we set sail , and lose sight of the island of Cyprus , and the 15. day we be likewise at sea , and see no land : and the 16. day towards night , we look for land , but we see none . but because we suppose our self to be near our port , we take in all our sail except only the foresail and the missen , and so we remain all that night . 
 the 17. day in the morning , we be by report of the mariner , some six mile from Jaffa , but it prove contrary . but because we will be sure , we come to a anchor seven mile from the shore , and send the skiffe with the pilot and the master gunner , to learn the coast , but they return , not have see tree nor house , nor speak with any man . but when they come to the sea side again , they go up a little hill stand hard by the brink , whereon as they think they see the hill of Jerusalem , by the which the pilot know ( after his judgement ) that we be past our port . and so this place where we ride be , as the mariner say , about 50. mile from Jaffa . this coast all alongst be very low , plain , white , sandy , and desert , for which cause it have few mark or none , so that we ride here as it be in a gulf between two cape . 
 the 18. day we abide still at anchor , look for a gale a great curto return back , but it be contrary : and the 19 we rant-set sail , but the currant have more force than the wind , we be drive back , insomuch , that the ship be under sail , we cast the sound lead , and ( notwithstanding the wind ) it remain before the ship , there we have muddy ground at fifteen fathom . the same day about 4. of the clock , we set sail again , and sail west alongst the coast with a fresh side-wind . 
 it chance by fortune that the ship cat leap into they a cat fall sea , which be down , keep her self very valiant read . above water , notwithstanding the great wave , still swim , the which the master know , he cause the skiff with half a dozen man to go towards she and fetch she again , when she be almost half a mile 
 [ ii i . 106. ] from the ship , and all this while the ship lie on stay . i hardly believe they will have make such haste and mean if one of the company have be in the like peril . they make the more haste because it be the patron cat . this i have write onelyto note the estimation that cat be in , among the italian , for general they esteem their cat , as in England we esteem a good spaniel . the same night about ten of the clock the wind calm , and because none of the ship know where we be , we let fall a anchor about 6 mile from the place we be at before , and there we have muddy ground at twelve fathom . 
 the 20 it be still calm , and the current so strong still one way , that we be not able to stem the stream : moreover we know not where we be , whereupon doubt whither we be pass , or short of our port , the master , pilot , and other officer of the ship enter into counsel what be best to do , whereupon they agree to send the boat on land again , to seek some man to speak with all , but they return as wise as they go . than we set sail again and sound every mile or half mile , and find still one depth , so we not know where we be , come again to a anchor , seven or eight mile by west from the place we be at . thus still doubt where we be , the boat go on land again , and bring news that we be short 80 mile of the place , whereas we think we have be overshoot by east fifty mile . thus in these doubt we lose four day , and never a man in the ship able to tell where we be , notwithstanding there be diverse in the ship they with with bat bad be there before . then say the pilot , that on land ™ at hi® come to the shore , by chance he see two wayfare man , which be moor , and he cry to they in turkish , insomuch that the moor , partly for fear , and partly for lack of understanding , ( see they to be christian ) begin to fly , yet in the end with much a do , they stay to speak with they , which man when they come together , be not able to understand each 88 
 1553-oth , but our man make to they the sign of the cross on the sand , to give they to understand that they be of the ship that bring the pilgrim . then the moor know ( as all the country else do ) that it be the use of Christians to go to Jerusalem , show they to be yet by west of Jaffa . thus we remain all that night at anchor , and the far west that we sail , the less water we have . 
 the 21 we set sail again , and keep our course Northeast , but because we will not go along the shore by night , we come to a anchor in four and twenty fathom water . then the next morning be the 22 we set sail again , and keep our course as before , and about three of the clock in the afternoon we have sight of the two tower of Jaffa , and about five of they the two clock , we be with a rock , call in the italian tongue , Scolio di Santo Petro , on the which rock they $ Santg say he fish , when Christ bid he cast his net on the Petro . right side , anfd catch so many fish . this rock be now almost wear away . it be from Jaffa two or three mile : here before the two tower we come to a anchor . 
 then the pilgrim after supper , in salutation of the holy land , sing to the praise of God , te deum laudamus , with magnificat , and Benedictus , but in the ship be a friar of Santo Francisco , who for anger because he be not call and warn , will not sing with we , so that he stand so much upon his dignity , that he forget his simplicity , and neglect his devotion to the holy land for that time , say that first they ought to have call he year they do begin , because he be a friar , and have be there , and know the order . 
 the 23 we send the boat on land with a messenger to messenger the Padre guardian of Jerusalem . this day it be notify unto i by one of the ship that have be Mahomet be a slave in turquoise , that no man may wear green in clothe in this land , because their prophet Mahomet go in green . greene-this come to my knowledge by reason of the Scrivanello , 
 who have a green cap , which be forbid he to wear on the land . 
 the 24. 25. and 26 we tarry in the ship still look for the come of the Padre guardian , and the 26 at night we have a storm which last all the next day . the guardian the 27 in the morning , come the Cadi , you Subassi , 
 of Jerusalem and the meniwe , with the Padre guardian , but they can ‘ ja^with not cotne at we by reason of the stormy weather : in the Cady , and the afternoon we assay to send the boat on land , Subassi . but the weather will not suffer we . then again towards night the boat go a shore , but it return not that night . the same day in the afternoon we see in the element , a cloud with a long tail , like unto the tail a cloud call of a serpent , which cloud be call in italian cion , the the italian tail of this cloud do hang as it be into the sea : and dangerous we see watef under the say cloud ascend , as it ' be like a smoke or mist , the which this cion draw up to it . the mariner report to we that it have this property , that if it shall happen to have light on any part of the ship , that it will rend and wretch sail , mast , shroud and ship and all in manner like a with : on the land , tree , house , or whatsoever else it light on , it will rend and wretch . Theise marA conjuration , riner do use a certain conjuration to break the say [ il i . 107. ] tail , or cut it in two , which as they say do prevail . 
 they do take a black haft knife , and with the edge of the same do cross the say tail as if they will cut it in twain , say these word , hold thou cion , eat this , and then they stick the knife on the ship side with the edge towards the say cloud , and i see it therewith vanish in less than one quarter of a hour . but whether it be then consume , or whether by virtue of the enchantment it do vanish i know not , but it be go . hereof let they judge that know more than i . this afternoon we have no wind , but the sea very stormy , insomuch that neither chest , pot , nor any thing else can stand in the ship , and we be drive to keep our meat in one hand , and the pot in the other , 90 
 and so sit down upon the hatch to eat , for stand we can not , for that the sea in the very port at a anchor go so high as if we have be in the bay of Portugal with stormy weather . the reason be , as the mariner say to i , because that there meet all the wave from all place of the strait of Gibraltar , and there break , and that in most calm there go great sea , whether the wind blow or not . 
 the 28. the weather grow somewhat calm , we go on land and rest our self for that day , and the next day we set forward towards the city of Jerusalem . 
 what i do , and what place of devotion i visit in Jerusalem , and other part of the holy land , from this my departure from Jaffa , until my return to the say port , may brief be see in my Testimoniali , under the hand and seal of the vicar general of mount Zion , which for the contentment of the reader i think good here to interlace . 
 universis and singulis praesente littera inspecturis salutem in domino nostro Jesus christo . Attestamur vobis ac aliis quibuscunque , qualiter honorabilis vir Johannes Lok civis Londoniensis , filius honorabilis viri Guilhelmi Lok equitis aurati , ad sacratissima terrae sanctae loca personaliter se contulit , sanctissimum domini nostri Jesus christi sepulchrum , e quo die tertia glorious a mortuis resurrexit , sacratissimum Calvariae montem , in quo pro nobis omnibus cruci affixus mori dignatus est , Zion etiam montem ubi coenam illam mirificam cum discipulis suis fecit , and ubi spiritus sanctus in die sancto Pentecostes in discipulos eosdem in linguis igneis descendit , olivetique montem ubi mirabiliter coelos ascendit , intemeratae virginis Mariae Mausoleum in Josaphat vallis medio situm , bethaniam quoque , Bethlehem civitatem David in qua de purissima virgin maria natus est , ibique inter animalia reclinatus , pluraque loca alia tam in Jerusalem civitate sancta terre Judaeae , quam extra , a modernis peregrinis visitari solita , devotissimi visitavit , 91 
 the pilgrim return from Jerusalem . 
 mount Carmel . 
 Pesce columbini . 
 pariterque adoravit . in quorum fidem , ego frater Antonius de Bergamo ordinis fratrum minorum regularis observantiae , provinciae divi anthonii sacri conventus montis Zion vicarius ( licet indignus ) necnon aliorum locorum terrae sanctae , apostolica authoritate comissarius and rector , have Sigillo maiori nostri officii nostraque subscription muniri volui . Datum hierosolymis apud sacratissimum domini coenaculum in saepe memorato monte Zion , anno domini millesimo quingentesimo , quinquagesimo tertio , die vero sexto mensis septembris . 
 frater antonius qui supra . 
 the 15. of September be come from our pilgrimage , we go aboard our ship , and set sail , and keep our course west towards the island of Cyprus , but all that night it be calm , and the 16. the wind fresh , and we pass by mount Carmel . 
 the 17. the wind be very scant , yet we keep the sea , and towards night we have a gust of rain whereby we be constrain to strike our sail , but it be not very stormy , nor last very long . 
 the 18. 19 20. and 21. we keep still the sea and see no land because we have very little wind , and that not very favourable . 
 the 22. at noon the boatswain send some of the mariner into the boat , ( which we toe astern from Jaffa ) for certain necessary belong to the ship , wherein the mariner find a certain fish in proportion like a dace , about 6. inch long ( yet the mariner say they have see the like a foot long and more ) the which fish have on every side a wing , and towards the tail two other lesser as it be fin , on either side one , but in proportion they be wing and of a good length . Theise wing grow out between the gills and the carcase of the same fish . they be call in the italian tongue Pesce columbini , for in deed , the wing be spread it be like to a fly dove , they say it will fly far , and very high . so it seem that be weary of her flight , 92 
 she fall into the boat , and not be able to rise again die there . 
 the 23. 24. and 25. we sail our direct course with a small gale of wind , and this day we have sight of the island of Cyprus . the first land that we discover be a headland call Cavo de la Griega , and about mid - cavo de la night we anchor by north of the cape . this cape be grie&-a high hill , long and square , and on the east corner it have a high cop , that appear unto those at the sea , like . a white cloud , for towards the sea it be white , and it lie into the sea Southwest . this coast of Cyprus be high decline towards the sea , but it have no cliff . 
 the 26. we set sail again , and towards noon we come into the port of Salini , where we go on land and lodge that night at a town one mile from thence call arnacho di Salini , this be but a village call in italian , Casalia . this be distant from Jaffa 250. italian mile . 
 the 27. we rest , and the 28. we hire horse to [ H. i . 108. ] ride from arnacho to Selina , which be a good mile . the Salmi . 
 1 , ■ .. • 1 • arnacho dt 
 salt pit be very near two mile in compass , very plain and level , into the which they let run at the time of Casalia . rain a quantity of water come from the mountain , which water be let in until the pit be full to a certain mark , which when it be full , the rest be convey by a trench into the sea . this water be let run in about October , or soon or late , as the time of the year do afford . there they let it remain until the end of July or the midst of August , out of which pit at that time , in stead of water that they let in they gather very fair white salt , without any further art or labour , for it be only do by the great heat of the sun . This the venetian have , and do maintain to the use of saint mark , and the venetian ship that come to this hand be bind to cast out their ballast , and to lade with salt for Venice . also there may none in all the hand buy salt but of these man , who maintain these pit for saint mark . this place be watch by night with 6. horse - 
 six horseman man to the end it be not steal by night . also under to watch the venetian dominion no town may spend any salt , sa but they must buy it of saint mark , neither may any 
 man buy any salt at one town to carry to another , but every one must buy his salt in the town where he dwell . neither may any man in Venice buy more salt than he spend in the city , for if he be know to carry but one ounce out of the city and be accuse , he lose a ear . the most part of all the salt they have in Venice come from these Salines , and they have it so plentiful , that they be not able , never a year to gather the one half , for they only gather in July , August , and September , and not full these three month . yet notwithstanding the abundance that the ship carry away yearly , there remain heap like hill , some heap able to lade nine or ten ship , and there be heap of two year gather , some of three and some of nine or ten year make , to the value of a great sum of gold , and when the ship do lade , they never take it by measure , but when they come at Venice they measure it . this salt as it lie in the pit be like so much ice , and it be six inch thick : they dig it with axe , and cause their slave to carry it to the heap . this night at midnight we ride to Famagusta , which be eight league from Selina , which be 24 English mile . 
 the 29 about two hour before day , we alight at Famagusta . Famagusta , and after we be refresh we go to see the town . this be a very fair strong hold , and the strong and great in the hand . the wall be fair and new , and strong rampire with four principali bulwark , and between they turrion , respond one to another , these wall do the venetian make . they have also on the haven side of it a castle , and the haven be chain , the city have only two gate , to say , one for the land and another for the sea , they have in the town continual , be it peace or war , 800 soldier , and forty and six gunner , beside captain , petty 
 captain , governor and general . the land gate have always fifty soldier , pike and gunner with their harness , watch thereat night and day . at the sea gate five and twenty , upon the wall every night do watch fifteen man in watch house , for every watch house five man , and in the market place 30 soldier continual . there may no soldier serve there above 5. year , neither will they without friendship suffer they to depart afore 5. year be expire , and there may serve of all nation except greek . they have every pay , which be 45. day , 15 Mozenigos , which be 15 shilling sterling . Mozenigo . their horseman have only six solde Venetian a day , sell of and provender for their horse , but they have also cer - enice-taine land therewith to blow and sow for the maintenance of their horse , but true i marvel how they live be so hardly feed , for all the summer they feed only upon chop straw and barley , for hey they have none , and yet they be fair , fat and serviceable . the venetian send every two year new ruler , which they call Castellani . the town have allow it also two galley Castellani . continual arm and furnish . 
 the 30 in the morning we rid to a chapel , where they say saint Katherine be bear . this chapel be saint kathe-in old Famagusta , the which be destroy by english - fama-man , and be clean overthrow to the ground , to this g^ta . day desolate and not inhabit by any person , it be of a great circuit , and there be to this day mountain of fair , great , and strong building , and not only there , but also in many place of the island . Moreover when er coin they dig , plow , or trench they find sometime old ere ancient coin , some of gold , some of silver , and some of copper , yea and many tomb and vault with sepulcher in they . this old Famagusta be from the other , four mile , and stand on a hill , but the new town on a plain . Thence we return to new Famagusta again to dinner , and towards evening we go about the town , and in the great church we see the tomb of king Jaques , which be the last king of Cyprus , and 
 [ ii i . 109. ] Cornari , a family of Venice marl to king Jaques , 
 no victual must be sell out of the city of Famagusta . 
 be bury in the year of Christ one thousand four hundred seventie and three , and have to wife one of the daughter of Venice , of the house of Cornari , the which family at this day have great revenue in this island , and by mean of that marriage the venetian challenge the kingdom of Cyprus . 
 the first of October in the morning , we go to see the relief of the watch . that do , we go to one of the greek church to see a pot or jar of stone , which be say to be one of the seven jar of water , the which the lord God at the marriage convert into wine . it be a pot of earth very fair , white enamel , and fair wrought upon with draw work , and have on either side of it , instead off handle , ear make in form as the painter make angel wing , it be about a ell high , and small at the bottom , with a long neck and correspondent in circuit to the bottom , the belly very great and round , it hold full twelve gallon , and have a taphole to draw wine out thereat , the jar be very ancient , but whether it be one of they or not , i know not . the air of Famagusta be very unwholesome , as they say , by reason of certain marsh ground adjoin unto it . they have also a certain yearly sickness reign in the same town , above all the rest of the island : yet nevertheless , they have it in other town , but not so much . it be a certain redness and pain of the eye , the which if it be not quick help , it take away their sight , so that yearly almost in that town , they have about twenty that lose their sight , either of one eye or both , and it come for the most part in this month of October , and the last month : for i have meet diverse time three and four at once in company , both man and woman . their live be better cheap in Famagusta then in any other place of the island , because there may no kind of provision within their liberty be sell out of the city . 
 the second of October we return to arnacho , where we rest until the sixth day . this town be a pretty 96 
 * 553-village , there be thereby towards the sea side diverse great nine monument , that there have be great overthrow of in Cyprus . building , for to this day there be no year when they find not , dig under ground , either coin , cave , and sepulchre of antiquity , as we walk , do see many , so that in effect , all alongst the sea coast , throughout the whole island , there be much ruin and overthrow of building : for as they say , it be disinhabit six Cyprus 36. and thirty year , before saint Helen time for lack of water . and since that time it have be ruinate and cluofwater overthrow by Richard the first of that name , king of Cypr. ruin-England , which he do in revenge of his sister ravish - “ t by Richard mean come to Jerusalem , the which enforcement be * • do to she by the king of Famagusta . 
 the sixth day we rid to Nicosia , which be from arnacho Nicosia . seven Cyprus mile , which be one and twenty italian mile . this be the ancient city of the island , and be wall about , but it be not strong neither of wall nor situation : it be by report three Cyprus mile about , it be not thorough inhabit , but have many great garden in it , and also very many date tree , and plenty of pomegranate and other fruit . there dwell all the gentility of the island , and there have every cavalier or conte of the island a habitation . there be in this dfiuntaine city one fountain rent by saint mark , which be bind every eight day once , to water all the garden city . in the town , and the keeper of this fountain have for every tree a Bizantin , which be twelve solde Venice , and a Bizantin be six penny sterling . he that have that to farm , with a sterltn& fair and profitable garden thereto belong , pay every year to saint mark , fifteen hundred crown . the street of the city be not pave , which make it with the quantity of the garden , to seem but a rural habitation . but there be many fair building in the city , there be also monastery both of Franks and greek . 
 the cathedral church be call Santa Sophia , in the which a 
 there be a old tomb of jaspis stone , all of one piece , chirch-of make in form of a carriage coffer , twelve span long , Nicosia . 
 five 97 g 
 [ ii i . i io . ] 
 Limisso , 
 six span broad , and seven span high , which they say be find under ground . it be as fair a stone as ever i have see . 
 the seven day we rid to a greek friary half a mile without the town . it be a very pleasant place , and the friar feast we according to their ability . Theise friar be such as have be priest , and their wife die they must become friar of this place , and never after eat flesh , for if they do , they be deprive from say mass : neither , after they have take upon they this order , may they marry again , but they may keep a single woman . Theise greekish friar be very continent and chaste , and sure i have seidome see ( which i have well note ) any of they fat . 
 the 8. day we return to arnacho , and rest there . the 9 after midnight my company rid to the hill call Monte de la Croce ( but i not dispose will not go ) which hill be from arnacho 15. italian mile . upon the say hill be a certain cross , which be , they say , a holy cross . this cross in time past do by their report of the island , hang in the air , but by a certain earthquake , the cross and the chapel it hang in , be overthrow , so that never since it will hang again in the air . but it be now cover with silver , and have 3. drop of our lord blood on it ( as they say ) and there be in the midst of the great cross , a little cross make of the cross of Christ , but it be close in the silver , you must ( if you will ) believe it be so , for see it you can . this cross hang now by both end in the wall , that you may swing it up and down , in token that it do once hang in the air . this be tell i by my fellow pilgrim , for i see it not . 
 the 10. at night we go aboard by warning of'the patron : and the 11. in the morning we set sail , and creep along the shore , but at night we anchor by reason of contrary wind . 
 the 12. we set sail towards Limisso , which be from Salines 50. mile , and there we go on land that night . 
 the 13. and 14. we remain still on land , and the 15. the patron send for we ; but by reason that one of our company be not well , we go not present , but we be force afterward to hire a boat , and to overtake the ship ten mile into the sea . at this Limisso all the venetian ship lade wine for their provision , and some for to sell , and also vinegar . they lade also great store of Carrobi : for all the country thereabouts adjoin - Carrobi . king , and all the mountain be full of Carrobi tree , they lade also cotton wool there . in the say town we do see a certain foul of the land ( whereof there be many in this island ) name in the italian tongue vulture . it be a foul that be as big as a swan , vulture . and it live upon carrion . the skin be full of soft down , like to a fine fur , which they use to occupy when they have evil stomach , and it make good digestion . this bird ( as they say ) will eat as much at one meal as shall serve he forty day after , and within the compass of that time care for no more meat . the country people , when they have any dead beast , they carry it into the mountain , or where they suppose the say vulture to haunt , they see the carrion do immediate greedy seize upon it , and do so ingraft their talent , that they can speedy rise again , by reason whereof the people come and kill they : sometime they kill they with dog , and sometime with such weapon as they have . this foul be very great and hardy , much like a eagle in the feather of her wing and back , but under her great feather she be only down , her neck also long and full of down . she have on the neck bone , between the neck and the shoulder , a heap of feather like a tassel , her thigh unto her knee be cover with down , her leg strong and great , and dare with her talent assault a man . they have also in this island a certain small great plenty bird , much like unto a wagtail in feather and make , fat these be so extreme fat that you can perceive nothing ’ else in all their body : these bird be now in season . 
 they take great quantity of they , and they use to pickle they with vinegar and salt , and to put they in pot and send they to Venice and other place of Italy for present of great estimation . they say they send almost 1200. Jarres or pot to Venice , beside those which be consume in the island , which be a great number . these be so plentiful that when there be no ship , you may buy they for 10. carchy , which coin be 4. to a venetian Soldo , which be penny farthing the dozen , and when there be store of ship , 2. penny the dozen , after TheFamagus - that rate of their money . they of the limit of fama-tans observe gUsta do keep the statute of the Frenchman which sometime do rule there . and the people of Nicosia observe the order of the genouese , who sometime also do rule they . all this day we lie in the sea with little wind . 
 the 16. we meet a venetian ship , and they will to speak with we , and we with they , make towards each other , but by reason of the evil stirrage of the other ship , we have almost board each other to our great cavo Bianco , danger . towards night we anchor under Cavo Bianco , but because the wind grow fair , we set sail again present . 
 the 17. 18. 19 and 20. we be at sea with calm summer weather , and the 20. we have some rain , and another cion , see another cion in the element . this day also we a ship call see atlj speak with a venetian ship call el Bonna , el Bonna . l j r a - 
 bind for Cyprus . 
 the 21. we sail with a reasonable gale , and see no a great tem - land until the 4. of November . this day we have rain , pest ' thunder , lightning , and much wind and stormy weather , but God be praise we escape all danger . 
 the 4. of November , we have first sight of the island Candia , Gozi . of Candia , and we fall with the island call Gozi , by Antony Gel - South of Candia . this day depart this present life , ber depart one of our company name Anthony Gelber of Prussia , this life . who only take his surfeit of Cyprus wine . this night 
 we determine to ride a try , because the wind be contrary , and the weather troublesome . 
 100 
 the 5. we have very rough stormy weather . this day be the say Anthony Gelber sow in a Chavina fill with stone and throw into the sea . by reason of the freshness of the wind we will have make towards the shore , but the wind put we to the sea , where we endure a great storm and a troublesome night . 
 the 6. 7. and 8. we be continual at the sea , and this day at noon the wind come fair , whereby we recover the way which we have lose , and sail out of sight of Candia . 
 the 9 we sail all day with a prosperous wind after [ ii i . in . ] 14. mile a hour : and the 10. in the morning , we have sight of Cavo Matapan , and by noon of Cavo Gallo , cavo mata-in Morea , with which land we make by reason of contrary Ga^ wind , likewise we have sight of Modon , under the which Modon . place we anchor . This Modon be a strong town , and build in the sea , and join on the north side to the land . it have a little castle build into the sea , with a peer for little ship and galley to harbour in . it have on the south side of the channel , the island of sapientia , sapientia . with other little island all disinhabit . the channel lie southwest and Northeast between the island and Morea , which be firm land . This Modon be build by the venetian , but as some say it be take from they by force of the Turk , and other say by composition : in like case Coron , and Napolis de Romania , which corm . be also in Morea . this night the flemish pilgrim be drink will have slay the patron because ne anchor here . 
 the r 1. day we set sail again , and as we pass by Modon , we salute they with ordinance , for they that pass by this place , must salute with ordinance , ( if they have ) or else by strike their top sail , for if they do not , the town will shoot at they . this day towards 2. of the clock we pass by the island of Prodeno , prodeno . which be but little , and desert , under the Turk . about 2. hour before night , we have sight of the island of 
 ioi 
 Zante and Zante and Cephalonia , which be from Modon one Cephalonia . hundred mile . 
 the 12. day in the morning , with the wind at west , castle for - double between castle Torneste , and the island of Turk ^ante . this castle be on the firm land under the Turk . wonderful e ' this night we anchor afore the town of Zante , where we that night go on land , and rest there the 13. 14. and 15. at night we be warn aboard by the patron . this night the ship take in victual and other necessary . 
 cavo s. the 16. in the morning we set sail with a prosperous Maria on the wonderful ; nj a ( j ^g n , we have sight of cavo de santa maria Albania . in Albania , on our right hand , and Corfu on the left Corfu island , hand . this night we anchor before the castle of Corfu , and go on land and refresh our self . 
 the descrip - the 18. by mean of a friend we be licence to ^cfofCorfu enter the castle or fortress of Corfu , which be not only ’ of situation the strong i have see , but also of edification . it have for the inner ward two strong castle situate on the top of two high crag of a rock , a bow shoot distant the one from the other : the vocke be unassaultable , for the second ward it have strong wall , with rampier and trench , make as well as any art can devise . for the three ward and uttermost , it have very strong wall with rampire of the rock it self cut out by force , and trench about with the sea the bulwark of the uttermost ward be not yet finish , which be in number but two : there be continual in the castle seven hundred soldier . also it have continual four ward , to wit , for the land entry one , for the sea entry another , and two other ward . artillery and other munition of defence always ready plant it have sufficient , beside the store remain in their storehouse . the venetian hold this for the key of all their dominion , and for strength it may be not the island of less . this island be very fruitful and plentiful of wine plntifall^ and corn very good , and olive great store . this island 
 be part from Albania with a channel , in some place T02 
 eight and ten , and in other but three mile . Albania be under the Turk , but in it be many Christians . all the horseman of Corfu be albanese ; the island be not above 80. or 90. mile in compass . 
 the 19 20. and 21. we remain in the town of Corfu . 
 the 22. day we go aboard and set sail , the wind be very calm we toe the ship all that day , and towards sun set , the castle send a Fragatta unto we , to give we warning of three foist come mi hang after we , for who come we prepare and watch all night , but they come not . 
 the 23. day in the morning be calm , we toe out of the strait , until we come to the old town , whereof there be nothing stand but the wall . there be also a new church of the greek call Santa maria di Cassopo , and the town name be call Cassopo . it Cassopo . be a good port . about noon we pass the strait , and draw towards the end of the island , have almost no wind . this night after supper , by reason of a certain a dangerous Hollander that be drink , there arise in the ship such tumult in the a troublesome disturbance , that all the ship be in a s^ ’ uproar with weapon , and have it not be rather by god help , and the wisdom and patience of the patron , more than by our procurement , there have be that night a great slaughter . but as God will , there be no hurt , but only the beginner be put under hatch , and with the fall hurt his face very sore . all this night the wind blow at southeast , and send we forward . 
 the 24. in the morning we find our self before a island call Saseno , which be in the entry to Valona , Saseno . and the wind prosperous . Valona . 
 the 25. day we be before the hill of Antiveri , and about sun set we pass Ragusa , and three hour [ ii i . 112. ] within night we anchor within Meleda , have Sclavonia Meleda . or Dalmatia on the right hand of we , and the wind Southwest . 
 103 
 in the hand of Lesina , be take store of Sardinas . 
 the gulf of Quernero . 
 rovignio . 
 Parenzo . 
 s. Nicolo a hand . 
 the 26 in the morning we set sail , and pass the channel between Sclavonia and Meleda , which may be eight mile over at the most . this hand be under the raguse . at after noon with a hard gale at west and by north we enter the channel between the hand Curzola and the hill of Dalmatia , in the which channel be many rock , and the channel not past 3 mile over , and we anchor before the town of Curzola . this be a pretty town wall about and build upon the sea side , have on the top of a round hill a fair church . this hand be under the venetian , there grow very good vine , also that part towards Dalmatia be well people and husband , especial for wine . in the say hand we meet with the venetian army , to wit , ten galley , and three foist . all that night we remain there . 
 the 27 we set sail and pass along the hand , and towards afternoon we pass in before the hand of Augusta , and about sun set before the town of Lesina , whereas i be inform by the italian , they take all the Sardinas that they spend in Italy . this day we have a prosperous wind at southeast . the hand of Lesina be under the venetian , a very fruitful hand adjoin to the main of Dalmatia , we leave it on our right hand , and pass along . 
 the 28 in the morning we be in the gulf of Quernero , and about two hour after noon we be before the cape of Istria , and at sun set we be at anchor afore rovignio which be also in Istria and under the venetian , where all ship venetian and other be bind by order from Venice to take in their pilot to go for Venice . all the summer the pilot lie at rovignio , and in winter at Parenzo , which be from rovignio 18 mile by west . 
 the 29 we set sail and go as far as Parenzo , and anchor there that day , and go no further . 
 the 30 in the morning we row to Sant Nicolo a little hand hard by uninhabited , but only it have a monastery , and be full of olive tree , after mass we 104 
 return and go aboard . this day the patron hire a bark to embark the pilgrim for Venice , but they depart not . in the afternoon we go to see the town of Parenzo , it be a pretty handsome town , under the venetian . after supper we embark our self again , and that night we sail towards Venice . 
 the first of December we pass a town of the vene - cmrk stand-tians , stand on the entery to the palude or marsh tnsati^ of Venice : which town be call Caorle , and by contrary marsh * 0 } wind we be drive thither to take port . this be 60 Venice . mile from Parenzo , and forty from Venice , there our remained that night . 
 the second two hour before day , with the wind at southeast , we sail towards Venice , where we arrive arrival ( God be praise ) at two of the clock after dinner , and at five ™ ™ 1-landed about four , we be keep so long from land , because we dare not land until we have present to the provider de la sanita , our letter of health . 
 